UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
To give a fish or to teach how to fish? Children weigh costs and benefits in considering what
information to transmit.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5xr705ph

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Gweon, Hyowon
Chu, Veronica
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

To give a fish or to teach how to fish?
Children weigh costs and benefits in considering what information to transmit.
Hyowon Gweon (hyora@mit.edu)
Veronica Chu (verochu@mit.edu)
Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT

Abstract

about what is being taught (Bonawitz et al., 2011) and
decide which informants provide helpful, reliable
information (e.g., Koenig, & Harris, 2005; Sabbagh &
Baldwin, 2001; Birch, Vautier, & Bloom, 2008; Gweon,
Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, in press). Studies suggest that
certain kinds of interpretive biases in pedagogical contexts
are present even in preverbal infants (e.g., Yoon, Johnson,
& Csibra, 2008; Futó, Téglás, Csibra, & Gergely, 2010; see
Csibra & Gergely, 2009; 2011 for reviews).
Although there has been relatively less focus on
children’s ability to teach others, some prior work suggest
that even very young children can appropriately
communicate what they know. For instance, 12-month-olds
pointed more often to an object for an adult who was
ignorant of the object’s location than for an adult who knew
where it was (Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2008).
Furthermore, by age three, children expect that a teacher
should teach a skill (e.g., how to sing) to a student who
lacks the skill rather than the one who already possesses the
skill (Strauss, Ziv, & Stein, 2002), suggesting that children
have some understanding of what constitutes good teaching.
What has been relatively unexplored in the previous
literature is the idea that the cognitive capacities that allow
us to be good learners may also make us good at sharing
information with others as teachers; just as children
rationally infer, as learners, what a teacher is trying to
communicate, they might be able to tailor the information
they provide as teachers with respect to what the learner
knows and what she wants to know.
However, as an informant, knowing what information to
provide is not a trivial problem. In many pedagogical
interactions, explicit requests for information are either
absent, or ambiguous with respect to what the learner wants
to know. Imagine a toddler pointing to a light-up toy and
asking, “What is that?” Even such explicit requests are
rather ill posed, as the informant could generate various
behaviors depending on exactly what the learner wants to
know: the toddler might want the toy, might want to know
the name of the toy, see its cool effects, understand how the
effect is generated, etc. Depending on what the child wants,
an effective teacher might simply give the toy to the child,
label the toy, show its effects by activating the toy, or
explain that pressing a hidden button on the toy causes it to
light up. Even when the informant is helpful and
knowledgeable about the world, the space of possible sets of
data she could provide is virtually unlimited.

Previous developmental research on pedagogy has focused on
children’s inferences as learners. Here we look at children’s
inferences as teachers. We explore the hypothesis that young
children consider the goal of the learner and rationally
provide evidence that is both informative and cost-efficient.
Given a toy with an ambiguous causal structure, children
selectively
performed
costly
actions
to
provide
disambiguating evidence only when the learner wanted to
know how the toy worked; when the learner only wanted to
see the toy’s effects, children chose less costly actions. These
results suggest that children flexibly modify their behaviors as
teachers by considering what learners need to know.
Keywords: cognitive development, pedagogy, social
learning, causal learning, pragmatics

Introduction
We constantly communicate with others, learning from
them and sharing what we know. A particularly powerful
form of communication occurs when one person clearly
knows something about the world and wants to share her
knowledge, and another person clearly wants to learn what
she knows. In a pedagogical context, an informant provides
information to a learner to help her learn about the world,
and the learner updates her beliefs given information from
the informant.
As in any other form of communication, pedagogy is
often more than a simple, unidirectional transfer of
information. The learner might expect the informant to
provide helpful information, and the informant might have a
strong motivation to conform to the learner’s expectation.
Computational models of pedagogical learning have
formalized this idea as a set of inferences that mutually
constrain one another; a knowledgeable, helpful informant
selects data that increase the learner’s belief in the correct
hypothesis, and an ideal learner rationally updates her belief
given data from the informant, with the assumption that the
data were selected by a helpful, knowledgeable informant
(Shafto, Goodman, & Frank, 2012; Shafto, Goodman, &
Griffiths, 2014). This suggests that just as the learner
considers the informant’s knowledge and intent in
pedagogical interactions, the informant also considers what
the learner wants in order to select the set of information
requisite to her expectations.
Prior developmental work has shown children’s
receptivity to pedagogically transmitted information.. When
learning from a teacher, children draw rational inferences

559

Figure 1. A: Experimental procedure. B: The Blue block on any mat activated the red light, and the Yellow block on any
mat activated the green light. To show that blocks, but not mats, affect the color of lights, children had to perform at least 3
of these 4 actions. C: Experimental setup. The Far Mat was much more difficult to reach than the Near Mat, but it was
critical to provide disambiguating evidence about the toy.

One way to solve the problem might be to provide as
much information as possible. However, information does
not come for free, and the amount of transferable data is
limited by many factors. For instance, an informant incurs a
cost for the time and effort involved in generating the data,
and the learner does the same for processing the data. A
rational agent should try to minimize the costs of
information (e.g., time or effort) while maximizing its
benefits (e.g., precision and certainty of our beliefs about
the world). Furthermore, not all information is equally
useful; its utility depends not only on its truthfulness (the
Maxim of Quality; Grice, 1975) and necessity for accurate
learning (the Maxim of Quantity), but also whether the
resulting belief is relevant for the current goal of the learner
(the Maxim of Relevance; see also Wilson & Sperber, 2005).
Thus there are two parallel demands, to provide the right
kind of information, as well as the right amount of
information. In deciding what information to provide to the
learner, it is important to consider what the learner needs
and provide just what she needs.
If the learner merely wants to know how to make
something happen, you might simply show the target causal
relationship. If, however, the learner wants to understand
how a toy works, you might give them more elaborated
evidence about the causal structure of the toy. Here we
explore the hypothesis that even young children, as
informants, can (a) infer the right set of evidence the
learner needs both in its content and quantity, and (b) incur
the cost for generating evidence only when it is necessary
for the learner.
To address this question we provided children with a
novel causal apparatus (see Figure 1), let them learn the
causal relationship themselves, and then asked them to
introduce some aspect of the toy to a naïve learner. Imagine
an apparatus with two likely potential causes (blocks and
mats) and two potential effects (red and green lights);
changing the block determines which light will activate, but
changing the mat does not. If a learner just wants to see red
or green lights, the teacher can simply change the blocks; he
has no reason to manipulate the mats (particularly if
changing the mat is costly.) By contrast, if the learner wants

to know how the toy works, the informant might be most
helpful if he showed the learner that changing the block
affects the color of the lights, and that changing the mat
does not affect the lights.
Across two conditions, we manipulated whether a naïve
agent wanted to see the toy’s red and green lights (Show
Lights condition) or learn how the toy works (Show Toy
condition). We predicted that in comparison to children in
the Show Lights condition, children in the Show Toy
condition would generate 1) more evidence overall and 2)
more informative evidence, even if generating such
evidence required children to perform more costly actions.

Experiment
Methods
Subjects Forty-eight children between ages 4 – 6 were
recruited from a local children’s museum and were
randomly assigned to one of two conditions
(N=24/condition; mean age in months: 68.5 (Show Lights
vs. 69.6 (Show Toy); # boys: 8 (Show Lights) vs. 10 (Show
Toy)). Eight children were dropped and replaced due to
parental interference (N=2), not completing the procedure
(N=2), or experimental error (N=4).
Materials An Elmo hand puppet was used as the naïve
learner. The toy consisted of three components: two mats,
two blocks, and two boxes; the boxes lit up when the blocks
were placed on the mat (see Figure 1 for the experimental
setup). Each mat was made of 12” x 12” foam boards. One
was colored in black and the other in white, and each mat
was also covered with wire mesh with distinct patterns. The
black mat was placed right next to where the child sat in the
beginning of the experiment (henceforth Near Mat). It was
set vertically against a wall in the testing room,
approximately 1.5 ft. from the floor. The white mat (Far
Mat) was placed vertically near the other side of the wall, on
a table approximately 6 ft. from the other mat, and 2.5 ft.
from the floor, such that the child had to go around the table
or climb on the table to use the mat. Each block was made
of acrylic boards, approximately 2 x 2 x 1 inches with a

560

small knob on top. One was colored in blue and the other in
yellow. Each light box was approximately 8 x 8 x 4 inches,
placed side by side in front of the participant. Each one was
covered with red and green felt, respectively. The boxes
contained light bulbs visible through a transparent window
in front of the box. Each block was wirelessly connected to
each box. When the blue block contacted either the white or
the black mat, the red light box lit up and stayed lit as long
as the block remained in contact with the mat; similarly, the
yellow block on either mat activated the green light box.
Therefore, even though the mats were necessary for the
activation of the lights, the distinction between the two mats
was only perceptual and not functionally meaningful for
activating different light boxes.

experimenter asked “Are you done?” to confirm that the
children were indeed done showing Elmo about the toy.
Video Coding Video recordings of the testing sessions were
coded using a video annotation software (VCode; Hagedorn,
Hailpern, & Karahalios, 2008) by a trained coder blind to
condition manipulation. Its outputs were then analyzed
using a custom script in MATLAB separately for the initial
play with the toy (Play) and during the child’s
demonstration of the toy to Elmo (Show). For both Play and
Show, we coded for each time the child placed a block
(Blue, Yellow) on a mat (Near, Far) to turn on a light box;
each of these instances was coded as an “Action” (e.g., if
both blocks were placed on the same mat, they were coded
as two Actions). We also coded each time the child moved
from one end of the room to the other end to use a different
mat (coded as a “Transition”).
We also measured the informativeness of children’s
during the Show phase in the following two ways. First, we
looked at whether or not the child produced disambiguating
evidence about the causal structure of the toy during the
entire Show duration. For instance, if the child placed each
and block by itself on each mat at least once (four actions
total), or produced three of these four actions, the child had
produced disambiguating evidence about the toy, allowing
the learner to see that the blocks determine the light colors,
not mats. Second, we analyzed the informativeness of the
first four actions during the Show phase and scored them
from 0 to 3 (0: fully confounded evidence, 1: disambiguate
either the mats or the blocks, by trying one block on each
mat or trying each block on one mat; 2: three of four
disambiguating actions; 3: all four disambiguating actions).

Procedure The experiment took place in a quiet room in the
museum. Once the child sat down in front of the red and
green light boxes (see Figure 1), the experimenter asked the
child to point to each of the light boxes, the yellow and the
blue blocks, and the white and the black mats. This ensured
that the child saw all components of the toy. Then the
experimenter pointed to the blue block and the Near Mat,
and said “Hmm, why don’t you try putting this blue block
on this mat, and see what happens?” Once the participant
saw that one of the light boxes lit up, the experimenter said,
“I have to go write something down, so why don’t you go
ahead and play with the toy?” and walked out from the
child’s line of sight.
After approximately one minute, the experimenter
returned to the child and covered up the light boxes so that
the child was unable to see which box lit up. She asked the
child to turn the red light on, and then to turn the green light
on. And then she asked two more test questions. First, she
took whichever block the child had just used to turn the
green light on, brought it near the opposite mat, and asked
“if I put this block on this mat, will it turn on the same green
light, or the different red light?” Second, she took the other
block to bring it over the same mat, and asked, “what if I put
this block here? Will it turn on the same red (green) light, or
the different green (red) light?” These questions were used
to assess whether the child had learned the causal structure
of the toy during play. If the child could not answer the
question or explicitly said, “I don’t know”, the child was
given another minute to play (7 of 48 children played for
another minute). These children were asked the same
questions after their second play.
Finally, the experimenter brought out her friend “Elmo,” a
silly monster who knew nothing about these toys. In the
Show Lights condition, they were told that Elmo really
wanted to see red and green lights, and were asked to
“show Elmo red and green lights”. In the Show Toy
condition, children were told that Elmo really wanted to
learn how the toy works, and were asked to “teach Elmo
how the toy works”. Children demonstrated the toy to Elmo
for as long as they wanted; when the child said “I’m done”,
or when they indicated that they were done by putting down
the blocks or stopped to look at the experimenter, the

Results
Children were given identical instructions and questions
until the Show phase began. Thus, during the Play phase,
we did not predict any differences in how children played
with the toy. However, during the Show phase, we predicted
that children would produce different behaviors depending
on what they were instructed to do. In the Show Lights
condition, children were asked to show Elmo red and green
lights. The easiest way to do this is to use the Blue and the
Yellow blocks on the Near Mat; there is no need to move
from one side to the other side of the room to use both the
Near and the Far mat. By contrast, in the Show Toy
condition, children were asked to teach Elmo how the toy
works. In this case, it is helpful to show that the two blocks
are causally responsible for the activation of different lights,
as well as that the two mats are identical and not causally
relevant for determining which light would turn on.
Therefore, during the Show phase, we predicted that
children in the Toy condition would produce more Actions
and Transitions than children in the Lights condition, and be
more likely to provide causally informative evidence about
the toy.
During the Play phase, children in the Show Lights
condition and Show Toy condition did not show differences

561

actions (Pass vs. Fail: 11.5 vs. 11.0, t(22) = 0.09, p = 0.9) or
in the number of transitions (Pass vs. Fail: 3.5 vs. 2.9, t(22)
= 0.33, p = 0.74). Thus children who might have not fully
understood how the toy works provided just as many actions
and transitions as children who fully understood the toy.
This suggests that children in the Toy condition not only
produced more actions but also more costly actions. These
costly actions were informative: only acting on the far mat
could disambiguate the causal structure of the toy. Indeed,
more children in the Toy condition than the Lights condition
produced causally disambiguating evidence about the toy
(Show Lights vs. Show Toy: 16.6% vs. 54.2%, p = 0.014,
Fisher’s Exact). Interestingly, children were also likely to
provide the disambiguating information immediately. The
first four actions of children in the Toy condition were
significantly more informative than those of children in the
Lights condition (Show Lights vs. Show Toy: 0.67 vs. 1.58,
t(46) = 3.01, p = 0.004).

Figure 2. Experiment Results.

in the total playtime (Show Lights vs. Show Toy: 76 vs. 68
sec., t(46) = 1.05 p = 0.30), number of Actions (Show
Lights vs. Show Toy: 10.0 vs. 12.4, t(46) = 1.08, p = 0.29),
or the number of Transitions between the two mats (Show
Lights vs. Show Toy: 2.0 vs. 2.2, t(46) = 0.27, p = 0.79).
Children in the two conditions were also equally good at
answering the test questions about toy in both conditions.
All children used different blocks to activate different lights.
62.5% of children in both conditions understood that the
same block on a different mat would activate the same light,
and 79.1% (Show Lights) and 70.8% (Show Toy) answered
that changing the block would activate a different light.
During the Show phase, even though the duration of
demonstrations did not differ significantly across conditions
(Show Lights vs. Show Toy: 46 vs. 57 sec., t(46) = 1.55, p =
0.13), children’s behaviors differed by condition (see Figure
2). As predicted, children in the Toy condition produced
more Actions (Show Lights vs. Show Toy: 5.1 vs. 11.3,
t(46) = 2.26, p = 0.029) and more Transitions (Show Lights
vs. Show Toy: 1.29 vs. 3.25, t(46) = 2.04, p = 0.047).
Further analysis revealed that the number of actions on the
Near Mat did not differ across conditions (Show Lights vs.
Show Toy: 3.75 vs. 6.37, t(46) = 1.34, p = 0.187). Instead,
the overall difference in the action frequency was driven by
the number of actions on the Far Mat (Show Lights vs.
Show Toy: 1.42 vs. 4.88, t(46) = 2.42, p = 0.022) which was
necessary only if the children wanted to show Elmo that the
mats do not determine the color of lights.
One possibility is that these differences are due to
children in the Show Toy condition who failed to
understand the causal structure of the toy during the Play
phase. Even though children in both conditions
demonstrated equivalent knowledge about the toy, given
instruction to teach Elmo about how the toy works, children
in the Show Toy condition might have produced more
diverse actions simply in the hope that this would help Elmo
learn. To address this possibility, we split the children in the
Show Toy condition into two groups: those who answered
all questions correctly (Pass: N=13) and those did not (Fail:
N=11). There was no difference in the average number of

Discussion
Children in our study selectively performed costly actions
to generate causally disambiguating evidence only when it
is required to fulfill the learner’s goals. When children were
just showing Elmo the lights, they did so by performing
low-cost actions; when Elmo wanted to learn how the toy
worked, children not only performed more actions but also
actions that were both more costly and more informative.
These results suggest that children, as informants,
understand what information to provide to a learner based
on his goals. Children in the Show Lights condition
generated evidence that was easy to generate (i.e., because it
was on the near mat) and failed to fully disambiguate the
causal structure of the toy (because they never showed that
changing the mat failed to affect the outcome), but still
helped Elmo by showing him what he wanted to see.
Children in the Show Toy condition generated evidence that
was harder to generate (because they moved more often to
the far mat) and did disambiguate the causal structure of the
toy, and thus provided Elmo with what he wanted to know.
Thus children, as teachers rationally balanced the
informativeness of evidence and the cost for generating such
evidence to generate data that had the highest utility for the
learner.
Arguably, given that children’s possible actions were
naturally constrained by the causal structure of the toy (i.e.,
there were only four possible pairings of a block and a mat),
children might have produced more informative evidence
simply by virtue of doing more things. Perhaps children in
the Show Toy condition recognized that it was a
complicated question and simply did everything they could
think of. However, we think this is unlikely. Children could
have easily performed other kinds of actions rather than
specifically causally disambiguating actions (e.g., they
could have slid both blocks on the same mat back and forth,
they could have stacked the blocks, etc.). However, children
in the Show Toy condition not only produced more causally
relevant actions overall, but also produced them

562

immediately after the instruction to teach. Second, the
difference between the two conditions emerged from
children’s actions on the Far Mat rather than on the Closer
Mat. This suggests that children in the Show Toy condition
did not simply do more actions overall, but that their actions
were targeted to produce more causally informative
evidence.
By better understanding what others want, we can make
better decisions about what to do for the benefit of others. In
real life, there are cases where a simple transfer of factual
information might suffice, while there are cases worth going
through elaborate efforts to derive an abstract understanding
of the world in the learner’s mind. An old Chinese proverb
captures this idea: Give a man a fish and you feed him for a
day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime.
Although we often have a sense that the latter kind of
teaching is the most worthwhile, sometimes it is simply
more efficient to give someone a fish. The ability to flexibly
trade costs (e.g., time and effort) for benefits of pedagogy is
an important aspect of effective teaching.
In this study, we provided children with an instruction set
about what the learner wanted to learn. Children were told
either that Elmo wanted merely to see the lights or wanted
to learn the causal structure of the toy. In real life however,
good informants might not only consider learners’ explicit
requests about what they would like to learn, but also
predict what they would like to learn, or even draw
normative decisions about what the learner ought to learn.
One interesting possibility is that the decision about what to
teach and what information to provide will involve a
calculation of the learner’s expected utility from the data
given the learner’s mental states such as his beliefs and
desires. For example, when a belief inferred from a set of
data is likely to be useful repeatedly, an informant might be
more willing to teach such data than when the belief might
be transiently useful. Just as the ability to learn from
information provided by others, the ability to teach others
might involve an intuitive understanding of others’
knowledge, beliefs, and desires (Theory of Mind), as well as
an ability to consider the expected reward and costs of
information (i.e., a naïve utility calculus; Jara-Ettinger,
Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, in press). Future work
might further explore these ideas and shed light on the
cognitive mechanisms that underlies our ability to learn
from others and share information with others.
The current results provide the first steps in understanding
our ability to decide how to efficiently generate information
best suited to a learner. Given explicit information about the
learner’s goal, young children rationally select the right set
of evidence for the learner by carefully weighing its cost
and informativeness.

Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by NSF
STC awards CCF-1231216.

References
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the
unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children's
pragmatic inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Birch, S. A. J., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Threeand four-year-olds spontaneously use others’ past
performance to guide their learning. Cognition, 107(3),
1018–1034.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N. D.,
Spelke, E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword
of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration
and discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322–330.
Cook, C., Goodman, N. D., & Schulz, L. E. (2011). Where
science starts: spontaneous experiments in preschoolers'
exploratory play. Cognition, 120(3), 341–349.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148–153.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2011). Natural pedagogy as
evolutionary adaptation. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366(1567),
1149–1157.
Futo, J., Téglás, E., Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2010).
Communicative Function Demonstration induces kindbased artifact representation in preverbal infants.
Cognition, 117(1), 1–8.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics: Vol 3, Speech Acts
(pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz, L. E. (2010).
Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066-9071.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., & Schulz, L.E. (2011). Adults and
school-aged children accurately evaluate sins of omission
in pedagogical contexts. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1242-1247.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J. A., & Schulz, L. E. (in
press). Sins of omission: Children selectively explore
when teachers are under-informative. Cognition.
Hagedorn, J., Hailpern, H., & and Karahalios, K.G. (2008).
VCode and VData: Illustrating a new framework for
supporting the video annotation workflow. Extended
Abstracts of AVI 2008.
Horn, L. R., & Bayer, S. (1984). Short-circuited implicature:
A negative contribution. Linguistics and Philosophy, 7(4),
397–414.
Jara-Ettinger, Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz (in press). I’d
do anything for a cookie (but I won’t do that): Children’s
understanding of the costs and rewards underlying
rational action. Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust
ignorant and inaccurate speakers. Child Development,
76(6), 1261-1277.

Acknowledgments
We thank Julia Ellermeier for help with data collection and
Sidney Strauss for helpful comments on an earlier version
of this paper. This work was supported by the Center for

563

Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008).
Twelve-month-olds
communicate
helpfully
and
appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners.
Cognition, 108(3), 732–739.
Sabbagh, M., & Baldwin, D. (2001). Learning words from
knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: Links between
preschoolers' theory of mind and semantic development.
Child Development, 72(4), 1054-1070.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2012).
Learning From Others: The Consequences of
Psychological Reasoning for Human Learning.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7(4), 341–351.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N.D., & Griffiths, T.L. (2014). A
rational account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by,
and learning from, examples. Cognitive Psychology, 71,
55-89.
Strauss, S., Ziv, M., & Stein, A. (2002). Teaching as a
natural cognition and its relations to preschoolers’
developing theory of mind. Cognitive Development,
17(3), 1473–1487.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(36), 13690–13695.

564

