UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two is Company, Three is a Crowd: Party labels and number of candidates as determinants
of 'incorrect' vote choice.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0066k96p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
O'Brien, Keith
Harris, Adam

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two is Company, Three is a Crowd: Party labels and number of candidates as
determinants of 'incorrect' vote choice.
Keith O’ Brien (keith.brien.11@ucl.ac.uk) and Adam J. L. Harris (adam.harris@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, 26 Bedford Way
London, University College London, WC1H 0AP, UK
Abstract
Information-processing approaches to voter decision-making,
and how ‘correct’ voters are, have been largely confined to the
USA political system (Lau & Redlawsk, 1998; 2006). In a
lab-based study based on the UK voting system, we tested the
effects of increasing task complexity and one proposed
heuristic, 'party label' on rates of voting in line with one's
policy attitudes ('correct voting'). Increasing the number of
candidates from two to three decreases correct voting rates.
However, when participants had to choose between two
candidates, rates of correct voting were higher when the party
affiliation of the candidates was presented, with no effect
when there were three candidates in the choice set.
Implications of these results are discussed.
Keywords: politics; multi-attribute decision-making; voting;
correct voting; political psychology.

Introduction
Information-processing approaches to examining voter
decision-making have become popular in recent years (Lau
& Redlawsk, 2001, 2006). Information processing accounts
concern Multi-Attribute Decision Making (MADM), that is
the selection of an alternative (or ‘candidate’) from a finite
number of alternatives contained in a choice set, based on its
attributes (e.g. policies, candidate personal information,
campaign details). Such attributes may be exclusive to one
alternative, or shared by alternatives in the choice set. While
much of political science and political psychology research
is concerned with how and why voters make their decisions
(e.g. voting on partisan lines, policy issues), some
researchers (e.g., Lau & Redlawsk, 1997) have been
concerned with how well voters make decisions, and
consequent implications for democracy and governments.
Democracy relies on the assumption that voters vote in
line with their preferences and/or best interests; in order to
empower a relatively small number of people to reflect and
design society in line with those presumed preferences. If
people are not accurate in their vote-decisions, the quality of
democratic representation provided by the electoral system,
and the legitimacy of elected governments and any
decisions they make, are in question (see also, Lau, Patel,
Fahmy, & Kaufman, 2013). In majoritarian democracies
where marginal vote differences determine one party’s
overall control of government (e.g., UK, USA), inaccurate
voting can lead to governments that aren’t just
unrepresentative, but opposed to the preferences of broad
swathes (or even the majority) of the public.

Voting is the primary way that citizens influence their
government, yet even freely chosen decisions can be
misguided. The accuracy of voter decision-making can be
considered in terms of the degree to which voters choose the
candidate whose policies best represent their preferences – a
‘correct vote’ (Lau & Redlawsk, 1997). Therefore the rate
of electors voting correctly is a higher normative standard
than turnout or voter accessibility by which to judge the
health of democracies (Lau et al., 2013). Research
conducted in the USA suggests greater ability (knowledge,
or ‘Political Sophistication’), experience (age), and effort
(motivation to vote correctly) are positively associated with
higher rates of correct voting (CV) (Lau & Redlawsk, 2006,
2008). Lau et al. (2013) measured CV in 33 democracies by
using Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) data
to calculate ‘utility scores’ for party candidates, considering
a correct vote as one for the candidate with highest utility,
and comparing with survey respondents’ reported vote
choice.
Focusing on the results from the UK and the USA, Lau et
al. (2013) calculated rates of CV to be higher in the USA
(88% in 2004; 82% in 1996) than in the UK (79% in 1997;
78% in 2005). Across the entire analysis of 33 democracies,
10 factors were found to be associated with CV. We focus
here on one of them, the number of parties in the election.
Lau et al. (2013) reported that, across all 69 elections
considered, there was a negative relationship between rates
of CV and number of parties. The probability of casting a
correct vote dropped from 79% to 57% when number of
parties increase from two to nine. Such a result is of
particular interest given the trend towards larger number of
parties on offer in elections outside the USA. Further, in a
lab-based study, Lau and Redlawsk (2001) found increasing
candidate numbers was negatively associated with correct
voting. Why should rates of CV decrease so dramatically as
the number of candidates/parties increases?
One possible explanation is in terms of ‘chance levels’.
The chance of a voter choosing a party who matches her
own interests simply is higher when there are two parties (as
any voters choosing randomly will be correct 50% of the
time) than when there are nine. Lau and Redlawsk (1997)
find voters choose correctly better than chance when there
are two candidates, and Lau et al. (2013) show above
chance levels of CV across 69 elections where chance levels
range between 27% and 37%. Another explanation is task
complexity, which often requires decision-makers to

2705

simplify choice-tasks through the use of various ‘heuristics’
(‘cognitive shortcuts’; Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011).
A seminal definition of the aim of heuristics is to reduce
complex tasks to simpler judgmental operations (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974). Some researchers have suggested that
heuristics can approximate, and even outperform, optimal
decision-making strategies (e.g., Todd & Gigerenzer, 2011).
While heuristics are usually effective, “sometimes they lead
to severe and systematic errors” (p.1, Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974), with heuristic success dependent on
applying the appropriate heuristic given the environmental
structure (or decision context), with misapplication leading
to errors in accuracy (Todd & Gigerenzer, 2011).
Increasing the number of alternatives (herein, candidates)
should increase the complexity of the task, and increase the
reliance on heuristics (Bettman, Luce & Payne, 1998).
Political decision-making is no exception, as Lau and
Redlawsk (2001) find increasing numbers of candidates
increased the use of ‘political’ heuristics, specifically
differing types of political heuristics. In two candidate
scenarios, for example, voters use the viability or likelihood
of a candidate being elected; and candidate ideology in four
candidate scenarios (Lau & Redlawsk, 2001).
We examine the possible effects of one political heuristic
(‘party label’) on correct voting. Various authors have
posited that partisan identity (‘party label’) acts as a
heuristic in voter decision-tasks (e.g., Lau & Redlawsk,
2001; Rahn, 1993). Party labels are stereotypic schema with
which voters can infer a large amount about those with a
partisan label (e.g. Liberals are for high taxes, Republicans
are anti-government). Party labels act as ‘top-level’
affective proxies; a pre-computed summary of affective
reactions to all the schema’s attributes (Lau & Sears, 1986).
Application of party labels to candidates can easily lead to
errors if the default attributes do not apply (e.g., if a pro-EU
candidate runs for an anti-EU party). Despite participants
choosing to access information informing them of the party
to which a candidate belonged (to a greater extent than any
other information), Lau and Redlawsk (2001) could not
assess the importance of party label as a heuristic due to the
uni-party design of their study. Voters were more likely (but
non-significantly) to utilize candidate ideology as a
heuristic, but it stands to reason that in the absence of
candidate ideology, voters should infer it from the party
label. Thus the party label heuristic is best studied in multiparty scenarios.
Present study: Lau and Redlawsk (2001) find increasing
candidate numbers decreased correct voting, but in a uniparty scenario. We test this further in a UK setting with
multi-party candidates. We test the potential influence of the
party label heuristic on ‘correct voting’ by manipulating the
presence of the party label. Our hypotheses are:
H1: That rates of ‘correct voting’ will decrease when
candidates (alternatives) increase from 2 to 3.

H2: That ‘correct voting’ will decrease when Party Label
(party identity) information is available.
H3: That H1 and H2 will be multiplicative effects, such
that the effect of excluding Party Label will be greater in the
3-candidate condition, due to the enhanced task complexity.

Method
Participant Information
Participants were native English speakers and eligible to
vote in the UK local or parliamentary elections before
enrolment in the study. 138 participants (78 female), aged
18-73 (µ= 27.12 years), were recruited in return for £4
remuneration. Participants were mostly single (71%);
students (76%); self-identifying as ‘White-British’ (55%);
and with an income under £10,000 per annum (53%).

Design
A 2x2 ('Number of Candidates' x 'Party Label') betweenparticipants design was employed. Participants were
randomly assigned to a ‘Party Label Present’ (PLP) or a
‘Party Label Absent’ (PLA) condition by the experimenter,
and randomly assigned further by the software to either a 2
or 3 candidate condition within that block. The latter
randomisation led to some imbalance in cell sizes (2CanPLA: 35; 3Can-PLA: 34; 2Can- PLP: 41, 3Can-PLP: 28)
The 2-candidate condition consisted of simulated
candidates representing the UK’s main political parties, the
Labour Party and the Conservative Party [Lab/Con]. The ‘3Candidate’ (3-Can) condition also included the Liberal
Democrats [Lib]. Each candidate had 21 policies that could
be accessed during the campaign stage. The party
association of the candidates was either explicitly presented
(PLP) or not (PLA). ‘Party Label’ and ‘Number of
Candidates’ were the only variables manipulated in this
study. There were, however, a number of additional scales
included (e.g., ‘Need for Cognition’, UK Civics Test
questionnaire). These are not the focus of the current paper
and will not be discussed further, aside from mentioning
where in the procedure they were included.
Participants indicated their vote choice at the end of the
trial by choosing one of the candidates, or opting for ‘None
of the Above’ or ‘Abstain/Spoil’.

Materials
Dynamic Process Tracing Environment (DPTE): The
experiment was carried out using the Dynamic Process
Tracing Environment software (Lau & Redlawsk, 2006)1.
DPTE is designed to simulate the ebb & flow of information
during actual election campaigns, and examine how voters
obtain, process, and evaluate the information they
encounter. Stimulus items (i.e., candidate policies) are
1

2706

http://dpte.polisci.uiowa.edu/dpte/DPTE.html

presented during ‘flow stages’. Participants are told that
item boxes will appear with summary ‘headlines’ along with
the candidate’s name, and they have to click on an item to
read and learn more about that item if they wish.
Participants are also informed that information continues to
‘flow’ in the background, even while reading an open item,
as to mimic the flow (and opportunity-cost) of information
over time in a real campaign.
The order of items was randomised, with each item
appearing twice during the experiment. The time between an
item appearing at the top of the 'flow screen' and exiting at
the bottom was 15 seconds. Participants could click on any
item currently visible in the 'flow screen'. The ‘flow stage’
automatically terminated after the disappearance of the last
stimulus item.
Candidate Party Label: Party-identifying information
for candidates in PLP conditions was imparted by putting
party logos and party-branded colour theme (i.e. Red= Lab,
Blue=Con, Yellow= Lib) on stimulus items (e.g. a red rose
and red border for Labour candidates), and explained before
the voting task. In PLA conditions logos were absent, and
all stimulus item borders were grey.
Constructing the Candidates: Male-only names were
used to control for effects of candidate gender on votechoice. Names were chosen from the 3 most common UK
first and surnames on the 2007 UK Electoral Roll, and
randomly allocated. This was then checked against the list
of MPs in the House of Commons to check that such
politicians did not already exist.
Candidate Policies (Attribute Items): Candidate
policies were taken from the relevant party manifesto from
the 2010 UK General Election (Manifesto Project, 2013;
BBC News, 2010), and prioritized based on public attitude
polls asking voters to rank the importance of policycategories just prior to the time of the experiment (e.g.,
when asked “Which of the following do you think are the
most important issues facing the country at this time?”, 77%
of the public reported [the] ‘Economy’; YouGov, 2013a). 21
stimulus items for each candidate were constructed based on
these policy categories (e.g. for ‘Economy’, policies on
‘Jobs’ were used, e.g., “[Labour will] guarantee people
aged 18-24 a job, work experience or training place if they
are unemployed for more than six months”), and controlled
to be similar in word length, complexity and informational
content. Each policy was assigned a value between 1-7,
based on its position in a political ‘left-right’ continuum,
with up to 7 possible options for that policy (e.g. on Deficit:
Lab, Lib, and Con received 2, 4 or 5 respectively; for higher
education fees, 1= 100% Government Funded, and 7= 100%
Tuition Fees).

for each one. Upon continuing, participants completed three
questionnaires measuring their ‘political sophistication’ –
not the focus of the current paper.
After completion of the questionnaires, participants were
presented with instructions on the software’s operation, and
the experimental voting task, before proceeding to engage in
a practice trial featuring two candidates (Ken Livingstone &
Boris Johnston), with four stimulus items per candidate.
After completion of the practice experiment, participants
proceeded to the main experiment. Upon making their vote
choice, participants completed a further 3 questionnaires –
not focused on in this paper - as well as completing a policy
attitude survey relating to the 21 policy attributes that
appeared for each candidate (21 questions), before being
debriefed as to the purpose of the experiment and paid.

Procedure

2

The study was conducted in individual lab cubicles at UCL.
Participants first read an introductory message consisting
of an overview of the study’s main stages, and requirements

Results
Vote Choice
The Labour candidate was the most popular in our
experiment (60.4% of votes), followed by Conservative
(19.4%), Liberal Democrat (8.6%), None of those on ballot
(8%) and Abstain/Spoil (3.6%).
We examined the relationship between Vote Choice and
Number of Candidates. The moderate relationship between
these variables was significant, χ2 (4, N= 139) = 12.84, p =
.012, ϕc= .304. This is as expected: a lack of a 3rd (LibDem)
candidate in 2-Candidate conditions will create a significant
effect, as there will be no LibDem votes. There was no
relationship between Vote Choice and Party Label, χ2 (4,
N= 139) = 2.648, p= .618, ϕc= .138.

Correct Voting (CV)

The Measure: Lau and Redlawsk’s ‘normative naïve’
measure of correct voting (1997) is an objective
determination of whom a participant should have voted for,
based on their own reported preferences. Our measure was
in the same ‘normative naïve’ spirit, but with some notable
differences. We do not use or include group endorsements
or candidate pictures, nor do we weigh policy categories by
participants’ judgments of importance. Further, we do not
rescale participants’ (dis)agreement with candidates to a
simple -1/+1. Participants’ policy preferences are compared
with each candidate’s policies using their responses to the
policy attitude survey. The overall distance between their
preferences and the policies offered by candidates are
calculated using the Euclidian calculations2 for the distance
(d) between two points in (n) dimensions:

While this differs from the Rabinowitz and MacDonald (1989)
directional method typically employed, empirically the two are
usually indistinguishable, with Lau et al. (Note 37, 2013) in
agreement.

2707

pi and qi represent a participant’s and candidate’s position
respectively on policy i. These positions are given by
participants’ responses to the 21 question policy attitude
survey and the candidates’ values for each policy on the
‘left-right’ continuum. An end-product value of ‘0’ between a
candidate and a voter indicates a perfectly proximal
(overlapping) preference-distance, with an increasingly
positive (due to the squared difference) value reflecting
relative distance away from each other. For example: if a
person scores ‘1’ for Candidate A, and ‘2’ for Candidate B,
and ‘6’ for Candidate C, we can say A is closer to B, and B
is closer to A than C. Determining the Correct Choice:
From the above calculations, we already have a ranked
objective measure of whom a participant should have voted
for (e.g. A, as A<B<C). If a participant voted for the most
proximal candidate available to them in the ‘election’, it was
deemed a ‘correct’ vote, otherwise they voted ‘incorrectly’.
In the event of a participant being equally close to two or
more of the candidates, a vote for either of them was treated
as voting ‘correctly’.
Analyses: Participants who chose ‘Abstain’ or ‘Don’t
Know’ (N=16) were eliminated from subsequent analyses.
The proportions of participants voting correctly in each
condition are shown in Figure 1.

voted correctly in the 2-candidate condition (significantly
greater than the 50% expected by chance, p = .000), whilst
the 57% of participants voting correctly in the 3-candidate
condition did not differ significantly from chance levels
(33%; p= .489). Thus, the influence of increasing the
number of candidates on levels of CV cannot be explained
solely on the basis of a difference in chance levels. Note that
we are not claiming that participants are choosing randomly
in the 3-Can condition; simply that based on their own
reported policy preferences they choose the correct
candidate no better than if by chance.
As the interaction term approached significance, in light of
H3, we analysed the effect of PLP/A for 2 vs. 3 candidates
separately (on the legitimacy of planned simple effect tests
in the absence of a significant overall interaction, see
Howell, 1997, p. 415). In the 2-Can condition there was an
effect of Party Label on CV, χ2 (1, 69)= 4.514, p= .034, ϕc=
.256, where CV increases from 77% to 94% when there are
2 candidates and PL is present. However, there was no
significant effect of PL on CV in the 3-Can condition, χ2 (1,
N= 54)= .186, p= .667, ϕc= -.059.

Discussion
In discussing our findings, we refer back to our original
hypotheses:
H1: That increasing the number of alternatives (candidates)
in the vote-choice task will significantly decrease rates of
‘correct voting’.

Figure 1: % of correct votes per condition. Abstentions &
‘Don’t know’ removed.
A logistic regression confirmed the significant effect of
number of candidates on correct voting (β= -.88, p= .000).
The effect of Party Label did not reach significance (β =
.355, p= .160), with the trend suggesting people were more
likely to vote correctly in the presence of party labels than in
their absence. The interaction term approached significance
(β = -.474, p= .06). The significant effect of number of
candidates would of course be expected even if participants
were choosing candidates at random, due to the fewer
options available in the 2-Candidate condition. We therefore
compared rates of CV to chance levels in these conditions,
collapsing across party label conditions. 87% of participants

Our analysis showed a strong relationship between CV
and Number of Candidates. Indeed, we showed that in 3Candidate conditions, voters chose the candidate who best
represented their policy levels at a level no better than
chance. One might expect CV to increase with larger
numbers of vote-choice alternatives, due to increasing
alternatives to choose from, and the ability of those
identifying as Liberal Democrat to choose their preferred
party. However we know from findings in decision-making
research that increasing the numbers of alternatives in a
choice set increases the difficulty of the choice task
(Johnson & Payne, 1985), due to increased information
search requirements. This subsequently leads to the use of
different decision-making strategies, which can result in
different choices being made. It nonetheless seems striking
that such a small increase to three alternatives leads to such
a large effect on voters’ ability to vote correctly (87% to
57%), given in real-world elections increases from two to
nine alternatives decrease correct voting from 79 to 57%
respectively (Lau et al., 2013). Contrary to Lau et al.’s
(2013) results from real-world elections, we find
participants do not do better than chance in a controlled
laboratory-based study when there are 3 alternatives in the
choice set. Further research is required to better understand
the effects of additional candidates on CV.

2708

H2: That having partisan identification information
(candidate party labels) present will significantly decrease
rates of ‘correct voting’.
H3: That H1 and H2 will be multiplicative effects, such that
the effect of excluding Party Label will be greater in the 3candidate condition.
We observed no overall support for H2, and in fact the
trend is in the opposite direction. Given the marginally
significant interaction term, and the predictions of H3, the
effects of Party Label are best discussed separately for the
2-candidate and 3-candidate conditions, whilst recognizing
that the interaction term did not quite reach conventional
levels of significance. Consequently, our discussion is
tentative, but we suggest that future research is needed to
examine the effects of additional parties/candidates in the
presence/absence of party labels.
H3 was not supported. Although the interaction term
approached significance, the pattern of results was not as
predicted. We did not observe Party Label having any effect
on the rates of correct voting in the 3-candidate condition. In
the two-candidate condition, the reverse of our hypothesis
was observed; CV rates actually increased when party
labels were present (from 77% to 94%).
As discussed in the Introduction, heuristics are typically
employed because they (usually) guide decision makers to
appropriate decisions; the Party Label heuristic is one such
heuristic (Lau & Redlawsk, 2001). The fact that CV
increased when use of this heuristic was possible, suggests
the heuristic was well adapted to the task demands in the
two-candidate condition. It furthermore suggests that our
participants had a reasonable understanding of the relative
policy positions of these two parties, which are, after all,
diametrically opposed in the British political system. Thus,
Party Label is able to act as an efficient affective proxy to
enhance the decision making process.
The fact that this result did not hold in the three-candidate
condition could be explained in one of two ways. Firstly,
participants might not have used party label as a cue to
guide their decisions. This is plausible, but seems unlikely
given the demonstrated ubiquity of its use as a political
heuristic (e.g., Lau & Redlawsk, 2006; Rahn, 1993), and
that heuristics should be expected to be utilised more with
larger choice sets, especially when candidates may be more
ideologically similar, thus increasing task difficulty (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Gaissmaier, 2011; Lau & Redlawsk, 2006).
Alternatively, participants might have been using the party
label, but it did not confer a beneficial effect on the
correctness of their voting (as a group). This could occur if
participants’ understanding of the policies of the Liberal
Democrat, Conservative, and Labour parties are not well
delineated between all three (given the beneficial effect of
Party Label in the two-candidate condition, this
predominantly suggests confusion over the relative
standpoint of the Liberal Democrats in comparison with the

each of the other two parties). Such a possibility is
supported by past research in multi-party political systems.
Schmitt (1995) showed that voters are not good at matching
European parties to their issues, and Kritzinger and McElroy
(2012, p. 184) find that “British voters can hardly agree on
any party position”. Even considering voter partyidentification (PID; a stable identity based on one’s
values/issue preferences), this may not be related (entirely)
to one’s own true preferences. PID is correlated with
parental PID, at least in initial electoral choices (Niemi &
Jennings, 1990), and PID may not be updated in light of
negative changes in party positions, even strengthened
(Redlawsk et al., 2010). If voters use Party Label to match
with PID, the weakening of the relationship between PID
and underlying preferences might be attenuating the
possible informational benefit invoked by party labels.
Refining Correct Voting: CV is a complex concept, and
measurable in multiple ways (Lau & Redlawsk, 1997). The
conclusions presented here reflect the measure that we
chose. The degree to which these are robust across different
potential measures is yet to be seen, and worthy of
investigation. One issue not considered in the present study
was the relative importance (weighting) of each policy item
to voters, an issue that we are addressing in subsequent
research. While this is potentially a limitation of the current
study, within judgment analysis equal-weight models have
been shown to approximate the performance of optimally
weighted decision models (Dawes, 1979). It may,
nevertheless, be the case that a single issue dominates a
participants’ preference, and we were unable to assess that
in the current study. It is also debatable whether weights
should be created from participants judging policy
importance independently (Lau & Redlawsk, 2006), or in
relation to each other, an issue to be addressed in future
research.
In real-world voting with multiple parties and candidates,
strategic voting concerns (e.g. electability; Blais &
Gschwend, 2011) complicate things further. This is highly
unlikely to have been a concern in the present study, as our
election scenarios stressed candidates were equally ‘tied in
the polls’.
Conclusion and Implications: We have investigated
correct voting in a multi-party electoral context outside of
the USA, using in-lab experiments and participants’ own
self-reported policy preferences. Even when the increase in
the available candidates choice set is minimal (2 alternatives
to 3 alternatives), voters seem unable to correctly identify
the candidate that overall best matches their own reported
preferences; with partisan labels aiding when the choice set
is small, but having no effect on the ability to vote correctly
as the choice-set size increases.
Given the prevailing trend in non-USA countries towards
increasing the number of parties on offer, and the UK’s
comparatively high party tribalism (YouGov, 2013b), these
findings are highly concerning for the idea of democracy.

2709

Why is the gold standard for elections ‘free and fair’, but not
'accurate’? Should a government elected with high turnout,
but with low voter ‘correctness’, be preferable to one where
few vote but with high accuracy?

Acknowledgements
We thank Peter John for useful discussions, and Richard
Lau & David Redlawsk for permission to use their DPTE
software and discussions about ‘correct voting’.

References
Bartels, Larry M. (2001). A generational model of political
learning. Presented at the annual meeting of the American
Political Science Association, San Francisco, September.
BBC News. (2010). Where they Stand: Guide to Party
Election Policies.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/election_2010/8515
961.stm
Bettman, J. R., Luce, M. F., & Payne, J. W. (1998).
Constructive Consumer Choice Processes. Journal of
Consumer Research, 25(3), 187–217.
Blais, A., & Gschwend, T. (2011). Strategic Defection
Across Elections, Parties, and Voters. In Citizens,
Context, and Choice, ed. Russell J. Dalton and
Christopher J. Anderson, pp. 176. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dawes, R. M. (1979). The robust beauty of improper linear
models in decision making. American Psychologist,
34(7), 571.
Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuristic
Decision Making. Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1),
451eview
Gray, A. (1997). Euclidean Spaces. l PsychoModern
Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces with
Mathematica, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 25.
Howell, D.C. (1997). Statistical methods for psychology (4th
ed.). Duxbury Press, Belmont, CA.
Johnson, E. J. & Payne, J. W. (1985) Effort and accuracy in
choice, Management Science, 31, 394 Scien
Kritzinger S and McElroy, G (2012) Meaningful Choices?
Voter perceptions of party positions in European
Elections. In: Banducci S, Franklin M, Giebler H, et al.
(eds) An Audit of Democracy in the EU, Florence:
European University Institute, pp. 169-192.
Lau, R. R., Patel, P., Fahmy, D. F., & Kaufman, R. R.
(2013). Correct Voting Across Thirty-Three Democracies:
A Preliminary Analysis. British Journal of Political
Science, 1–21.
Lau, R. R., & Redlawsk, D. P. (1997). Voting Correctly.
The American Political Science Review, 91(3), 585–598.
Lau, R. R., & Redlawsk, D. P. (2001). Advantages and
Disadvantages of Cognitive Heuristics in Political

Decision Making. American Journal of Political Science,
45(4), 951–971.
Lau, R. R., & Redlawsk, D. P. (2006). How Voters Decide:
Information Processing During Election Campaigns.
Cambridge University Press.
Lau, R. R., & Redlawsk, D. P. (2008). Older but Wiser?
Effects of Age on Political Cognition. The Journal of
Politics, 70 (01).
Lau, R. R., & Sears, D. O. (1986). Political Cognition: The
19th Annual Carnegie Symposium on Cognition. L.
Erlbaum Associates.
Levendusky, M. S. (2010). Clearer cues, more consistent
voters: A benefit of elite polarization. Political Behavior,
32, 111-131.
Luskin, R. C. (1987). Measuring Political Sophistication.
American Journal of Political Science, 31(4), 856–899.
Luskin, R. C. (1990). Explaining political sophistication.
Political Behavior, 12(4), 331–361.
Manifesto Project (MRG/CMP/MARPOR). Version 2013b
https://manifesto-project.wzb.eu/
Niemi, R. G., Jennings, M.K. (1991). Issues and inheritance
in the formation of party identification. American Journal
of Political Science, 35:970-88.
Rabinowitz., G., & MacDonald, E. S. (1989). A Directional
Theory of Issue Voting. American Political Science
Review, 83, 93–121
Rahn, W. M. (1993). The role of partisan stereotypes in
information processing about political candidates.
American Journal of Political Science, 37, 472–496.
Redlawsk, D. P., Civettini, A. J. W., & Emmerson, K. M.
(2010). The Affective Tipping Point: Do Motivated
Reasoners Ever “Get It”? Political Psychology, 31(4),
563–593.
Schmitt, Hermann. (1995). National Party Systems and the
Policies of the European Union. First results from the
1994 European Elections Study, Il Politico, 90, pp. 93107.
Shah, A.K., Oppenheimer, D.M. (2008). Heuristics made
easy: an effort-reduction framework. Psychol. Bulletin.
137:207–22
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124–1131.
Todd, P. M., & Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Environments That
Make Us Smart Ecological Rationality. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 16(3), 167–171.
YouGov. (2013a). YouGov/The Sun Survey Results. 160413.
YouGov. (2013b). Report: Partisanship high in UK - but
lower than in USA.
http://yougov.co.uk/news/2013/04/18/tribalism-high-uk/

2710

