UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Dual Eye-Tracking to Evaluate Students’ Collaboration with an Intelligent Tutoring
System for Elementary-Level Fractions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8m3543hd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Belenkuy, Daniel
Ringenberg, MIchael
Olsen, Jennifer
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Dual Eye-Tracking to Evaluate Students’ Collaboration with an Intelligent
Tutoring System for Elementary-Level Fractions
Daniel Belenky (dbelenky@andrew.cmu.edu)
Michael Ringenberg (mringenb@cs.cmu.edu)
Jennifer Olsen (jkolsen@cs.cmu.edu)
Vincent Aleven (aleven@cs.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University - Human-Computer Interaction Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Nikol Rummel (nikol.rummel@rub.de)
Ruhr-Universität - Institute of Educational Research, Bochum, Germany
Abstract

is important to understand what sorts of instructional
environments and activities are better suited towards
different learning outcomes.
The current study is leveraging a recent methodological
advancement, dual eye-tracking (e.g., Jermann, Mullins,
Nüssli, & Dillenbourg, 2011), to better understand how
collaboration may influence learning. Dual eye-tracking
refers to the recording, synchronizing, and analyzing of eyetracking information from two different students, who, in
the present study, worked at two different machines (seeing
roughly equivalent interfaces). We use gaze recurrence
analysis (Richardson and Dale, 2005) to describe, both
quantitatively and qualitatively, the different patterns of
collaboration engendered by procedural and conceptual
learning materials. This analysis method quantifies the
degree to which the two collaborators’ gazes are in
agreement (defined as looking at or near the same place on
the interface) at any given point in time, and may provide an
index of the quality of interaction (e.g., Nussli, 2011). This
data is frequently graphed as a recurrence plot, which
provides a way to visualize patterns of joint attention. In the
present work, we introduce the methodological contribution
of integrating ITS log data into such gaze recurrence plots,
and illustrate this method’s utility in studying the dynamics
of interaction that contribute to successful learning. We
anticipate that higher levels of joint attention are related to
better collaborative discussions, and thus likely to predict
the development of conceptual knowledge.
Another contribution of the present research comes from
working with a sample drawn from a much younger
population than is generally examined in CSCL research,
providing an important test of the generalizability of prior
findings and theories to a wider range of students and
situations. Even with this age group, we expect that
collaboration can facilitate conceptual understanding, and
that, collaborators can benefit from more conceptuallyoriented learning materials, compared to more procedurallyoriented instruction. We test this hypothesis using a
collaboration-enabled version of the Fractions Tutor
(https://mathtutor.web.cmu.edu/info), an ITS that has been
shown to produce learning gains for elementary fractions.
The larger goal of our research program is to develop
adaptive learning technologies that optimize instruction by
matching the type of learning activity with the type of

As learning technologies proliferate, it is important for
research to address how to best align instruction to
educational goals. For example, recent evidence indicates that
working collaboratively may have unique benefits for
facilitating the acquisition of conceptual understanding, as
opposed to procedural fluency (Mullins, Rummel & Spada,
2011). To investigate this effect, we leverage and expand
upon a new methodology, dual eye-tracking, to understand
how collaborators’ joint attention may impact learning in a
collaboration-enabled Intelligent Tutoring System for
fractions. We present results from a study in which 28 pairs of
4th and 5th grade students completed a set of either
conceptually- or procedurally-oriented instructional activities
in a school setting. Results indicate that students collaborating
exhibited learning gains for conceptual knowledge, but not for
procedural knowledge, and that more joint attention was
related to learning gains. These results may inform the design
of future learning technologies, and illustrate the utility of
using dual eye-tracking to study collaboration.
Keywords: Collaboration; Intelligent Tutoring System, Dual
Eye-Tracking; Conceptual Learning.

Introduction
One of the most successful applications of cognitive science
to real-world settings has been through the development of
Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITSs). These learning
technologies have been shown to help students learn by
doing as they solve problems by providing targeted
feedback in response to errors, as well as next-step hints
when students request one. The present research extends
these lines of work to allow for pairs of students to
collaborate as they engage with an ITS, so students can have
the benefits of collaboration while also receiving the
cognitive support that ITSs provide. Building on prior
research from the field of Computer-Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL), there is reason to believe
that collaborating may be particularly well-suited to
facilitate the development of conceptual knowledge
(Mullins, Rummel & Spada, 2011). Working collaboratively
requires students to discuss, mutually elaborate, question,
and construct their knowledge, which has been shown to
promote a deeper understanding of the materials (see Chi’s
ICAP hypothesis; Chi, 2009). As robust knowledge consists
of both conceptual understanding and procedural fluency, it

176

knowledge that is the target of instruction. The research
presented here represents a preliminary examination
towards this end, focusing on three specific questions: 1)
Are 4th and 5th grade students able to show learning gains
when using a collaboration-enabled ITS? 2) Is the
development of conceptual knowledge especially facilitated
when collaborators work on conceptually-oriented learning
materials, compared to procedurally-oriented materials? 3)
Is joint visual attention related to increases in learning?

contrast two example explanations dealing with whether or
not two fractions are equivalent. One of the explanations is
correct, but the other reflects a common misconception;
students must decide which is correct and why. In another
type of problem, students manipulate numerators and
denominators of given fractions to see how they relate, and
use this information to define what makes fractions
equivalent. The procedural problems, in contrast, scaffold
student problem solving as they create and compare
equivalent fractions (see Figure 1b). These problems focus
solely on executing actions to generate the correct solution,
but do not ask students how or why the procedures work
(Rittle-Johnson & Alibali, 1999). For example, one type of
problem has students list the factors of both the numerator
and denominator, find the greatest common factor, and then
reduce the fraction. Another has students decide if fraction
A is equivalent to fraction B by making a series of fractions
equivalent to A, and seeing if fraction B is in that list.
The collaborative tutors scaffold collaboration by varying
problem features available to each partner working on a
shared problem. That is, students are given different roles
throughout the problems, such as the “problem solver,” or
the “helper.” The problem solver is tasked with inputting
responses, based on discussion with her partner. The helper
is tasked with aiding her partner in coming up with a correct
solution. Students are sometimes given unique information
they must share, creating a sense of individual
accountability. All of the various tasks (e.g., solving,
sharing, asking) are clearly labeled with appropriate icons
(e.g., a “do” icon, a “share” icon, an “ask” icon, etc.). In
addition, some steps provide opportunities for group
knowledge awareness (Janssen & Bodemer, 2013) by asking
each student to first respond independently to a question,
and then showing each student’s answer to one another.
This allows for discussion, particularly in cases where there
is disagreement, before submitting an answer that is tutored
by the system. These features are in addition to other
“standard” ITS cognitive supports, such as an interface that
breaks problems into steps, targeted feedback, and ondemand hints for each step. Student interactions, like mouse
clicks and keyboard entries, are logged by the ITS.
Test materials. A computer-based test was developed to
closely match the target knowledge covered in the tutors.
The test comprised 5 procedural and 6 conceptual test items,
based on pilot studies with similar materials and population.
The pre-test was administered in the morning on the day
that the student would be using the learning materials, and
the post-test was administered the following morning.
Students had up to 25 minutes to complete the 11-item test,
and almost all were able to do so. Two isomorphic sets of
questions were developed, and there were no differences in
performance on these two test forms, t (79) = .96, p = .338.
The presentation of these forms as pre- or post-tests was
counter-balanced.

Method
Participants
Eighty-four 4th and 5th grade students from a Western
Pennsylvania school district participated in 45-minute “pullout” sessions (in lab rooms set up in their schools) during
normal instructional time. Their ages ranged from 9-12
years old, M = 9.96, SD = .75. They were assigned to dyads
based on teacher pairings, and each dyad was randomly
assigned to one of four conditions, created by crossing two
factors; whether learning was collaborative or individual,
and whether the learning materials were geared towards
acquiring conceptual knowledge or procedural knowledge.
As the present hypotheses are only concerned with the
collaborative conditions, the sample of interest here are the
28 students in the collaborative/conceptual and 28 students
in the collaborative/procedural conditions (see Olsen,
Belenky, Aleven, & Rummel, 2014, for more details on the
study). Dyadic-level data is presented here, so that each
dyad’s eye-tracking data can be compared to an average of
the dyad’s test performances. Learning data from one dyad
has been removed, as the post-test data was unusable due to
experimenter error, but the eye-tracking data was retained.

Materials
Learning materials. The materials for this study were built
using the Cognitive Tutor Authoring Tools (CTAT, freely
available from http://ctat.pact.cs.cmu.edu), which have been
extended to support collaborative interaction between two or
more students working (Olsen et al., 2014). Sets of 16
conceptual and 16 procedural learning activities that cover
basic fraction equivalence were developed. Each set consists
of four types of problems, with four isomorphs of each type.
The materials were sequenced so that students completed
one of each of the four types of problems for their condition
(procedural or conceptual) before beginning a new round of
isomorphic problems. Time-on-task was controlled, with
students working for 45 minutes.
The conceptual problems focus on understanding
underlying principles of fraction equivalence, and how
individual components (e.g., numerators, denominators) are
interrelated (see Figure 1a), following Rittle-Johnson and
Alibali’s definition of conceptual knowledge (1999). For
example, some problems have students compare and

177

Figure 1a (left) and 1b (right). The first collaborative conceptual learning activity (left), and the first procedural learning
activity (right). The conceptual activities require students to reason about the underlying principles of fraction equivalence,
while procedural activities require executing specific steps to produce and evaluate equivalent fractions.
Dark areas along the diagonal indicate joint attention (i.e.,
that participants were looking at the same areas of the
screen at the same time), while dark points either just above
or just below this line indicate that one participant “led” and
the other followed his gaze. Dark points further away from
the diagonal indicate that a certain area of the screen was
fixated by each student but not in close temporal proximity.
Location information is not encoded in the plot; dark pixels
represent gaze convergence in a certain interface area, but
the graph itself does not say which area.

Eye-Tracking
Participants completed the learning activities on a 22-inch
screen equipped with an SMI Red 250 Hz infrared eyetracking camera (www.smivision.com). The eye-tracking
data also includes log messages sent directly from the ITS.
As discussed in the introduction, this methodological
contribution synchronizes between students’ observable
actions in the tutor interface and their eye-tracking behavior.
For example, when students interact with the tutor to input a
response, whether it is correct or incorrect is immediately
evaluated, and this can be included in the recurrence plot.
Gaze Recurrence. The gaze recurrence analysis can be
conceptualized as asking, “For each two-second slice, what
proportion of fixations were at the same location for both
students?” This information can be analyzed numerically, as
well as displayed graphically in recurrence plots. In these
plots, if point (t1, t2) is dark, it means that at time point t2,
Student 2 fixated on the same screen location on which
Student 1 fixated at time point t1. Our particular focus is on
points representing joint attention – that is, when t1 is equal
to t2 – which are plotted along the diagonal of the recurrence
plots. Specifically, gaze recurrence was calculated by first
binning the data into two-second slices. As the eye-tracker
was sampling at 250 Hz, this provides a maximum of 500
data points for each student for each two-second slice.
Considering only fixations (non-fixation data was removed),
we calculated for each two second slice the proportion of
data points in which students’ gazes were co-located,
defined as being less than 100 pixels apart. This criterion
was chosen because it is similar to what has been used in
prior research (i.e., 70 pixels in Jermann et al., 2011), and is
close to the size of the interface elements.
Numerical analyses will focus on the proportion of data
points that indicate joint attention, which we define as when
the collaborators are looking in the same area within two
seconds of one another. In addition, qualitative analysis of
the complete interaction can be examined by graphing the
data according to a color scale, with darker colors indicating
a larger proportion of fixation-based data points being
located in the same area (see Figures 2a, 2b, 3a, and 3b).

Results
Learning Data
The tutor was effective in helping students gain conceptual
knowledge. As revealed in a repeated-measures ANOVA,
with pre/post scores on the conceptual test items as the
dependent variables, and condition (procedurally- or
conceptually-oriented instruction) as a between-subject
factor, students increased their conceptual test scores from
pre-test (M = 2.06, SD = 1.25) to post-test (M = 2.56, SD =
1.05), F(1, 25) = 7.66, p = .010. However, there was no
effect of condition, F(1, 25) = .01, p = .922, nor an
interaction, F(1, 25) = .00, p = .99.
There were no differences in a similar analysis comparing
procedural test scores on the pre-test (M = .70, SD = .77) to
post-test (M = .87, SD = .84), F(1, 25) = 1.13, p = .296.
There was, again, no effect of condition, F(1, 25) = .93, p =
.345, nor an interaction, F(1, 25) = 1.13, p = .296.
These results may indicate that, regardless of instructional
activity, there is a benefit to collaborating for the
development of conceptual understanding, which supports
our first hypothesis. However, we do not see evidence that
conceptually-oriented instruction facilitates the acquisition
of conceptual knowledge more than procedurally-oriented
materials do, contrary to the second hypothesis.

Eye-Tracking Data
Joint attention was calculated for each dyad, and for each
separate problem. Because students completed a variable

178

	  

	  

Figure 2a (left) and 2b (right). Gaze recurrence plots for a high-performing (left) and low-performing (right) conceptual
dyad, on the first conceptual problem in the tutor. Darker areas along the diagonal indicate a greater proportion of
synchronized gazes. Interaction data from the ITS is overlaid, with red lines indicating moments when incorrect attempts
were entered and green lines indicating correct attempts. The axis labels are time stamps for each student.
number of problems, ranging from 2 to 14, (M = 6.96, SD =
2.83), as a first, gross measure, we averaged the joint
attention measures for the first four problems (see Table 1).
This represents the amount of time collaborators spent
jointly attending to the same information during their first
attempt at each of the 4 problem types, which represented
the bulk of the 45-minute instruction for most dyads. The
reliability of the gaze convergence measure (Cronbach’s
Alpha, see Table 1) was acceptable across both the
conceptual and procedural problems, encouraging given
there were only 14 dyads per condition. Thus, there appear
to be systematic dyad-level differences; those who had
greater gaze convergence on one problem tended to have
greater gaze convergence on other problems, inspiring
confidence that this measure captures information about
characteristic patterns of joint attention across problems.
We investigate if this measure of joint attention can be
used as an index of the quality of collaboration by analyzing
if pairs who more frequently jointly attend to the same
information learn more and perform better (Nussli, 2011).
To separate out the effect of prior knowledge, gaze was
correlated to separate learning gain scores for the procedural
and conceptual test subscales, calculated by subtracting pretest from post-test. The amount of joint attention was not
correlated to the procedural gain score, r = .14, p = .491, but
there was a marginally significant correlation between joint
attention and improvement on the conceptual test, r = .35, p
= .072. Interestingly, this effect was localized to the
procedural condition, r = .067, p = .012, and not observed in
the conceptual condition, r = .08, p = .777.

Thus, joint attention may have been particularly important
for students working on the procedural problems to induce
conceptual knowledge, whereas students working on the
conceptual problems were able to learn the same
information with less joint attention.
Dyadic-Level
Comparisons.
One
approach
to
understanding how collaboration influences outcomes is to
compare gaze recurrence plots for high-performing and lowperforming dyads. This comparison may provide insight as
to how different patterns of interaction are related to
different outcomes. It also demonstrates the utility of our
novel methodology of overlaying data from the ITS onto the
gaze recurrence plot. First, we begin with the conceptual
condition, and compare gaze recurrence during the first
problem for a dyad with a high post-test score to a dyad
with a low post-test score (see Figures 2a and 2b). We chose
the first problem because dyads produced a number of errors
on this problem, as they were just beginning on the learning
activities and were not immediately familiar with how to
proceed. These figures include student behaviors with the
tutors, with red lines indicating moments where students
inputted an incorrect response, and green lines indicating a
correct response. These particular figures are representative
examples of the general patterns observed in the data.
The two plots show a clear pattern where the high-scoring
dyad had, overall, much greater gaze convergence.
Specifically, they have more areas with some amount of
dark points, indicating more moments with shared attention,
and have darker areas, indicating a greater proportion of colocated fixations. The red lines indicate moments when the
tutor provided feedback indicating the student response was
incorrect, and, as is clear, both groups produced a number of
these moments in the middle and late phases of the problem.
The large area in the center of the high-performing dyad’s
graph (Figure 2a) shows a high level of joint attention while
they struggled. The red lines here suggest that productive

Table 1. Means (and standard deviations) proportion of
fixations with joint attention for the first four problems.

Conceptual
Procedural

Problem
1
.19 (.13)
.19 (.11)

Problem
2
.13 (.08)
.19 (.12)

Problem
3
.19 (.11)
.21 (.13)

Problem
4
.14 (.12)
.14 (.10)

Alpha
.75
.57

179

	  

Figure 3a (left) and 3b (right). Gaze recurrence plots for a high-performing (left) and low-performing (right) procedural
dyad, on the first procedural learning problem.
discussions occurred, as incorrect responses were entered
only after brief delays. In contrast, the low-performing
dyad’s graph (Figure 2b) shows a period of difficulty in the
top-right section where joint attention is noticeably weaker.
With such small amounts of time between incorrect
attempts, it is likely students were engaging in a guess-andcheck strategy.
Figures 3a and 3b show gaze recurrence plots for one
high-performing and one low-performing procedural dyad
on the first procedural learning problem. Again we see that
the high-performing dyad has more areas with a high degree
of joint attention (the darker areas). In particular, about
halfway through the problem, the high-performing dyad
begins a series of periods with intense gaze convergence,
and they begin to input a series of correct responses
relatively rapidly (the green lines). The low-performing
dyad has a more diffuse pattern of joint attention, and, even
when they begin to enter correct responses, their attentional
focus does not converge as strongly.

factors. First, it may be that the short duration of the
instruction (45 minutes) lowered the likelihood for complex
interactions to emerge. In particular, students working
collaboratively completed an average of 6.96 problems,
compared to an average of 10.41 among students working
by themselves (Olsen et al., 2014). That being said, the
collaborative conditions did show learning gains, indicating
the potential effectiveness of having students collaborate.
Finally, the test items may not be sensitive to all forms of
learning that may have occurred. While the test items were
closely aligned to the instruction, other measures of transfer,
such as preparation for future learning (Schwartz & Martin,
2004), may have revealed longer-term benefits for the
conceptual instruction. Given these constraints, it is
encouraging that we found evidence that even elementaryschool students can productively collaborate while using the
ITS in a school setting.
Turning to the dual eye-tracking data, we observed
reliable between-dyad differences in joint attention. We also
found that joint attention was related to learning gains in
conceptual knowledge, although only in the procedural
condition, a surprising finding. It is possible that, for this
condition, only those dyads that actively and constructively
engaged were able to induce the underlying conceptual
knowledge. This finding suggests that one route to
successful conceptual learning may be to have collaborators
explain procedures to one another, an intriguing possibility
that warrants further investigation.
However, this result also requires considering why joint
attention was not related to learning gains for the conceptual
condition. One possibility is that joint visual attention was
less important for learning from the conceptually-oriented
problems, as the more abstract instruction required
engagement with the underlying principles, regardless of
where the students were looking. This interpretation is
supported by the lack of differences in learning between the
conceptual and procedural conditions, which indicates that
the conceptual condition learned just as well, regardless of
joint visual attention. However, it is also possible that this

Discussion
We hypothesized 1) working collaboratively would produce
learning gains, 2) conceptual instruction would particularly
benefit collaborators, producing greater conceptual learning
gains than the procedural instruction, and 3) increased levels
of joint attention would be related to greater learning gains.
We will address these hypotheses in order.
Students who collaborated showed learning gains. This is
encouraging, as the sample is younger than is traditionally
studied in CSCL, and it was possible that requiring
collaboration could have hindered their learning. As such, it
appears that building opportunities and support for
collaboration can be a beneficial addition to ITSs. We also
expected that the conceptually-oriented instruction would
produce higher conceptual learning gains for collaborators,
compared to the procedurally-oriented instruction. Evidence
for this prediction was not observed. The absence of this
effect may be due to a small number of methodological

180

effect stems from differences in the collaborative features of
the particular problems. Some of the conceptual problems
required verbally conveying unique information that their
partner could not see, which may have reduced the
possibility for joint visual attention to emerge. Future
research could investigate how particular collaborative
features influence joint attention, as well as comparing
visual attention with other measures of synchronized
attention (e.g., frequent turn-taking in dialogue), to see how
each of these are related to successful learning outcomes for
different instructional activities. This could additionally
provide support for the validity of this approach, by
documenting how joint visual attention is related to
increased interactivity between collaborators.
More broadly, we have attempted to illustrate the utility
of dual eye-tracking in guiding the iterative design of
successful learning technologies. For example, we observed
variability in the amount of joint attention maintained
during periods of difficulty in the conceptual problems,
indicating a potential target for additional scaffolding. One
possibility would be to develop targeted feedback or
highlighting on the tutor interface to guide both students to
attend to the same information in response to errors. The
helper could be given a prompt that explicitly provides some
concrete steps they can take to help the problem solver.
Another possibility is to integrate information about the
collaborator’s current visual position, helping students
maintain joint attention (see Schneider & Pea, 2013). Dual
eye-tracking can also be used to test hypotheses about
patterns of interaction. Although this was not explored in
the present paper, we did observe that joint attention was
consistent for dyads across problems, indicating its potential
utility as a marker of collaboration quality. We believe that
the methodological contribution of integrating data from the
ITS directly into the eye-tracking log will greatly contribute
to this sort of research, as this information can be combined
with other streams of data (like transcripts and videos of the
interaction), helping researchers study the dynamics of
productive collaboration. While we have presented a
descriptive approach to characterizing learning based on a
mix of quantitative and qualitative features of gaze
recurrence, it will be necessary to codify a set of analytical
and procedural norms to ensure that ITS-linked dual eyetracking can become a broad and impactful methodological
contribution.
In this work, we have introduced a collaboration-enabled
ITS for teaching fractions, and illustrated its efficacy with a
short, school-based experiment. We demonstrated that
having students collaborate leads to increases in conceptual
understanding of the materials. In addition, dual eyetracking measures were used to help understand how joint
visual attention was related to learning, introducing the
novel contribution of integrating information from the ITS
log with a gaze recurrence plot. Dual eye-tracking is
emerging as a useful contributor to the measurement, study,
and creation of novel and effective CSCL systems (e.g.,
Schneider & Pea, 2013). By integrating theories of learning

from cognitive science with insights into the dynamics of
collaboration revealed by these new data streams, our
understanding of collaborative learning, and the
technologies to support it, will continue to improve.

Acknowledgments
The work is supported by award R305A120734 from the US
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-Constructive-Interactive: A
conceptual framework for differentiating learning
activities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.
Janssen, J., & Bodemer, D. (2013). Coordinated computersupported collaborative learning: Awareness and
awareness tools. Educational Psychologist, 48 (1), 40-55.
Jermann, P., Mullins, D., Nüssli, M.-A., & Dillenbourg, P.
(2011). Collaborative Gaze Footprints: Correlates of
Interaction Quality. In CSCL '11: Proceedings of the
2011 conference on Computer support for collaborative
learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences,
2011.
Mullins, D., Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2011). Are two
heads always better than one? Differential effects of
collaboration on students’ computer-supported learning in
mathematics. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 6, 421-443.
Nüssli, M.-A. (2011). Dual eye-tracking methods for the
study of remote collaborative problem solving. (Doctoral
dissertation). doi: 10.5075/epfl-thesis-5232.
Olsen, J., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, V., & Rummel, N.
(2014). Using an intelligent tutoring system to support
collaborative as well as individual learning. Paper to be
presented at the 12th International Conference on
Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Honolulu, Hawaii.
Olsen, J., Belenky, D. M., Aleven, V., Rummel, N., Sewall,
J., & Ringenberg, M. (2014). Authoring tools for
collaborative intelligent tutoring system environments.
Paper to be presented at the 12th International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Honolulu, Hawaii.
Richardson, D. C., & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to
understand: The coupling between speakers’ and
listeners’ eye movements and its relationship to discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045-1060.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M.W. (1999). Conceptual and
procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead
to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(1),
175-189.
Schneider, B., & Pea, R. (2013). Real-time mutual gaze
perception enhances collaborative learning and
collaboration quality. International Journal of ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning, 8 (4), 375-397.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognitive and Instruction, 22 (2), 129-184.

181

