UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What’s Your Source: Evaluating the Effects of Context in Episodic Memory for Objects in
Natural Scenes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53g0184w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Hemmer, Pernille
Persaud, Kimele
Venaglia, Rachel
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What’s Your Source: Evaluating the Effects of Context in Episodic Memory for
Objects in Natural Scenes
Pernille Hemmer (pernille.hemmer@rutgers.edu)1
Kimele Persaud (kimele.persaud@rutgers.edu) 1
Rachel Venaglia (venaglir@lafayette.edu) 2
Joseph DeAngelis (joseph.deangelis@rutgers.edu) 1
Department of Psychology, Rutgers University 1
Department of Psychology, Lafayette College 2
Abstract
It is well known that the context of a scene can have a strong
effect on the identification of objects in the scene (e.g., Biederman,
1972). However, it is unclear what role global versus local context
plays on episodic memory for objects. We present results from a
series of experiments that evaluate the degree to which the global
and local context contributes to memory performance: partial scene
context, where global context was partially removed, no-spatial
scene context, where the local spatial relationships among objects
was distorted, and random context, where the associative
relationship among objects was altered. Study time was also
manipulated. We compare the findings to memory performance for
objects in natural scenes (Hemmer & Steyvers, 2009; Steyvers &
Hemmer, 2012). Results show that background context of a scene
is important for initial scene interpretation. In addition, associative
and spatial context is important for the retention of a larger number
of objects in memory.
Keywords: Context; Episodic Memory; Prior Knowledge;
Natural scenes; Objects in scenes.

Introduction
The context of a natural scene can be defined as the
structure and permanence (i.e. stable over time) of
relationships among the background and objects in an
environment consistent with the real world. The context of a
natural scene has important implications for a variety of
cognitive tasks including: how we visually search a scene,
how we categorize objects in a scene, scene perception,
memory for objects in a scene, attention, etc. However, the
functional components of context that influence these areas
of cognition are not yet fully understood.
The context of natural scenes is thought to be both
globally and locally structured (Galleguillos & Belongie,
2010; Torralba, 2003). The global context (also known as
scene centered context) refers to the overall configuration of
a scene. Global context is responsible for the unification of
objects and the background (see Figure 1a for an example of
a scene with global context preserved and partially
removed) and supports quick high-level semantic
interpretation of a scene (Potter, Staub, Rado, & O’Connor,
2002; Torralba, 2003). It also affords individuals the ability
to make predictions about objects that prototypically
accompany the scene type (Galleguillos & Belongie, 2010).
Similarly, local context (a.k.a. object centered context)
refers to the relations among objects in the entire scene, or
in a particular region of a scene. Local context is derived

from the associative and spatial arrangements of the scene
objects. These associative and spatial relationships enhance
scene perception and aid object recognition (Biederman,
1972; Biederman et al., 1982; Galleguillos & Belongie,
2010; Palmer, 1975; Torralba, 2003). Take for example the
ambiguous object in Figure 1b (left panel). The intrinsic
properties of this object make confident object recognition
quite difficult. However, when that same ambiguous object
is placed next to another object (i.e., the trashcan in the next
panel), object recognition occurs more readily.
The spatial relationship among objects in a scene also
contributes to object recognition. Figure 1c (left panel)
demonstrates an ambiguous object placed above a table,
which leads one to conclude that the object is a table cloth.
However, in Figure 1c (middle panel), that same object is
placed below the table and now one may conclude that it is
an area rug. In Figure 1c (right panel), the same object is
placed above a bed and now appears to be a blanket. Taken
together, the context of a scene is comprised of the global
level, which unifies the objects and the background of the
scene, and the local level which determines the associative
and spatial relationships of objects.
Although a great deal of research suggests that global and
local features of scene context facilitates object
identification, object categorization, and scene perception, it
remains unclear how these components of context influence
long-term episodic memory for objects in scenes. In this
study, we employ novel stimuli, in which we systematically
remove both global and local contextual features from
simulated natural scenes, to measure their influences on
memory. The contribution of this study is that it bridges the
influence of scene context effects on object perception,
object categorization, and computer vision to long term
episodic memory. Previous research of scene context effects
has either employed short term or working memory in an
effort to understand scene perception (Biederman, 1972;
Hollingworth & Henderson, 1998) or failed to demarcate the
influence of global and local components of context
(Hemmer & Steyvers, 2009; Steyvers & Hemmer, 2012).
We extend the work of Hemmer and Steyvers (2009)
which measured long-term episodic memory for objects in
full context natural scenes (figure 1a, left panel) in an effort
to investigate the influence of the functional units of natural
scene context on episodic memory. We outline the
methodology in their study as it serves as a basis of

2765

We evaluate performance in all three experiments against
the prior expectation experiment in the original Hemmer
and Steyvers (2009) study. That is, we evaluate memory
performance relative to the prior knowledge condition
where performance was based only on contextual
knowledge and expectations, and not episodic memory. We
predict that accuracy will decrease as a function of the
incremental exclusion of global and local context.

General Methods

Figure 1. 1a shows a natural scene – a dining room – with
the global context preserved (left) and removed (right). 1b
shows the associative relationship among objects. 1c shows
the spatial relationship among objects.
comparison for the contextual manipulations in the current
study. Hemmer and Steyvers first measured people’s prior
expectation for objects in natural scenes, i.e., objects
consistent with the context of that scene. Participants were
asked to list all of the objects that make up each of five
natural scene types (i.e., kitchen, dining, hotel, urban, and
office). Interestingly, by simply guessing with their context
based expectation of objects in scenes, subjects achieved a
high degree of accuracy when responses were scored against
actual images. Next, Hemmer and Steyvers tested free recall
for the same natural scenes as a function of study time. They
found that for initial responses, accuracy was highest for
short study times, however, at later responses, accuracy was
best for longer study times. Investigating the influence of
global and local context may provide insight for the
accuracy shifts across the study time conditions.

Materials
To create the stimuli for the three experiments, we used
the original images along with the ground truth assessment
for what objects really occurred in the scenes from Hemmer
and Steyvers (2009). Every object named in the ground truth
was then cropped from the original image using Paint and
Photoshop. If an object could not be clearly cropped out of
an image, Google Images was used to find an object that
closely matched the original scene. A ratings panel of three
students was employed to measure agreement of the Google
items to the original items (across all experimental
conditions raters agreed 97%). Individual objects were then
placed on a white background. The ordering scheme for
placing the object onto the background differed for each of
the experimental conditions.
Extensive measures were taken to ensure that the context
manipulated scenes matched the original scene as closely as
possible, which included: making the most salient objects in
the original scene the most salient object in the contextdisrupted scene, matching up the sizes of the objects,
making the objects as clear as possible, matching up the
colors and angles of the objects as closely as possible. The
size and saliency of the objects was especially important
when creating the context manipulated scenes because
people are known to have a “normative viewing size”
preference for a given object (Konkle & Oliva, 2007).
Figure 2 shows an example of a partial scene context image
(global context partially removed) used in Experiment 1,
compared to a full natural scene.
Response Normalization
Responses for all experiments were corrected for spelling,
plurals, capitalization, and qualifiers (e.g., numbers, color,
size and location). For example, “chair” and “chairs” were
mapped to the single entry “chair”, and “silver car” was

Experiments
In three experiments, we systematically evaluate the
effect of contextual relations on episodic memory. In
addition, we manipulate study time to determine if
decreasing available context can be compensated for by
additional study time. In the first study, we evaluate the
effect of global context by removing background
information. In the second study, we evaluate the effect of
simulated spatial context by disrupting the natural spatial
relationship among objects. In the third study, we evaluate
the effect of associative context by presenting study items,
drawn from different natural contexts, together as a scene.

Figure 2. Left: full natural dining room scene. Right:
partial-context dining room scene, in which the background
was removed.

2766

mapped to “car”. All short form responses were corrected to
the full word (e.g., mayo was mapped to mayonnaise, and
fridge was mapped to refrigerator). All responses that could
not be interpreted were removed. The correction rules were
automated and applied to all datasets uniformly.
Ground Truth
To measure performance in all experiments reported here,
we checked whether a recalled object was part of any of the
responses given by participants in the original ground truth
assessment1 of Hemmer and Steyvers (2009). In the original
study, the ground truth was measured by asking subjects
viewing a single image at a time from the image set to
“report as many objects as you can see”. If a response given
in our memory studies matched the ground truth, it was
scored as a correct response. If it did not match, we
manually checked whether the recalled object could still be
considered as a description of an object that was part of the
image. This ground truth was then added to the original list
of ground truth objects. Only if the response still did not
match was it scored as incorrect.

Experiment 1: Partial scene context
We sought to investigate the effect of global context – in
the form of scene background- on episodic memory. That is,
to what extent does the natural setting of a room (e.g., the
walls and ceiling) contribute to successful memory? We
predicted that this absence of global context would disrupt
gist extraction and result in a decrement in performance. We
expected that additional study time would improve memory
performance, and sought to evaluate both the effect of
removing the background context, and the amount of time
needed to return to equivalent recall performance levels of a
non-disrupted scene. We will refer to this as the partialcontext condition.
Participants
Fifty-three undergraduate students at Rutgers University
participated in exchange for either course credit or monetary
compensation of $10.
Materials and Procedure
To create the partial-context images, objects were placed
onto the white background in the same spatial organization
as the objects in the original image. The 10 images were
used to form two sets of five images, one from each scene
type (kitchen, dining room, office, hotel room and urban
scene). We followed the exact experimental procedure of
Hemmer and Steyvers, and employed a recall paradigm in
which images were presented at the center of the computer
screen for either 2, 10 or 15 seconds. A simple ‘find 5
mistakes’ picture distracter task was inserted between study
and test trials. At test, participants were asked to list all the
objects they could recall from the image presented in the
preceding study trial. Participants were given clear verbal
instructions to ensure that they understood the task.

1

The ground truth of the occurrence of an object in the given
images is stationary and therefore we did not replicate this portion
of the study. See Hemmer and Steyvers, 2009 for further detail.

On study trials, study times were randomly assigned as
either 2, 10 or 15 seconds following a Latin square design.
On test trials, participants were required to type responses or
wait 60 seconds before they could move to the next study
trial. Each participant only saw 5 images, one from each
scene type, to avoid carryover effects where the memory
from one scene type affects recall of another image of the
same type. The 5 images were presented in random order.
At the end of each of the five test sessions, participants
received feedback on the number of correct responses, and
how many more objects they could have recalled.
Results
Performance was measured in terms of mean accuracy as
a function of the output position (i.e., the order in which
responses were given) and study time (See Figure 3, left
panel). Figure 3, also includes the results from the prior
knowledge condition in the Hemmer and Steyvers study, as
a baseline for comparison. Because subjects were allowed to
determine the number of responses they wanted to provide,
the number of responses for each output position varied (see
Figure 5 for the average number of outputs by study time
and condition). Therefore, we restricted the analysis to the
first five output positions. A 5 (output position) x 3 (study
time) repeated measures with-in subject ANOVA was
conducted to evaluate the effect of study time and output
position on recall accuracy. There was as a significant main
effect of output position (F [4, 272] = 17.97, p<.001), such
that greater accuracy was achieved in initial output positions
relative to later output positions. There was also a
significant main effect of study time (F [2, 272] = 8.92,
p<.001), such that greater accuracy was achieved for longer
study times compared with shorter times. Lastly, there was a
significant interaction between output position and study
time (F [8, 272] = 4.92, p<.001). Overall, mean accuracy
decreased as a function of output position. However, the
removal of the background context negatively affected the 2
second condition compared to the 10 and 15 second
conditions. This might be due to disturbed global level gist
extraction with the removal of the background.

Experiment 2: No spatial context
While the partial removal of global context only appears
to have a negative impact on short study time conditions,
other aspects of scene context have been shown to disrupt
memory performance for natural scenes (Biederman, 1972).
In the next experiment, we tested the influence of spatial
context on episodic memory for scenes by placing the
objects in Experiment 1 in random order on a white
background. We predicted that this absence of spatial
context would disrupt the ability to use local spatial context,
and result in a decrement in recall performance across study
times. We refer to this as the no-spatial context condition.
Participants
Fifty Rutgers University undergraduates participated in
exchange for either monetary compensation of $10 or
course credit, and were not involved in Experiment 1.

2767

Figure 3. Mean accuracy as a function of output position and study time. Each line gives a different study time condition.
The gray line gives performance from the Prior Knowledge condition of Hemmer and Steyvers (2009). Left panel: partialcontext condition. Middle panel: no-spatial context condition. Right panel: random context condition.
Materials and Procedure
The materials were identical to those used in Experiment
1, except the spatial relationship among objects was not
retained. Instead objects within each scene were placed onto
the white background in random order. Figure 4, left panel,
shows a sample image from the no spatial context condition.
The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.
Results
As in Experiment 1, performance was measured in terms
of mean accuracy as a function of output position. Figure 3,
middle panel, shows accuracy across output positions and
study time, as well as the prior knowledge condition for
comparison. As in Experiment 1, we restricted the analysis
to the first five output positions. A 5 (output position) X 3
(study time) repeated measures with-in subject ANOVA
was conducted to evaluate the effect of study time and
output position on recall accuracy. There was as a
significant main effect of output position (F [4, 200] =
17.59, p<.001), resulting in greater accuracy for initial
output positions relative to later output positions. There was
also a significant main effect of study time (F [2, 200] =
3.36, p<.05), such that greater accuracy was achieved for
longer study times compared with shorter times. There was
no significant interaction. Overall, accuracy decreased as a
function of output position. In contrast to Experiment 1, the
removal of spatial context negatively affected accuracy in
all 3 study time conditions. Performance in the 2 second
condition was no better than guessing with prior knowledge
after 5 output positions.

Experiment 3: Random scene context
The preceding two studies revealed a continuous decline
in memory performance with the progressive removal of
context information in a natural scene. In the next
experiment, we tested memory for random objects. The
inclusion of a random context condition served to quantify
pure episodic memory and allowed additional comparisons
of the influence of prior knowledge for naturalistic stimuli.
We predicted that this absence of natural context would
result in a further decrement in performance across study
times. We refer to this as the random context condition.

Participants
Forty-eight undergraduate students from the Rutgers
University participated in exchange for either monetary
compensation of $10 or course credit. These participants
were not involved in Experiment 1 or 2.
Materials and Procedure
The materials were identical to those used in Experiment
1 and 2, except the scene context among objects was not
retained. Instead, objects within each study set were drawn
at random from across the 5 scene types, and placed in
random order on the white background. In this way, the
stimulus no longer retained the global or local context of a
natural scene.
Objects were matched for size from the stimuli in
Experiments 1 and 2, such that small and large objects
occurred in all scenes, and no one object was allowed to
repeat across the 5 random scenes in each set. Again, a three
person-rating panel was used to determine the consistency
of the overall quality of the ‘scene’ relative to the previous
experimental stimuli. Figure 4, right panel, shows a sample
image from the random context condition. The procedure
was identical to Experiment 1 and 2.
Results
As in Experiment 1 and 2, performance was measured in
terms of mean accuracy as a function of output position.
Figure 3, right panel, shows accuracy across output position
and study time, as well as the results from the prior
knowledge condition as a baseline for comparison. As in
Experiment 1 and 2, we restricted the analysis to the first
five output positions. A 5 (output position) X 3 (study time)
repeated measures with-in subject ANOVA was conducted
to assess the effect of study time and output position on
recall accuracy. There was a significant main effect of
output position (F [4, 144] = 10.61 p<.001), in the form of
greater accuracy for initial output positions. There was also
a significant main effect of study time (F [2, 144] = 8.38,
p<.001), where greater accuracy was achieved for longer
study times. Finally, there was a significant interaction
between output position and study time (F [8, 144] = 5.59,
p<.001). As a whole, accuracy decreased as a function of

2768

Figure 4. Left panel: No-spatial context dining room scene
in which the spatial relationship between the objects was
disrupted. Right panel: Random context scene, in which
objects were randomly selected from the 5 images in each
scene set to create the random study list of images.
output position. As in Experiment 2, the lack of coherent
context negatively affected accuracy in all three study time
conditions, but more so for the 2 second condition.

Comparison of Results across All Experiments
The results from the three experiments appear to show a
proportional decline of memory accuracy with the
successive removal of scene context. To evaluate this effect,
three repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to
compare performance for each study time (i.e., 2, 10, and 15
seconds) across the 3 contextual manipulated conditions.
For the 2 and 15 second study times, the 5 (output position)
X 3 (context conditions) repeated measures ANOVAs
revealed a significant main effect of context conditions (2
sec.: F [2, 144] = 7.99, p<.0013; 15 sec.: F [2, 144] = 10.10
p<.001)]. However, the main effect of context condition
for 10 second study time was not significant (F [2, 144] =
0.51, p=0.60)]. There was also a main effect of output
position [2 seconds: (F [4, 144] = 38.64, p<.001); 10
seconds: (F [4, 144] = 8.84, p<.001); 15 seconds: (F [4,
144] = 5.06 p<.001)]. These findings suggest that the
removal of context negatively affects memory performance,
especially at short study times.
In addition, Figure 5 shows the number of responses as a
function of context condition and study time. A 3 (study
time) X 3 (context condition) repeated measures ANOVA

was conducted to evaluate the effect of study time and
context condition on number of responses. There was a
significant main effect of study time (F [2, 294] = 210.72,
p<.001), with more responses for longer study times. There
was also a significant main effect of context condition (F [2,
294] = 45.36, p<.001), with more responses for more
context. Lastly, there was a significant interaction between
study time and context condition (F [4, 294] = 6.69,
p<.001), such that there were more responses given in the
10 and 15 second conditions compared to the 2 second
condition as a function of the context manipulations
We also evaluated the time needed to compensate for the
decrement in performance with decreasing available
context. Figure 6 shows mean accuracy for each output
position as a function of study time. We compared
performance to a full context natural scene (Hemmer &
Steyvers, 2009), using the result from the 5th output
position, where accuracy in the 2 and 10 second conditions
were equivalent (black dashed line). With the partial global
context removed (left panel), performance for both the 10
and 15 second conditions remained above the full context
performance by the 5th output. While it might appear
somewhat counterintuitive that removing global context
information helped performance, this might be due to the
additional ‘clutter’ that global context adds. In contextually
manipulated scenes, there were a limited number of objects
available, and this constraint appeared to help performance.
For the no-spatial context condition (middle panel),
performance for both 2 and 10 second study time fell below
full context performance on the 5th output, while the 15
second condition was slightly above. Lastly, in the random
context condition (right panel), only the first output position
was above full context performance for the 5 th output. Even
the 15 second study time was not enough to compensate for
the loss of both global and local information.
The types of intrusions participants made further
elucidated the distinction in contribution of global and local
context to memory. Under the influence of global context,
participants incorrectly recalled objects that were consistent
with the overall scene and prototypically accompany that
scene type. For example, when participants studied office
scenes, they falsely recalled calculator because this object is
highly representative of objects that are generally found in
natural office settings. Similarly, while under the influence
of local context, participants inaccurately recalled studying
objects that are typically found in close proximity of some
objects that were present in the scene. For example, when
participants studied urban scenes and saw a sky, they falsely
recalled seeing clouds because clouds are often found in the
sky in natural urban settings.

Discussion

Figure 5. Average number of responses by context
condition and study time

In this paper, we assessed the relative contribution of
global and local components of context to recall for objects
in natural scenes. First, we partially removed the global
scene context (i.e., removal of the background, walls, and
ceiling) and found a decrement in memory performance for

2769

Accuracy
Cummulative
Mean Accuracy

0.95

0.95

0.95

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.85

0.85

0.85

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.7

0.7

0.65

0.65

0.6

0.6

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55

Output
Output
Output
Output
Output

1
2
3
4
5

2
10
15
Study Time (Seconds)

0.55

2
10
15
Study Time (Seconds)

0.55

2
10
15
Study Time (Seconds)

Figure 6. Mean accuracy as a function of study time. Each line gives a different output position. The dashed black line gives
performance from a full natural scene context – 5th output position (Hemmer and Steyvers, 2009). Left panel: partial-context
condition. Middle panel: no-spatial context condition. Right panel: random context condition.
shorter study time conditions. Previous studies have found
that the global context supports quick interpretation of a
natural scene, which is important for performance at shorter
study times, but is compensated for by the available local
context at longer study times. In the next two experiments,
we systematically removed local context by removing the
spatial relationships of objects (i.e. randomize the locations
of objects in the scene) and the associative relationships of
objects (i.e. randomize objects from various scene types).
While the removal of the background of a natural image
initially impedes memory for short study times, the removal
of spatial and associative context impinges on both short
and long study times. The results of the analysis for the
number of responses further illustrate the benefit of having
global and local context where, the mean number of
responses for full natural scene context > partial context
(global context partially removed) > no-spatial context >
random context (associative context removed). The same
trajectory applies to study time.
These finding have implications for our understanding of
the effect of global and local context on long-term episodic
memory. The removal of global context affects quick scene
interpretation, and for memory this impacts performance for
shorter study times, but is compensated for, at longer study
times, by the available local context. However, the removal
of spatial and associative information in local context
affects memory performance for both short and long study
times. Taken together, these studies show that global
context is important for scene interpretation, which initially
helps memory, but local context is important for sustained
memory performance.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant Number NSF DGE 0937373, National Science
Foundation I.G.E.R.T. under Grant Number NSF DGE
0549115, National Science Foundation REU under Grant
Number IIS-1062735, and Rutgers University Aresty
Summer Science Program.

References
Biederman, I. (1972). Perceiving real-world scenes. Science,
177, 77-80.
Biederman, I., Mezzanotte, R.J., & Rabinowitz, J.C. (1982).
Scene Perception: Detecting and judging objects
undergoing relational violations. Cognitive Psychology,
14, 143-177.
Galleguillos, C., & Belongie, S. (2010). Context based
object categorization: A critical survey. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding, 114(6), 712-722.
Hemmer, P., & Steyvers, M. (2009). Integrating episodic
and semantic information in memory for natural scenes.
In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Hollingworth A., & Henderson, J. (1998). Does consistent
scene context facilitate object perception? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 127(4), 398-415
Konkle, T., & Oliva, A. (2007). Normative representation of
objects: Evidence for an ecological bias in object
perception and memory. In D. S. McNamara & J. G.
Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive
Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Palmer, S. (1975). The effects of contextual scenes on the
identification of objects. Memory & Cognition, 3, 519
526.
Potter, M. C., Staub, A., Rado, J., & O’Connor, D. H.
(2002). Recognition memory for briefly presented
pictures: The time course of rapid forgetting. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 28, 1163-1175.
Steyvers, M. & Hemmer, P. (2012). Reconstruction from
memory in naturalistic environments. In B. H. Ross
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
(pp.126-144). Elsevier Publishing.
Torralba, A. (2003). Contextual priming for object
detection. International Journal of Computer Vision, 53,
169-191.

2770

