UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Color is that Smell? Cross-Cultural Color-Odor Associations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8dk5829j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Levitan, Carmel
Ren, Jiana
Woods, Andy
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Color is that Smell? Cross-Cultural Color-Odor Associations
Carmel A. Levitan (levitan@oxy.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles CA 90041, USA

Jiana Ren (jiana.ren@hotmail.com)
Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University
P.O. Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, Netherlands

Andy T. Woods (andy.woods@xperiment.mobi)
Xperiment, chemin I.-de Montolieu 177
1010 Lausanne, Switzerland

Sanne Boesveldt (sanne.boesveldt@wur.nl)
Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University
P.O. Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, Netherlands

Jason S. Chan (chan@med.uni-frankfurt.de)
Institute of Medical Psychology, Goethe Universitaet Frankfurt am Main
Senckenberganlage 31, 60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Kirsten J. McKenzie (kirsten.mckenzie@nottingham.edu.my)
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus
Jalan Broga, 43500 Semenyih, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia

Michael Dodson (michaelernest90@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles CA 90041, USA

Jai Levin (jaialexanderlevin@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles CA 90041, USA

Xiang Ru Leong (khyx2lxr@nottingham.edu.my)
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus
Jalan Broga, 43500 Semenyih, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia

Jasper J.F. van den Bosch (jasperb@uw.edu)
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington
1715 Columbia Road N, Seattle WA 98195, USA
found consistent patterns in color choices for each odor within
each culture, and variation in the patterns of color-odor
associations across cultures. Thus culture plays a role in
color-odor crossmodal associations, which likely arise, at
least in part, through experience.

Abstract
People can consistently match to odors to colors, and within a
culture, there are similarities in color-odor associations. These
associations are forms of crossmodal correspondences.
Recently, there has been discussion about the extent to which
these correspondences arise for structural reasons (e.g., an
inherent mapping between color and odor), statistical reasons
(e.g., covariance in experience), and/or semantically-mediated
reasons (e.g., stemming from language). The present study
probed this question by testing color-odor correspondences in
6 different cultural groups (Dutch, Dutch residing-Chinese,
German, Malay, Malaysian-Chinese, and US residents), using
the same set of 14 odors and asking participants to make
congruent and incongruent color choices for each odor. We

Keywords: Crossmodal; color; olfaction; culture

Introduction
Would a rose smell as sweet if it were blue? Perhaps not;
color plays an important role in recognizing odors and
congruent color-odor combinations are rated as more
pleasant than incongruent combinations (Zellner, Bartoli, &
Eckard, 1991). Colors and odors can be consistently

839

matched across participants (e.g., Gilbert, Martin, & Kemp,
1996; Demattè, Sanabria, & Spence, 2006; Maric &
Jacquot, 2013); for instance, caramel tends to be most
commonly associated with brown. Color influences odor
identification, discrimination, intensity, and even
pleasantness (see Zellner, 2013 for a thorough review). Thus
a crossmodal correspondence between color and odor exists.
Crossmodal correspondences can take different forms.
Spence (2011) distinguishes between three kinds of
correspondences: structural, statistical, and semantically
mediated. Structural correspondences can occur due to
neural connections (e.g., if stimuli in different senses share a
feature such as intensity). Statistical correspondences are
learned, and occur when two stimulus dimensions are
routinely correlated in the environment. Semanticallymediated correspondences arise due to language (e.g., “low”
for elevation and pitch). The type of crossmodal effect has
implications for the perceptual consequences of the
correspondence; semantically-mediated correspondences are
decisional, but structural and statistical correspondence can
lead to perceptual or decisional effects. For color-odor
associations, both perceptual and semantic factors seem to
play a role; color brightness correlates with perceptual
attributes of odors (odors that are more irritating, intense,
and unpleasant are associated with brighter colors) and
semantic attributes (more familiar and identifiable odors are
associated with more saturated colors), though hedonics are
also important (Stevenson, Rich, & Russell, 2012).
Cross-cultural comparisons allow some insight into how
correspondences might emerge. Structural correspondences
might be highly idiosyncratic (in the case of synesthesia) or
universal (if they reflect an underlying neural mechanism
common to all people). Some statistical correspondences are
also likely to be universal (e.g. larger objects tend to have
lower resonant frequencies) but others may be less universal
if environments are likely to differ. Finally, semantically
mediated correspondences are more context dependent; as
language influences these associations, different cultures
may experience different crossmodal associations.
Comparing different studies that used similar stimuli
could provide insight into this question. Many studies have
shown that yellow and lemon correspond, but this could
easily be learned and could be mediated by recognition of
the odor. Potential evidence for structural correspondences
(in the universal sense) between color and odor come has
come from cases in which colors are reliably associated with
odors where there is not a likely history of learning, such as
for almond (Spector & Maurer, 2012). In that study,
conducted in Canada, almond was significantly associated
with red (and also with purple and gray). If the
correspondence was not learned, then this result would
support the notion of a structural correspondence. However,
the red-almond association is not universal, as in an
Australian sample, almond was associated with blue
(Stevenson et al., 2012). But because there was variation in
the odors used (as well as their concentration) and the ways
in which the color matches were obtained (e.g. verbal report

of color, matching color chips, indicating a point on a color
wheel) and analyzed, procedural, rather than cultural,
factors may underlie differences in results. Thus comparison
of different studies cannot fully address this question of
universality; studies explicitly designed to examine cultural
factors can rule out these procedural differences.
Cultural differences in odor perception have been
identified. In the US, anise, wintergreen, and cinnamon
odors are associated with sweets; in France, they are
considered medicinal; and in Vietnam they are classified as
floral but associated with traditional medicine (Chrea,
Valentin, Sulmont-Rossé, Ly Mai, Hoang Nguyen, & Abdi,
2004). Culturally-specific emotional experiences with
particular odors may explain differences in how pleasant the
odors are perceived to be; wintergreen has been rated as
very pleasant in the US, where it has been associated with
candy but as very unpleasant in the UK, where it has been
associated with medicine (Herz, 2005). Studies of these
cultural differences in odor preferences have been
systematically investigated since Pangborn, Guinard, &
Davis (1968) studied 16 different groups found that the
patterns of odor preferences could be clustered into distinct
groups (e.g. all 7 European countries in their sample
clustered together) and that both country and ethnic origin
influenced liking of particular odors; for instance, ethnic
Taiwanese people living in California showered similar
preferences to both non-Taiwanese Californians and to
Taiwanese people living in Taiwan (Pangborn, Guinard, &
Davis, 1968). Subsequent studies have found that people in
different cultures even rate the intensity of many odors
differently (Ayabe-Kanamura, Saito, Distel, MartínezGómez, Hudson, 1998; Chrea et al., 2004; Ferdenzi,
Roberts, Schirmer, et al., 2013). As intensity evaluations do
not require judgement of identity or pleasantness of the
odors, these differences in perceived intensity are
particularly noteworthy; decisional factors are less likely to
come into play for intensity and thus these differences may
be more likely to be perceptual in nature.
Culture’s influence on color perception is more
controversial. Color names seem to be near universal, but
there are some cultural differences in these names; color
names in turn can influence perception, though the effect
may be stronger in the right visual field than in the left (see
Regier & Kay, 2009 for a review). For instance, Russian
speakers use different terms for light and dark blues, and are
faster at distinguishing shades of blue that cross their
linguistic boundary than distinguishing shades that do not
(English speakers are not faster at distinctions that cross the
Russian boundary). When a spatial interference task is
added, the cross-boundary advantage persists for Russian
speakers but when a language interference task is added, the
cross-boundary advantage disappears (Winawer, Witthoft,
Frank, Wu, Wade, & Boroditsky, 2007). Thus the perceptual
differences seem dependent on access to language as they
are semantically mediated.
The present study compares color-odor associations in
participants from different cultural backgrounds, using

840

odors that occur across cultures and using a non-verbal task.
If these associations are universal, they are unlikely to be
semantically mediated, but if they differ systematically by
group, then the crossmodal correspondence between color
and odor cannot be structural. The closest cross-cultural
study to be done in this area asked British and Taiwanese
participants to look at pictures of colored drinks and state
what flavor they would expect to experience; that study
found systematic differences in expectations, such as brown
drinks being associated with cola in the UK and grape in
Taiwan (Shankar, Levitan, & Spence, 2010). Those results
are likely due to different patterns in beverage consumption
in those nations, which could lead to a statistical or a
semantic correspondence. Our study uses actual odors and
asks participants to select the most congruent and
incongruent colors to systematically map out the pattern of
association for each group.
Our goal is not just to find the single color most strongly
associated with an odor, but instead to map color-odor
associations across a wider palette of colors. Summary
statistic approaches based on the univariate frequency of a
chosen color ignore more subtle interactions with weaker
associated colors, or opposing colors. Instead, a multivariate
approach is employed to take into account groups of colors,
such as bright colors, pastel colors, warm versus cold colors,
without explicitly defining these categories.
We choose to apply a representational similarity analysis
(Kriegeskorte et al., 2008a) to determine how a distribution
of congruent and incongruent colors represents various
odors, and the degree to which cultures are similar or differ
in their patterns. This technique has been successful in
neuroimaging studies comparing physically distinct data,
such as semantic categories in monkey and human object
areas (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008b).
Our approach allows us to compare color-odor
associations, both for specific odors and for the pattern of
color-odor associations across cultures. Consistent
associations within a culture but differences in patterns
across cultures would demonstrate that color-odor
associations are not simply structural, but that they are
mediated by statistical or semantic experiences.

group) were tested in the Netherlands. Twenty German
participants were tested in Germany. Malay and MalaysianChinese participants (20 of each group) were tested in
Malaysia. 22 US participants were tested in the US. The
Dutch resident-Chinese participants were native Chinese
people who had resided in the Netherlands for less than 2
years; all other participants had grown up in the country in
which they were tested. All participants were healthy
volunteers who reported a normal sense of smell and no
history of olfactory impairments or current respiratory
complications (e.g. colds or allergies). Participants received
extra credit in coursework (in Malaysia and the US), cash
remuneration (€10 in Germany; €5 in the Netherlands), or
chocolate/fruit (in Malaysia) for their participation. Each of
the test sites complied with local requirements for ethical
treatment of human participants.

Materials
Fourteen odorants were embedded in odor pens. Odorants
were originally used for industrial research and were
designed to typify the following descriptions: burnt, candy,
fish, flower, fruity, hazelnut, meat, musty, plastic, rice,
soap, vegetable, vinegar, woody. The specific odors were
selected as they were likely to be common across cultures
and were easily discriminable. 36 colors, derived from the
32 used in the Berkeley Color Project (Palmer & Schloss,
2010) with the addition of white, light gray, dark gray, and
black were randomly arranged for each trial as in Figure 1.
The visual stimuli were presented through the Xperiment
software package (version 0.0.12; www.xperiment.mobi)
either on an Android phone (HTC Desire Z, Android™ 2.2
(Froyo) with HTC Sense™) in the Netherlands or on an
iPod touch 3rd Generation in Germany, Malaysia, and the
US. (A control experiment found no significant difference
in color associations using the different devices.)

Procedure
Participants were given each odor pen one at a time, in
random order. Participants indicated the 3 most congruent
and 3 most incongruent colors for each pen by selecting
those colors on screen; no verbal labels for color or odor

Methods
Design
Six different populations of participants completed the same
task of selecting colors that were the most and least
consistent each of 14 different odorants. Culture was a
between-participants variable. Odor and consistency
/inconsistency were within-participant variables.

Participants
A total of 122 untrained participants from 6 populations
were recruited: Dutch, Netherlands-residing Chinese,
German, Malay, Malaysian-Chinese, and the US. Dutch and
Netherlands-residing Chinese participants (20 of each

Figure 1: Color choices. 36 colors were arranged in
random order for each trial.

841

were introduced, as we did not wish to activate any semantic
associations. We asked participants to select both congruent
and incongruent colors as it had been previously used to
successfully probe associations with color and music
(Palmer, Schloss, Xu, and Prado-León, 2012). Participants
were allowed to control their sniffing within each trial, and
there was a minimum of a 20 sec. pause between each pen.

that had similar patterns of color choices were fruity, flower,
and candy; hazelnut, musty, burnt, vinegar and rice; and
meat, woody, and vegetable. We also calculated RDMs
using only the congruent choices, and found that they were
not as successful in finding similarities in patterns of colorodor choices; while this may be in part due to a reduction in
data and thus in statistical power, we believe that the
incongruent choices are important for uncovering the
underlying color-odor space.
We then computed the cross-culture RDM shown in
Figure 4 by comparing the overall color-odor associations
for each color. We had expected that, if some differences
between cultures were to emerge, geographical and cultural
similarities would lead to similar patterns as in Pangborn et
al.’s study (1998); thus we had predicted that German and
Dutch choices would be quite similar and that MalaysianChinese choices would be similar to those of both Malay
and Netherlands-residing Chinese. None of those

Analyses
For each odor, one pattern of choices was compiled, pooling
choices from all participants of each group. A color pattern
consists of 72 values; two for each of the 36 colors
participants could choose; one for the number of congruent
and one for the number of incongruent choices. Separate
color patterns were made from each of the population
samples. For each odor within each culture, we calculated
the chi-square associated with the pattern of congruent and
incongruent color choices.
To quantify the similarity structure, or isomorphism, of
odor-color associations within a culture, we created one
representational dissimilarity matrix (RDM; Kriegeskorte et
al., 2008) for each population. The RDM has as many rows
and columns as there are odors, and each cell in the matrix
stands for the dissimilarity between the color-pattern of the
odors in the respective row and column. The diagonal of the
matrix therefore contains only the value of 0 for perfect
dissimilarity of an odor’s color-pattern with itself. The
dissimilarity was defined as 1 - correlation between the two
patterns (Pearson’s r).
To quantify the difference between cultures, the secondorder isomorphism was calculated as the pair-wise
dissimilarity between the culture-specific RDMs, compiled
as one inter-culture RDM.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 depicts the most frequently selected congruent
color matches for each odor within each culture. For
instance, the fruity odor tended to be associated with pink
and red colors, while the musty odor was more associated
with browns and oranges. Each of the 14 chi-square values
within each of our six groups was statistically significant.
Chi-square values ranged from 35.6-41.2, p all below
0.0002. (A Bonferroni corrected cutoff value for
significance for the 84 comparisons would result in a
threshold for significance of 0.0006.) This confirms that,
within each group, there were consistent patterns of color
choices for each odor. This result is consistent with those of
other studies that only had participants make congruent
matches (e.g., Gilbert, Martin, & Kemp, 1996; Demattè,
Sanabria, & Spence, 2006; Maric & Jacquot, 2013)
Because we wanted to better understand the patterns of
color choices (including both congruent and incongruent
choices) for each odor, we calculated the RDMs within each
culture, shown in Figure 3. This allows us to take advantage
of potential similarities between colors and odors without
presupposing a particular representation of those
similarities. Within the US, for instance, clusters of odors

Figure 2: Color congruency for each odor in each
culture. Colors per odorant per country are ordered by
frequency (most frequent are shown lowest on their
respective y-axis). Frequency is represented by the
height of each color box; the box on the right of the
figure shows the height a given box must be for their to
be 10,9,8 etc. ratings of that color for a given odorant.
Background bars are colored to help differentiate rows.

842

predictions were supported by the data. The most similar
color-odor associations were between the USA and
Germany and between Germany and Malaysia. The largest
differences were between Malay and Netherlands-resident
Chinese, and between Dutch and Malaysian-Chinese, and

the Malay also differed notably from the Dutch and the
Malaysian-Chinese. Overall, the USA participants showed
the most similarities to other cultures while the Malay
participants were the most different from participants in
other cultures. The differences could be due to patterns in
dietary habits (which differ, perhaps for geographical and
historical reasons, between Germany and the Netherlands,),
the role of fragrance in each society, or other social factors.
Chinese students who choose to study in the Netherlands,
for instance, might be living in very different "olfactory"
worlds from both Dutch and Malaysian-Chinese individuals.
The cross-cultural results indicate that color-odor
associations – while fairly consistent within a culture –
differ across cultures. This pattern argues against the notion
that color-odor associations are structural, as structural
correspondences would be largely universal. Instead, the
results favor statistical or semantically-mediated learning of
color-odor correlations.
While it is possible that our results are due to semantic
differences, we attempted to minimize effects of language
by selecting odors that were relatively general (e.g., fruity
rather than strawberry, vegetable rather than broccoli) and
we created an interface and procedure that was relatively
non-verbal. Moreover, people’s ability to label odors is
“astonishingly bad” (Yeshurun & Sobel, 2010; see also
Lawless & Engen, 1977), though this itself may be
culturally specific (Majid & Burenhult, 2014; Wnuk &
Majid, 2014). Further research could tease out the effect of
language by asking some participants to identify the odor
before making color choices and exploring how color
choices differ as a result of identification, though this would
necessitate a very large number of participants. Such a study
would also allow us to determine whether the odors are
cuing particular objects, which in turn cue colors, or
whether the color-odor associations are mediated by another
factor, such as emotion, or by perceptual correspondences.
We also conducted analyses in CIE-Lab color space, to
look for patterns in the selected colors for each odor (e.g.,
whether certain odors were associated with colors of a
particular luminance). However, because of how our colors
were distributed in the color space, averaging resulted in
similar results for all odors. Future studies could better
probe the nature of the perceptual correspondences between
colors and odors by obtaining intensity and valence ratings
of the colors and odors and directly testing how color-odor
matches change with these parameters across cultures.
Associative learning influences odor perception; for
instance, odors that have been paired together are later
judged more similar (Stevenson, 2001) and odors that have
been paired with sucrose are later judged to smell sweeter
(Stevenson, Boakes, & Prescott, 1998). Odors can even
become associated with emotions which in turn shape
behavior (Herz, Schankler, & Beland, 2004). Thus it is
plausible that color’s many effects on odor (Zellner, 2013)
also arise via associative learning. In conclusion, we have
shown that color-odor associations are robust within a
culture, but that there are substantial cross-cultural

Figure 3. Representational Dissimilarity Matrices (RDM)
for each group. Both axes of each represent the 14 odors.
Each cell in the matrix indicates the degree of dissimilarity
between the color-patterns of the respective odors in that
row and column. The dark blue diagonal indicates perfect
similarity of the odors with themselves. The
representational geometry, or the spatial configuration of
clusters of high and low dissimilarities, shows differences
and commonalities in each culture.

Figure 4. Representational Dissimilarity Matrix comparing
cultures. Both axes represent the 6 cultures. Each cell in
the matrix indicates the degree of dissimilarity between the
respective cultures’ odor representation geometry.

843

variations. This is consistent with the notion that these
associations are learned through experience.

and Preference, 27(2), 191-195.
Mur, M., Bandettini, P. A., and Kriegeskorte, N. (2009).
Revealing representational content with patterninformation fMRI—an introductory guide. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 4(1):101-109.
Palmer, S. E., & Schloss, K. B. (2010). An ecological
valence theory of human color preference. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 107(19), 8877-8882.
Palmer, S. E., Schloss, K. B., Xu, Z., & Prado-León, L. R.
(2013). Music–color associations are mediated by
emotion. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 110(22), 8836-8841.
Pangborn, R. M., Guinard, J. X., & Davis, R. G. (1988).
Regional aroma preferences. Food Quality and
Preference, 1(1), 11-19.
Regier, T., & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color:
Whorf was half right. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
13(10), 439-446.
Shankar, M. U., Levitan, C. A., & Spence, C. (2010). Grape
expectations: The role of cognitive influences in color–
flavor interactions. Consciousness and Cognition, 19(1),
380-390.
Spector, F., & Maurer, D. (2012). Making sense of scents:
the colour and texture of odours. Seeing and Perceiving,
25(6), 655-677.
Spence, C. (2011). Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial
review. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73(4),
971-995.
Stevenson, R. J. (2001). Associative learning and odor
quality perception: how sniffing an odor mixture can alter
the smell of its parts. Learning and Motivation, 32(2),
154-177.
Stevenson, R. J., Boakes, R. A., & Prescott, J. (1998).
Changes in odor sweetness resulting from implicit
learning of a simultaneous odor-sweetness association:
An example of learned synesthesia. Learning and
Motivation,29(2), 113-132.
Stevenson, R. J., Rich, A., & Russell, A. (2012). The nature
and origin of cross-modal associations to odours.
Perception, 41(5), 606.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M. C., Wu, L., Wade, A.
R., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian blues reveal effects
of language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104(19), 7780-7785.
Wnuk, E., & Majid, A. (2014). Revisiting the limits of
language: The odor lexicon of Maniq. Cognition, 131(1),
125-138.
Yeshurun, Y., & Sobel, N. (2010). An odor is not worth a
thousand words: from multidimensional odors to
unidimensional odor objects. Annual Review of
Psychology, 61, 219-241.
Zellner, D. A. (2013). Color–Odor Interactions: A Review
and Model. Chemosensory Perception, 6(4), 155-169.
Zellner, D. A., Bartoli, A. M., & Eckard, R. (1991).
Influence of color on odor identification and liking
ratings. The American Journal of Psychology, 104(4),
547-561.

Acknowledgments
Financial support was provided by an Occidental College
Richter-ASP Grant, by the Ready Mind Project (I-LABS),
and by the Hessian initiative for the development of
scientific and economic excellence (LOEWE Neuronal
Coordination Research Focus Frankfurt). Unilever provided
the olfactory stimuli.

References
Ayabe-Kanamura, S., Saito, S., Distel, H., Martínez-Gómez,
M., & Hudson, R. (1998). Differences and similarities in
the perception of everyday odors. A Japanese-German
cross-cultural study. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 855, 694-700.
Chrea, C., Valentin, D., Sulmont-Rossé, C., Ly Mai, H.,
Hoang Nguyen, D., & Abdi, H. (2004). Culture and odor
categorization: agreement between cultures depends upon
the odors. Food Quality and Preference, 15(7), 669-679.
Demattè, M. L., Sanabria, D., & Spence, C. (2006). Crossmodal associations between odors and colors. Chemical
Senses, 31(6), 531-538.
Ferdenzi, C., Roberts, S. C., Schirmer, A., Delplanque, S.,
Cekic, S., Porcherot, C., ... & Grandjean, D. (2013).
Variability of affective responses to odors: culture,
gender, and olfactory knowledge. Chemical Senses, 38(2),
175-186.
Gilbert, A. N., Martin, R., & Kemp, S. E. (1996). Crossmodal correspondence between vision and olfaction: the
color of smells. The American Journal of Psychology,
335-351.
Herz, R. S. (2005). Odor-associative Learning and Emotion:
Effects on Perception and Behavior. Chemical Senses,
30(1), i250-i251.
Herz, R. S., Schankler, C., & Beland, S. (2004). Olfaction,
emotion and associative learning: effects on motivated
behavior. Motivation and Emotion, 28(4), 363-383.
Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., and Bandettini, P. (2008a).
Representational similarity analysis - connecting the
branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems
neuroscience, 2.
Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., Ruff, D. A., Kiani, R., Bodurka,
J., Esteky, H., Tanaka, K., and Bandettini, P. A. (2008b).
Matching categorical object representations in inferior
temporal cortex of man and monkey. Neuron, 60(6):11261141.
Lawless, H., & Engen, T. (1977). Associations to odors:
interference, mnemonics, and verbal labeling. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
3(1), 52.
Majid, A., & Burenhult, N. (2014). Odors are expressible in
language, as long as you speak the right language.
Cognition, 130(2), 266-270.
Maric, Y., & Jacquot, M. (2013). Contribution to
understanding odour–colour associations. Food Quality

844

