UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Bottom-Up Approach to Concept Possession

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wx0g3pc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Melcher, David

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Bottom-up Approach to Concept Possession
Cristina Meini (meini@lett.unipmn.it)
Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici, Università del Piemonte orientale,
L.go Marinone 116, 13100, Vercelli, Italy

Alfredo Paternoster (pater@lett.unipmn.it)
Dipartimento di Studi Umanistici, Università del Piemonte orientale,
L.go Marinone 116, 13100, Vercelli, Italy

Abstract
We present a bottom-up approach to the problem of fixing
psychological requirements to concept possession. It is
argued that four constraints are required: abstraction,
directedness, multimodality and off-line processing. Taken
together, these psychological requirements yield a view of
concepts similar (on certain aspects) to “dual” philosophical
pictures: both inferential role and referential mechanisms are
necessary to characterize conceptual competence.

Keywords: concepts, categorization, animal thinking.

1. A methodological premise
Two oppositions can be found in the philosophical literature
on concepts.
First, there is a theoretical opposition between a
characterization of concepts in terms of abilities (or
capacities), and a characterization of concepts in terms of
things, or particulars.
The second dichotomy is meta-theoretical. On the one
hand, theories of concepts are taken to provide individuation
conditions; on the other hand, theories of concepts are
supposed to provide possession conditions. This latter
opposition concerns the kind of question a theory of concepts
should answer: “What kind of entity is a concept?”, rather
than “What is required in order to ascribe a concept to an
agent”?
At first glance, one would say that endorsing either of the
meta-theoretical options does not determine the theoretical
way of characterizing concepts. For instance, one could start
with the problem of establishing what the possession
conditions of a concept are, and eventually reach one of two
conclusions: concepts are mental particulars or they are a
family of abilities. Indeed, generally speaking, it would
appear strange that constraints on the form of a theory would
also determine its content.
However, as Fodor correctly points out (1998, Cap. 1),
there is an historical-factual, though nonlogical, link between
the characterization of concepts in terms of abilities and the
idea that the core problem of a theory of concepts is to
determine possession conditions. In fact, this meta-theoretical
option is usually motivated by scepticism towards the
possibility of identifying concepts with particulars, “things”.
The classical reference is Wittgenstein (1953), whose

explication of the notion of meaning in terms of
use/competence derives mainly from his negative attitude as
to meaning reification. A combination of scepticism and antimetaphysical concerns is, therefore, the main reason for
“reducing” concepts to abilities1. This attitude has arguably
influenced cognitive science. Being interested in concepts
essentially from a psychological point of view – that is, to
concepts regarded as those mental endowments which allow
certain epistemic performances – cognitive scientists are
naturally inclined to establish a close link between possession
conditions and the manifestation of certain abilities. In other
words, one cannot state what a concept is independently of
what agents are able to do.
According to Fodor, this is the most serious error of
cognitive science, which prevents cognitive scientists from
adopting the only plausible theory of concepts: informational
atomism. According to informational atomism, concepts are
unstructured mental symbols (this is the atomistic aspect),
whose content is determined by a causal-nomological relation
with objects in the world (this is the informational aspect)2.
On Fodor’s view, it is just because cognitive scientists take
concepts to be abilities – rather than mental particulars – that
1

Cf. Fodor: «… [P]eople who start with ‘What is concept
possession?’ generally have some sort of Pragmatism in mind as
the answer. Having a concept is a matter of what you are able to
do, it’s some kind of epistemic ‘know how’ (…). The
methodological doctrine that concept possession is logically prior
to concept individuation frequently manifests a preference for an
ontology of mental dispositions rather than an ontology of mental
particulars.» (1998, pp. 3-4). A bit later Fodor suggests that
scepticism is the skeleton in Dummett’s closet (cfr. ibid., p. 5.
Indeed Dummett defended a similar position in the philosophy of
language, identifying the theory of meaning with the theory of
understanding).
2
In a nutshell: the concept (e. g.) CAT is the mental symbol whose
tokens are systematically caused by tokens of real cats in the
world. Please note that to say that concepts are mental entities
endowed of a content could be misleading, since concepts,
whatever they are exactly, are already contents – they do not
require further interpretation. Anyway, the point should be clear:
The causal-nomological link with the world is what determines
concept contentfulness. In other words, a concept is intrinsically
content-bearer or “self-interpreted”, because the mental
representation which carries the concept is causally linked with the
world.

1479

they go wrong in regarding them as complex (non-atomic),
that is, in considering inferential patterns as constitutive of
conceptual content. In other words, Fodor’s claim is that
cognitive science is flawed because it does not recognize that
metaphysical questions concerning concepts are independent
of and precede epistemological questions about concepts. For
instance, one issue is what the concept CAT (or, the concept of
a cat) is -- namely, the mental symbol nomologically linked
to real cats; quite another issue concerns the mental structures
allowing us to recognize cats, or to infer that cats are animals.
It turns out, in particular, that the inferential links are not
constitutive of concepts or, to put it in a slightly different
way, that agents’ knowledge about cats is not relevant to
establish what such a concept is.
We shall persist in this alleged mistake. We do not a priori
reject informational atomism; however, whichever theory of
concepts turns out to be right3, the priority accorded to the
epistemological question, and the related theoretical
preference for a characterization in terms of abilities, come
from the following reasons:
a) The metaphysical question seems to bring with itself
the idea that concepts are things, particular objects (in the
mind); and this does not fit well the richness and variety of
performances commonly associated to the pre-theoretical,
intuitive notion of concept. In other words, if concepts are
mental particulars, it seems more difficult to account for the
powerfulness of concepts, for instance, for their capacity to
stand for a whole class of objects. Indeed, in order to be
considered as a concept, a mental representation must work in
a certain way, and to explain how it works is hardly
exhausted by a description of the representation as such. As
Ned Block (1986: 633) nicely put it, «What or how a
representation represents is not only a matter of intrinsic
properties of representation, but depends much more on a
complex relational property: how the representation works.».
b) Suppose concepts are mental particulars, such as
mental symbols. Since concepts must be already interpreted,
these mental particulars should intrinsically be contentbearer: Content is part of the concept, it is one among its
individuation conditions. But it is quite difficult to justify that
a mental entity is interpreted. The few proposals on the
market, such as Fodor’s informational atomism, must face
many criticisms (see e.g. Baker 1991; Putnam 1992). By
contrast, a framework based on capacities accounts for
concept contentfulness as a feature of the entire system of the
relevant processes and structures.
c) To account for concepts in terms of capacities seems
to fit scientific practice better, in the following sense. The
approaches underlying “metaphysical” theories of concepts,
including informational atomism, tend to answer the question
of what concepts are (what concepts must be) on the basis of
purely philosophical, a priori requirements or constraints, and
only then to find the relevant, psychological empirical
3

In fact, as has been stated before, the link between the metatheoretical option and the theoretical option is not logical.

evidence. By contrast, a naturalistic, capacities-oriented
approach takes into consideration from the start the empirical
evidence concerning behavior and the mental endowments
postulated by cognitive scientists. Or, at any rate, this is the
kind of approach we want to pursue. To establish a priori
what a concept must be is to put the horse before the cart, so
to speak.4
In light of the above considerations, our strategy will be the
following. We shall look for some abilities with prima facie
relevance to concept attribution, beginning with the most
basic, and gradually increasing their sophistication. For each
individuated ability, we shall discuss whether it is required for
concept possession. Eventually, we shall argue that concept
possession could be identified with a certain collection of
these abilities. The relevant abilities can easily be
characterized in computational terms.
This approach is naturalistic insofar as it proceeds by
assimilating human mental processes to nonhuman
(proto)mental processes, rather than assuming a clear-cut
distinction (cf. Brandom, 2000 for the nonassimilative
strategy). We call this approach “bottom-up” insofar as it
starts from what is simpler, more basic (perceptual), and
climbs, so to speak, on what is more sophisticated
(inferential, linguistic).
This strategy does not beg the question of which theory of
concepts is right. There are good reasons to think that each
theory of concepts on the market gives an account of some
aspects of the problem, being unable to account for others.
However, we expect that our analysis will evidence the merits
of some theories and the shortcomings of other theories.

2. Concepts and categorization abilities
Several mental abilities are relevant to concept attribution or,
in brief, to concepts. Of course, the notion of mental ability
can be picked out at different levels of analysis.
Consequently, different kinds of mental abilities will be
considered relevant. For instance, following a rough and
popular classification schema, there are three macroabilities
relevant to concepts: categorization, inference and language.
We shall assume categorization to be the core ability
relevant to concept possession, and we shall distinguish
different kinds of properties instantiated at different levels of
categorization. We shall argue that, in order to ascribe
concepts, some sophisticated aspects related to categorization
must be present. In the last section (see §3) we shall return to
the notion of inference, to see whether it fits our proposal. As
far as language is concerned, it is not among the topics of this
paper. To put it crudely, we assume that language is relevant
in order to possess certain concepts, not to have conceptual
abilities in general.
By ‘categorization’ we mean, at a first approximation, the
process by which a natural or artificial system subsumes a
4
However, as we shall see, a certain extent of apriorism will also
be unavoidable in our inquiry – as well as, we submit, in every
inquiry aiming at outlining a theory of concepts.

1480

stimulus under a class. As Medin & Aguilar (1999) nicely put
it, categorization is «the process by which distinct entities are
treated as equivalent». Thus, an agent can be said to be
somehow able to categorize if there is evidence that he or she
takes some particulars to be put together under some aspects5.
Whatever pre-theoretical, intuitive notion of concept is
assumed, it has to account for categorizing abilities; in other
words, being endowed to a certain extent with this ability is a
necessary condition in order to be able to conceptualize.
Ability to categorize is a minimal requirement to ascribe
concepts, since these are in the first place tools for putting
together particulars for a variety of goals: giving appropriate
behavioral responses to stimuli of a given kind, forming
inductive predictions about properties that have to be applied
to new (never met before) particulars, and so on.
Indeed, all theories of concepts on the market provide
accounts of categorization. These theories can be
distinguished essentially by the fact that they offer a different
explanation of how categorization works.
At first glance, there are two crucial aspects involved in the
formation of categories. The first is abstraction: to “build” a
class, one abstracts from some features and focuses on some
other features. Trivially, being green rather than red is not
important for an apple in order to be (categorized as) an
apple. Please notice that we are not talking about
sophisticated “abstract” concepts, such as DEMOCRACY or
ELEGANCE, but only about the ability to pick out some
aspects, and exclude others. Without this ability no particular
could be considered on a par with another particular under
some aspect.
The second aspect, which is somehow symmetrical to the
previous one, is directedness, that is, the property of
conceptual structures to carry information, or represent,
entities in the world. No matter how a category is built, a
pattern is generated that is regularly associated to something
in the world. Something mental mediates the stimulus and the
behavioral response. This corresponds to a (very minimal)
notion of representation. That is to say, concepts require
representational abilities.
One might describe directedness as a sort of aboutness, a
bare, primitive referential relation that even thermostats can
instantiate, but we prefer to dispense with this too much
committing way of speaking. The point is just that any kind
of categorization involves the instantiation of a certain
mechanism that stands, or represents, a certain collection of
particulars. This does yet not amount to a full notion of
reference, which, at least according to some authors (e.g.
Deacon, 1997), requires a system of symbols each standing
for something.
5

We will always use ‘category’ as synonymous with ‘class of
objects’. That is, our notion of category corresponds only to the
extensional aspect of the notion of concept. Remember also that
we are talking about subjective categories: We are not interested in
the question whether the categories formed by people are
appropriate by certain public normative standards (naturalistic
constraint).

Clearly, this definition of directedness does not suggest that
language is necessarily involved in categorization. As we will
see below (§2.1), many behavioral patterns, of different
degrees of sophistication, show that a given stimulus has been
subsumed under a certain category. For instance, in order to
ascribe perceptual categorization, it is enough that an animal
behaves differently in response to different kinds of stimuli.

2.1 Evidence from animal categorization: rats
As we said, categorizing a stimulus amounts to subsuming it
under a class. Many experimental data provide evidence that
even animals far from us in phylogeny are able to categorize
stimuli. Take, for instance, an experiment aimed at
establishing to what extent categorization in rats is accurate
(McIntosh, 1994). If the experimenter feeds a rat on some
coffee at t1 and causes it to have a stomach ache at t3 (by a
lithium chloride injection), the next day the rat will be off
coffee, i.e., the last thing it has eaten. If, however, the rat eats
some sugar at t2 (t2 < t3), then it will avoid sugar rather than
coffee. Results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Case
1
Case
2

t1
Coffee

t2
____

Coffee

Sugar

t3
Stomach
ache
Stomach
ache

Behavior
Coffee avoidance
Sugar avoidance
(not coffee)

These data suggest that the rat is able to represent a
category such as “stuff-to-avoid” in a rather accurate way,
discriminating bad food on the grounds of non-trivial cues
such as the events’ temporal order.
The two criteria regarded as necessary for categorization,
i.e., abstraction and directedness, are both satisfied: rats
abstract from differences among particular foods and pick out
the common attribute of noxiousness; it is this feature that
determines behavior, implicitly establishing an informational
link with bad food.
It is worth to point out that a third feature of animal
categorization has sometimes been highlighted in literature.
According to Dretske (1986), in order to ascribe a genuine
representational ability to a system, the system must be
endowed with multimodality, that is, the ability to pick out
one and the same feature of a stimulus by multiple sensory
channels (Dretske 1986, p. 33).6
Multimodality allows to establish what the content of a
representation is. In fact, when there is only one sensorial
channel, we have no basis to claim that the content of a
representation is the external (distal) stimulus rather than,
e.g., the proximal stimulus. This systematic ambiguity in the
6

More precisely, Dretske claims that representations can also be
ascribed to systems that are able to exploit in a single sense
modality different external features of a stimulus. We shall restrict
ourselves to multimodality.

1481

content determination is removed in the multiple-sense case,
because there are two distinct paths connecting the endpoints, that is, the relevant representation and its object7. In
other words, multimodality allows us to establish whether an
animal is representing or misrepresenting something.
Therefore, Dretske’s argument is fundamentally that a
genuine representational ability requires also the ability of
misrepresenting, which, in turn, requires multimodality.
Multimodality seems to be present in many vertebrates,
including rats. Therefore, we could say that bare animal
categorization is characterized by abstraction, directedness
and multimodality. Is this “bare categorization” enough to
attribute concepts? Let us discuss another example, involving
more complex animals, such as monkeys. As we shall see,
monkeys’ behaviour is probably easier to interpret, in the
sense that the properties we have individuated so far are more
apparent.

2.2 Monkeys
The example we are going to discuss is taken from Cheney
and Seyfarth (1990), who observed a group of vervet
monkeys living free in a park. Vervet monkeys, who live in
groups of 10-30 individuals, engage in complex vocal
interactions. Each individual uses a set of 25-30 signals,
which appear to be messages to conspecifics. The most
frequent communication contexts are dangerous situations,
search for food and sexual interaction. Each of these contexts
is characterized by the use of highly specific vocal signals.
For instance, three different alarm calls are produced facing
different predators such as snakes, birds of prey (usually,
eagles) and big cats (typically, leopards). The reaction of
monkeys hearing an alarm is very specific as well: leopard
alarms make vervets run into trees, whereas eagle alarms
cause them look up or run into bushes; in response to a snake
alarm, vervets keep still and peer at their surroundings.
Notice that the escape reaction is not triggered by a unique
cause. In fact, even when he is not alerted by a conspecific
alarm, the monkey who sees a leopard runs away (over and
above alarming his conspecifics). Therefore this is also a case
of multimodal categorization, as recognition is performed
through different sensory channels.
Now, although the behavioral pattern of vervet monkeys is
quite sophisticated in comparison with the rats’ behavior
discussed in section 2.1, we submit that this kind of
categorization is still too coarse-grained. In fact, the vervet
monkeys’ behavior in the face of an alarm is a rigid reaction.
Whenever a leopard is perceived, a monkey cries and
escapes. On the other side of the communication channel,
whenever a monkey perceives a leopard alarm, it escapes.
7

However, as Dretske points out, multimodality as such does not
yet rule out the possibility that the content of a representation is
disjunctive, as it could happen when two different stimuli -- say, an
elm and a beech -- have some sensorial properties in common.
Dretske accounts for this problem by invoking the notion of
indication function (cf. 1986, pp. 35-6).

That is to say, the stimulus <leopard alarm> only triggers
escape reactions. This seems to show that the requirements on
categorization so far individuated are necessary but not yet
sufficient. Why do we argue that concepts require a sort of
non-rigid categorization? Before answering this question, let
us draw attention to another kind of empirical data,
concerning the neural level.
The relevant experimental evidence concerns canonical and
mirror neurons, two classes of visuo-motor cells found in the
premotor cortex (F5) of macaques’ brain. Canonical neurons
fire both when the animal grasps a certain object using a
certain grip and when it observes an object which can be
grasped in the same way. According to Gallese, canonical
neurons could subserve multimodal representation of an
organism-object relation.
Mirror neurons discharge both when the monkey makes a
specific action and when he observes another agent
performing the same kind of action. For example, they fire
when the animal grasps an object and when he sees someone
grasping the same kind of object. Some mirror neurons are
multimodal since they fire not only when the monkey visually
perceives an agent performing an action, but also when he
hears the same action being performed by someone (Kohler
et al., 2002). There are also mirror neurons which can detect a
(partially) occluded action. For example, “grasping” mirror
neurons fire when the animal sees an action whose final,
relevant part is occluded by an opaque screen (Umiltà et al.,
2001).
To sum up, the properties of macaques’ categorization
processes are abstraction, directedness and multimodality. In
particular, with regard to abstraction, canonical neurons fire
independently of the specific object’s shape. Likewise, mirror
neurons fire both when the action is seen and when the action
is heard.
According to Gallese, these properties are sufficient to
attribute concepts and, in particular, the concept of a goaloriented action. Yet we believe something is still missing. Let
us go back to the psychological level.

2.3 On-line and off-line processes
A sophisticated feature of macaques’ categorization consists
in the inhibition of action. In fact, since pre-motor regions are
activated when an action is perceived, one could expect the
same action to be actually performed. Yet, despite F5
neurons’ activity, perceiving an action does not necessarily
lead the monkey to act. In this sense, an action is prepared
without being really performed, a working modality that
could be called “off-line”, meaning that there is a
“detachment” from action.
This feature is quite sophisticated, since it weakens the
rigidity of the categorization models discussed earlier. But the
notion of off-line categorization we are interested in requires
more than this. Take, e.g., canonical neurons. They can be
said to work “on-line” insofar as, in the light of the available
evidence, they fire only when an object is present in the
perceptual field of the monkey. In other words, the category-

1482

like representation realized by canonical neurons’ firing
seems to be necessarily triggered by perceptual contingencies,
in a bottom-up way.
It seems, however, that conceptual capacities involve the
possibility to exploit a representation even when the stimulus
is not present. Arguably, it is the possession of concepts that
allows us, for instance, to figure out a potential danger, so that
to plan a preventive behavior. Indeed, according to
Haugeland (1998), this feature is necessary even in order to
speak of representations: Something is a representation only
if it can stand in for the stimulus, so that the relevant behavior
can be guided by the mechanism, in stead of the stimulus.
This suggests that full-blooded off-line modality -- the only
one that can fully remove rigidity -- requires more than
inhibition of action. It requires the possibility to trigger the
process in a top-down way. Therefore, we define off-line
processing as the conjunction of the two following
conditions:
1) Off-line representations can be activated not only by
objects in the perceptual field but also by top-down
processes such as imagery or long-term memory;
2) Off-line representations can be activated without
triggering any real action: an action is planned but its
execution is inhibited.
We claim that concept attribution requires the ability to
perform off-line processes in this full-fledged sense. In other
words, conceptual competence requires off-line processing in
the sense that (1) representations can be activated in a topdown manner, and (2) representations can trigger simulated
(rather than actual) actions. A similar view is put forward by
Bickerton (1995), in a different, language-oriented, context.
As we pointed out earlier, the second constraint is still
satisfied by mirror neurons8. However, according to our
proposal, in order to attribute concepts to macaques, the first
constraint must be met as well. Whether or not it is fulfilled in
monkeys remains an open empirical question. In any case, the
relevant point is that off-line processing is the last and crucial
constraint necessary to attribute concepts. Therefore, a system
can be ascribed conceptual competence if and only if all of
the following features are present:
a) abstraction
b) directedness
c) multimodality
d) off-line processing
Let us work out more deeply why we hold that off-line
processing is necessary for concept possession. Admittedly,
this claim is to a certain extent a matter of stipulation: the
issue of establishing what counts as conceptual capacity is not
purely empirical. However, there are at least two reasons
supporting our hypothesis.
First, the pretheoretical notion of concept seems to require
a kind of generality which is over and above the kind of
8
The off-line working modality, even if limited to the motor side,
does not seem to play any role in Gallese’s discussion on the
conditions required to attribute concepts.

generality involved in bare (nonhuman) categorization – the
notion of generality captured by the feature of abstraction.
The idea is that one and the same representation can be
exploited in several different mental operations; in particular,
we can use it in reasoning. This intuition was formalized by
Evans’ (1982) so-called generality constraint, according to
which if an agent has the ability to entertain the proposition
Fa (= a is an F), he also has the ability of entertaining the
proposition Ga, for each concept G he can grasp.
The independence from sensori-motor constraints is a
special case of generality: among the different possible uses
of a representation, there are situations which are not
constrained to the “here and now”. Following our definition
of off-line processing, on the one hand representations can be
activated in a top-down way, (i.e. by imagery processes
operating on long term memory data) and, on the other hand,
this activation does not necessarily yield the execution of any
motor plan.
Second, if concept attribution were based only on
abstraction, directedness, and multimodality, a system would
be confined to a rigidity which does not easily fit our
pretheoretical notion of concept. This is evidenced by vervet
monkeys’ alarms as discussed by Cheney & Seyfarth: in
presence of leopard alarm, they cannot but react, rigidly, by
crying and escaping. There is, so to speak, too much
determinism in the vervets’ behavior to attribute them the
relevant concepts.
Admittedly, rigid, species-specific patterns of behavior are
not useless. On the contrary, being the product of natural
selection, this rigidity is typically part of a good strategy to
avoid mortal dangers. To put it in a slogan, to act is better
than to stand still.
Rigid patterns of behavior are typically very cautious, in
the sense that they happen to be also triggered by false
positives: sometimes a danger is seen in a harmless situation.
Again, this is a good strategy for survival in simple systems.
However, to acquire the power to inhibit behaviour
constitutes a significant cognitive improvement for a
biological system. An animal belonging to a species
characterized by rigid patterns of behavior gets a selective
advantage when it becomes able to inhibit an action: its
cognitive system is less deceived by false positives and can
“decide” when it is the case to act.
That said, our proposal should not be taken as a dogmatic
thesis about what a concept is (in terms of possession
conditions). Rather, empirical data seem to show that the
relevant abilities (bare categorization, that is, abstraction and
directedness; multimodal categorization; off-line multimodal
categorization) are distributed along a continuum, such that
the boundary between the non-conceptual (or pre-conceptual)
and the conceptual is fuzzy. We might say that proto-concepts
are included in the leftmost area of the continuum, whereas
full-blooded concepts belong to the rightmost area. In the
middle, there is a grey area in which conceptual capacities
begin to emerge. This would provide further evidence for the
widespread thesis according to which the concept of concept

1483

is vague, prototypical. In a way, it is just for a sort of
anthropological chauvinism that we are inclined to claim that
concepts are only located in the rightmost part of the
continuum.

for concepts, without being involved in the inferentialist, topdown talk.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Barbara Giolito, Diego Marconi, Daniele
Sgaravatti, Alberto Voltolini and two anonymous referees for
their helpful criticisms.

3. Inferences and inferential role theories
Let us conclude by briefly outlining a few points about
inferences and inferential role.
First, in our paper we did not appeal to the notion of
inference, which is often considered as the mark of
conceptual, because it appears, in our opinion, rather
ambiguous. Admittedly, at the core of ‘inference’ lies the
(conscious) derivation of a conclusion from premises. To
have concepts amounts to being able to use concepts in this
kind of inferences (see e.g. Crane 1992, p. 144), an idea
already familiar to Frege. The off-line modality can be seen
as an alternative way to account for this kind of exploitations
of concepts, in the sense that inferences are paradigmatic
cases of off-line uses of representations.
However, the notion of inference has also been used to
denote the kind of processes constitutive of perception. Since
Helmholtz, it is common to regard a perceptual task as a kind
of unconscious inferential process. Accordingly, we should
have distinguished two kinds of inferences: off-line or highlevel inferences, which are the core inferences, and on line
inferences, which are rigid and necessarily triggered by
sensory information. On the interest of clarity, we chose to
give up the inferentialist talk.
Second, even if one insisted that our off-line account
amounts, after all, to the thesis that inferences are necessary
for concepts, our account should not be considered as a
version of the so-called inferential role theories about
concepts. According to inferential theories, to possess a
concept is to be able to make some inferences. We know what
the concept DOG is if (and only if) we possess some relevant
beliefs on dogs, such as that a dog is a barking mammal with
a highly-developed sense of smell, and so on. Although this
way of speaking is compatible with our view, the focus and
the method of our account are rather different. Our aim is to
relate, in a bottom-up, empirical way, human capacity to non
human abilities, whereas typical inferential role theories
assume a language-oriented characterization from the start
and proceed in an a priori way. They do not comment on the
basic categorical processes underlying inferential roles.

Conclusions
We have taken categorization as the core ability relevant to
concept possession, and we have distinguished some different
kinds of properties involved in different levels of
categorization. Four constraints have been individuated in
order to possess concepts: abstraction, directedness,
multimodality and off-line processing. The last requirement,
in particular, allows us to account for the popular (and
plausible) thesis according to which inferences are necessary

References
Baker, L. Rudder (1991). “Has Content Been Naturalized?”,
in B. Loewer, G. Rey (eds.), Meaning in Mind. Fodor and
his Critics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Bickerton, D. (1995). Language and Human Behavior,
Washington: University of Washington Press.
Block, N. (1986). “Advertisement for a Semantics for
Psychology”, in P. French, T. Uheling, H. Wettstein (eds.),
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 10, pp. 615-683,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Brandom, R (2000). Articulating reasons, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. (1999). How monkeys see
the world, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Crane, T. (1992). The non conceptual content of experience,
in Id., The Content of Experience, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The Symbolic Species. The Co-evolution
of Language and The Brain, New York: Norton & C.
Dretske F. (1986). Misrepresentation, in R. Bogdan (ed.),
Belief, Oxford: Clarendon.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1998). Concepts: Where cognitive science went
wrong, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallese, V. (2003). A neuroscientific grasp of concepts: from
control to representation, Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, B. 358, 1231-1240.
Haugeland, J. (1998). Representational Genera, in Id., Having
Thought, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Kolher, E., Keysers, C., Umiltà, M.A., Fogassi, L., Gallese,
V., Rizzolatti, G. (2002). Hearing sounds, understanding
actions: Action representation in mirror neurons, Science,
297, 846-848.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1994). Intelligence in evolution, in J.
Khalfa (ed.), What is intelligence?, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Medin, D. & Aguilar, C. (1999). “Categorization”, in R.
Wilson, F. Keil (eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive
Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Putnam H. (1992). Renewing Philosophy, Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press.
Umiltà, M.A., Kohler, E., Gallese, V., Fogassi, L., Fadiga, L.,
Keysers, C., Rizzolatti, G. (2001). I know what you are
doing: A neurophysiological study, Neuron, 32, 91-101.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations,
Oxford: Blackwell.

1484

