UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Conceptual Complexity Account of Theory of Mind Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34g8v2md

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Conceptual Complexity Account of Theory of Mind Development
Matthew Phillips (phillips@sci.ccny.cuny.edu)
Department of Biology, The City College of CUNY,
Marshak Science Building J526, Convent Avenue at 138th Street,
New York, NY 10031 USA

Abstract:

actions. Armed with such an understanding, 4-year-olds are
able to successfully predict the behavior of someone acting
on a false belief.
Three-year-olds, on the other hand, are restricted to being
able to represent another agent as entertaining a model of a
situation in the world, even when the model isn’t veridical,
according to Perner. Thus children of this age can
understand when a belief is out of step with reality, and
counterfactual situations generally.
Strictly speaking,
however, children at this age do not have the concept of
belief at all; rather, they “associate” representations with
other agents, without truly understanding how the
association figures into the agent’s practical reasoning.
When confronted with an FB situation, 3-year-olds, not
receiving any cues that the agent (e.g., Maxi) is pretending
that the chocolate is in the non-actual location, the child
bases its prediction off of reality.
By characterizing 3-year-olds this way, Perner is
potentially able to explain a lot of the facility with mental
states that 3-year-olds do have. For example, he explains
the fact that children do successfully use mental state
vocabulary correctly on many occasions. (Bartsch &
Wellman, 1995) He can also explain 3-year-olds’ ability to
use physical models to draw inferences about a real,
perceptually available situation. (Perner, 1988, 1991) Most
impressively, perhaps, he can explain the fact that 3-yearolds do not appear to be able to clearly distinguish between
belief and pretense. (Perner et al. 1994, Perner 1995)
One difficulty with Perner’s view is that he provides no
direct evidence for the existence of a conceptual leap of the
relevant sort at any point in development, and what
evidence there is which bears on the question seems to point
in the other direction. It has been found, for example, that
simply adding the word “first” to the instructions in a FB
task (‘Where will Maxi look first’) pushes the age of
success down significantly. (Siegel & Beatty, 1991, and
especially German et al., 2005: 65ff.) If younger children
simply don’t have the concept of false belief, however, such
a change should not help. This consideration encourages us
to look for a more parsimonious account of childhood
development.

Experiments published by Wimmer & Perner (1983) appeared
to show that young children, relatively fluent in the language
of belief attribution, did not have the concept of false belief as
applied to other people. Since the publication of these results
there has been an enormous amount of research dedicated to
understanding the cognitive and biological apparatus
underlying our capacity for mentalizing, i.e. for attributing
mental states to other individuals, and how this apparatus
develops in children. The False Belief task has been the
predominant, though by no means the only, experimental
paradigm through which this task has been studied. Many
theories of Theory of Mind (ToM) development have arisen
from this research. In this paper, I will consider two
influential such theories, namely those of Josef Perner et al.
(1988, 1991, 1995), and Alan Leslie et al. (1987, 1994, 2005).
I will observe some problems each view faces (drawing these
problems in two cases from the literature), and then I will
offer my own explanation of the developmental data. This
explanation is motivated by past and contemporary
investigations into the semantics of propositional attitude
attributions. It holds that, for the sorts of ToM tasks
considered in the literature such as the False Belief task, when
children of a particular age fail at these tasks it is because the
representations required for success are too conceptually
complex for those children at that age. Finally, I will describe
a direction for further experimentation for testing Leslie’s
theory as well as my own.

1. Perner and Leslie
In False Belief (FB) tasks, the subject predicts the behavior
of an agent who within the course of the experiment has
come to have a false belief (usually about the location of an
object). Typically, children younger than 4 fail on these
tasks, whereas older children (and adults) succeed. (E.g.
Wimmer & Perner 1983.) In order to explain these results,
Perner (1988, 1991) holds that children undergo significant
conceptual change around age 4. In particular, children
acquire the capacity for metarepresentation, that is, the
capacity to represent an agent as having an internal
representation or model of the world, and moreover to
represent the semantic relation, truth or falsity, between that
person’s model and the way the world is. That is, 4-year
olds represent the agent’s representation, the world, and the
semantic relation between the two. Being able to represent
agents’ mental states in this way is the essence, Perner
claims, of being able to understand that people use their
representations of the world, true or false, to guide their

The theory of Alan Leslie and his collaborators avoids the
concern raised against Perner’s view. According to Leslie
and collaborators, the developmental pattern with respect to
ToM exhibited by children is a result of the collaboration of
two mechanisms. The first is an innate “Theory of Mind

1756

Mechanism” (ToMM), which embodies ToM knowledge as
well as representational structures needed to mentalize. The
ToMM is to be understood as closely analogous to the
mechanism which embodies linguistic competence, as
described by Chomskyan linguistic theory. The other
mechanism is a gradually maturing “Selection Processor”
(SP), which, when the child is induced to predict behavior
or attribute attitudes, chooses from multiple “competing
alternative representations” of the agent’s mental states.
(Leslie et al., 2005: 48) The SP is thought to perform an
essentially executive function, modulating the activation
levels of the different representations in ToMM. In
particular, the SP serves to inhibit the default (prepotent)
representation which ToMM offers: namely, the
representation of the agent’s mental states which is identical
to the subject’s own. I.e., the SP’s job is to overcome the
subject’s reality bias, where appropriate. In young children,
the SP is typically not able to deliver enough inhibition to
do this; in older children it is. Moreover, since the SP is by
hypothesis cognitively penetrable, situational factors can
serve to make one or another alternative representation more
“salient” than another. Explicitly bringing the non-default
representation to the attention of the subject, for example,
might make it more salient and therefore easier to select.
This view, ToMM-SP theory, has considerable
explanatory power. It explains why ‘look first’ instructions
increase FB task success rates; doing so brings to the
attention of the child the location where the transferred
object was first, and this makes the prepotent reality
attribution easier to inhibit. Leslie’s view also appears to
very nicely explain the dissociability exhibited by autistic
children between mentalizing, and reasoning about
representations more generally.
Autistic children, as
reported in Leslie & Thaiss (1992), fail spectacularly at
attributing false beliefs, relative to their normal verbal-agematched counterparts. They do this despite performing
better than matched normals on false map and outdated
(Zaitchik) photograph tasks, both of which presuppose
possession of the concept of misrepresentation. Finally,
Leslie’s view is currently the only one which explains the
sharp falloff in performance in both FB and True Belief
(TB) tasks when an avoidance desire (e.g., wanting to avoid
putting the sick kitten in with the food), is substituted for the
standard approach desire (e.g., wanting to eat the
chocolate).
However, it is not clear that ToMM-SP theory can explain
the substantial developmental asymmetry that exists
between belief and desire concept acquisition. Children use
desire vocabulary a year before belief vocabulary (ages 2
and 3, respectively). (Bartsch & Wellman, 1995: chapter 2)
They also understand contrastive (i.e., not-own) desires at
age 3. (1990, 218ff.) Leslie et al.’s (2005) own results
illustrate this phenomenon, in that TB-avoidance desire
tasks prove to be easier for children than FB-approach
desire. In discussion of this, they write:

1757

[Our results show] that a desire target-shift is easier
to produce than a belief target shift. A weaker
inhibition may shift a desire target while a stronger
inhibition is required to shift a belief target.
Perhaps this is because a belief, but not a desire,
inhibition must overcome a default. (2005: 75)
The claim that there is no default in desire attribution,
however, seems suspect. Certainly, the natural assumption
to make would be that just there is a bias towards our own
beliefs in belief attribution, there is a bias towards our own
desires in desire attribution. This bias is the default.
Moreover, even if the inhibitory threshold is lower for
desire, there is still no explanation of why the child acquires
desire psychology earlier than belief psychology.
Thus, both views considered here have problems. I turn
now to my own view, which avoids these problems.

2. Conceptual Complexity explains ToM
development as well as semantic data
In light of the difficulties which face the views discussed in
the last section, it is reasonable to look for alternative
hypotheses which explain the data. The one I will offer
derives from research done in the formal semantics of
propositional attitude ascriptions as well as on the eventbased semantic structure of all natural language. It has the
virtue of explaining both developmental as well as linguistic
data. It is similar in many ways to the account of de Villiers
(2003), but also crucially different in one respect which I
will mention below.
Following Scheffler (1954), I will suppose that the
complementizer clause which typically follows a verb of
propositional attitude contains, in effect, an operator which
serves to ‘cordon off’ or, to use language from Leslie
(1987), to ‘decouple’ or ‘quarantine’ the part of the sentence
which constitutes the metarepresentation. This operator
turns the embedded sentence into a predicate, which is a
predicate of an internal argument that is also an argument to
the mental state verb. Put in psychological terms, I propose
that to a first approximation, when a person hears and
understands a sentence like ‘Sally thinks that the ball is in
the red box’, she represents the utterance to herself as
follows, where ‘(∃x)’ denotes the existential quantifier, and
[] … [] is the operator which ‘quarantines’ the
metarpresented component:
(1)

(∃x)(BELIEVES(Sally, x) & []the ball is in the red
box[](x))

‘x’ is basically an abstract object, such as a proposition.
The above reads, ‘there is an x such that Sally believes x
and according to x, the ball is in the red box’. The boxes
prevent the hearer of this utterance from confusing Sally’s
belief with any of her own.

longer period of time before looking elsewhere.1 This result
was persisted under variation of the amount of time between
events (.5 to 1.5 sec), and even persisted, in weakened form,
when the puppet is in continuous motion in between jumps.
Wagner & Carey (2003) also discuss data which shows that
children are able to individuate events at a very early age.
In the domains of perception and memory, Zacks et al.
(2001) and Zacks & Tversky (2001) discuss evidence that
memory representations encode event structure and that
perception is sensitive to event boundaries.
In the
experiments they discuss most thoroughly, subjects were
instructed to view a videotape of an actor making a bed or
performing other familiar tasks. Subjects were indicate
through tapping on a recording device how the video
decomposed into “natural and meaningful units”; in distinct
trials, they described both “small” and “large” such units.
The segment boundaries subjects assigned in the coarsegrained version of the task (“large units”) had a significant
tendency to match up with boundaries they assigned in the
fine-grained version (“small units”). This effect—the
“alignment effect”—indicates, as Zacks and his coauthors
claim, that perception has a hierarchical, event-based
structure; the video segments picked out in the fine-grained
version of the task are subevents of the segments picked out
in the coarse-grained version. Interestingly, the ratio of
fine-grained to coarse-grained segments was typically 3:1,
suggesting that the fine-grained segments divide the coarsegrained events into a beginning, middle, and end. (Cf. Zacks
et al. (2001: 34).)

This semantic analysis, then, generalizes to thought; the
proposal is that any time someone thinks ‘Sally thinks that
the ball is in the red box’—as, presumably, one must in
order to pass an FB task—a similar sort of representation
exists.
We can analyze the above representation further, by
exposing its event-based structure. A cardinal insight of
semanticists since Davidson (1967/1980)—who I will
interpret here as being engaged in the psychology of
language comprehension and deductive reasoning—is that
every natural language sentence can be seen as describing
an event (where this concept is understood broadly, so as to
include states). The verbs and adverbs in the sentence
describe this event, and the objects picked out by the nouns
bear thematic relations to it. Thus, for example, we can
analyze ‘John kissed Mary tenderly’ as
(2)

(∃e)(AGENT(e, John) & KISSING(e) & PAST(e) &
OBJECT(e, Mary) & TENDER(e))

In (2), ‘e’ is an event variable; in the example, e is a(n event
of) kissing, e occurred in the past, and e was tender. John
was the agent involved in e, and Mary was its object.
Thus, event semantics renders English sentences in such a
way as to make explicit, and to isolate, all of the pieces of
information in them, while retaining intelligibility. What’s
more, applying the logic of conjunction elimination to (2),
we can in effect use it as the basis of a psychological model
of deductive reasoning. We all know that if John kissed
Mary tenderly, then it follows (trivially) that John kissed
Mary. Correspondingly, we can formally derive (3) from
(2):
(3)

The Conceptual Complexity account of ToM development
arises when operator-based accounts of propositional
attitudes and event semantics (again, with event semantics is
understood as a psychological theory about the structure of
conceptual representation) are combined.
The full,
combined analysis of ‘Sally thinks that the ball is in the red
box’ is as follows:2

(∃e)(AGENT(e, John) & KISSING(e) & PAST(e) &
OBJECT(e, Mary))

Further logico-linguistic evidence supporting event-based
semantics is legion. Event semantics elegantly explains
inference and ambiguity data involving compound adverbial
modification, causative and resultative verbs, verbs of
perception, quantification over and reference to events, and
many other topics. For reviews, see Parsons (1990) and
Pustejovsky (1995).
There is also considerable psychological evidence in
favor of the claim that high-level cognition is event-based.
For example, in the domain of developmental psychology,
Wynn (1996) reports that 6-month-old infants—as yet
incapable of speech, qualitative object discrimination, and
complex physical action—are able to enumerate events.
After being habituated to scene in which a puppet jumped
some fixed number of times (2 or 3), infants were
‘surprised’ in test trials where the puppet jumped a number
of times different from the number in the habituation trial (3
or 2, respectively). That is, infants stared at the scene for a

(4) (∃x)(∃e)(AGENT(e, Sally) & BELIEVING(e)
PRESENT(e) & OBJECT(e, x) &
(∃e*)[]SUBJECT(e*, the ball) & PRESENT(e*) &
IN(e*, the red box)[](x))

&

This is pretty symbol-heavy, but if you consider all the
entailments that are possible from the sentence ‘Sally thinks
1

Looking time, along with sucking frequency and galvanic
skin response, are the three chief behavioral responses that
infants are capable of which are recorded by developmental
psychologists. It is taken to be a measure of the extent to
which an infant finds a stimulus ‘interesting’, and it is
assumed that infants find novel or unexpected stimuli to be
particularly interesting.
2
‘Full’ here and elsewhere must be taken with a grain of
salt. Much structure, irrelevant for current purposes, is
suppressed.

1758

that the ball is in the red box’, you will see that every piece
is doing some work. I note that specifying that the abstract
object x is the object of the belief addresses an important
semantic explanandum; it explains the fact that from ‘Sally
believes that the ball is in the red box’ you can infer that
‘Sally thinks something’. This explanation gets interesting
linguistically when one considers that although ‘John
complained that the ball is in the red box’ is grammatically
just fine, ‘*John complained something’ is not; yet ‘John
complained about something’ is perfectly acceptable again.3
What’s interesting for the purposes of explaining ToM is
what occurs between the boxes. Combining event semantics
with operator PA semantics allows us to quantify, in an
approximate way, the amount of conceptual material that a
subject is metarepresenting on a given occasion. (NOTE: I
use the term ‘metarepresentation’ to refer to any thought
about a thought, not in Perner’s richer sense.) In (4), it’s
two thematic relations and a tense concept (present tense, in
particular). Metarepresentations can thus be more or less
complex in a way that is made perspicuous by this form of
representation. What the Conceptual Complexity view
(‘CC’, henceforth) holds, then, is that what changes through
development is how much conceptual material the child can
metarepresent,
i.e.
‘put
between
the
boxes’.
Metarepresentation takes cognitive energy. The older the
child is, the more it can metarepresent.
How this claim translates into an explanation of
developmental data is as follows. Consider first the
relatively early onset of desire psychology, at age 2. As
we’ve seen, it’s not clear how Leslie’s view can explain this
(or Perner’s for that matter). But on CC the explanation
falls out immediately from the conceptual structure of desire
attribution. Desire attributions are tenseless; whereas the
embedded clause in a belief attribution is always tensed
(‘is’, ‘kissed’), the embedded clause in a desire attribution
never is (‘Sam wants to leave’, ‘John wants Mary to kiss
him’. CC holds that this reflects a genuine, quite significant
conceptual difference between our representations of belief
and desire. We conceptualize belief as a relation to a
particular event; this event is particular because it has a
temporal location, and that is what is picked out by the tense
predicate. We conceptualize desire, on the other hand, as a
relation to a kind of event. There is no particular
fulfillment event one has in mind for Susan when one thinks
‘Susan wants Bob to leave’; for Susan, any member of the
class of acts of leaving, undertaken by Bob, will do. On the
other hand, there is a particular event we take Susan to be
thinking about when we think ‘Susan thinks that Bob has
left’.
The representation of ‘Susan wants Bob to leave’, then,
looks like this, suppressing irrelevant detail in the main
clause:

(5) (∃x)(∃e)(WANTS(e, Susan, x) &
(∃e*)[]AGENT(e*, Bob) & LEAVING(e*)[](x))
There is no tense predicate in the embedded clause. Thus
(5) is conceptually simpler than (4). This, according to CC,
is why desire psychology comes first. Children have all the
concepts they need at a very early age, but they don’t have
the cognitive ‘space’ or ‘energy’ to metarepresent tense
until around 4.
Now consider the failure of 3-year-olds at standard FB
tasks. The CC explanation of this fact is similar in some
respects to Perner’s. 3-year-olds can’t metarepresent tense;
that means that they can’t do it for belief either, even if they
are able to use the language successfully on occasion.
Rather, they treat belief as a relation to an event kind. In not
being able to tie an agent’s belief to a particular situation via
a conceptualization of the tense of the event which is the
subject of the belief, they can not use such a representation
to reason about particular situations. Specifically, when
asked about e.g. the current situation, children are forced to
predict behavior and report mental states on the basis of
their own primary belief representations (i.e., their own
beliefs). These are tensed and thus do refer to a particular
situation, in this case the current one.
So, the 3-year-old’s version of (4) above is the following:
(6) (∃x)(∃e)(BELIEVES(e, Sally, x) &
(∃e*)[]SUBJECT(e*, the ball) & IN(e*, the red box)[](x))
Again, it is the absence of a tense representation in the
embedded clause which prevents the child from relating the
belief content to a particular situation.
There are some independent considerations which support
this analysis. Hollebrandse (1998) found that False Belief
task failers had difficulty representing past tense embedded
within a past tense matrix verb. In the scenario, Cookie
Monster says ‘I will have a banana on my plate’, whereupon
he receives one. Children are then asked: ‘Did Cookie
Monster say that he had a banana on his plate?’ The correct
answer, in Dutch as in English, is ‘no’. The temporal
location of the embedded event in the question is at or prior
to the event of saying, but Cookie Monster referred to an
event occurring after, not during or before, his utterance.
Hollebrandse found a correlation between incorrectly
answering the test question and failing the False Belief task.
This supports the idea that FB mastery depends on
successfully metarepresenting tense.
Another consideration—though a relatively weak one—
comes from a survey of the mental state language used by
children reported in Bartsch & Wellman (1995). Although
children are able to use tense in embedded clauses
complementing verbs like ‘think’ and ‘know’, they do not
appear to be able to distinguish conceptually between the
two tenses. That is, the tense of the embedded clause verb
is almost always identical to that of the main clause verb.

3

Space limitations force me to remain coy as to exactly
what the explanation is here.

1759

This suggests that notwithstanding language, children can’t
genuinely metarepresent tense at a young age. This
distinction between linguistic ability and conceptual
competence is, I note, what sets CC apart from the syntaxbased view of Jill de Villiers, and which allows it to avoid
objections based on cross-linguistic data to which her view
is subject. (Cf. de Villiers (2003:22ff.) for discussion.)
Finally, CC elegantly accounts for the particular difficulty
children have with semantic opacity—the recognition that,
even if the hunting knife is what was used to murder Jones,
Sam might think that the hunting knife was on the dresser
while not realizing that the murder weapon was on the
dresser. Children do not achieve adult-like performance on
opacity until significantly after the point at which they
succeed on FB tasks; this further development can take
years. (E.g. Russell, 1987) Rather, they show a consistent
bias toward de re interpretation—if they know that the knife
is the weapon, they assume Sam does too. CC accounts for
this by making a slight but natural modification to the
original representational format; it assumes that, under
normal circumstances, only the tense and thematic
predicates get ‘boxed’, i.e. quarantined, along with variables
that connect them to the objects and events in the agent’s
belief.4 In situations calling for semantic opacity, however,
the crucial predicates (‘murder weapon’) also get
quarantined in adult metarepresentations. Where Sam’s state
of mind is salient, adults will hear ‘Sam thinks that the
murder weapon is on the dresser’ as, roughly, ‘Sam thinks
that what Sam believes to be the murder weapon is on the
dresser’. Hearing it this way requires entertaining a much
more complex metarpresentation, which children can’t do
until they get older.

result does not show very much, for two reasons. First,
children may have immediately re-conceptualized the desire
as the positive desire to give the bone to whatever particular
dog fit the criterion. In this case CC would predict success
as well. Second, Leslie et al. put the negative particle in a
relative clause; the true negative equivalent of an avoidance
desire, however, would put the negation on the embedded
clause verb—e.g., wanting to not put the sick kitten in with
the fish. It seems quite possible that, as CC predicts,
children would find this construction more difficult than
positive desire constructions.5 However, only children’s
success on a construction like this could constitute a threat
to the analysis of avoidance desires as desires which are
negative in character, and so conceptually more complex.
CC can also offer a reasonably straightforward
explanation of ‘look first’ effects, which is broadly similar
to that of Leslie et al.’s.6 Saying ‘… look first’ makes
temporal information more salient to the child, as ‘first’
designates a temporal location, and the child is at least
implicitly aware that task-relevant information is timedependent (i.e. that the object is in one location at one time
and in another location at another time). As the salience of
temporal information increases, the ‘cost’ to the child of
metarepresenting time decreases. This makes it easier for a
tense predicate to ‘fit in the boxes’ and thus makes it easier
for the child to entertain an adult-like belief representation.

3. Further experimentation
The developmental asymmetry regarding belief and desire
discussed in section 1 sets up some experiments that would
provide critical tests of ToMM-SP and CC theories, and I
will describe them here.
Although there is no such thing as a ‘false desire’, there
are desires so at odds with our own that we would never
imagine attributing them to another; the desire to eat spoiled
food, for example. If we assume that, in fact, considerable
inhibition is required in order to attribute such a desire to
another agent, then running FB and TB experiments
employing this desire (possessed by the character ‘Nasty
man’, say) would test between ToMM-SP and CC theories.
ToMM-SP should predict considerable difficulty for
children; CC theory predicts only negligible difficulty.
Of course, without an independent measure of the
inhibition required to attribute a particular attitude, the
results from such an experiment could not be definitively
interpreted. The deeper project, then, particularly for
ToMM-SP, is to find a way of independently measuring the

CC can also explain avoidance desire effects and ‘look first’
effects. Avoidance desires are naturally construed as
containing negation at the conceptual level and therefore
being more difficult to process. Leslie et al. (2005) claim to
have eliminated this hypothesis, as children succeeded as
well on FB tasks with the negative desire ‘want to give the
bone to the dog that doesn’t have spots’ as with standard FB
tasks which employ a positive desire. Unfortunately, this
4

Note that when we ascribe a belief, it’s really only the
thematic relations and event locations that are quarantined.
The various objects involved are, considered separately,
typically common ground, even in a case of false belief.
The representation involved here is pretty complex; viz. for
‘John believes Twain smoked’, we have:

5

If, as suggested in the previous paragraph, noun phrases
are not normally quarantined, then children’s success with
Leslie et al.’s negative desires can be explained without
appeal to reconceptualization; viz., the negation in the
relative clause is not part of the metarepresentation proper.
6
I’m grateful to an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this
explanation.

(∃!x)(∃e)(AGENT(e, John) & BELIEVING(e) & PRES(e)
OBJECT(e, x) &
[THE z: TWAIN(z) & []TWAIN(z)[](x)](
(∃e′)[]AGENT(e′, z) & SMOKING(e′) &
PAST(e′)[](x)).

1760

inhibition requirement, or the prepotency, of beliefs and
desires. Since some beliefs are held less strongly than
others, and one’s own desires presumably must be prepotent
to a certain extent (the nature of many sexual harassment
cases often strongly suggests this, I note), if such a measure
were found it should be possible to find belief/desire pairs
which are matched on their inhibitory requirements, and
then to run experiments comparing success across the two
cases. ToMM-SP would predict equivalent performance
across tasks; CC would predict contrastive desire tasks to be
uniformly easier than FB tasks, even in matched
circumstances.
How might the inhibition requirement be measured? One
way might be to make subjects control the action, instead of
simply predict or explain it. Children could be given
control of a puppet or computer character, and told to make
it behave as they themselves would behave in given
situations, modulo discrepancies introduced by the
experimenter. Attributing discrepant beliefs or desires to an
agent might be easier if the subject is interpreting the agent
as, essentially, himself; the child would be, in effect,
pretending to believe something it didn’t believe or
pretending to want something it didn’t want. This might
prove possible even for children who failed any of the ToM
tasks discussed above. If so, the child’s resistance to
accepting the various mentalistic pretenses could be
measured by seeing how well it could maintain the pretense
in tasks analogous to traditional FB/avoidance desire tasks.
This would in turn allow us to measure the relative
inhibition requirements on the corresponding beliefs and
desires.
Clearly, the foregoing is highly speculative. Nonetheless,
I hope to have provided a strong motivation for pursuing
further investigation in this area, as well as some initial
suggestions as to how it might go. I hope also, of course, to
have introduced a new, viable account of the child’s ToM
development.7

Bibliography
Bartsch, Karen, and Wellman, Henry M. (1995) Children
Talk about the Mind, Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Donald, (1967/1980) “The Logical Form of
Action Sentences”, in Davidson (1980).
Davidson, Donald, (1980) Essays on Actions and Events,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Donald, (1984), Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation, New York: Oxford University Press.
de Villiers, Jill G. (2003) “Can Language Acquisition Give
Children a Point of View?”, draft, to appear in Why
Language Matters for Theory of Mind, OUP.

7

Thanks to Alan Leslie and Ori Friedman, and Jill de
Villiers and the Smith College Propositional Attitudes Task
Force for useful discussions in the course of developing
these ideas.

1761

de Villiers, Jill G. & de Villiers, Peter (2000) “Linguistic
Determinism and the Understanding of False Beliefs”,
in Mitchell & Riggs (2000).
Hollebrandse, Bart (1998) “On Theory of Mind and
Sequence of Tense in Dutch”, in Bart Hollebrandse, ed.,
New Perspectives on Language Acquisition, UMopp 22,
G.L.S.A., Amherst, Massachusetts.
Leslie, Alan M. (1987) “Pretense and Representation: The
Origins of “Theory of Mind””, Psychological Review
(94:4), pp. 412-426.
Leslie, Alan M. (1994) “Pretending and Believing: Issues in
the Theory of ToMM”, Cognition (50), pp. 211-238.
Leslie, Alan M.; Tim P. German and Pamela Polizzi (2005)
“Belief-desire reasoning as a process of selection”,
Cognitive Psychology (50), 45-85.
Parsons, Terrance (1990) “Events in the Semantics of
English”, MIT Press.
Perner, Josef (1988) “Developing semantics for theories of
mind: From propositional attitudes to mental
representation”, in Astington, Janet W.; Harris, Paul L.;
Olson, David R. (eds.) Developing Theories of Mind,
Cambridge University Press.
Perner, Josef (1991) Understanding the Representational
Mind, MIT Press.
Perner, Josef, Baker, Sarah, and Hutton, Deborah (1994)
“Prelief: The Conceptual Origins of Belief and
Pretence”, in Lewis & Mitchell (1994).
Perner, Josef (1995) “The Many Faces of Belief:
Reflections on Fodor’s and the Child’s Theory of
Mind”, Cognition (57), pp. 241-269.
Pustejovsky, James, (1991) “The Syntax of Event
Structure”, Cognition (41), pp. 47-81.
Roth, Daniel, & Leslie, Alan M. (1991) “The Recognition
of Attitude Conveyed by Utterance: A Study of
Preschool and Autistic Children”, British Journal of
Developmental Psychology (9) pp. 315-330.
Russell, James, (1987). ““Can we say … ?” Children’s
understanding of intensionality”, Cognition (25), 289308.
Scheffler, Israel, (1954) “An Inscriptional Approach to
Indirect Quotation”, Analysis (14: 4, March), pp. 83-90.
Wagner, L. and Carey, S. (2003). Individuation of Objects
and Events: A Developmental Study. Cognition, 90,
163-191.
Wimmer, Heinz and Perner, Josef (1983) Beliefs about
beliefs: Representation and constraining function of
wrong beliefs in young children’s understanding of
deception. Cognition (13), 103-128.
Wynn, Karen, (1996) “Infants’ Individuation and
Enumeration of Actions”, Psych. Science (7: 3), 164-9.
Zacks, J., and Tversky, B. (2001) “Event Structure in
Perception and Conception”, Psych. Bull. (127), 3-21.
Zacks, Jeffrey M., Tversky, Barbara, and Iyer, Gowri,
(2001) “Perceiving, Remembering, and Communicating
Structure in Events”, Journal of Experimental
Psychology, General (130: 1), pp. 29-58.

