UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model for Spatial Reasoning with Mental Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3w8662hq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Knauff, Markus
Nebel, Bernhard
Ragni, Marco

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model for Spatial Reasoning with Mental Models
Marco Ragni (ragni@informatik.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Computer Science, Georges-Köhler-Allee
79110 Freiburg, Germany

Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@cognition.iig.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, Friedrichstraße 50
79098 Freiburg, Germany

Bernhard Nebel (nebel@informatik.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Computer Science, Georges-Köhler-Allee
79110 Freiburg, Germany
The aim of the following paper is to suggest a detailed
computational model for human reasoning with spatial
relations based on mental models. We formally describe the
main assumptions that underlie our computational theory.
Then we describe how the SRM model (Spatial Reasoning
by Models) constructs mental models from the premises and
uses a spatial focus to manipulate the position of objects and
to inspect the array to find spatial relations that are not given
in the premises. In the third part, we describe a complexity
measure that immediately results from the SRM model. It
simply relies on the number of operations in the model and
the number of relations that must be handled. We show that
our approach accounts for many experimental findings.

Abstract
We propose a computational model for spatial reasoning by
means of mental models. Our SRM model (Spatial Reasoning
by Models) maps spatial working memory to a twodimensional array and uses a spatial focus that places objects
in the array, manipulates the position of objects, and inspects
the array to find spatial relations that are not given in the
premises. The SRM model results in a computational
complexity measure that relies on the number of operations in
the array and the number of relations that must be handled.
The performance of the SRM model is compared to the
performance of human subjects reported in the literature and
in our own study.

Introduction

Basic assumptions for the computational model

People make extensive use of binary spatial relations which
locate one object with respect to another, for example
relations such as “to the left of”, “in front of”. Individuals
are also able to reason with such relations; that is, to infer
relations not explicitly given from the ones already known.
Take, for instance, the following reasoning problem:

The aim of this section is to define in formal terms the main
tenets underlying our SRM model. First, a model is defined
in the usual logical sense as a structure in which the
premises are true. Psychologically, a model is an internal
representation of objects and relations in spatial working
memory that matches the state of affairs given in the
premises of the reasoning task. From the representational
view, the model could account for metrical or relational
information. The former is the more constraining (i.e.,
stronger) and usually identified with visual mental images.
The latter is less constraining (i.e., weaker) and typically
identified with spatial representations (Berendt & Schlieder,
1998). Following the principle of representational
parsimony, our account is based on relational information
alone. Thus, models are spatial representations that are more
abstract than visual images. They avoid excessive visual
detail to bring out salient information for inferences (Knauff
& Johnson-Laird, 2002). In the SRM model, spatial working
memory is conceptualized as a spatial array. From the
different ways in which spatial relations can be represented,
we choose the most parsimonious, namely to represent only
that one object is to the left of, to the right of, in front of, or
behind the other object. Each of these binary relations is
defined as a triple (X, r, Y) in which
X is the referent
r is a binary local relation, and
Y is the relatum.
The referent X is the “to be located object” (LO), and the
relatum Y is the reference object (RO) (Miller & JohnsonLaird, 1976). Thus, in a typical case the RO must be

The hammer is to the right of the pliers.
The screwdriver is to the left of the pliers.
The wrench is in front of the screwdriver.
The saw is in front of the pliers.
Which relation holds between the wrench and the saw?
The four sentences are called premises, the tools are the
terms, and the question refers to a possible conclusion that
follows from the premises. There are basically two possible
ways to make such inferences: by applying formal rules of
inference to the linguistic representation of the premises or
by constructing and inspecting a spatial array that represents
the state of affairs described in the premises. This paper is
based on the latter approach. The account was introduced by
Huttenlocher (1968) and was further elaborated in the
mental models theory (MMT) of reasoning (Johnson-Laird
& Byrne, 1991; Johnson-Laird, 2001). According to the
MMT, linguistic processes are only relevant to transfer the
information from the premises into a spatial array and back
again, but the reasoning process itself totally relies on nonlinguistic processes for the construction and inspection of
spatial mental models.

1797

integrated into the model first followed by the LO. One
exception is the first premise. Here, we assume that
reasoners prefer to switch the roles of RO and LO in favor
of an incremental model construction. An incremental
model construction saves working memory capacities
because each bit of information is immediately processed
and integrated into the model (Johnson-Laid & Byrne,
1991). The SRM model does not account for the problems
related to the ambiguity of spatial relations (Knauff, 1999).
We simply assume that “left” means that the LO is to the
left of the RO and exactly in the same line. It can be
adjacent to the RO or there can be other cells (empty or
filled) in between. The relation “in front of” means that the
LO is in a cell in front of the RO and exactly in the same
line. It can also be adjacent to the RO, or there can be other
cells in between. “Right” and “behind” are defined
equivalently.
The reasoning process in the SRM model is realized as a
move of a spatial focus. This focus can place an element
into the model or inspect the model to find new information
(Schaeken et. al., 1996). We assume that the reasoning
process proceeds in three steps. In the construction phase,
reasoners construct a mental model that reflects the
information from the premises. For the preceding example,
they, for instance, construct the following model:
screwdriver
wrench

pliers
saw

hammer

In agreement with many experimental findings, we assume
that if new information is encountered during the reading of
the premises it is immediately used in the construction of
the model (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). In the inspection
phase, this model is inspected to find new information that
is not explicitly given in the premises. From this model it
follows: the wrench is to the left of the saw. In the variation
phase alternative models are constructed from the premises
that refute this putative conclusion. In our example no such
model exists and thus the conclusion is valid. Although this
phase lies in the heart of reasoning, it is still unclear how it
exactly works. The orthodox view is an iteration of the first
two phases in which alternative models are generated and
inspected in turn (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). In the
following, however, we refer to our own account saying that
there is no iteration process but rather a process that starts
from the preferred mental model (PMM) and then varies
this model to find alternative interpretations of the premises
(Rauh, Hagen, Knauff, Kuß, Schlieder, & Strube, 2005).
The term PMM refers to a phenomenon encountered during
reasoning with multiple-model problems. In problems in
which more than one model is consistent with the premises
(so called indeterminate problems) reasoners often construct
only one single model – the PMM. This model is the one
that is easier to construct and to maintain in working
memory than other possible models (Knauff, Rauh,
Schlieder, & Strube, 1998). From many studies it is known
that indeterminate problems are more difficult than
determinate ones, and the PMM frequently lead to incorrect

conclusions because other possible models are ignored
(Rauh et al., 2005).

The SRM model
We are now in the position to formally define our SRM
model as a quintuple (I, O, A, F, C), with
•

•
•
•

•

I the input mechanism. This process reads the premises
from an external device (The comprehension of the
meaning of the premises is not part of our model. We
simply assume that there is an external “parser” that
supplies the correct meaning to the model).
O being a set of object names.
A being a spatial array.
F being the focus that is on the spatial array, initially on
position (0, 0), is able to move right, left, front, behind,
but can also perform a no-move operation. In addition it
has a grouping function, and a shift operator for groups.
C being a control process that is responsible for
controlling the focus and other executive functions.

At each time of the inference process the SRM model has a
problem input (a set of premises) where the relational
problem is stated, a control process to generate a mental
model from the problem input, a two-dimensional spatial
array, and a focus which can be used to inspect the model or
to place an element into the model. According to findings
from Vandierendonck et al. (2004), the focus is also able to
write annotations to objects (see below). These annotations
are only in use if the model detects the indeterminacy of the
premises. In this case, the relation that holds between the
RO and the LO is attached to the LO (see below). An
illustration of the SRM model is given in Figure 1.

How does the SRM model implement the three phases of
the inference? At the beginning of the construction phase,
the focus is at position (0, 0) and there are 5 directions in
which the focus can be moved: right, left, front, behind, and
no-move. Now four types of premises must be
distinguished: (1) premises in which no object has been in
the array so far(that is the first premise), (2) premises in
which one object from the preceding premise appears (a
middle term that connects the premise to the previous one)
and the next object must be added to the array, (3) the type
of premises in which no object of the previous premise
appears. This is typically the case, when the second premise
of a discontinuous premise order must be processed, i.e. D r
C, A r B, B r C, and (4) premise in which an object appears
that connects two formally separate models. This is the case

1798

when the third premise of a discontinuous premise order
must be processed. The SRM model now works on an input
I in the following way:
(1) Initially the SRM model receives a premise of type 1.
(2) The SRM model inserts the first object of the first
premise in cell (0, 0). Then it uses this object as RO and
adds the second object into the next adjacent cell
according to the local relation.
(3) The “parser” reads the next premise
(4) The SRM model decides on the type of premise:
• The premise is from type 2: the focus moves to the
RO, from there it inserts into the next cell
according to the relation the LO. If there is already
an object in the cell the machine moves back to the
reference object and makes an annotation. Then it
moves then to the next free cell according to the
relation and inserts the object into the next free
position (according to the relation to RO).
• The premise is of type 3: a new spatial array is
generated and both objects are inserted as for
premises of type 1 (see Step 2), (Schaeken et al.,
1996).
• The premise is of type 4: the focus groups one
model and inserts it into the other model (Bara et
al., 2001)
When the model construction is finished, the inspection
phase works for our example in the following way: a
conclusion must be generated that defines the relation that
holds between the wrench and the saw. So the focus moves
to the wrench (RO) and then inspects the model to find the
saw (LO). In previous studies, we were able to determine
how this inspection process works (Knauff et al., 1998).
After constructing the mental model, the focus is positioned
on the last end-term of the last premise and this should also
be the starting point for the scanning of the RO. In our
model, then the scanning for the LO proceeds in the same
direction as before when it found the RO. This saves the
costs of re-focusing (see below). If the LO cannot be found
in this direction the focus changes its direction and preceeds
until it has found the LO. It is important that in our model,
the focus only checks the cells of the array in which an
object is. Empty cells are not scanned. In other words, the
system “knows” which cells are occupied but not which
object is in the cell. The current model does not make any
assumptions about how this is realized (although it is easy to
imagine that filled cells are more activated in the array). If
the LO is found from the scan direction the relation between
the two objects is known (the meaning is again provided by
the external module). What happens if a possible conclusion
must be verified? This is the case when the question for the
relation is replaced by a conclusion that must be verified.
Assume that the model must check whether the conclusion
“The wrench is to the left of the saw” is valid. In this case,
the focus moves to the saw (RO) and then scans the array to
the left to find the wrench (LO). Since the conclusion is
valid the model generates the output “valid conclusion”
(also not part of our model). It is important to notice that in

the SRM model no variation of the model is assumed if a
conclusion is generated. The SRM model stops when it has
found just one model – which often leads to errors. Model
variation only comes into play if a conclusion must be
verified or if more than one model can be constructed from
the premises. We are still working on the exact details of the
variation phase, but we definitely assume that there is no
iteration of the first two phases in which alternative models
are generated and inspected in turn (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). Instead, the current version of the SRM model starts
from the PMM and then successively generates alternative
models by modifying the PMM with minimal changes
(Rauh et al. 2005). The minimal changes follow the
principle of “conceptual neighborhood” which we have
empirically determined in recent studies (Rauh et al. 2005).
The principle says that alternative models are generated by
local transformations, i.e. moving one object in the model.
To find the next alternative model, the SRM model starts
from the RO of the conclusion and first checks if the next
objects have annotations with respect to the LO. As already
mentioned, this annotation basically stores the relation that
must hold between RO and LO. If so (this is always the case
in indeterminate problems because the premises itself are
forgotten) the SRM model starts to change the position of
the objects as long as the constraint from the annotation is
satisfied. This takes it stepwise to alternative models but
also has the consequence that models which are difficult to
reach are thus more likely to be neglected than models
which are only minor revisions of the PMM. This
phenomenon we reported in recent experiments (Rauh et al.,
2005).

A Processing Example
In the following, we describe how the SRM model works
with the above mentioned example. The construction phase:
The SRM model has received the first premise: The hammer
is to the right of the pliers. The focus takes the hammer as
RO (because it is mentioned first) and inserts it in the spatial
array. In the next step, the focus moves to the left (the
linguistic process of generating the reverse relation is not
part of our model, but see Clark, 1969) and inserts the pliers
into the next free position. Then, the model reads the next
premise: The screwdriver is to the left of the pliers. The
focus is still on the pliers and inserts the screwdriver in the
next free cell to the left.

Then, the model reads the next premise: The wrench is in
front of the screwdriver. The focus changes its direction and

1799

moves to the front cell (of its last cell) and inserts the
wrench. The model reads the next premise: The saw is in
front of the pliers. The focus moves back to the pliers. After
that, it moves one step in front of the pliers and inserts the
saw. Since in this case the model is determinate, there is no
model variation phase. In the inspection phase the machine
checks the putative conclusion: Which relation holds
between the wrench and the saw? The focus now checks if
the position that it is on contains an object mentioned in the
conclusion. In this case it is so, as the last operation
performed was the insertion of the saw.

screwdriver is to the left (the model “saves” the information
that the screwdriver is left to the hammer), it then moves to
the left of the pliers and inserts the screwdriver. This gives
us the first model, and this model is constructed according
to a principle we refer to as first free fit (fff). It says that an
object is inserted at the first free position. The alternative
principle we call the first fit (ff) principle and this gives us
the second possible model. The ff principle always inserts
the object at the next position that fulfills the spatial relation
from the premise. This sometimes means that another object
that is already in the model must be moved. The fffprinciple results in the first model and the ff-principle in the
second model.

A Complexity Measure

Then, the focus moves from the saw to the wrench and
checks in which direction it moves and if it changes its
direction. The output is: The wrench is left of the saw. This
process is more complex for indeterminate modelsas the
SRM model uses annotations to “remember” the
indeterminate models. To give an example, assume that the
following premises are given:
The hammer is to the right of the pliers.
The screwdriver is to the left of the hammer
The wrench is in front of the screwdriver.
The saw is in front of the hammer.
There are two possible models:

The SRM model works on the premises in the following
way: it reads the first premise and constructs the model in
analogy to the described procedure. For the second premise
the machine proceeds as follows: it reads the second
premise, moves to the reference object (the hammer,
because it is in the model), from there it then moves to the
left, and the focus scans (reads) the inserted screwdriver.
Obviously, the model cannot insert an object there, because
the cell is already occupied with the pliers. Therefore, the
model makes an annotation at the hammer, saying that the

We define three categories of relational problems: those that
have only one model, the determinate problems, those that
have only a small number of models, all of which can be
checked by humans, and those at which the number of
models exceeds the capacities of the human working
memory. To capture the notion of practically feasible
problems, we must limit our computational device to only
run for a number of steps that is bounded by a function.
Should this function be bounded in the length of the input,
i.e. the number of premises, which would be a standard
definition in the theory of computation? We do not think
this is a cognitively plausible criterion. Instead we believe
that the number of relations that have to be handled by the
cognitive system is the limiting factor (Maybery et al.,
1986). Based on this assumption, we now introduce a
complexity measure, that can be used to classify the
difficulty of different reasoning problems. The main concept
is thus an abstract “unit” that stands for the number of
operations in the array and the number of relations that must
be handled. Although this concept is quite abstract, there are
many experimental findings in support of the assumption
that the capacities of the cognitive system are limited by
both, in terms of visuo-spatial capacities (Luck & Vogel,
1997; Sperling, 1960) and in terms of relational complexity
(Maybery et al., 1986).
The model maps the spatial working memory to a twodimensional spatial array and a focus function. Since the
processing consists mainly in model construction, inspection, and -variation, and since these processes are
done by the focus, the difficulty of tasks clearly depends on
the movement of the focus. Assume that we only have a set
of premises for which the focus moves along one direction
and inserts successively an element into the array. This
problem is of course a lot easier than a problem, where the
focus has to change the direction several times and to insert
several objects in-between other objects. As it is common in
complexity theory we abstract from different costs for
different operations of this machine and use only one
uniform complexity measure. Nonetheless, we can show that
the empirical differences in reasoning difficulty can be
captured by this measure. The focus has, as has been shown,
several functions. The first function: the focus can scan the
model, i.e. this scanning process consists of a sequence of
movements of the focus to the left, right, front, or behind

1800

(cf. with the scanning process, Schaeken et al., 1996, pp.
211). In our account, each movement of the focus costs one
unit, each direction change costs an additional unit. The
second function: the focus can insert or delete an object in
the model. This operation also costs one unit. The third
function: the focus can shift an object or a group (of
objects). This operation also costs one unit. Finally, objects
can be grouped together. Here the number of relations
comes into play: the grouping operation costs one unit for
each relation between neighbored objects in the grouping.
This is according to Maybery, et al. (1986) a sensible cost
measure from a cognitive point of view, and recent brain
imaging studies also have shown that it correlates with
neural activity in working memory related brain areas (e.g.
Waltz, et. al., 1999). To give an example, we want to group
these three objects:
screwdriver

hammer

pliers

This means that the screwdriver is left of the hammer, and
the hammer is left to of the pliers. This arrangement is
perfectly described by these relations, and we do not need
the relation that the screwdriver is left of the pliers. The
grouping process, in this case, can be compared to
composing the two binary relations to a ternary relation. Or
to be more general, for (n+1) objects to be grouped, we
have n binary relations, and the grouping consists of a n–ary
relation, and this grouping costs n units.
How does this complexity measure help to explain the
different difficulties of reasoning problems? First, it follows
that the premises
The screwdriver is to the left of the hammer.
The hammer is to the left of the pliers.
are the easiest problem. Many studies have shown that such
tasks are very easy to solve because they are compatible
with only one model, and the last term of the first premise is
the first term in the second premise (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991). The costs to build this model is three units
(one for each of the three objects). The harder problem is:
The hammer is to the right of the screwdriver.
The hammer is to the left of the pliers.
First, the SRM model inserts the hammer, moves to the left
to insert the screwdriver, then moves two steps right
(because one step left of the inserted screwdriver is the
hammer), and then inserts the pliers. The costs for building
this model is five units (because of the direction change).
The two examples already indicate that the model with the
complexity measure can differentiate between problems
with different term and premise orders (and thus also for the
“figural effect” in spatial reasoning; Johnson-Laird & Bara,
1984; 1982; Knauff, et al. 1998). The approach explains the
PMM, which is computationally the cheapest, and also
accounts for the difference in difficulty between determinate
and indeterminate problems, since in the model variation
phase (see above) the machine generates according to the
annotations the other models. This generation which
consists of shifting and grouping operations incurs
additional costs.

First Free Fit, First fit, and other Empirical Data
We here very briefly compare the performance of the SRM
model to some experimental findings with human subjects.
A more detailed evaluation will be provided in Ragni,
Knauff, & Nebel (in prep.). First, the SRM model is able to
reconstruct the effect of term order in spatial reasoning.
Many studies have shown that problems are easier to be
solved if the end term of the first premise is the first term in
the second premise (for an overview see Manktelow, 1999).
Our model can explain this by the different costs in terms of
necessary units. Another well-known effect is that
indeterminate problems are more difficult than determinate
problems (Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989). In the previous
section we have described that this difference can also be
explained by the SRM model. Our main attention, however,
is focused on the two insertion principles, first free fit (fff)
and first fit (ff), and the explanation of preferred mental
models. First, we have some initial evidence that in
problems of our indeterminate example the model on the
left-hand side is preferred over the right-hand side model. In
Knauff & Ragni (in prep) 20 volunteers (all logically naïve
undergraduate students) participated in a paper-and pencil
test in which they had to draw “just one model” that was
consistent with a set of premises. In nine of the twelve
problems the participants generated a model that followed
the same principle as the construction of the left-hand side
model. The other possible model was generated very rarely.
More empirical evidence comes from a study by Jahn,
Knauff, & Johnson-Laird (in press). In this study, we
directly tested the ff and the fff principle against each other.
Twenty-four students of the University of Tübingen served
as paid participants. The reasoning problems consisted of
three premises that referred to horizontal one-dimensional
layouts of four objects. The premises were consistent with
four different arrangements. The problems were displayed
on the computer screen, and the presentation was self-paced.
Each trial began with the initial two premises. When
participants pressed the space-key, the third premise
replaced the initial premise. The third premise was
presented together with the prompt "Is there a layout for
which all premises are true?". After the participants had
responded “yes” or “no” with one of the response keys, they
used the initial letters of the four objects to write down a
layout on an answer sheet. The results of this study clearly
support the first free fit (fff) principle. Sixty-five percent of
the generated models agreed with this principle, whereas the
other 35 percent were distributed over the three other
models. This means that only about 10 percent followed the
ff principle. The details of this study can be found in Jahn,
Knauff, & Johnson-Laird (in press). The most important
result from this study is the following: if the first possible
position in the model that fulfils the spatial relation of a
premise is already occupied by another object, human
subjects prefer to sacrifice adjacency (ff) in favor of outside
insertion. In other words, they avoid relocating an object
that is already in the model to make the first possible
position free. Instead, they place the object in question at the

1801

end of the line, where the relation is also fulfilled. Our SRM
model and the related complexity measure predict exactly
this behavior. In other words: the fff principle is less
expensive than the ff principle.

Discussion
The presented SRM model allows us to construct and
manipulate mental models. This computational model
implies a complexity measure based on abstract “units” that
might have a cognitive counterpart: Nonetheless, our SRM
model can predict problem difficulty and model preferences.
What are the limits of the SRM model? One could object
that the spatial array structure, which is in fact a
discretization of space, seems to be too restrictive.
Nonetheless, this is not a real restriction because, for all
psychologically relevant reasoning problems, the number of
objects is bounded. Moreover, the shift operator can
simulate a non-discrete space, even if a third object cannot
be placed between two objects. This is a kind of
“continuousness” that is sufficiently general in our context.
What are the differences to existing computational models
for (spatial) reasoning? The models of Schlieder and
Berendt (1998) also make use of a focus and explain model
preferences. Both models, however, are restricted on
intervals as elements and a quite technical set of relations.
A fundamental difference is that our model is much more
“natural” because it uses solid objects and the most common
verbal relations from natural language (and reasoning
research). Our computational model shares the most features
with the UNICORE model developed by Bara et al. (2001).
Both models are based on the same three considerations: a
model must include a grid of positions that are assigned to
tokens (our spatial array), those tokens must have a name
(our objects), and some objects may be in relation. The main
difference between Bara’s model and the SRM model is that
our model reproduces reasoning steps involved in spatial
reasoning, the UNICORE model does not have this
property. Another advantage of the SRM model is that we
have introduced a complexity measure which explains the
difficulty of reasoning problems.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from the DFG within
the SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition to MK and BN. MK is also
supported by a Heisenberg Award from the DFG.

References
Bara, B., Bucciarelli M., & Lombardo V. (2001). Model
theory of deduction: a unified computational approach.
Cognitive Science, 25, 839-901.
Byrne, R. M. J., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). Spatial
reasoning. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 564-575.
Clark, H.H. (1969) Linguistic processes in deductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 76, 387-404.
Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550-560.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. (in press).
Preferred Mental Models in Spatial Reasoning. In

Proceedings of the Twenty Seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and deduction.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 434-442.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M. (1999). The cognitive adequacy of Allen's
interval calculus for qualitative spatial representation and
reasoning. Spatial Cognition and Computation 1, 261-290
Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Visual imagery
can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 30, 363-371.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 200-205). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity effect and figural bias in spatial relational
inference. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 573578). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M., Strube, G., Jola, C., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C.
(2004). The psychological validity of qualitative spatial
reasoning in one dimension. Spatial Cognition and
Computation 4, 167-188.
Luck, S. J. & Vogel, E. K. (1997). The capacity of visual
working memory for features and conjunctions. Nature
390, 279–281.
Manktelow, K.I. (1999). Reasoning and Thinking. Hove
(UK): Psychology Press.
Maybery, M.T., Bain, J.D., & Halford, G.S. (1986):
Information processing demands of transitive inference.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition. 12, 600-613.
Miller, G. A. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976).: Language and
Perception. Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Knauff, M., Kuß, T., Schlieder, C. and
Strube, G (2005). Preferred and alternative mental
models in spatial reasoning. Spatial Cognition and
Computation (in press).
Schlieder, C., & Berendt, B. (1998). Mental model
construction in spatial reasoning: A comparison of two
computational theories. In U. Schmid, J. F. Krems & F.
Wysotzki (Eds.), Mind modelling: A cognitive science
approach to reasoning (pp. 133-162). Lengerich: Pabst.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief
visual presentations. Psychological. Monographs. 74
(Whole number 498).
Vandierendonck, A., Dierckx, V., & Vooght G. D. (2004).
Mental model construction in linear reasoning: Evidence
for the construction of initial annotated models. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. 57A,
1369-1391.
Waltz, J. A., Knowlton, B. J., Holyoak, K. J., Boone, K. B.,
Mishkin, F. S., Menezes Santos, M. de, Thomas, C. R., &
Miller, B. L. (1999). A system for relational reasoning in
human prefrontal cortex. Psychological Science, 10, 119125

1802

