UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Human Planning in the Traveling Salesman Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40x945nd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Basso, Demis
Bisiacchi, Patrizia
Cutini, Simone
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Human Planning in the Traveling Salesman Problem
Simone Cutini (simone.cutini@unipd.it)
University of Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8
Padova, 35131 ITALY

Andrea Di Ferdinando (andrea.diferdinando@unipd.it)
University of Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8
Padova, 35131 ITALY

Demis Basso (demis.basso@uniroma1.it)
Econa, University La Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro, 5
Roma, 00185 ITALY

Patrizia Bisiacchi (patrizia.bisiacchi@unipd.it)
University of Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8
Padova, 35131 ITALY

Marco Zorzi (marco.zorzi@unipd.it)
University of Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8
Padova, 35131 ITALY

1985, for a review) and much less by psychologists.
Nevertheless, there has been a growing interest in the
analysis of human performance in TSP-like problems
(Cadwallader, 1975; Gärling, 1989, 1994). In the TSP,
given a set of n interconnected towns, represented by nodes
on a graph, the task consists in finding an itinerary that
visits each town exactly once, returning to the starting town,
ensuring that the total travelled distance is as short as
possible.
TSP involves essentially visuo-spatial planning, a
particular kind of problem solving in which participants try
to optimize a performance measured in spatially constrained
environments. In comparison with more typical planning
tasks, spatial planning requires a stronger interaction
between central and peripheral processes: visual, attentive
and motor factors play a fundamental role, in addition to
reasoning, in determining the final behavior.
Our research is inspired by a series of studies conducted
with an open version of the TSP task (Basso et al., 2001),
consisting in choosing the order of locations with the start
and end point fixed (fig. 1b). The behavioral data showed
the presence of three distinct spatially-based heuristics
supporting the production of successful strategies. The first
heuristic, widely described in previous studies (Barr &
Feigenbaum, 1981; Hirtle & Gärling, 1992) is the Nearest
Neighbour (NN): it states that each location is chosen on the
basis of the local minimum distance from the actual
location. The other two Direction Heuristics (DH) described
in the studies conducted with the TSP variant take place
when subjects start from a location placed on a border and
reach the next locations following one of the main spatial
axes (horizontal or vertical) (Basso et al., 2001) and a
direction (up or down for vertical axis, left or right for

Abstract
Planning is a fundamental cognitive function frequently
employed in usual daily activitities. The Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP), in which the participant decides what order
between a number of locations optimizes total travel distance,
is a paradigm that allows the study of planning and strategy
choice. We present a computational model that simulates the
human performance observed during the execution of a
variant of the TSP task, including bottom-up and top-down
influences. The performance of the model simulated the
continuous monitoring observed in human participants;
moreover, after a lesion to the network’s units corresponding
to the prefrontal cortex, we found a decrease of strategy
changes like those observed in frontal patients.
Keywords: TSP, planning, computational modelling, frontal
damage.

Introduction
Planning is a mental simulation which envisages the
circumstances and runs possible actions, evaluating their
consequences and selecting the optimal order for executing
them (Cohen, 1989). It depicts the skill of producing mental
representations of the future behavior prior to action and
sequential reasoning about the consequences of acting, in
order to properly choose among the possible courses of
action. TSP is a useful tool to investigate planning, because,
in this task, participants are required to generate a strategy
in order to optimize the pathway.
TSP, as a paradigmatic example of non-polynomial
optimization problem, has been extensively studied by
mathematicians and computer scientists (see Lawyer et al.,
524

horizontal axis). In the studies we refer to, the starting point
was always in the upper left corner; accordingly, the
heuristics have been renamed with Direction Right (for
horizontal heuristic) and Direction Down (for vertical
heuristic).
Another interesting finding concerns the interaction
between heuristics: participants often show on-line changes
of heuristic during the execution of the task (Basso et al.,
2001). These results confirm that subjects operate a
continuous monitoring and flexibly adapt their behavior to
the requirements of the task (or environment), as pointed out
in previous studies (Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth, 1979).
From a neuroanatomical point of view, the substrates of
planning skills are located in frontal areas: planning deficits
have long been associated with frontal lobe lesions (Cooper
& Shallice, 2000; Duncan, 1986; Goel & Grafman, 1995,
2000; Shallice, 1982, 1988). More specifically, the crucial
role of the frontal lobe in visuo-spatial planning has been
demonstrated using the TSP variant described above.
Patients with frontal lesions and normal subjects under
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) over the
frontal lobes showed a significant reduction in the number
of heuristic changes which are usually performed during the
execution of the task (fig.1a) (Basso et al., submitted).

in which the input pattern is processed by Gabor filters to
simulate the processes responsible of perceptual grouping;
2) a competitive selection module that simulates the internal
dynamics for the choice of the heuristic; 3) a motor map,
based on population codes, that executes the pathway at the
spatial level. Moreover, the presence of saliency maps,
recurrent connections and inhibitory mechanisms allow us
to simulate the incremental aspect of visuo-spatial planning
and the interaction of bottom-up and top-down processes.
Top Down
Controller

Fig. 2. The architecture of the model.

The visual module

60

%

40

This module is designed to enhance the directional features
intrinsically present in the input pattern. The input consists
of a two-dimensional image of 161x161 pixels representing
the pattern. Each city is represented by a black region of
4x4 pixels coded with ones, whereas empty space is coded
with zeros.
The visual image is processed by a family of eight Gabor
filters. Gabor filters are band-pass filters with tuneable
center frequency, orientation and bandwidth. Gabor filters
provide an excellent approximation of the response of
simple cells in the primary visual cortex and have been
widely used in computer vision. In particular, we used the
family derived by Lee (1996):

20
0
C o nt ro l

rT M S

TBI

No strategy
Unique
With changes

Fig.1. a) Percentage of strategies from the experiment with the
TSP variant. From left to right: normal subjects, subjects under
rTMS, and traumatic frontal lobe brain injured patients (TBI). b)
An example of an open version of TSP.

The aim of this article is to develop a computational model
simulating the perceptual and cognitive processing involved
in the human solution of the TSP. The model shows a good
match to human performance when tested on the same
patterns administred to the healthy participants. Moreover,
after an artificial lesion to its “frontal lobe” component, the
model accounts for the behavior exhibited by traumatic
brain injured patients (TBI) with damage to the frontal lobe
(Basso et al., 2001).

(1)

where x and y represent the center of the wavelet, o is the
radial frequency in radians per unit length and
is the
wavelet orientation in radians. Moreover, a Gabor filter is
defined as a complex function, and its real and imaginary
part are used as two real filters (odd and even). In the
present work, we varied only the wavelet orientation (0,
¼ , ½ e ¾ ) for a total of eight filters (four even and
ω

θ

The model
The computational model is composed by three
interconnected modules (fig. 2), with a broad hierarchical
organization and feedback connections, that loosely
simulate the occipito-parieto-frontal circuit involved in the
TSP task. These components comprise: 1) a visual module,
525

four odd). A set of eight maps was then obtained by
convolving the input image with the eight Gabor filters.
To calculate the strength of the directional features
extracted by the different filters, all local values evaluated
from the patterns (composing the training set) were scaled
to the [0 1] range and the highest value was collected for
each map. This procedure allows to establish whether the
maximum value of a filter is above the average global
response, indicating a strong presence of the directional
features enhanced by the filter. The structure of this module
is consistent with the hypothesis of Field (1994) that
oriented edge features constitute a sparse representation of
the images. This means that for any image, only a few of the
features are needed to represent that particular image, and
that over an ensemble of images a particular feature will
seldom be significantly active.

The saliency maps
The saliency maps have been implemented to simulate the
influence of the chosen heuristic through the sequential
selection of stimuli. The saliency maps have the same size
of the motor output map (see below): each unit in the motor
map is pre-activated by the corresponding unit of the
saliency map. The Nearest Neighbor (NN) is implemented
as a Gaussian-shaped hill of activity centered on the last
visited city, whereas Direction Right (DR) and Direction
Down (DD) saliency maps consist of linear gradients that
cover the entire visual space.
The effect of a saliency map is to relatively enhance the
activation of one city by reducing (in accordance with the
specific gradient) that of all other cities on the map. The
competition among neurons in the motor output map
produces a single winning location that corresponds to the
most salient city, which constitutes the next target. Each unit
of the competitive selection module activates the heuristic
(that is, a saliency map) that corresponds most closely to its
coded directional feature.
We have observed that most of the subjects tend to select
the DR heuristic when the cities are principally distributed
along the diagonal axis from upper-left to lower-right, while
the DD is often chosen when the cities are principally
distributed along the opposite diagonal axis. In intermediate
or ambiguous situations, subjects tend to use the NN
heuristic. Similarly, after training on the visual patterns, two
output units of the competitive network are mainly driven
by the Gabor filters oriented at 45° and 135°, respectively.
Accordingly, they have been connected to the DR and DD
saliency maps. The last unit, being equally driven by many
Gabor filter outputs, has been connected to the NN saliency
map.

The competitive selection module
The simulation of the selection process was implemented
with a self-organizing, competitive learning network
consisting of feedforward excitatory connections (between
input and output units) and lateral inhibitory connections
(only between the output units). The training set consisted
of 100 randomly created patterns, composed of six to ten
cities.
This network was able to discover three main categories
of input images on the basis of the features detected by
Gabor filter processing. In the model, the competitive
learning network has one layer of eight input neurons
corresponding to the normalized highest value of the eight
Gabor filter responses, and a layer of output neurons. Each
input unit indicates the strength of a particular orientation
axis, whereas each of the three output nodes represents an
image class that calls for a specific heuristic (see below).
Inserting more than three units in the competitive layer did
not produce substantial changes in the results, as most of the
patterns (95%) were still classified by three units.
In the learning phase the weights w are updated according
to the following equation:

∆wi = η ( xi − wi ) y

The Motor Output
The output map is composed of 21 x 21 units. The location
of the activations correspond to the positions of the cities in
the pattern. Each neuron Oi receives inputs from the
corresponding units of the visual input, and from all the
other output units.
These different inputs are combined in the following way:

(2)

Oi =

where η is the learning rate, x is the activation of the input
vector and y is the activation of the winning output unit.
Note that in a winner-takes-all circuit, the output unit
receiving the largest input is assigned the full value of 1,
whereas all other units are suppressed to a 0 value. The
competitive selection takes place thanks to the lateral
inhibition in the output layer.
The result of the competitive selection is produced by an
entirely bottom-up process (spatial analysis). The presence
of directional features in the input pattern determines the
choice of a heuristic, which in turn biases the execution of
the pathway by means of a saliency map.

2
1+ e

− NetInput i

−1

(3)

(if NetInput i<= 0 Oi = 0)
Net Inputi

= Vi (1 + Saliency i ) + ∑ Wij O j

(4)

j

where NetInputi is the input to the unit and Saliencyi is the
activation value of the i-th unit in the Saliency map.
All the saliency maps consist in a gradient that produces a
pre-activation of 0.2 at motor level in the position of
maximum enhancement. In particular, the DR saliency map
produces a preactivation of 0.2 at the extreme left side that
decreases linearly to zero at the extreme right side. The DD
526

the set of input images, using the selection mechanism
described above, was compared with the data collected on
both healthy and impaired participants.
We evaluated the heuristics considering the relationships
among the cities: the heuristic used to move from a city to
another was judged considering the distance from that city
and the other cities not yet visited. At each step, we
determined the horizontally closest city, the vertically
closest city and the absolute closest city, with respect to the
last visited city. Following this method, we obtained a
precise description of the heuristics used by the model at
every single step.

saliency map employs an equivalent gradient from the upper
to the lower side of the output map. The NN saliency map is
represented by a broad Gaussian-shaped hill of activity
centered on the last visited city, with a peak of 0.2. The lefthand side of equation (4) computes the visual input Vi
modulated by the corresponding Salience unit, while the
right-hand side computes the internal input, resulting from
the connections W with the other output units. Indeed, the
output map contains symmetric lateral connections with
fixed-value inhibitory weights that depend on the distance
between neurons. When more than one stimulus is presented
to the network, the competition between neurons belonging
to different populations resolves over time in favor of one of
the stimuli.
Every time a city is visited, the corresponding population
code is subsequently suppressed in the motor map and
inhibition spreads to the input module via a feedback
connection. This ensures that the city with the highest
activation value will be visited and that the same population
will not be selected again during the sequential selection
process.

Skilled performance
The resulting percentage of heuristics used by the model
was very close to that observed in healthy adults (fig. 3a).
We also analyzed the overall pathways chosen by the model
(fig. 4). The test consisted in comparing each pathway
executed by the model with the frequencies of solutions
produced by the human participants for the corresponding
pattern. For this test, we used the patterns which have been
administered to the largest number of subjects: indeed, for
these patterns the frequencies of the pathways chosen by the
participants were clearly more reliable.

The Top-Down Controller
After each step, The Top-Down Controller resets the
activation of the heuristic units in the competitive selection
module. This endorses the required flexibility of the model
in order to make it capable of a change of heuristic during
the execution of the task.

a

b

Simulation
The model is able to perform planning as an incremental
process. For each pattern, the visual input is analyzed with
Gabor filters to enhance the most influential spatial features,
then the competitive selection module chooses the most
appropriate heuristic for the pattern. The winning heuristic
is implemented in terms of a saliency map, whose activation
influences the motor map in determining the city to be
visited.
At the end of each step, the units in the motor map
corresponding to the visited city are inhibited and the
activation of the same city in the input pattern is reduced via
the inhibitory feedback loop (fig. 2). This reduction allows a
possible change of heuristic: indeed, the visual input is
processed again in the visual module and, if a different
heuristic emerges from the competitive selection, the Top
Down Controller inhibits the previously selected heuristic to
foster the new heuristic. This process takes place at every
single step; therefore, heuristics can be changed more times
during the execution of a single path.

Fig. 3. Percentage of heuristics chosen by a) the unimpaired model
and b) the lesioned model.

The results demonstrate that the pathways chosen by the
model are often among the most frequently produced by
healthy adults. In particular, in 50% of patterns, the pathway
chosen by the model is the most frequently executed by the
human participants.

Results
The performance of the computational model has been
compared with the behavioral data of the experiments based
on the TSP variant (Basso et al., submitted). The percentage
of heuristics chosen by the model in performing the TSP on

Fig. 4. Examples of pathways performed by the skilled model.
These pathways correspond to those most frequently observed in
human subjects.

527

Moreover, in order to distinguish the type of strategy used
by subjects to solve the TSP task, the number of heuristics
used in every single trial has been examined: if, during the
pathway, participants operated a switch between two or
more heuristics, the resulting strategy was considered with
changes; otherwise, the strategy was classified as unique.
The ratio between unique strategies and strategies with
changes showed by the model is very close to the
performance showed by healthy adults (compare fig.1a with
fig. 5a).

Another remarkable finding concerns the selection among
the possible heuristics. Even inserting more than three units
in the competitive layer, most of the patterns (95%) were
still classified by three units. This means that the images can
be divided into three broad categories with respect to their
directional features.
However, the most intriguing characteristic of the model
regards its capacity to change heuristics during the
execution of a single pathway. The flexibility of the model
is based on the online updating of the problem
representations. Healthy adults appear to execute the TSP in
an iterative manner; the incremental process requires a
minimum cognitive load because participants do not need to
generate a comprehensive plan resolving the entire situation
but only the next move. The model executes the pathway
operating the same incremental process observed in human
participants, by selecting and having the chance to choose
among different heuristics at every point of the pathway.
The interaction of bottom-up (Gabor filters and competitive
selection module) and top-down (Top Down Controller)
influences have been successfully implemented in our
model.
Finally, there are strong similarities between our
computational model and the ATA model (Norman &
Shallice, 1986). In our model, the Top Down Controller
allowed the inhibition of the previously chosen heuristic,
when at a given point the use of another heuristic was more
appropriate. The rare use of strategies with changes showed
by the damaged model confirmed the key role of the Top
Down Controller in this task, in agreement with Norman
and Shallice’s (1986) proposal regarding the Supervisor
Attentional System.

Lesioned model
We simulated a lesion to the Top Down Controller by
decreasing its capacity to reset the competitive selection
module. This damage produced a conspicuous decrease of
strategies with changes (fig. 5b). This matches the decline
of changes observed by Basso et al. (2001) in frontal
patients and in normal subjects under rTMS over the frontal
lobe (fig. 1a). As for the behavior of frontal patients, the
performance of the model was still adequate because of the
preserved bottom-up mechanism (fig. 3b), but the damage
of the Top Down Controller caused a loss of flexibility and
adaptivity in the behavior, resulting in a greater difficult in
switching between heuristics.

80

a

b

60
Strategies w ith
changes
Unique Strategies
Unique Strategies

% 40
20

Acknowledgments

0
Health model Lesioned
model

Strategies
changes

with

This study was supported by grants from MIUR (PRIN
2003 to P.B. and PRIN 2004 to M.Z.) and the University of
Padova (Progetto di Ateneo 2003 to M.Z.).

References

Fig. 5. Performance of a) the unimpaired model and b) the lesioned
model.

Barr, A., Feigenbaum, E., A.. (1981). In: The Handbook of
Artificial Intelligence (Eds), vol. I, Stanford Los Altos,
California.
Basso, D., Bisiacchi, P., S., Cotelli, M., Farinello, C.,
(2001). Planning times during Travelling Salesman’s
problem: differences between closed head injury and
normal subjects. Brain and Cognition, 46,38–42
Basso, D., Lotze, M., Bisiacchi, P., S., Olivetti, M., B.,
Birbaumer, N. (submitted). The role of Broadmann Area
9 in visuo-spatial planning: a repetitive-TMS study.
Cadwallader, M. (1975). A behavioral model of consumer
spatial decision making. Economic Geography, 51, 339349.
Carreira, M., J., Orwell, J., Turnes, R., Boyce, J., F.,
Cabello, D., Haddon J., F. (1998). Perceptual Grouping
from Gabor Filter Responses Proceedings of the Ninth
British Machine Vision Conference, 14-17 September,

Discussion
Overall, the simulations closely mirrored
human
performance in both normal and pathological states. This
suggests that the model captures the basic cognitive
processes involved in the human solution of the TSP. There
are several points that deserve consideration. First of all, the
spatial analysis performed in the visual module through the
Gabor filters appears to successfully account for bottom-up
influences in the TSP. That is, the directional features of the
input pattern, enhanced by perceptual grouping, are the
main determinants of the TSP solution. Note that Gabor
filters have been previously used to successfully simulate
perceptual grouping (Carreira et al., 1998).

528

Hayes-Roth, B., Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive model
of planning. Cognitive Science, 3, 275-310.
Hirtle, S., Gärling, T.(1992). Heuristic rules for sequential
spatial decisions. Geoforum, 23, 227-238.
Lawler E., L., Lenstra, J., K., Rinnooy Kan, A.., H., G.,
Shmoys, D., B. (1985). The Traveling Salesman Problem:
A Guided Tour of Combinatorial Optimization. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.
Lee, T., S. (1996). Image representation using 2D Gabor
wavelets. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, Vol.18, 10, 959- 971.
Norman, D., Shallice, T. (1986) Attention to action: Willed
and automatic control of behavior. In: Davidson, R.,
Schwartz, G., Shapiro, D. (eds) Consciousness and self
regulation: Advances in research and theory, Vol 4.
Plenum, New York, pp 1–18.
Shallice, T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning.
Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society of
London, Part B, 298, 199-209.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental
structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1998, University of Southampton, U.K., Eds. P.H. Lewis
and M.S. Nixon, ISBN 1-901725-05-7, 336-345.
Cohen, G. (1989). Memory in the real world. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale NJ.
Cooper, R., Shallice, T. (2000). Contention scheduling and
the
control
of
routine
activities.
Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 17,297–338.
Duncan, J. (1986). Disorganization of behavior after frontal
lobe damage. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 3,271–290.
Field, D., J. (1994) What is the goal of sensory coding?
Neural Comput. 4, 559–601.
Gärling, T. (1989). The role of cognitive maps in spatial
decisions. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 9,269–
278.
Gärling, T. (1994). Processing of time constraints on
sequence decisions in a planning task. Euopean Journal
of Cognitive Psychology, 6,399–416
Goel, V., Grafman, J. (1995) Are the frontal lobes
implicated in "planning" functions? Interpreting data from
the Tower of Hanoi. Neuropsychologia 33,623–642.
Goel, V., Grafman, J. (2000). Role of the right prefrontal
cortex
in
ill-structured
planning.
Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 17,415–436.

529

