UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Neurobehaviorally Inspired ACT-R Model of Sleep Deprivation: Decreased Performance in
Psychomotor Vigilance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kt7r0fg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dinges, David F.
Gluck, Kevin A.
Gunzelmann, Glenn
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Neurobehaviorally Inspired ACT-R Model of Sleep Deprivation:
Decreased Performance in Psychomotor Vigilance
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Kevin A. Gluck (kevin.gluck@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory; 6030 South Kent Street; Mesa, AZ 85212 USA

Hans P. A. Van Dongen (vdongen@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Robert M. O’Connor (roconnor@mail.med.upenn.edu)
David F. Dinges (dinges@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Division of Sleep and Chronobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
1013 Blockley Hall; 423 Guardian Drive; Philadelphia, PA 19104-6021
The model is inspired by neurophysiological findings from
the sleep restriction community, and demonstrates the
promise of this approach for understanding the impact of
sleep restriction on performance.

Abstract
This paper describes how changes in architectural parameters
in ACT-R can be used to understand and predict the effects of
sleep deprivation on a fundamental aspect of human
performance. In a sample task, the parameter manipulations
produce changes in the model’s performance that closely
resemble the neurobehavioral effects seen in human data. The
parameter that is manipulated (G) influences a mechanism in
ACT-R that is considered to be associated with the thalamus,
an area that is sensitive to sleep deprivation.

Neurophysiology of Sleep Restriction
Research on sleep restriction has identified some of the
ways in which lack of sleep impacts brain activity (e.g.,
Durmer & Dinges, 2005; Drummond & Brown, 2001; Lin,
2000; Portas et al., 1998). The effects that are observed
depend on what task is being performed, especially at the
cortical level (e.g., Drummond & Brown, 2001). At the
subcortical level, the thalamus has been implicated in
regulating arousal (Lin, 2000; Moruzzi & Magoun, 1949),
particularly in modulating attention (Portas et al., 1998).
Research on sleep restriction has found changes in the
activation of the thalamus as a function of sleep debt (e.g.,
Portas et al., 1998). These findings point to the thalamus as
a key neural structure in mediating the effects of sleep
deprivation on cognitive performance.

Introduction
Sleep is essential for normal human functioning. When
people are deprived of sleep or even experience restricted
sleep schedules, their performance degrades. These
performance drops are evident in everything from simple
sustained attention reaction time tasks like the psychomotor
vigilance task (Van Dongen, 2004) to complex, dynamic
tasks like flying high-fidelity military aircraft simulators
(Caldwell et al., 2004). The effects of sleep deprivation
range from subtle increases in reaction times to “sleep
attacks,” where an individual falls asleep while engaged in
goal-directed behavior (Durmer & Dinges, 2005). These
effects can have major consequences in settings where
swing shifts or long or unusual hours are the norm, such as
long-haul trucking, commercial aviation, and military
operations.
In order to improve our ability to predict how and when
performance will decline as a result of restricted or deprived
sleep, we must improve our understanding of how sleep
deprivation impacts the cognitive system. If these
predictions can be made, then actions can be taken a priori
to mitigate the effects of sleep deprivation and minimize the
likelihood of costly or tragic fatigue-related errors (Dinges,
2004).
This paper describes our recent efforts along these lines.
We first describe relevant research from the sleep restriction
and cognitive modeling literatures. This is followed by a
description of a cognitive model that makes predictions in a
sample task used frequently in sleep restriction research.

Math Models of Cognitive Throughput
Research on the effects of sleep restriction also has resulted
in a better understanding of how sleep and circadian
rhythms interact to influence an individual’s ability to
perform tasks. These findings have been incorporated into a
variety of biomathematical models that are either
commercially or publicly available (Mallis et al., 2004). A
review of these models, their implementations, and their
ability to predict novel empirical results was recently
conducted and published (Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine, 75, 3, March 2004). All of the
models produce some form of prediction of sleepiness or
impairment in cognitive performance due to sleep loss,
which is useful for quantifying the overall effectiveness of a
person’s cognitive system relative to maximal. However,
these models do not make performance predictions in
specific task situations. For example a model may predict
only that cognitive throughput is at 70%, leaving it unclear

857

what the implications are for changes in response times or
error rates on a particular task.
Intentional Module
(not identified)

Computational Models of Cognition

Goal Buffer
(DLPFC)
Productions
(Basal Ganglia)

Cognitive architectures like ACT-R and Soar provide an
alternative to mathematical models in the cognitive
scientist’s toolbox. Architecture-based models allow the
modeler to simulate cognitive processes in the context of a
specific task domain. Owing to the “embodiment”
movement (primarily the addition of visual and motor
system representations) in the 1990’s, modelers can now
develop process models that interact with the same
computer-based tasks or simulations used by participants in
empirical studies, which greatly facilitates model validation.
A recent development is that researchers have started
using these architectures as tools for explaining the effects
of cognitive moderators on performance. For instance, the
ACT-R architecture was used by Jongman (1998) to
simulate within-task mental fatigue; by Belavkin (2001) to
simulate the role of emotion in decision making; and by
Ritter and colleagues (2004) to simulate pre-task appraisal
and anxiety. These efforts reflect an increasing maturity in
the architecture and a vibrant user community.
Another recent development within the ACT-R
architecture has been an effort to establish a mapping
between mechanisms in the architecture and regions in the
brain. The current conceptualization of this mapping is
shown in Figure 1. Research using fMRI has validated this
mapping by demonstrating that increased activity in the
brain regions of human subjects performing a task
corresponds to increased activity in those components of a
model performing the same task (Anderson et al., 2004).

Declarative Module
(Temporal/Hippocampus)
Retrieval Buffer
(VLPFC)

Matching (Striatum)
Selection (Pallidum)
Execution (Thalamus)

Visual Buffer
(Parietal)
Visual Module
(Occipital/etc)

Manual Buffer
(Motor)
Manual Module
(Motor/Cerebellum)

External World
Figure 1: ACT-R Architecture, including mapping of ACTR components to brain regions. Adapted from http://actr.psy.cmu.edu/tutorials/10

Psychomotor Vigilance Task
The PVT (Dinges & Powell, 1985) is widely used among
scientists studying the effects of sleep restriction and
circadian desynchrony because human performance on the
task has proven to be highly sensitive to such factors
(Dorrian et al., 2005). The task requires simple sustained
attention to a high signal rate, typically for a period of 10
minutes. Thus, participants must maintain stable goaldirected alertness, which can be quite difficult when sleep
deprived. During the task, participants are seated and
visually fixed on a computer screen while holding a
response box. Each time a red light stimulus appears in the
window, participants respond by pressing the button on the
box. The critical measure is how long it takes them to press
the button after the stimulus appears. Stimuli appear
randomly at 2-10 s ISI. Once the response button is pressed,
the reaction time is displayed, to motivate the participant to
respond as fast as possible without making errors of
commission.

Modeling Goal The major goal of our research is to
produce a model that provides a principled computational
account of how loss of sleep impacts the cognitive system.
This paper reports recent successes at modeling the effects
of sleep restriction in a sample task using ACT-R. We
manipulate The G parameter, which is associated with
production selection and execution in ACT-R (Figure 1),
which aligns the modeling work with the findings from the
sleep restriction community by focusing on a mechanism in
ACT-R that is associated with the thalamus. The model’s
performance mirrors aspects of the impact of sleep
deprivation in human participants. In the remainder of the
paper, the task used in this research is described, followed
by a detailed description of the model. The paper ends with
conclusions and some directions for future research.

Results
The apparent simplicity of the PVT as a performance task
belies the richness of the data and the complexity of the
brain’s response to sleep deprivation. Extensive research in
the Dinges laboratory, where the PVT was developed, has
revealed that responses to the PVT contain information on a
number of facets of behavioral capability, and provide
insights into the nature of neurobehavioral functioning in
the presence of elevated biological pressure for sleep
(Dorrian et al., 2005). Several phenomena of interest in PVT
results are illustrated in Figure 2. The data are from an 88hour, total sleep deprivation (TSD) study described in detail
in Van Dongen (2004). Data on the PVT were collected in

858

10-minute test bouts performed every 2 hours. Subjects
were awake throughout all days. The data in Figure 2 show
baseline PVT performance and performance after 1, 2, and 3
days of TSD.

Cognitive Model
ACT-R is a production system, with a distinction between
declarative memory, or memory for facts and information,
and procedural memory, or memory for operations and
transformations. In addition to these memory components,
ACT-R has perceptual and motor modules that allow the
system to interact directly with experimental software under
realistic perceptual-motor constraints. Each module has an
associated set of buffers (e.g., the visual system has a visualobject buffer and a visual-location buffer), which holds
current information relevant to that module. ACT-R runs in
cycles where the current state (i.e., the contents of the
buffers) is compared to the conditions of the set of actions,
and one is selected from the set of productions that match
the current state. That production is then executed, or fired,
and a new state emerges based on the consequences of the
production. The selection of which matching production to
fire is governed by an equation that calculates the “expected
utility” (E) of using that production to reach the goal using
the equation:

0.30

Proportion of Responses

0.25

Baseline
Day 1 TSD
Day 2 TSD
Day 3 TSD

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

Fa
lse
St
ar
ts
<1 :
70
<1 :
90
<2 :
10
<2 :
30
<2 :
50
<2 :
70
<2 :
90
<3 :
10
<3 :
30
:
<3
50
<3 :
70
<3 :
90
:
<4
10
<4 :
30
<4 :
50
<4 :
70
<4 :
9
La 0:
ps
es
:

0.00

Response Time (ms)

Figure 2: PVT data distributions for increasingly sleep
deprived healthy adults.
The data in Figure 2 are presented according to how
quickly or slowly participants responded. If participants
responded during the delay period or within 150ms of the
stimulus presentation, the response was characterized as a
false start. As Figure 2 shows, the likelihood of a false start
increases as sleep deprivation increases (Doran et al., 2001).
Response times between 150ms and 500ms were considered
to be in the normal alert range, and are plotted as a
proportion of responses in each 10ms interval in Figure 2.
As sleep deprivation increased, there was a shift toward
longer response times in this range, with the fastest response
times becoming less likely.
The second-to-last point on each of the lines in Figure 2
represents lapses. Lapses were defined a priori (by
convention) as RTs greater than 500ms (but less than
30,000ms). As Figure 2 displays, there was a substantial
increase in the proportion of responses classified as lapses
(from approximately 8% at baseline to approximately 28%
with 3 days of TSD). Finally, the last point on each line
represents sleep attacks, where the participant failed to
respond within 30,000ms of stimulus onset. This triggered
an alarm to wake the participant. The increase in sleep
attacks (from almost none to just over 2%) was smaller than
the increase in lapses, but they represent a dramatic failure
to respond.
These findings present significant modeling challenges.
One unusual aspect of the data is the impact of sleep
deprivation on false alarms (errors of commission), which
increase at the same time that appropriate responses become
slower and less likely (errors of omission). In addition,
while response times in the normal range increased subtly,
the large increase in lapses and the smaller increase in sleep
attacks suggest that something more substantial is occurring
than just a simple slowdown in processing – variability in
performance increases as sleep deprivation increases (Doran
et al., 2001). The ACT-R model described next illustrates
the account of these effects that we have developed.

E = PG – C + ε
Here, P is the estimated probability of reaching the goal if
the production is fired, and C is the expected cost (in
seconds) of achieving the goal if the production is fired. G is
an architectural parameter that has been loosely referred to
as the value of the goal. The equation also incorporates a
stochastic component, ε, which makes the calculation of E
noisy. The production whose condition matches the current
state of the system and has the highest value of E is selected
and fired on each cognitive cycle1. This process is
modulated by a utility threshold. If there is no production
with an expected utility above the threshold, then no actions
are performed. While this circumstance is usually avoided in
ACT-R models, it is an important feature of this model, the
details of which are described next.

Model Design
Due to the simplicity of the PVT, the model which performs
it is relatively straightforward. The model is driven by
procedural knowledge since the task simply requires a
motor response to a visual stimulus. Using ACT-R’s
perceptual and motor modules, the model interacts directly
with an implementation of the PVT. The model performs
the task by waiting for the stimulus to appear, and
responding with a button press.
There are two productions that may fire during the delay
before the stimulus appears; a wait production and a justclick production. The wait production represents appropriate
behavior during the inter-stimulus interval. In contrast, the
1
The probability of selecting a specific production on a given
cycle is governed by the Production Choice Equation in Anderson
et al. (2004, p. 1044).

859

just-click production represents the capacity for a false
alarm. This production executes a mouse-click regardless of
whether or not there is anything in the model’s visual
buffers (i.e., regardless of whether or not ACT-R “sees”
anything in the window on the monitor).
Once the stimulus appears, a sequence of two productions
must fire to produce a response. The first shifts visual
attention to the presented stimulus (i.e., recognizes that the
stimulus has been presented) and the second executes a
response. The wait production does not fire once the
stimulus appears because it is deliberate inaction that
depends on nothing being on the screen. However, because
the just-click production does not consider whether or not
something is on the screen, there is a chance it may fire at
any point, whether or not the stimulus has been presented.
The brief description just provided leaves out one
important component of the model, the utility threshold. It is
possible for none of the productions to rise above threshold
on a given cycle. If this happens, the system is idle for the
length of that cycle (about 50ms). After the cycle, the
expected utility values are recomputed, and if a production
rises above threshold it is executed. The addition of noise to
the calculation of E means that it is possible for nothing to
happen on one cycle, followed by a cycle in which a
production is executed.
The “empty” cognitive cycles represent the model
slipping off to sleep while performing a task. However, this
should mean that arousal is decreasing over time. To
represent this in the model, a mechanism was added that
decrements G when none of the matching productions rise
above threshold after the stimulus has been presented. Each
time this happens, the value of G is decreased by .035,
which effectively lowers the utility values of the appropriate
productions. The impact of this mechanism is that as time
passes after the stimulus appears, it becomes less likely that
the model will produce a response on any given cycle. In the
current model, the value of G is reset at the beginning of
each delay period. However, alternatives for calculating this
value in an ongoing manner are being pursued. The initial
values of G used here are discussed in the next section.
It is the interplay of the productions and the utility
threshold that produces the model’s behavior. During the
inter-stimulus interval, the model can behave appropriately
by waiting or doing nothing on each cycle. Doing nothing
occurs when both the wait production and the just-click
production have E values below threshold. This still results
in appropriate behavior during the delay, because nothing
should be done during that interval. Once the stimulus
appears, the model may either attend (if the stimulus has not
been attended), respond (if the stimulus has been attended),
or do nothing. In this situation, doing nothing is no longer
appropriate behavior, and it only occurs if none of the E
values for eligible productions are above threshold. If it
persists for long enough, the model produces a lapse. If
doing nothing continues for a really long period, the model
produces a sleep attack.

Parameters A total of three parameters in this model varied
from their default values. Of these, two were not
manipulated across different levels of sleep deprivation. The
first of these is the utility threshold. The calculated value of
E must be greater than this value for the production to fire
on a given cycle. In the model presented here, the utility
threshold was set to 1.75. The default setting is 0. However,
most models in ACT-R maintain all productions above
threshold and rely on the production matching process and
conflict resolution to determine which production will fire.
Thus, little research has been done examining the role of
this parameter on performance in ACT-R.
The second parameter that was used in this model was the
probability of success for the just-click production. This was
set to 0, which results in a comparatively low E. This
reflects the idea that random clicking is not likely to lead to
success on the task. The net impact is to reduce the
likelihood that the just-click production will fire relative to
the wait production during the delay and relative to the
attend and respond productions after the stimulus has been
presented.
The third parameter was adjusted to produce the effects of
sleep deprivation seen in the data. This parameter was G.
While G has been referred to as the “value of the goal” in
general, some researchers have viewed this parameter as
reflecting “arousal” or “motivation” in studies of how stress
or mental fatigue impact performance (Belavkin, 2001;
Jongman, 1998). It is in this sense that G is conceptualized
in this model.
By viewing G as a measure of arousal, it is natural to see
one of the impacts of sleep deprivation as a lowering of G.
This has the effect of decreasing the probability that
expected utility will rise above threshold for any of the
productions. In addition, the value of G plays a large role in
determining the likelihood that a production will be
executed, a role attributed to the thalamus in Figure 1.
Because activity in the thalamus is impacted by sleep
deprivation, G appears to be an excellent candidate for a
parameter that may be impacted by lack of sleep.
The value of G was set to 1.87 for the baseline condition.
As sleep deprivation increased, G was decreased,
representing a decreased level of arousal. In this model, the
value of G was set to best fit the observed data (though
alternatives mechanisms are being explored). G was set to
1.77, 1.72, and 1.68 to represent the effects of 1, 2, and 3
days of TSD respectively. These initial values are
decremented on empty cognitive cycles to represent the
model drifting off to sleep.
Finally, there is a flag in ACT-R that allows cycle times
and motor actions to be noisy. By default, these processes
take a set amount of time (e.g., the default cycle time is
50ms). In our model, these times varied between 50% and
150% of their default values, according to a uniform
distribution. This does not impact the behavior of the model.
However, this mechanism is necessary to allow the model to

860

relative probability that the just-click production will fire
actually increases as G decreases. Whereas E decreases for
the wait production as G is lowered, E for the just-click
production remains unchanged, because the probability of
success for the just-click production was fixed at 0. Thus,
with lower values of G, only the wait production has a
reduced likelihood of firing, thereby making it a little more
likely that just-click will fire. The result in the model is a
subtle increase in false alarms as sleep deprivation
increases. Further work is needed to understand the source
of the comparatively large increase in false alarms shown by
human participants.

produce a continuous distribution of response times, rather
than response times distributed at specific intervals.

Results
The changes in the G parameter have a large impact on the
model’s performance. The data from the model are
presented in Figure 3. It illustrates that all but one (false
alarms) of the major trends in the human data are closely
matched by the model. The correlation to the human data is
0.986 and the RMSD is 0.55%. The data and predictions
presented in Figures 2 and 3 are on the same scale, and the
RMSD indicates that the overall correspondence between
the two datasets is quite close.
0.30

Proportion of Responses

0.25

Conclusions and Future Directions
The model presented in this paper provides the first
successful approach to cognitive modeling of how sleep
deprivation may lead to poorer performance on a task that
requires sustained attention and rapid responses to frequent
signals. PVT performance changes in a complex manner as
sleep deprivation increases (Doran et al., 2001; Dorrian et
al., 2005), which presents challenges to modeling these
effects. The ACT-R approach used here appears to have
captured most of the effects of sleep loss on PVT
performance. As such, the model has increased our
understanding of how the effects of fatigue from sleep
deprivation can be captured in a formal cognitive model.
Our approach was to use existing research to narrow the
range of possible mechanisms for producing fatigue effects
in ACT-R. The neurophysiological work that has been done
in the fatigue community and the recent work in ACT-R on
mapping architectural components to brain areas, appear to
provide useful constraints for identifying which parameters
to manipulate in order to capture the effects of sleep loss.
By combining these research areas, we were able to identify
a parameter in ACT-R that (1) influences the behavior of
our model, with outcomes that are very similar to those
found in human performance before and during sleep
derivation, and (2) corresponds to a neural structure (i.e.,
thalamus) that has been identified as influential in the
brain’s response to sleep restriction (Portas et al., 1998).
The thalamus is linked to the production execution
component of ACT-R. Manipulations in G influence the
likelihood that a production will be executed, by influencing
the probability that expected utility (E) will rise above
threshold. This suggests that changes in activity in the
thalamus of human participants may be related to changes in
G in the ACT-R architecture. The model described here
demonstrates that such an account is feasible by using G to
produce performance differences in the model that closely
match changes in human performance as a result of sleep
deprivation.
We are currently extending this research to other simple
tasks that are used in sleep restriction research. This work
seeks to identify a small set of ACT-R parameters,
corresponding to a small set of neural structures, that are
impacted by sleep deprivation. Once these parameters are
identified, we will use cognitive performance data and the

Baseline
Day 1 TSD
Day 2 TSD
Day 3 TSD

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

Fa
l

se
S

ta
rts
<1 :
70
<1 :
90
<2 :
10
<2 :
30
<2 :
50
<2 :
70
<2 :
90
:
<3
10
:
<3
30
:
<3
50
<3 :
70
<3 :
90
:
<4
10
:
<4
30
<4 :
50
<4 :
70
<4 :
9
La 0 :
ps
es
:

0.00

Response Time (ms)

Figure 3: Model data from PVT.
As noted above, the model’s performance results from the
interaction of the utility values for the available productions
and the utility threshold. When the stimulus is on the screen,
either the attend or the respond production will match.
However, on some occasions the production will fall below
threshold, resulting in a temporary delay in the response.
The likelihood of this happening increases as G is lowered
because the expected utility value is lower before noise is
added. In addition, because G is lowered when ACT-R does
nothing on a cognitive cycle, it becomes increasingly
unlikely that the model will respond at all each time the
model misses an opportunity to respond. In effect, the
model drifts off to sleep.
The manipulations of G produce the increase in lapses
and sleep attacks, as well as the shift in normal response
times in the model. Interestingly, the model does not require
an increase in cycle time as a function of sleep deprivation.
The shift in normal response times is due to the decreased
probability of the model responding at the first opportunity
as G is lowered. The immediate result is fewer fast
responses, but the effects accumulate and translate into
many more lapses and more sleep attacks, as occurs in the
experimental data (Doran et al., 2001).
It is notable that during sleep deprivation, the model’s
false alarm rate increases. However, model false alarms did
not show the degree of increase that was found
experimentally, although the trend is in the right direction.
The reason that false alarms increase in the model is that the

861

biomathematical models that capture the temporal dynamics
in these data to drive changes in their values. The resulting
theory will then be used to make a priori predictions about
human performance on complex dynamic tasks under
conditions of degraded cognitive functioning.

Deprivation: Clinical Issues, Pharmacology and Sleep
Loss Effects. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, NY, pp 3970.
Durmer, J. S., & Dinges, D. F. (2005). Neurocognitive
consequences of sleep deprivation. Seminars in
Neurology in press.
Drummond, S. P. A., & Brown, G. G. (2001). The effects of
total sleep deprivation on cerebral responses to cognitive
performance. Neuropsychopharmacology, 25, S68-S73.
Jongman, L. (1998) How to fatigue ACT-R? In Proceedings
of the Second European Conference on Cognitive
Modelling (pp. 52-57). Nottingham: Nottingham
University Press.
Lin, J. S. (2000). Brain structures and mechanisms involved
in the control of cortical activation and wakefulness, with
emphasis on the posterior hypothalamus and
histaminergic neurons. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 4, 471503.
Mallis, M. M., Mejdal, S., Nguyen, T. T., Dinges, D. F.
(2004). Summary of the key features of seven
biomathematical models of human fatigue and
performance. Aviation, Space & Environmental Medicine
75, 3, A4-A14.
Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. (1949). Brainstem reticular
formation
and
activation
of
the
EEG.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1,
455–473.
Portas, C. M., Rees, G., Howseman, A. M., Josephs, O.,
Turner, R., & Frith, C.D. (1998). A specific role for the
thalamus in mediating the interaction of attention and
arousal in humans. The Journal of Neuroscience, 18,
8979-8989.
Ritter, F. E., Reifers, A., Klein, L. C., Quigley, K., &
Schoelles, M. (2004). Using cognitive modeling to study
behavior moderators: Pre-task appraisal and anxiety. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society (pp. 2121-2125). Santa Monica, CA: Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Van Dongen, H. P. A. (2004). Comparison of mathematical
model predictions to experimental data of fatigue and
performance. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine, 75(3), 15-36.

Acknowledgments
Cognitive model development was sponsored partly by
AFRL’s Warfighter Readiness Research Division and partly
by grant number 04HE02COR from the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (AFOSR). Human data collection was
sponsored partly by AFOSR grants F49620-95-1-0388 and
F49620-00-1-0266, and by NIH grant RR00040.

References
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y . (2004). An integrated theory of
the mind. Psychological Review 111, 1036-1060.
Belavkin, R. V. (2001). The role of emotion in problem
solving. In C. Johnson (Ed.), Proceedings of the AISB ’01
Symposium on emotion, cognition, and affective
computing (pp. 49-57). York, England: Heslington.
Caldwell, J. A., Caldwell, J. L., Brown, D. L., & Smith, J.
K. (2004). The effects of 37 hours of continuous
wakefulness on the physiological arousal, cognitive
performance, self-reported mood, and simulator flight
performance of F-117A pilots. Military Psychology,
16(3), 163-181.
Dinges, D.F. (2004). Critical research issues in development
of biomathematical models of fatigue and performance.
Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 75(3),
A181-A191.
Dinges, D. F., & Powell, J. W. (1985). Microcomputer
analyses of performance on a portable, simple visual RT
task during sustained operations. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers 17, 6, 652-655.
Doran, S. M., Van Dongen, H. P., Dinges, D. F (2001).
Sustained attention performance during sleep deprivation:
evidence of state instability. Archives of Italian Biology:
Neuroscience 139, 3, 253-267.
Dorrian, J., Rogers, N. L., & Dinges, D. F. (2005).
Psychomotor vigilance performance: Neurocognitive
assay sensitive to sleep loss. In Kushida, C.A. (Ed.), Sleep

862

