UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Novel Approach to Understanding Novelty Effects in Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7799x63f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Lovett, Marsha C.
Nellen, Stefani

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Novel Approach to Understanding Novelty Effects in Memory
Yasuaki Sakamoto (yasu@psy.utexas.edu)
Bradley C. Love (love@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Abstract
Enhanced memory for oddball items has been long
established, but the basis for these effects is not well
understood. The present work offers a novel way to
think about novelty that clarifies the roles of isolation and differentiation in establishing new memories. According to the isolation account, items that
are highly dissimilar to other items are better remembered. In contrast, recent category learning
studies suggest that oddball items are better remembered because they must be differentiated from
other similar items. The current work pits the isolation and differentiation accounts against each other.
The results suggest that differentiation, not isolation, leads to more accurate memory for deviant
items. In contrast, gains for isolated items are attributable to reduced confusion with other items, as
opposed to preferential storage.

Figure 1: Examples of isolation and differentiation
are shown. The left circle is more isolated, whereas
the right circle is more differentiated.

of detecting novelty in our mental activities, recent
work in cognitive neuroscience has focused on identifying the neural circuits underlying novelty processing (e.g., Kishiyama, Yonelinas, & Lazzara, 2004;
Ranganath & Rainer, 2003).
Despite the widespread interest in novelty effects,
the basis for these effects is not well understood.
Most explanations focus on the advantage conferred
to items that are relatively distinct or isolated from
other stimulus items (e.g., Busey & Tunnicliff, 1999;
Valentine, 1991). However, recent category learning
research has brought the isolation account into question and has instead suggested that differentiation
underlies the memory advantage of oddball items
(Sakamoto & Love, 2004). The differentiation account holds that the basis for the oddball advantage
is contrasting with highly similar items that establish a context or backdrop.
Figure 1 depicts an oddball item that is either
more isolated or differentiated. Inter-item similarity relations play opposing roles in the isolation and
differentiation accounts. In the isolation account,
items that are highly dissimilar and atypical are best
remembered. In the differentiation account, items
that are highly similar to other items, yet deviate
on a critical property (such as category membership
or shape in the case of Figure 1), are best remembered. Previous research has not distinguished these
two accounts of novelty effects.

Introduction
Vancouver, Toronto, Montréal, Austin. Given a list
of items to remember, people show a memory advantage for an item that differs from the others in
some way, such as an American city (Austin) in a list
of Canadian cities (Vancouver, Toronto, Montréal).
This robust memory phenomenon is known as the
von Restorff (1933) effect and has been established in
various forms. For example, distinctive faces (Valentine, 1991), behaviors (Hastie & Kumar, 1979), and
category members (Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995) are
remembered better than typical items.
Items judged as novel tend to be processed more
fully and deeply and may in fact be processed differently (Friedman, 1979). For instance, a distinctive member of a group is judged as more influential and more behaviors of the distinctive member
are remembered (Taylor, Fiske, Etcoff, & Ruderman, 1978). Moreover, both the positive and negative characteristics of distinctive individuals are perceived as more extreme (McArthur, 1981).
Novelty detection is the flip side of stimulus generalization and thus likely plays a central role in our
mental development. Indeed, infants tend to show
preference for a novel stimulus once they habituate
to a familiar one (Fantz, 1964) and this ability to
respond to novelty is predictive of later intelligence
(McCall & Carriger, 1993). Given the importance

1919

0.25
0.15
0.10
0.05

Response probability

0.20

Differentiated
Isolated

0.00

Figure 2: The stimuli used in Experiment 1 are
shown. An imperfect rule determined membership
in category A or B for all but two items. In this
case, red items tend to be in category A, whereas
green items tend to be in category B. Each category
contains an exception. Item BX is more differentiated than item AX, whereas item AX is more isolated than item BX. To eliminate possible influences
of line length on performance (Ono, 1967), subjects
were randomly assigned to either the left condition
in which the differentiated exception was the longer
item or to the right condition in which the isolated
exception was the longer item.

−10

−5

0

5

10

Predicted − actual (mm)

In the present work, we evaluate the relative contributions of the isolation and differentiation accounts to enhanced oddball memory. To foreshadow
our results, qualitatively different memory advantages are attributable to isolation and differentiation
manipulations. Experiment 1 demonstrates that
as predicted by the differentiation account, higherfidelity memory traces result for deviant items that
are highly similar to other items. As predicted by
the isolation account, deviant items that are dissimilar to other items are easier to identify. Experiment 2 demonstrates that the identification advantage of dissimilar items is attributable to reduced
confusion with other items rather than stronger
memory traces for those items.

Figure 3: Probability distribution of subjects’ responses are shown for the differentiated and isolated
exceptions in the reconstruction phase of Experiment 1. The x-axis represents the difference in millimeters between subjects’ predicted length and the
actual length. Positive values indicate overshoot,
whereas negative values indicate undershoot.

ure 2) was highly similar to items belonging to the
contrasting category, whereas the isolated exception
(labeled AX in Figure 2) was dissimilar to other
items. The differentiation account predicts that subjects will develop high-fidelity memory traces for the
differentiated exception to reduce confusions with
similar items from the opposing category. In contrast, the isolation account predicts that memory
should be best for the isolated exception due to its
dissimilarity to other items. Memory measures following the learning phase are used to evaluate these
accounts of enhanced oddball memory.

Method and Results
Learning phase Eighty-two University of Texas
undergraduates learned to classify 10 line stimuli.
They completed either 20 blocks of learning trials
or two consecutive error-free blocks, whichever occurred first. A block was the presentation of each
learning item in a random order. Subjects were
provided with the imperfect rule because our main
interest was their memory for the exceptions (cf.
Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995; Sakamoto & Love, 2004).
As predicted, subjects classified the isolated exception more accurately (.66 vs. .60) than the differentiated one, t(81) = 2.89, p < .01.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we pit isolation and differentiation
against each other in a category learning task. Subjects learned to correctly assign stimuli varying in
color (red or green) and length (continuously valued) to one of two contrasting categories through
trial by trial classification learning with corrective
feedback. As displayed in Figure 2, the membership
of all but two items can be correctly determined by
applying an imperfect rule (e.g., red items are in
category A, whereas green items are in category B).
One exception (i.e., oddball) item in each category
violates this regularity.
The differentiated exception (labeled BX in Fig-

1920

Reconstruction phase Following learning, subjects answered three arithmetic problems to prevent
rehearsal of information from the learning phase.

Subjects then reconstructed the lengths of the differentiated and isolated exceptions. The color and
category assignment of the exception were given.
The exception’s initial length was set 66.5 mm, amid
the two exceptions’ actual lengths. Subjects reconstructed each exception three times, alternating between each on successive trials. Reconstruction error was measured as the absolute difference between
the actual and predicted lengths. Consistent with
the differentiation account, the mean reconstruction error (averaged across three trials) was significantly smaller (2.1 mm vs. 2.7 mm) for the differentiated than for the isolated exception, t(81) = 3.37,
p < .01. As shown in Figure 3, more responses centered around the actual value (i.e., distance of 0) for
the differentiated than for the isolated exception.
Transfer phase Following the reconstruction
phase, subjects answered another set of three arithmetic problems. Finally, subjects completed two
transfer blocks in which they classified the 10 items
presented in the learning phase without corrective
feedback. Although subjects reconstructed the differentiated exception more accurately, their transfer classification performance was significantly better (.91 vs. .77) for the isolated than for the differentiated exception, t(81) = 3.89, p < .01.
Individual analyses In Experiment 1, more accurate memory did not result in better identification.
An item is easier to identify when it is more separated from its nearest confusable item. The differentiated exception was not easy to identify because although it was represented more accurately, its representation was still not as separated from the nearest
confusable item from the opposing category as the
representation of the isolated exception was. The
isolated exception was highly dissimilar (19.95 mm
to the nearest neighbor on each side), resulting in
a larger difference between the reconstructed length
and the length of the nearest confusable neighbor
than the differentiated exception (6.65 mm to the
nearest neighbor on each side).
We advance that identification is largely determined by how separated an item is in a representational space rather than memory accuracy itself.
In accord with this idea, there was a significant negative correlation between individual subjects’ reconstruction errors and transfer classification accuracies
for the differentiated exception, r(80) = −.27, p <
.05. Smaller reconstruction errors on the differentiated exception, and thus larger differences between
the predicted length and the actual length of the
nearest neighbor, were associated with better identification of the differentiated item. For the isolated
exception, there was no correlation (r = 0) between
the reconstruction errors and the transfer classification accuracies. The isolated exception was highly
dissimilar to its near neighbors, and the difference
between the reconstructed length of the isolated ex-

1921

ception and the actual length of the nearest confusable item was relatively large regardless of the
magnitude of the reconstruction error.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that items that are
highly differentiated from similar items result in
more accurate memory, whereas items that are
highly separated from other items are easier to
identify. In Experiment 2, similarity relations are
equated for the isolated and differentiated exceptions as shown in Figure 4. Instead, the differentiated item (BX) is more frequently contrasted
with similar items by presenting its adjacent rulefollowing items from the opposing category (A2 and
A3) more often (90% vs. 10%) than its distant rulefollowing items (A1 and A4) during learning. In
contrast, the isolated item (AX) is more frequently
contrasted with dissimilar items by presenting its
distant rule-following items from the opposing category (B1 and B4) more often (90% vs. 10%) than its
adjacent rule-following items (B2 and B3). Other
than these changes in similarity relations and presentation frequency of the rule-following items, Experiment 2 is identical to Experiment 1.
As in Experiment 1, the differentiated exception
had more opportunities for confusion with members of the opposing category and resulted in a
finer-grained memory representation. In the learning phase, 52 University of Texas undergraduates
classified the isolated exception more accurately (.51
vs. .44) than the differentiated one, t(52) = 3.32, p <
.01. Following learning, the differentiated exception
resulted in smaller reconstruction errors (2.6 mm
vs. 4.2 mm) than the isolated one, t(52) = 2.62,
p < .05. More reconstruction responses centered
around the actual value for the differentiated exception as displayed in Figure 5.
Unlike in Experiment 1, the identification advantage for the isolated exception was eliminated when
the isolated and differentiated exceptions shared the
same inter-item similarity relations. Subjects’ transfer classification accuracy without corrective feedback for the isolated (.81) and the differentiated
(.80) exceptions showed no significant difference,
t < 1. Although the isolated exception resulted in
fewer classification errors than the differentiated exception during learning, they were both highly confusable with other items as indicated by their low
accuracies in the learning phase.
These results suggest that the frequency manipulation in Experiment 2 plays an important role in
memory accuracies but has little impact on identification abilities. Identification performance is largely
determined by the inter-item similarity relations. As
in Experiment 1, there was a significant negative correlation between individual subjects’ reconstruction
errors and transfer classification for the differentiated exception, r(50) = −.46, p < .01. Unlike in Ex-

0.25
0.15
0.10
0.05

Response probability

0.20

Differentiated
Isolated

0.00

Figure 4: The stimuli used in Experiment 2 are
shown. Unlike Experiment 1, the differentiated
(BX) and isolated (AX) exceptions share the same
inter-item similarity relations. The differentiated
exception is more “differentiated” because its near
neighbors from the contrasting category (A2 and
A3) are presented more frequently than its distant
neighbors (A1 and A4) during learning. The isolated exception is more “isolated” because its distant neighbors (B1 and B4) are presented more often
than its near neighbors (B2 and B3).

−30

−20

−10

0

10

20

30

Predicted − actual (mm)

periment 1, the same pattern was found for the isolated exception in Experiment 2, r(50) = −.63, p <
.01. The difference between the predicted length
and the nearest confusable item’s actual length in
Experiment 2 was similar for both the isolated and
differentiated exceptions. This was not the case in
Experiment 1 as the isolated item was more dissimilar to other items than was the differentiated item.

Figure 5: Probability distribution of subjects’ responses are shown for the differentiated and isolated
exceptions in the reconstruction phase of Experiment 2. The x-axis represents the difference (in mm)
between the predicted and actual lengths.

General Discussion

Experiment 1 shows that isolation and differentiation lead to qualitatively different memory enhancements. The differentiated item that was contrasted
with highly similar items led to more accurate memory than did the isolated items, whereas the isolated
item that was dissimilar to other items was easier
to identify (i.e., classify as an exception) than the
differentiated item. Experiment 2 shows that the
isolation advantage is attributable to reduced confusion with other items rather than preferential storage. The isolation advantage was eliminated when
the inter-item similarity relations were equated for
the isolated and differentiated items. These different memory enhancements can be predicted by the
same mental representations. In Experiments 1 and
2, subjects whose reconstruction of the oddball item
was more separated from the nearest confusable item
of the opposing category showed better transfer classification performance on that item.
One alternative view is that the number of errors
during the learning phase drove these differences as
subjects in both experiments made more errors classifying the differentiated than the isolated exception
during learning. Indeed, similarity and confusability are the catalysts of differentiation and also beget
classification errors. However, errors and differentiation are not synonymous. By manipulating the feedback associated with an item, Sakamoto and Love
(2004) dissociated violating a regularity and committing an error during learning, and found that enhanced memory is attributable to structure violation
and not errors per se.

Experiments 1 and 2 evaluated two explanations for
enhanced oddball memory. The isolation account
holds that most dissimilar items should be remembered best. In contrast, the differentiation account
holds that items should be remembered best that
are similar to other items, yet differ in some critical property that brings the contrast into focus. In
most laboratory experiments, both of these explanations are usually operable and their relative influences are indeterminate. In the initial example in
this paper, for example, Austin is isolated in that
it has unique properties that Vancouver, Toronto,
Montréal do not have, but it is also differentiated
in that it shares many properties with these other
cities, yet varies in the key property of nationhood.
Which explanation is operable depends on how one
construes the list of city names. To address this
conundrum, we pit isolation and differentiation accounts against each other in a classification learning
task utilizing rule-plus-exception category structures
in which one category’s exception was relatively isolated and the other’s was relatively differentiated.

1922

Methodological Implications

members of the opposing category and should lead to
a finer-grained memory representation according to
the differentiation account. This result held and was
predicted by SUSTAIN but could not be accounted
for by RULEX. The result seems at odds with rulebased representations of regularities in general (e.g.,
Pinker, 1991) and instead favors a clustering account
that is more schematic in nature.
These results are also inconsistent with exemplar
accounts (though see Sakamoto, Matsuka, & Love,
2004). Exemplar models cannot account for the oddball recognition advantage because they store every
training instance in memory rather than using novelty gated storage and do not accord special status
to oddball items. To determine recognition strength,
exemplar models sum the similarity of the probe
item to all exemplars stored in memory, which does
not predict an advantage for oddball items. Exemplar models do not favor items that are odd by
virtue of being isolated because the summed similarity recognition calculation favors typical items. For
this reason, correct identification is modeled as the
inverse of summed similarity, thus favoring isolated
items (Busey & Tunnicliff, 1999). The idea is that
the most dissimilar item is least confusable and best
remembered. Of course, this account is at odds with
the current findings suggesting finer-grained representations for differentiated than for isolated exceptions. The critical problem with exemplar models is
that storage is not dependent on what other items
are already stored in memory.
Consideration of the current results, coupled with
those from Sakamoto and Love (2004), strongly favor non-rule-based representations of regularities or
patterns. Factors such as frequency, expectation violation, and similarity to other items are crucial factors driving performance in these tasks, suggesting
that storage is gated by novelty and mental representations are cluster- or schema-like and are engaged
through similarity-based processing.

The present results may help resolve the apparent
conflict between studies that do and do not find isolation advantages. The isolation advantage in transfer classification of Experiment 1 can be attributable
to the isolated exception being less confusable with
members of the opposing category than the differentiated exception is. Thus, the isolation advantage in
transfer is likely due to the nature of the other test
items, rather than due to a stronger memory trace
for the isolated exception.
Analogously, studies that have found an isolation
advantage in old/new recognition judgments did not
include foils that are similar to isolated items (e.g.,
Busey & Tunnicliff, 1999; Valentine, 1991). Studies that include foils equally similar to all studied
items do not find an isolation advantage (e.g., Davidenko & Ramscar, 2004; though see Nosofsky &
Zaki, 2003). In contrast, the advantage for the differentiated exception in Experiments 1 and 2’s reconstruction task is not attributable to other items
included in the test set and instead indicates that
subjects developed finer-grained representations for
the differentiated exception.
As demonstrated in the present studies, one determinant of whether an isolation advantage or disadvantage is observed is the nature of the task. For
instance, item confusability constrains performance
for tasks that yield an isolation advantage, whereas
confusability is not harmful or even beneficial for
tasks not favoring isolation. Future work that employs multiple memory measures and distinguishes
between isolation and differentiation will be necessary to fully resolve these issues.

Theoretical Implications
A number of category learning and memory models
utilize novelty detection mechanisms to gate storage
(e.g, Nosofsky, Palmeri, & McKinley, 1994; Love,
Medin, & Gureckis, 2004). For example, Love et
al.’s SUSTAIN clustering model forms new clusters
in memory in response to surprising events, such as
learning that a bat is a mammal and not a bird.
This mechanism allows SUSTAIN to correctly predict enhanced recognition memory for stimuli that
violate salient regularities as observed in Palmeri
and Nosofsky’s (1995). Similarly, Nosofsky et al.’s
RULEX hypothesis-testing model correctly predicts
enhanced memory for exceptions by explicitly storing items that violate inferred rules.
Sakamoto and Love (2004) modified Palmeri and
Nosofsky’s design to tease apart the predictions of
cluster- and rule-based accounts of category representations and to test the differentiation hypothesis.
Sakamoto and Love introduced an asymmetry in the
category structures in which one category contained
more rule-following items than the contrasting category. The exception violating the more frequent
regularity had more opportunities for confusion with

Final Note
Novelty effects have been examined in various domains, including the study of schemas/stereotypes
(Rojahn & Pettigrew, 1992), basic memory phenomena Hunt & Lamb, 2001, face recognition (Valentine, 1991), the neurobiological basis of memory
(Kishiyama et al., 2004), and category learning
(Sakamoto & Love, 2004). The relative contributions of isolation and differentiation are not well understood in these studies. The present work offers a
novel way to think about novelty that clarifies the
roles of isolation and differentiation in establishing
new memories.

Acknowledgements

1923

This work was supported by AFOSR grant FA955004-1-0226 and NSF CAREER grant 0349101 to
B. C. Love.

References

Nosofsky, R. M., & Zaki, S. F.
(2003).
A
hybrid-similarity exemplar model for predicting distinctiveness effects in perceptual oldnew recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
29 (6), 1194–1209.

Busey, T. A., & Tunnicliff, J. L. (1999). Accounts of
blending, distinctiveness, and typicality in the
false recognition of faces. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25 (5), 1210–1235.
Davidenko, N., & Ramscar, M. (2004). Reexamining the “distinctiveness effect”: Poorer recognition of distinctive face silhouettes. In K. D.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1550). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fantz, R. L. (1964). Visual experience in infants:
Decreased attention to familiar patterns relative to novel ones. Science, 146, 668–670.
Friedman, A. (1979). Framing pictures: The role of
knowledge in automatized encoding and memory for gist. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 316–355.
Hastie, R., & Kumar, P. A. (1979). Person memory:
Personality traits as organizing principles in
memory for behaviors. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 37, 25–38.
Hunt, R. R., & Lamb, C. A. (2001). What causes
the isolation effect? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27 (6), 1359–1366.
Kishiyama, M. M., Yonelinas, A. P., & Lazzara,
M. M. (2004). The von Restorff in amnesia: The contribution of the hippocampal system to novelty-related memory enhancements.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 15–23.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of human category learning. Psychological Review, 111, 309–
332.
McArthur, L. Z. (1981). What grabs you? The
role of attention in impression formation and
causal attribution. In E. T. Higgins, C. P. Herman, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Social cognition:
The Ontario symposium (Vol. 1, pp. 201–246).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McCall, R. B., & Carriger, M. S. (1993). A metaanalysis of infant habituation and recognition
memory performance as predictors of later IQ.
Child Development, 64 (1), 57–59.
Nosofsky, R. M., Palmeri, T. J., & McKinley, S. C.
(1994). Rule-plus-exception model of classification learning. Psychological Review, 101 (1),
53–79.

Ono, H. (1967). Difference threshold for stimulus length under simultaneous and nonsimultaneous viewing conditions. Perception & Psychophysics, 2, 201–207.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. M. (1995). Recognition memory for exceptions to the category
rule. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 548–
568.
Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253,
530–535.
Ranganath, C., & Rainer, G. (2003). Neural mechanisms for detecting and remembering novel
events. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 4, 193–
202.
Rojahn, K., & Pettigrew, T. F. (1992). Memory for
schema-relevant information: A meta-analytic
resolution. British Journal of Social Psychology, 31 (2), 81–109.
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B. C. (2004). Schematic
influences on category learning and recognition
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 133, 534–553.
Sakamoto, Y., Matsuka, T., & Love, B. C. (2004).
Dimension-wide vs. exemplar-specific attention in category learning and recognition. In
M. Lovett, C. Schunn, C. Lebiere, & P. Munro
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference of Cognitive Modeling (pp. 261–
266). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Taylor, S. E., Fiske, S. T., Etcoff, N. L., & Ruderman, A. J. (1978). Categorical and contextual bases of person memory and stereotyping.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36, 778–793.
Valentine, T. (1991). A unified account of the effects of distinctiveness, inversion, and race in
face recognition. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43A, 161–204.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Analyse von vorgängen in
spurenfeld. I. Über die wirkung von bereichsbildungen im spurenfeld [Analysis of processes
in the memory trace. I. On the effect of group
formations on the memory trace]. Psychologische Forschung, 18, 299–342.

1924

