UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Situated Cognition Perspective on Presence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sm3n3bj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Carassa, Antonella
Morganti, Francesca
Tirassa, Maurizio

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Situated Cognition Perspective on Presence
Antonella Carassa (antonella.carassa@lu.unisi.ch)
Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano
via G. Buffi 13, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland

Francesca Morganti (francesca.morganti@auxologico.it)
Applied Technology for Neuro-Psychology Lab, Istituto Auxologico Italiano
via Pelizza da Volpedo 41, 20149 Milano, Italy

Maurizio Tirassa (tirassa@psych.unito.it)
Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive Science, University of Torino
via Po 14, 10123 Torino, Italy

sense of being placed somewhere different from the actual
physical location. Sheridan, in particular, has defined virtual
presence as the subjective feeling or mental state in which a
subject has the belief of being "physically present with
visual, auditory, or force displays generated by a computer".
Heeter (1992) has defined an environmental presence which
is yielded by the perception that an environment exists that
seems to consider you as present and modifies depending on
what you do. Witmer and Singer (1998) also have taken
presence to be due to immersion, but have linked it to the
tendency to direct attention toward selected information that
be meaningful to the individual. Presence would then be
similar to selective attention, and the sense of presence
would be yielded by the allocation of attentional resources.
According to these authors, both involvement and
immersion are needed to experience presence. Their
approach, while focusing on immersive properties, also
emphasizes the role that attention-directing role of activity
within complex interactive situations.
The specific role that interaction with technology plays in
creating presence has been firstly considered by Lombard
and Ditton (1997), who have defined presence as the
"perceptual illusion of non-mediation". In particular,
according to Lombard (2000), presence should be divided
into those aspects which involve the perception of a physical
environment (where the sensory features correspond to
those of the physical world), those which involve the
perception of social interaction (where the social features
correspond to those of the physical world), and those which
involve both.
In this perspective, presence is taken to occur when a
person misperceives an experience mediated by technology
as if it were a direct (that is, non-mediated) one. Presence,
then, would not be intrinsic to technology, but would vary
depending on how much the user acknowledges the role of
technology. It could therefore be yielded by different kind
of technologies.
The importance of activity in the support and the
enhancement of presence in virtual reality has been
investigated by Flach and Holden (1998), who have
emphasized the necessity that interaction with objects be

Abstract
During interaction with computer-based 3-D simulations like
virtual reality, users may experience a sense of involvement
called presence. Presence is commonly defined as the
subjective feeling of "being there". We discuss the state of the
art in this innovative research area and introduce a situated
cognition perspective on presence. We argue that presence
depends on the proper integration of aspects relevant to an
agent's movement and perception, to her actions, and to her
conception of the overall situation in which she finds herself,
as well as on how these aspects mesh with the possibilities for
action afforded in the interaction with the artifact. We also
aim at showing that studies of presence offer a test-bed for
different theories of situated cognition.
Keywords: Situated cognition; presence; virtual reality;
affordance; action; artifacts

Introduction
The development and the diffusion of computer-based
interactive simulations, like 3-D videogames or virtual
reality, has been accompanied by an increasing perception
of the importance of the sense of presence and involvement
that users may experience while interacting with them.
Presence is commonly defined as the subjective feeling of
"being there" (Riva, Davide & IJsselsteijn, 2003; Slater,
Usoh & Steed, 1995; Witmer & Singer, 1998). Several
authors have considered this feeling as mainly deriving from
the immersion in a virtual environment (Schubert,
Friedmann & Regenbrecht, 1999a; Schubert, Friedmann &
Regenbrecht, 1999b; Slater & Wilbur, 1997). In their view,
presence results from subjective involvement in this kind of
highly interactive virtual environment. Presence would be
strong inasmuch as the virtual system enables an inclusive,
extensive, surrounding and vivid illusion: the immersive
quality of a virtual reality system would be enhanced by the
perceptive features and the proprioceptive feedback
provided by the system.
Within this perspective, different authors have developed
different conceptions of presence. Sheridan (1992) and
Zeltzer (1992), for example, have described presence as the
384

between proto presence (that is, the distinction between self
and not-self), core presence (that is, the distinction between
the self and the present external world), and extended
presence (that is, the distinction of self with respect to the
present external world). These authors stress that the sense
of presence is a direct function of these three layers (the
more they are integrated, the more we feel present) and that,
in the experience of optimal presence, biologically and
culturally determined cognitive processes work in harmony
to focus all the levels of the self on a significant situation in
the external world, be it real or virtual.
Finally, Biocca (2001) has claimed that the issue of
presence may be most fruitfully approached via philosophy
of mind. Specifically, he has suggested that the issue of
presence opens the door to related problems in the science
of human consciousness, notably the mind-body problem.
The problem of presence bridges the philosophy of mind
and the philosophy of technology on the issue of mediated
embodiment, that is, on the fuzzy boundaries between the
body and its technological extensions.
We agree that a proper treatment of the issue of presence
in virtual reality should begin with the acknowledgment that
presence is a major feature of human consciousness, and the
hub of any interaction with natural as well as artificial
environments.
The environments in which human beings live are
endowed with a huge component of artificiality: virtual
reality, as it has been developed in the last two decades, is a
recent and particularly sophisticated expression of our basic
biological disposition to create artifacts as supports for
intrapersonal and interpersonal activities.
Human beings interact with and through artifacts — and,
in more general terms, with their world or worlds — in
ways that depend on the representations that they entertain
about them. We take representations to be conscious mental
states (Searle 1992). Representations are essentially about
spaces of possible actions (affordances) and are thus colored
with different degrees of desirability and emotion (Tirassa,
in press; Tirassa, Carassa & Geminiani 2000). They
originate in the interaction between an individual, who is
endowed with her personal history as well as with the
biological history of our species, and a perceived, desired,
remembered or imagined environment.
Our basic tenet is that the mind should not be conceived
of as an ideal, abstractly defined cognitive system (possibly
a computational or information-processing one) which is
"implemented" in a separate and interchangeable material
structure that physically realizes its activities. We think
instead that the mind is a biological property of the body,
with which it is in a relation of coevolution and
codetermination.

introduced in virtual environments. On a similar vein,
Zahorik and Jenison (1998) have focused on the role of
plausibility in perception/action behaviors; the latter are
dealt with in terms of affordances.
Thus, while studies in the area began within a purely
technological, artifact-centered perspective, the need for a
more psychological, human-centered framework has been
felt with increasing strength.
In an attempt to combine immersion-based theories with
activity-based ones, Sheridan (1999) has built his
Estimation Theory on the assumption that we can never
have true knowledge of objective reality; instead, we are
continuously making and refining a mental model which
estimates reality. This process is made possible by our
sensing reality and interacting with it. Immersion in virtual
reality is a source of stimuli, starting from which users
would create a mental model of the virtual environment and
of how they relate to it. It would be the structure of this
mental model that determines whether or not users
experience a sense of presence. Thus, even when the users
are uncertain about the reality of their perceptions in the
virtual environment, such perceptions would anyway be
close relatives of those they have in the "real" physical
world.
Mantovani and Riva (1999) have been the first to
emphasize the importance of the freedom that users may
have in their interaction with the virtual environment, as
well as the need that the social and cultural dimensions of
action in both the physical and the simulated world be
thoroughly considered. According to them, every action —
and especially those performed in a simulated world —
takes place within a framework of meanings that are
grounded in the user's cultural background. It is based on the
information found in this cultural framework that each
specific user develops her sense of presence in interaction.
Culture shapes the individual minds and organizes their
ways of knowing and acting in their social and physical
environment (Mantovani & Riva, 2001). When the
information provided by the environment is ambiguous to
the individual, as may happen with virtual reality, the
ambiguity can be resolved or reduced with the aid of
culturally based information that helps the user to reinterpret
and understand the overall interaction.
Riva, Waterworth and Waterworth (2004) have pointed
out that a culture-based view of interaction supports a
perspective on presence as " the referencing of our
perception to an external space beyond the limits of the
sensory organs themselves". According to this perspective,
it is the capacity of distal attribution — that is, the capacity
that humans have of distinguishing between their own body
and the external world — that allows for the sense of
presence in simulated as well as in non simulated worlds.
Even if the experience of presence is a unitary feeling, it can
be conceptually divided in three different layers,
phylogenetically different and closely related to the three
levels of self discussed by Damasio (1999). Riva,
Waterworth and Waterworth (2004) thus distinguish

Affordances as Representations
The human mind/body has evolved for generating an
adaptive interaction with the world, and in particular for
planning actions which be able to modify the environment
in order to fulfill individual aims and desires. It is thus
385

primarily based on perceptual-motor integration, a deeper
analysis reveals that a much wider array of cognitive
capacities is involved.
Think of a person who is going to prepare a cake, and
imagine that he choose to use a whisk to prepare part of the
dough.
The whisk, a small object made of curved pieces of wire
with a handle, affords a variety of movements that depend
on how our physical (manual in this case) capacities mesh
with features of the object like its shape, dimensions,
structure, and rigidity. The point is that the very object
immediately affords one particular movement to someone
who possess a specific expertise. This peculiar affordance
does not depend on perceptual-motor abilities alone: it
requires the capacity to recognize what the specific function
of the artifact is within the practices aimed at preparing
certain specific recipes. An experts is "invited" by the whisk
to perform a quite technical movement: to handle it in an
oblique position so to be able to execute a quick light
sweeping movement.
The management of such movement depends on the
creation, the maintenance, and the moment-by-moment
reactivation of sensorimotor schemes that "tell" the agent
how to appropriately program his movements in the specific
situation in which he finds himself, what sorts of feedback
to expect from the world, and so on. That way, his
mind/body will "know" what muscular power to exert in
order to achieve that particular movement; and, if he
exercises such power correctly, his mind/body will "take it
for granted" that the world will respond in agreement with
certain invariant rules of the physical world. Actually, it is
also on the grounds of such feedback that he will be able to
know how he is executing his movement, which point in a
particular sequence of movements he has reached, and so
on.
The whisk, like any artifact, is an embodied project whose
functions only exist in the minds of the designer and of the
user (Tomasello, 1999; Mantovani, 1996; Norman, 1988).
Let us consider again how a potential user may be able to
grasp what function the whisk incorporates. He will be able
to infer the designer's intentions in the light of a rich
background of knowledge. For example, if he knows that
certain types of cakes contain a soft and creamy component,
he will be able to imagine the possible make-up of a specific
tool designed to obtain this effect, as well as to recognize an
object which has been designed for that purpose.
Circularly, the whisk designer will ground her work on
the knowledge that she thinks she can safely attribute to a
(anonymous, but decently expert) user, and will probably try
to make the affordances that the tool incorporates as evident
as possible.
Thus, an affordance does not result from a perceptual act
alone, nor from a simulation of perceptual-motor abilities
alone. It is instead a representation in which different
aspects are meshed: cultural aspects (culinary culture),
representation of function (a tool-to-whip-a-cream), and
somatic/functional aspects (the human hand's articular

reasonable to accept the suggestion, originally advanced
from within ecological psychology (Gibson, 1979), that an
individual perceives the world not in terms of objective,
abstract features, but directly in terms of spaces of possible
actions, that is, of affordances. An affordance is not defined
univocally based on the agent's features or of the world's
features alone. It is instead a relational notion: possibilities
for action depend on the encounter of the characteristics of
the two poles of the interaction, and are shaped by the
overarching activity in which the agent is involved (Carassa,
Morganti & Tirassa 2004).
In our reading of Gibson's work, what the world puts in
the agent/environment interaction is the resources and the
constraints to which the animal's control systems must
conform, such as the invariants of the optical flow (which is
also part of the reason why Gibson talks of "direct
perception"). What the animal puts in the interaction is its
own nature, which makes a certain configuration of
surfaces, a certain texture of the layout, and so on, take the
mental shape of a certain affordance.
If the animal's nature includes a mind like ours, the
traditional concept of affordance has to be reconsidered in
the light of what we actually know about human cognition.
The dimension of interaction which have been more
thoroughly discussed in recent research is perceptual-motor
coordination. In investigating how affordances develop
cognitively and behaviorally, particularly in the first years
of life, the focus is thus on activities like crawling or
reaching for and grasping objects; and the problems
typically addressed concern the locomotory control, based
on information contained in the optical flux, or the adaptive
control of action through the integration of proprio- and
estero-ceptive information.
Research has been less concerned with the cognitive
dimensions of interaction. However, these dimensions are
identified as the crucial ones for treating the issue of
presence in the literature on virtual reality. It has been
claimed, for example, that "it is necessary to add layers of
meaning to perceptual objects" (Biocca, 2001), and that it is
necessary to study "the interplay of bodily and cognitive
processes" (Schubert, Friedman & Regenbrecht, 1999b) and
the mental models that people entertain when interacting
with virtual environments (Biocca, 1997; IJsselstein, 2002;
Riva, Waterworth & Waterworth, 2004).
In this vein, we will discuss the cognitive nature of
affordances as representations situated in an unfolding
interaction. We will use as an example the case of an agent
engaged in cooking, an activity that necessarily requires the
use of artifacts.
Cooking is pervasive in everyday life; it is grounded in a
history-long cultural tradition and embued with values and
social meanings. In our culture, the art of cooking is
particularly appreciated and can be performed with a rich
repertoire of practices and specialized tools. Each tool has
been designed for a specific function, tailored to a class of
activities like chopping, cutting, smashing and so on. While,
at first glance, the use of such artifacts may be viewed as
386

overall situation in which she finds herself, as well as on
how these aspects mesh with the possibilities for action
afforded in the interaction with the virtual environment.
We have distinguished three levels in the interaction of an
agent with her world, be it real or virtual: that of the
situation, that of the action, and that of body movement and
perception (Carassa, Morganti & Tirassa 2004). These
levels are not reducible to one another; instead, each of them
"contains" and gives meaning to the subsequent one, which
in turn realizes it, in a circular relationship of
codetermination.
Normally, an agent will not think of her movement in
terms of a motor sequence (unless, of course, she has any
reason to do so, like when learning a physical exercise, in
which case the motor sequence may be the very action or
situation). Instead, she will choose and perform actions
whose goals are part of a broader situation, which she
represents as the activity, or the weave of activities, in
which she is participating at each moment.
These activities are, in their turn, supported by goals,
values, knowledge, and roles that give them meaning,
boundaries, histories, and possible directions of
development.
Therefore, an individual will represent herself not as a
monad with no history who "behaves" in an objectively
given world, but as an agent who carries on a narrative
about herself in the world. What is of interest to her is to
follow complex flows of meaning relevant to the different
choreographies in which she finds herself. Her
representations and actions create her participation in such
choreographies from moment to moment.
How does this conception of mind and agency, a
constructivist and interaction-based one (Tirassa, in press)
affect our conception of experience and presence in virtual
reality?
When the interaction is such that a good feeling of
presence is generated and maintained, several other things
will become possible. Firstly, the mind may compensate
with its own capacities, at least to a certain extent, for the
"low fidelity" of the simulated world. As we have said
above, what makes the difference is not the technological
perfection of the virtual environment, but the type of
interaction that it affords.
Secondly, just as action support presence, so does
presence support action. The feeling of presence is
satisfactory when the user manages to make an overall sense
of her interaction with the environment. When this happens,
she will also be able to make such interaction useful and
interesting for her future narratives: in simple terms, she
will be able to learn something.
Thus, in experiencing a virtual reality environment, the
user will bring with herself everything that she has been up
to that moment. By the same token, her experience with the
media will add to her "cognitive history". This may mean
that she will have acquired knowledge (e.g., concerning the
Qumran scrolls, or how to fly an airplane), or that she will
have spent a few hours shooting nasty green aliens that want

mobility and grasp). Moreover, for an individual engaged in
an unfolding interaction, the landscape of affordances is
shaped by his motives, interests, values and long-term goals
and desires. All these elements give meaning to what is
perceived and done moment by moment.
Meaning does not arise only from the sensibility to
appreciate what is currently happening and from the ability
to react in a fluid and savvy way: it depends on our
conceptualizations of ourselves as immersed in a global
situation, which is in turn embedded in our personal history.
In this sense, our feeling of presence is not determined by
the physical place to which we are immediately tied by
perception, be it natural, artificial, or virtual; instead, it is
grounded in a meaningful situation that stretches in the past
and faces future. The meaning of the situation, which is
conceptual in its nature (Clancey, 1997), creates a bundle of
affordances that become relevant within a specific
interaction.
In an individual's subjective perspective, each action that
he performs plays a role within a narrative that he tells
himself concerning what is happening, what he is doing
there and why, with what future perspectives, and so on.
More precisely, each action that he performs plays a role
within a complex weave of such narratives, that end up
giving a meaning to his being there, in that place, in that
very moment, choosing to perform a certain action, as well
as to the specific body movement which ultimately shapes
the material counterpart of his mental state. Each such
narrative may be viewed as a choreography (Clancey, 1997)
in which the agent features as the protagonist; each has an
intrinsically autobiographical and social nature, and the
overall weave thus results from the whole previous history
of that individual (which includes, of course, his current and
past hopes and plans for the possible futures).

Situated Presence
Our view is different from the mainstream view of
"embodied cognition" that has led Schubert, Friedmann and
Regenbrecht (1999b) to talk of "embodied presence" in the
following terms: "Presence develops from the representation
of navigation (movement) of the own body (or body parts)
as a possible action in the virtual world. Presence is the
outcome of media perception. In the process of developing
presence a mental model of the virtual three-dimensional
space is constructed, consisting of the possible actions in
this space. The possible actions of the body are central in
this model. Stimuli from the real environment must be
suppressed for presence to emerge. The more the mediated
stimuli follow embodied constraints (e.g., coupling with
body movement), the easier is the construction. Because the
environment is perceived in terms of embodied action
(affordances in our terms), a feeling equivalent to the feel of
memory mentioned above develops. This is what we call the
sense of presence."
In our view, instead, presence depends on the proper
integration of aspects relevant to an agent's movement and
perception, to her actions, and to her conception of the
387

to invade the Earth, or, in the worst case, that she will have
suffered from cybersickness — even this is an experience,
however unpleasing, that will affect her possible futures.
What the designer does is to create an envelope within
which the interaction with the virtual environment may
belong to a weave of narrative meanings. The goal of such
enterprise is not intrinsic to the virtual environment, but is
born out of the structural coupling between the user and the
environment — or, as happens, between the user, the
environment, and a supervisor or a tutor who guides the
interaction.
The kernel of our position is that the environment, even a
virtual one, has a subjective, rather than objective, nature.
The classic dichotomy between an external world, which is
objectively given, and an internal world, which mirrors it
faithfully (any discrepancy being a misrepresentation), does
not capture the interactional nature of human agency. The
meaning of the entities in the world lies in the affordances
that they grant to the agent, and such affordances are not an
intrinsic property of the entities alone, but a property of the
interaction between the agent and the entities themselves
(Tirassa, Carassa & Geminiani, 2000). Of course, in the case
of the human species, many affordances are not relevant to
physical movements only, but to mental activities like
reasoning or daydreaming, or to social activities like
communicating.
The availability of the affordances depend on the
activities in which the agent is participating at each moment.
Such activities result from the agent's previous history,
which goes to constitute both her memory and the processes
of recognition and reconceptualization that make such
history immediately useful in the current interaction
(Edelman, 1992; Glenberg 1997).
Thus, what happens on entering a virtual environment is
not that we leave behind and forget about a real world
whose role is then, at most, that of an external disturbance
which decreases or hampers presence in the virtual
environment. Instead, we bring our experience inside the
virtual world, and, in turn, we integrate the virtual world in
our experience, which will go to sediment in our overall
future history and projects.
The possibility of first-person action in the world, that is,
the possibility of contributing to the generation and
maintenance of world dynamics, and of receiving in turn the
possibility (and the need) to generate and maintain our
cognitive dynamics, is another crucial factor of presence,
that is, of our capability to feel that we are participating in
the world in which we find ourselves.
On the basis of these considerations, Varela (1990) has
claimed that virtual reality environments, cognitive systems,
and the world co-define themselves. According to Varela,
the sensory and motor levels provide the ground on which
reality is constructed, in that they provide the ontological
foundations of knowledge.
We claim that these basic levels have to integrated with
cognitive dimensions that we consider as much important to
characterize human agency.

Acknowledgments
Antonella Carassa and Francesca Morganti were funded by
the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
(MIUR), Cofin 2003 prot. 200311 9035 ("Fattori percettivi e
cognitivi in compiti di navigazione spaziale in ambienti di
realtà virtuale"). Francesca Morganti was also funded by the
European Union, project on I-Learning (FP5 IST/FET 2001
- 38861). Maurizio Tirassa was funded by the University of
Torino, Fondi individuali di ricerca (Quota ex-60%) for the
year 2004.

References
Biocca, F. (1997). The cyborg's dilemma: Progressive
embodiment in virtual environments. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 3, 2. <http://www.
ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue2/biocca2.html>
Biocca, F. (2001). Inserting the presence of mind into a
philosophy of presence: A response to Sheridan and
Mantovani and Riva. Presence, 10, 5, 546-556.
Carassa, A., Morganti, F., & Tirassa, M. (2004). Movement,
action, and situation: Presence in virtual environments. In
M. Alcañiz Raya & B. Rey Solaz (Eds.), Proceedings of
Presence 2004 (pp. 7-12). Valencia, Spain: Editorial
Universidad Politécnica.
Clancey, W.J. (1997). Situated cognition. On human
knowledge and computer representations. Cambridge
University Press.
Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens: Body,
emotion and the making of consciousness. San Diego,
CA: Harcourt Brace and Co.
Edelman, G.M. (1992). Bright air, brilliant fire: On the
matter of the mind. New York: Basic Books.
Flach, J.M., & Holden, J.G. (1998). The reality of
experience: Gibson's way. Presence, 7, 1, 90-95.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Glenberg, A.M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 20, 1, 1-55.
Heeter. C. (1992). Being there: The subjective experience of
presence. Presence, 1, 2, 262-271.
IJsselsteijn, W. (2002) Elements of a multi-level theory of
presence: Phenomenology, mental processing and neural
correlates. Proceedings of Presence 2002 (pp. 245-259),
Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal.
Lombard, M. (2000). Resources for the study of presence:
Presence explication. Retrieved from the World Wide
Web, September 3, 2000. <http://nimbus.temple.edu/
~mlombard/Presence/explicat.htm>
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. (1997). At the heart of it all: The
concept of presence. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 3, 2. <http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/
issue2/>
Mantovani G. (1996) New communication environments —
From everyday to virtual. London: Taylor & Francis.
Mantovani, G., & Riva, G. (1999). "Real" presence: How
different ontologies generate different criteria for
presence, telepresence, and virtual presence. Presence, 8,
5, 540-550.

388

Slater, M., Usoh, M, & Steed, A. (1995). Taking steps: The
influence of a walking technique on presence in virtual.
ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 2, 3,
201- 219.
Slater, M, & Wilbur, S. (1997). A framework for immersive
virtual environments (FIVE): Speculations on the role of
presence in virtual environments. Presence, 6, 6, 603-616.
Tirassa, M. (in press) Agencies. In L.A. Pérez Miranda &
J.M. Larrazabal (Eds.), [Title to be announced].
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Tirassa, M., Carassa, A., & Geminiani, G. (2000). A
theoretical framework for the study of spatial cognition.
In S. Ó Nualláin (Ed.), Spatial cognition. Foundations
and applications (pp. 19-31). Amsterdam & Philadelphia:
Benjamins.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.
Varela (1990) Il corpo come macchina ontologica. In M.
Ceruti & F. Preta (Eds.), Che cos'è la conoscenza. Bari:
Laterza.
Witmer, B.G., & Singer, M.J (1998). Measuring presence in
virtual environments: A presence questionnaire, Presence,
7, 3, 225-240.
Zahorik, P., & Jenison, R.L. (1998). Presence as being-inthe-world. Presence, 7, 1, 78-89.
Zeltzer, D. (1992). Autonomy, interaction, and presence.
Presence, 1, 1, 127-132.

Mantovani, G., & Riva, G. (2001). Building a bridge
between different scientific communities: On Sheridan's
eclectic ontology of presence. Presence, 10, 5, 537-543.
Norman, D.A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.
New York: Basic Books.
Riva, G., Davide, F., & IJsselsteijn, W.A. (2003). Being
there: Concepts, effects and measurements of user
presence in synthetic environments. IOS Press.
Riva, G., Waterworth, J.A., & Waterworth, E.L. (2004). The
layers of presence: a bio-cultural approach to
understanding presence in natural and mediated
environments. Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 7, 402416.
Schubert, T.W., Friedmann, F., & Regenbrecht, H.T.
(1999a). Decomposing the sense of presence: Factor
analytic insights. Presented at the 2nd International
Workshop on Presence. University of Essex, UK, April 67.
Schubert, T.W., Friedmann, F., & Regenbrecht, H.T.
(1999b). Embodied presence in virtual environments. In
R. Paton & I. Neilson (Eds.), Visual representations and
interpretations (pp. 268-278). Berlin: Springer.
Searle, J.R. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sheridan, T.B. (1992). Musings on telepresence and virtual
presence. Presence, 1, 1, 120-126.
Sheridan, T.B. (1999) Descartes, Heidegger, Gibson, and
God: Towards an eclectic ontology of presence. Presence,
8, 5, 551-559.

389

