UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Unified Account of Conjunction and Disjunction Fallacies in People's Judgments of
Likelihood

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3bj8p4tk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Costello, Fintan J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Unified Account of Conjunction and Disjunction Fallacies in People’s
Judgments of Likelihood
Fintan J. Costello (ﬁntan.costello@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Belﬁeld, Dublin 6, Ireland

a function which will respond diﬀerently to diﬀerent conjunctions, giving some conjunctions a lower likelihood
than their constituents, but giving other conjunctions a
higher likelihood than their constituents. A number of
researchers, particularly in the area of fuzzy logic, have
proposed various diﬀerent conjunctive functions, such as
Product, Average, Sum, or Minimum (see Osherson and
Smith, 1982; Hajek, 1988). However, none of these can
respond in diﬀerent ways to diﬀerent conjunctions, as
required by the conjunction fallacy.
In the light of this diﬃculty, a variety of diﬀerent accounts of the conjunction fallacy have been proposed,
implicating prototype similarity or representativeness,
the use of implicit mental models, the role of conversational implicature, or the inﬂuence of causal attribution
(Ahn and Bailenson, 1996; Betsch and Fiedler, 1999;
Giverenzer and Hertwig, 1996; Tversky and Kahneman
1983). In this paper I return to something close to the
traditional view of conjunction and I describe a simple
continuous-valued logic for conjunction which can produce both conjunction fallacy responses and standard
conjunction responses. This logic is an extension of the
standard probability theory account of the operations
AND, OR, and NOT. I ﬁrst describe this logic and its
account for the conjunction fallacy. I then describe two
experiments testing this model by comparing the model’s
predictions against people’s judgments of likelihood in an
everyday domain; that of estimating the likeihood of different types of weather. In testing this model I examine
its ability to mirror people’s production of three diﬀerent
conjunctive responses (one in which people judge a conjunction to be more likely than both constituents; one
in which they judge the conjunction to have an intermediate likelihood between those of its two constituents;
and one in which they judge the conjunction to have
a lower likelihood than either constituent). I also test
this model’s ability to account for the relative responses
seen in people’s judgments of disjunctions in these experiments. In both cases the model gives a good match
to people’s responses to items in the experiment.

Abstract
This paper describes a simple continuous-valued logic
which aims to explain the occurrence of both conjunction fallacies (where a conjunction AandB is judged
more likely than a constituent A) and disjunction fallacies (where a disjunction AorB is judged less likely
than a constituent A) in people’s judgments of likelihood for simple and complex events. In this model both
these fallacies are the result of minor rescaling of constituent likelihood judgments. Two experiments tested
this model by asking people to judge the likelihood of
diﬀerent everyday weather events and the likelihood of
conjunctions and disjunctions of those events. In both
experiments the model was able to accurately predict
the occurrence of these fallacies in both conjunctions
and disjunctions.

Keywords: logical reasoning; probabilistic reasoning;
conjunction fallacy; disjunction fallacy.

Introduction
To what extent are human thought processes rational?
How closely do people’s mental operations correspond
to consistent and logical rules? In a inﬂuential paper
Tversky and Kahnemann (1983) addressed this question
by looking at how people carried out the operation of
conjunction (the AND operation) for judgments of likelihood. A fundamental law of probability is that a conjunction cannot be more probable than any of its constituents. In most cases people follow this law when
assessing conjunctive probability. Tversky and Kahnemann showed, however, that for some conjunctions people reliably deviate from this rule, judging a conjunction
to be more likely than one or other of its constituents
(committing a ‘conjunction fallacy’). This conjunction
fallacy has been conﬁrmed in a number of studies (e.g.
Stolarz-Fantino, Fantino, and Zizzo, 2003). A similar
fallacy can also occur in peoples’ judgments of disjunction likelihood: this ‘disjunction fallacy’ arises whenever
a disjunction is judged less probable than any of its constituents.
How do we explain robust errors such as the conjunction fallacy? Traditional approaches to conjunction assume that people judge the likelihood of a conjunction
A&B by ﬁrst judging the likelihood of A and the likelihood of B, and then combining those two constituent
likelihoods using some conjunction operator or function.
To account for the conjunction fallacy we need to provide

AND, OR, and NOT in probability theory
Perhaps the simplest way to produce a continuous-valued
logic for people’s judgments of likelihood is to use standard probability theory equations for ANDing and ORing independent probabilities: equations 1, 2, and 3.

494

P (N OT A) = 1 − P (A),

(1)

P (AandB) = P (A) × P (B),

(2)

P (AorB) = 1 − P (N OT A) × P (N OT B).

(3)

make a distinction between people’s probability judgments and their responses, and assume that their responses are rescaled so that some fall above 1 and others
below 1.

These equations assume that the probability of a given
event A occurring falls in a range from 0 (certain not to
happen) up to 1 (certain to happen). The probability of
A not occurring is then simply 1 minus the probability of
A occurring. The probability of both A and B occurring
is simply the product of the probabilities of A and B.
Finally, the probability of A or B occurring is 1 minus
the probability of not A occurring and not B occurring.
These equations make sense as a logic for graded probability. In a rational account of human reasoning, we
would hope to see people making judgments about conjunction and disjunction in a way that followed these
equations. A problem, however, is that the product function representing AND (Equation 2) is unable to account
for conjuction fallacy responses. With constituent probabilities limited to the range from 0 to 1, this product
function always produces the same relationship between
conjunctive probability and constituent probabilities: a
‘less than’ relationship where the probability of a conjunction is always less than or equal to the probability
of both constituents of that conjunction (for example,
if A = 0.9 and B = 0.8, AandB = 0.72, which is less
than both). People do not follow this rule: for some
conjunctions they give conjunctive probabilities that are
less than constituent probabilities, but for others they
give conjunctive probabilities that are greater.

R(A) = P (A) + s,

(4)

R(N OT A) = P (N OT A) + s,

(5)

R(AandB) = R(A) × R(B),

(6)

R(AorB) = 1 − R(N OT A) × R(N OT B).

(7)

In these equations, the likelihood judgment for item
A is equal to the probability of that item plus a rescaling factor s. This rescaling factor moves some likelihood
judgments over the 1 boundary. Similarly, the likelihood judgment for N OT A is the probability of N OT A,
rescaled by the factor s. Importantly for the current proposal, the likelihood judgment for a conjunction AandB
is simply equal to the product of the rescaled likelihood
judgments for A and B. In some cases one of these constituent judgments will will be above 1, producing conjunction fallacy responses). Finally, the likelihood judgment for a disjunction will be as in the standard probability approach, but making use of the rescaled likelihood judgments for N OT A and N OT B, rather than the
standard probability judgments.
In the next section I describe a preliminary experiment
which tests this ‘rescaled’ model in two ways. This experiment ﬁrst examines the extent to which the equation
for AND (Equation 6) above can account for people’s
pattern of response for conjunctive judgments, and for
the occurrence of conjunction fallacy responses. Next,
the experiment examines the extent to which the derived
equation for OR (Equation 7) can account for people’s
pattern of response disjunctive likelihood judgments and
for the occurence of any disjunction fallacy responses.

Generating diﬀerent relationships between
constituent and conjunction likelihoods
The product function for conjunction will always produce conjunction likelihood ratings that are less than
constituent ratings, as long as we assume that likelihood
ratings (like probabilities) are limited to the range 0 to 1.
Interestingly, however, if we allow ratings scores to move
above 1, the product function will produce three diﬀerent relations between constituent likelihood values and
conjunctive values. If the values for both constituents A
and B are below one, the conjunctive value (A × B) is
lower than both. If one value is above 1 and the other is
below 1, however, the conjunctive value A×B will fall between both values (if A = 0.9 and B = 1.1, A×B = 0.99,
higher than A but lower than B). Finally, if both constituent scores are above 1, the conjunctive score A × B
will be higher than both values (if A = 1.1 and B = 1.2,
A × B = 1.32, higher than both).
This observation leads to a new proposal as to why
people sometimes produce the conjunction fallacy in
judgments of likelihood: they are making use of the
product function for forming conjunctions of constituent
judgments, but some of those constituent judgments are
higher than 1. In any conjunction where one or both
constituent have likelihood judgments greater than 1,
the conjunction fallacy will occur. The following equations formalise this idea in a ‘rescaled’ version of the
standard probabilistic logic. In this ‘rescaled’ model we

Experiment 1
This experiment asked participants to rate the likelihood of various diﬀerent single weather events (‘cold’,
‘sunny’,‘windy’) and the likelihood of various diﬀerent
conjunctions and disjunctions (‘cold and windy’, ‘cold
or windy’) of those events. Weather events were used
because people frequently need to assess the likelihood
of such events in their everyday lives (deciding whether
they need a coat when going out, whether they should
bring sunglasses, and so on), and so the assessment of
likelihood in the experiment should be a natural task for
participants to carry out.
The aim in this experiment was to examine the various diﬀerent relationships that can hold between people’s judgments of likelihood for complex weather events
(conjunctions and disjunctions) and their judgments of
likelihood for the constituents of those complex events.
Three diﬀerent relationships were examined: the conjunctive event being more likely than both constituent
events (a ‘greater than’ response); the conjunctive event
being more likely than one constituent event, but less
likely than the other (an ‘intermediate’ response); and
the conjunctive event being judged less likely than both

495

constituents (a ‘less than’ response). Speciﬁcally, this
experiment was intended to compare the frequency of
these diﬀerent types of response for conjunctions and disjunctions with the occurrence of these responses as predicted by the ‘rescaled’ model. Given people’s rated likelihood for single weather events, to what extent would
this model combine those likelihoods to produce ‘greater
than’, ‘intermediate’ and ‘less than’ responses for the
conjunctions and disjunctions used in the experiment?
To what extent would these responses correspond with
those produced by participants in the experiment for the
same conjunctions and disjunctions?

pared. In total there were 192 distinct conjunction likelihood judgments in the experiment (16 participants × 12
conjunctions). The most frequent pattern across these
judgments was a logically correct ‘conjunction less than
constituents’ response, which occured in 113 cases (59%
of the total). The two other fallacious response types
were rarer: a ‘conjunction intermediate’ response was
given in 38 cases (20%) , and a ‘conjunction greater than’
response in 34 cases (18%), giving a total of 72 cases
(38%) of fallacious responses overall. In the remaining
3% of cases the conjunction likelihood was equal to both
constituent likelihoods: all three likelihood rating were
the same.
A similar count of ‘greater than’, ‘intermediate’ and
‘less than’ responses for d isjunctions in the experiment
was also carried out. The logically correct ‘disjunction
greater than’ response occured in 75 cases (39%). The
fallacious ‘disjunction intermediate’ and ‘disjunction less
than’ responses occured in 72 cases (38%) and 35 cases
(18%) respectively, giving a total of 107 (56%) cases in
which people made fallacious judgments. In the remaining 5% of cases all three likelihood rating were the same.
Both conjunction fallacy and disjunction fallacy responses occured quite often in this experiment, with the
disjunction fallacy being particularly frequent. Can the
‘rescaling’ model account for these results? In the next
section I apply the model to the experimental data and
examine its ability to predict the occurrence of diﬀerent
responses for diﬀerent conjunctions and disjunctions.

Materials and procedure
Twenty-four familiar types of weather event (‘cold’,
‘windy’, ‘sleet’, ‘sunshine’, and so on) were selected and
formed into 12 pairs (e.g. ‘cold-windy’, ‘sleet-sunshine’).
For each pair, a conjunctive event was generated by
ANDing the two constituents and a disjunctive event was
generated by ORing the constituents (see Table 1 below
for a full list). To provide a realistic range of weather
events the 12 pairs used were selected to provide a range
of diﬀerent degrees of relationship between constituent
events, ranging from closely related events to unrelated
events. The materials used in the experiment consisted
of the 12 conjunctive events and the 12 disjunctive events
generated in this way, plus the 24 original single weather
events.
The 24 single events and 24 complex events (12 conjunctions and 12 disjunctions) were printed two per page
in a questionnaire given to participants. Each questionnaire contained all events, events were in a diﬀerent random order in each questionnaire. Each event was accompanied by a a request to the participant to ‘Please
rate the following statement on the corresponding scale
according to the likelihood with which you believe the
weather type may occur many times in Ireland over the
year’. This request was followed by a 7-point rating scale
going from ‘highly unlikely’ (-3) to ‘highly likely’(+3).
The cover page of this questionnaire explained to participants that they would be asked to rate the likelihood
of diﬀerent types of weather occurring, and contained
two worked examples using diﬀerent weather events to
demonstrate the task.
A total of 16 participants were given these questionnaires. The questionnaire typically took between 20 and
40 minutes to complete.

Comparison with the rescaling model
To apply the rescaling model to the experimental data,
the average likelihood ratings produced for participants
for single weather events were transformed from the −3
to +3 scale used in the experiment onto the range 0
to 1. A value for the rescaling parameter s was selected
and added to all these single-event likelihoods, and these
rescaled single-event likelihood scores were used as input
for the equations for AND (Equation 6) and OR (Equation 7). Using this procedure, values were computed
for each of the 12 event conjunctions which participants
rated in the experiment, and each of the 12 event disjunctions. A conservative rescaling parameter value of
s = 0.1 was used; adding this value to all 24 single-event
likelihoods resulted the likelihood of only one event moving above 1.
To compare the model’s predicted responses with
those seen in the experiment, I counted the number of
participants who gave the response patterns ‘less than’,
‘intermediate’, or ‘greater than’ for each conjunction and
disjunction in the experiment. If a given response pattern was produced by 50% or more of participants for
any given conjunction or disjunction, that was taken to
be the dominant response pattern for that item. These
dominant response patterns from the experimental data
were then compared with the predicted response patterns computed by the rescaling model (see Table 1).
Note that the blank entries in the response columns in
Table 1 represent cases where there was no dominant response for that conjunction or disjunction. The model’s

Results
To examine the reliablility of participants’ likelihood
judgments in the experiment, participants were divided
into two groups (even-numbered participants in one
group, odd-numbered participants in the other). There
was a signiﬁcant Spearman-Brown split-half correlation
between likelihood ratings for weather events in the two
groups (rsb = 0.86, p < .01) across single and complex
events, conﬁrming the reliability of these ratings.
To examine the occurrence of ‘greater than’, ‘intermediate’ and ‘less than’ responses for conjunctions in
the experiment, each participant’s conjunction and constituent likelihood judgments were individually com-

496

Table 1: Response patterns given by at least 50% of participants to conjunctions and disjunctions in Experiment 1,
with response patterns as computed by the rescaling model.
response patterns for conjunction
conjunction

observed

response patterns for disjunction

computed

disjunction

cold and windy

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

cold or windy

frost and drizzle

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

frost or drizzle

fair and hot

observed

computed

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

fair or hot

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

rain or thunder

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

rough winds or hail

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

warm and humid

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

warm or humid

greater than (correct)

intermediate (fallacy)

wet and bright

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

wet or bright
overcast or calm

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

showers or sunny

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

rain and thunder
rough winds and hail

overcast and calm
showers and sunny
sleet and sunshine

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

sleet or sunshine

gale winds and hazy

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

gale winds or hazy

icy and cloudy

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

icy or cloudy

and disjunctions in the experiment fall into quite a narrow range; most single and complex events were judged
likely by most participants; few events were judged unlikely. To address this possibility the next experiment
repeated the task of the current experiment, but using
a set of single events that were distributed more evenly
across the range of diﬀerent likelihood judgments.

responses are not compared with participants’ responses
in these cases.
As Table 1 shows, there was a close association between the response patterns predicted by the model and
the dominant response patterns in the experiment. For
example, there were 10 conjunctions for which the response ‘less than’ was dominant; the model also produced that response for those conjunctions. There was
one conjunction (‘thunder and rain’) for which the response ‘intermediate’ was dominant (a conjunction fallacy response, in that the conjunction likelihood is higher
than one of the constituent likelihoods. The model also
produced that response for that conjunction. In total
there were 17 cases where there was a dominant response
for a conjunction or disjuction; in 16 out of that 17 the
model produced the same response (p < .01, binomial).
The model thus seemed to be able to mirror people’s production of both logically correct responses (‘less than’
for conjunctions; ‘greater than’ for disjunctions) and for
both conjunction and disjunction fallacies (‘intermediate’ responses in both cases).
To further investigate the aggeement between the
model’s computed conjunction and disjunction scores
and participants’ responses in the experiment, the models scores were compared with the average likelihood
scores for conjunction and disjunctions in the experiment. For disjunctions there was a signiﬁcant correlation between observed average likelihoods and those
computed from constituent scores by the rescaling model
(r = 0.72, %var = 0.52, p < .01). For conjunctions, however, the correlation was less signiﬁcant (r =
0.61, %var = 0.37, p < .05). Given the model’s good
account of the occurence of the diﬀerent sorts of conjunction and disjunction response patterns in the experiment, these relatively low correlations are surprising. One possible explanation for these relatively low
correlations comes from the fact that participant’s likelihood judgments for single events and for conjunctions

Experiment 2
As before, this experiment asked participants to rate the
likelihood of various diﬀerent single weather events and
the likelihood of conjunctions and disjunctions of those
events. In this experiment, single events were selected to
have a range of diﬀerent likelihoods, from highly unlikely
to highly likely.

Materials and procedure
From the set of 24 single events used in Experiment 1,
two sets of 4 single events were selected so that each set of
events included events of a range of diﬀerent likelihoods.
By combining each single event from one set with every
single event in the other set, a collection of 16 event pairs
were constructed. For each pair, a conjunctive event was
generated by ANDing the two constituents and a disjunctive event was generated by ORing the constituents.
There were thus 8 single events, 16 conjunctive complex events, and 16 disjunctive complex events, used as
materials in the experiment. These single and complex
events were presented to experimental participants on a
standard web browser. Each participants saw events in
a diﬀerent random order. The format and instructions
used were as in Experiment 1. A total of 21 participants
were given these web-based questionnaires. The questionnaire typically took between 20 and 40 minutes to
complete.

497

Table 2: Response patterns given by at least 50% of participants to conjunctions and disjunctions in Experiment 2,
with response patterns as computed by the rescaling model.
response patterns for conjunction
conjunction
rain and cloudy

observed

computed

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

Response patterns for disjunction
disjunction

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

windy or rain

rain and sunny

less than (correct)

intermediate (fallacy)

rain or sunny

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

cold and cloudy

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

cold or cloudy

thunder or rain
all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

windy and cold

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

windy or cold

all equal (correct)

all equal (correct)

cold and sunny

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

cold or sunny
intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

thunder or coldb

thunder and cold

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

frost and cloudy

less than (correct)

intermediate (fallacy)

frost or cloudy

windy and frost

less than (correct)

intermediate (fallacy)

windy or frost

frost and sunny

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

frost or sunny

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

thunder and frost

less than (correct)

less than (correct)

thunder or frost

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

sleet and cloudy
a

b

computed

all equal (correct)

windy and rain

thunder and raina

a

observed

rain or cloudy

sleet or cloudy
windy or sleetb

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

less than (correct)

sleet or sunny

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

less than (correct)

thunder or sleet

greater than (correct)

greater than (correct)

windy and sleet

intermediate (fallacy)

intermediate (fallacy)

sleet and sunny

less than (correct)

thunder and sleet

less than (correct)

The two conjunctions for which an ‘intermediate’ response was produced by the highest proportion of participants (43% in both cases)
The two disjunctions for which an ‘intermediate’ response was produced by the highest proportion of participants (38% in both cases)

Results

(32%) fallacious judgments. Finally, in 109 cases (32%)
an ‘all equal’ response was returned.
Again, both the conjunction fallacy and disjunction
fallacy responses occured quite often in this experiment,
although somewhat less frequently than in Experiment
1. Can the rescaling model account for the pattern of
responses seen for conjunctions and disjunctions? Will
the correlation between model and data be improved by
the greater spread of constituent likelihood scores in this
experiment?

As before, to examine the reliability of participants’
likelihood judgments in the experiments, participants
were divided into two groups. There was a signiﬁcant
Spearman-Brown split-half correlation between likelihood ratings for weather events in the two groups (rsb =
0.93, p < .01) across single and complex events, conﬁrming reliability.
As in Experiment 1, each participant’s judgments of
likelihood for conjunctions and disjunctions were examined individually. In total there were 336 distinct conjunction likelihood judgments in the experiment (21 participants × 16 conjunctions). The most frequent pattern
across these conjunctive judgments was a logically correct ‘ less than’ response, occuring in 173 cases (51%).
The two fallacious response types were rarer: in 64 cases
(19%) an ‘intermediate’ response was given, and in 36
cases (11%) a ‘greater than’ response occured, giving a
total of 100 (30%) cases in which people made fallacious
judgments. In 63 cases (19%) the conjunction likelihood
was equal to both constituent likelihoods: all three likelihood rating were the same. Apart from these ‘all equal’
responses, the pattern here was similar to that seen in
Experiment 1 (where logically correct ‘conjunction less
than’ responses also dominated).
Disjunction responses were also similar to those from
Experiment 1 (apart from an increase in ‘all equal’ responses). The logically correct ‘greater than’ response
occured in 120 cases (36%). The fallacious ‘intermediate’ and ‘less than’ responses occured in 66 cases (20%)
and 41 cases (12%) respectively, giving a total of 107

Comparison with the rescaling model
As before, to apply the model the average likelihood ratings produced for participants for single weather events
were transformed onto the range 0 to 1. A value for the
rescaling parameter s was selected (a conservative value
of 0.06 was used) and added to all these single-event likelihoods, and these rescaled single-event likelihood scores
were used as input for the equations for AND (Equation
6) and OR (Equation 7).
In this experiment, unlike in Experiment 1, there was
a signiﬁcant proportion of responses where both constituent event likelihoods and conjunctive or disjunctive
event likelihood were all equal. Since the rescaling model
was computing conjunctive and disjunctive likelihoods
on the basis of average likelihood scores for constituent
events, the model was extremely unlikely to produce a
response in which both rescaled constituent scores and
computed conjunction (or disjunction) likelihood were
all exactly equal. To attempt to account for the ‘all
equal’ responses in the experiment, a second parameter
was added to the model, a distance parameter d such

498

that if any likelihoods computed by the model fell with
d of each other, they would be taken to be equal. This
distance parameter would give the model a chance to account for the ‘all equal’ responses seen in the experiment.
A value of d = 0.05 was chosen for this parameter.
As before, to compare the model’s predicted responses
with those seen in the Experiment, I counted the number of participants who gave the response patterns ‘less
than’, ‘intermediate’, or ‘greater than’ for each conjunction and disjunction in the experiment. If a given response pattern was produced by 50% or more of participants for any given conjunction or disjunction, that
was taken to be the dominant response for that item.
There were no cases where an ‘intermediate’ response
was produced by 50% or more of participants for either
a conjunction or a disjunction. Without such responses
there would be no cases of the conjunction fallacy or
the disjunction fallacy against which the model’s predictions could be compared. To avoid this problem, the
conjunctions for which the ‘intermediate’ response was
most frequent, and the disjunctions for which the ‘intermediate’ response was most frequent, were also included
in the set of dominant responses (see Table 2). Again,
the blank entries in the response columns in Table 2 represent cases where there was no dominant response for
that conjunction or disjunction. The model’s and participants’ responses are not compared in these cases.
As in Experiment 1, there was a close association
between the response patterns predicted by the model
and the dominant response patterns in the experiment.
In total there were 25 cases where there was a dominant response for a conjunction or disjunction; the
model produced the same response for 22 out of that
25 (p < .01, binomial).
Finally, the model’s computed scores were compared
with the average likelihood scores for conjunction and
disjunctions in the experiment, giving a signiﬁcant correlation both for conjunctions (r = 0.85, %var = 0.72, p <
.01) and disjunctions (r = 0.92, %var = 0.85, p < .01).
In both cases these correlations are higher than those
seen in Experiment 1, and conﬁrm the model’s account
for the experimental data.

probability theory). Errors in reasoning, such as conjunction and disjunction fallacies, do not arise because
our mental operations for conjunction or disjunction are
illogical. Rather they arise because of ‘rescaling’ of the
inputs to these operations.
The main contribution of this paper has been to describe how a continuous-valued logic which includes this
‘rescaling’ can account for the various patterns seen in
people’s responses when judging the likelihood of conjunctive events. This model can account for cases in
which people judge a conjunctive event to be less likely
than both constituents of that event, and can also account for conjunction fallacy responses, in which a conjunction is judged more likely than constituent events.
This model does not need any extra information or assumptions (no conjunctive prototype or representativeness heuristic is required) to account for both normal
conjunction responses and for conjunction fallacy responses. Not only can this logic account for the various
patterns seen in conjunctive likelihood judgments, the
same approach can also account for the various patterns
seen in people’s judgments of disjunctive likelihood, and
for the occurrence of disjunction fallacy responses for
some disjunctions. Evidence from the two experiments
described above suggest that this model can give a reasonably good account of people’s judgment of likelihood
in conjunctions and disjunctions; however, there is a signiﬁcant amount of work yet to be done in testing this
approach.

References
Ahn, W. K. and Bailenson, J. (1996). Causal attribution as a search for underlying mechanisms: An explanation of the conjunction fallacy and the discounting
principle. Cognitive Psychology 31(1) 82-123.
Betsch, T. and Fiedler K. (1999). Understanding conjunction eﬀects in probability judgments: the role of
implicit mental models. European Journal of Social
Psychology 29(1) 75-93.
Hajek, P.(1988) Metamathematics of Fuzzy Logic.
Kluwer, Amsterdam.
Hertwig, R. and Gigerenzer, G. (1996). The ‘conjunction
fallacy’ revisited: Polysemy, conversational maxims,
and frequency judgments. International Journal of
Psychology 31(3-4) 1176-1176.

Conclusions
This paper started by asking about the correspondance
between people’s mental operations and logical and consistent rules. Both the conjunction fallacy and similar
disjunction errors have been widely used as evidence
that people do not think logically; and indeed, both conjunction fallacy and disjunction fallacy responses must
be seen as logically incorrect. From some perspectives,
this is very worrying: if even our mental mechanisms for
conjunction and disjunction (two of the simplest possible operations) are not logically consistent and correct,
how can we rely on our more complex thought processes?
The rescaling model of continuous-valued logic described
here may address these concerns. In this model, the
our mechanisms for both conjunction and disjunction
are logically justiﬁable and consistent (the equations for
AND and for OR are simply transferred directly from

Osherson, D. N. and Smith E. E. (1982). Gradedness
and conceptual combination. Cognition 12(3) 299318.
Sides, A., Osherson, D. and Bonini, N. (2002). On the
reality of the conjunction fallacy. Memory & Cognition 30(2) 191-198.
Stolarz-Fantino, S., Fantino E. and Zizzo, D.J. (2003).
The conjunction eﬀect: New evidence for robustness.
American Journal of Psychology 116(1) 15-34.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1983). Extension versus
intuititve reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment. Psychological Review 90 293-315.

499

