UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Accumulation of Visual Memory for Natural Scenes: A Medium-Term Memory?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76v4z34v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Melinger, Alissa
im Walde, Sabine Schulte

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Accumulation of Visual Memory for Natural Scenes:
A Medium-Term Memory?
David Melcher (dmelcher@brookes.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University
Gipsy Lane, Oxford OX3 0BP, United Kingdom
Abstract
We studied visual memory for objects in natural scenes.
Participants viewed photographs or pictures for periods of 1 to
20 seconds, and were then asked questions about the color,
location, and identity of objects that they had seen, as well as
given recognition tests. Performance improved as a function of
display duration for all question types and for objects of both
central and peripheral interest. On some trials, previously
viewed stimuli, which had been shown 4 to 6 trials earlier with
no subsequent memory test, were repeated to see if
performance continued to improve across separate
presentations. There was no loss of information across retests,
such that memory for a display shown for 10 and then 5
seconds was equal to performance after a single trial of 15
seconds. Overall, memory performance exceeded the capacity
and duration limits of short-term or working memory,
supporting the idea of a medium-term visual scene memory.

Introduction
The ability to remember the contents of visual displays is
critical for a variety of real-life tasks. Traditionally, this
process has been characterized as “storage” of a few items in
visual short-term memory (VSTM) followed by either
information loss or transfer into long term memory (LTM).
Visual short-term memory is generally considered to contain
only about four items (Cowan, 2001; Vogel & Machizawa,
2004), although the exact capacity remains a matter of debate
(Brockmole et al., 2002; Rensink, 2000).
Unfortunately, such a limited short-term memory system
would make learning about the world extremely difficult. For
example, imagine that the typical view of a cluttered office
desk contains at least three to four objects. It would follow
that if someone looks at that desk, then it would cause the
person to forget everything they had just seen unless it had
already been stored in long-term memory. The dichotomy
between short and long-term memory implies that people
either spend a great deal of their waking life rehearsing
information to keep it from fading away, or that they must be
constantly filling their long-term memory with information
that may later turn out to be useless.
Real-life memory, as opposed to memory for relatively
meaningless stimuli (letters, numbers, colored shapes), may
not fit neatly into the storage model of memory. Objects in
naturalistic scenes, for example, are linked with the scene
context in memory rather than stored as a discrete set of
objects (Melcher, 2001; Melcher & Kowler, 2001).
Moreover, visual memory for objects and other details in
photographs exceeds the three to four item memory limit after

just a few seconds of viewing (Melcher, 2001; Melcher &
Kowler, 2001; Tatler et al., 2003). The build-up and
persistence of memory does not, however, depend on transfer
to long-term memory, since memory for scenes did not persist
across testing on separate days.
The finding that memory for objects in a room exceeds both
the capacity and duration of traditional short-term visual
memory, while not necessarily finding a permanent place in
long-term memory, suggests the existence of a “mediumterm” working memory for visual scenes (Melcher, 2001;
Pierrot-Deseilligny et al., 2002). There is considerable
support for the idea that useful visual information
accumulates across separate glances. For example, Tatler et al
(2003) found that performance in answering questions about
the visual details of a photograph increased over a 10 second
interval. Henderson and colleagues have reported accurate
recognition memory for the visual features of objects shown
several minutes earlier (Henderson et al., 2003). In addition,
there is evidence that traditional measures of short-term
memory underestimate the visual processing of a larger
number of items in the brain (VanRullen & Koch, 2003)
The goal of the present study was to examine the build-up
and persistence of working memory for different visual
attributes in a complex image. Natural scenes contain a
myriad of visual information, including color, texture, shape,
absolute and relative object location, object identity, overall
spatial layout and scene gist. Recent studies suggest that
different visual features may have different rates of memory
accumulation and decay (Melcher & Morrone, 2003; Tatler et
al., 2003). Such differences in memory for particular visual
features might, in fact, help to explain the conflicting reports
in the visual memory literature.
A second, and related, issue is the role of scene-related
salience in the guidance of attention and subsequent memory
for objects in a scene. In studies of change detection,
alterations to the scene are noticed more quickly when they
occur to an item of “central interest”, rather than one that is
peripheral to the gist or general meaning of the picture
(Rensink, 2000). This raises the question of which types of
items benefit from extended viewing of a scene. One
possibility might be that salient items would show more
improvement because they are viewed earlier and more often,
increasing the chance that their details would be in memory,
while peripheral items would tend to be ignored On the other
hand, peripheral items might show the greatest benefit from
longer presentations, compensating for a lack of earlier
attention, while central items would lose their initial
dominance in memory.

1485

Our earlier studies showing memory accumulation across
separate views of the same display did not differentiate
between central and peripheral interest items (Melcher, 2001).
By comparing memory performance as a function of time and
for repeated stimuli, we can examine the way that memory
for different attributes of items of central and peripheral
interest accumulates and persists in memory.

second time. This manipulation served to measure whether
the memory accumulation across repeats of the same stimuli
found previously for object recall (Melcher, 2001) extended
also to questions about specific object attributes. Re-test trials
were shown 4 to 6 trials after the initial display of that
stimulus.

Experiment 1
Methods
Figure 1. Three alternative forced choice recognition test

Participants
20 participants participated in the first experiment, and 10
participants in the second experiment. All participants gave
informed consent and were paid a small fee for their time.

Results
The first experiment tested the accumulation of memory for
visual detail. Overall, performance improved for longer views
(F[1,647] = 8.30, p < 0.001) and was enhanced for stimuli
that were shown more than once before the questions were
asked (F[1,756] = 6.76, p < 0.02) Figure 2 shows the average
percent correct performance for all types of questions as a
function of total viewing time. The solid squares show
performance after 5, 10 or 20 seconds on the non-repeat trials.
Open circles show re-test trials, in which the memory test was
given only after the second time that the picture had been
shown. The leftmost open circle shows performance after
seeing a display twice for 5 seconds each time on repeat trials,
for a total viewing time of 10 seconds. The rightmost open
circle shows percent correct response after seeing a 10 second
and a 5 second display for a total viewing time of 15 seconds.
On half of those trials, the 10 second duration trial preceded
the 5 second trial, while the other half of trials contained the
opposite pattern.

Stimuli
The stimuli were displayed on a 21” SONY high-resolution
monitor viewed from 60 cm and controlled by MATLAB and
the Psychophysics toolbox (Brainard, 1997). Each image was
approximately 20 degrees of visual angle in height and width.
Images included drawings of realistic scenes, reproductions
of paintings and photographs of both indoor and outdoor
natural scenes. About one-half of the images contained
people.
The memory test contained a series of written questions on
the screen about specific objects in the scene and a list of
three choices. Examples include: (1) What color is the
tablecloth? peach, white, or blue (2) Where is the teacup?
bottom right, bottom left or center (3) What food is in the
middle plate of the three-tiered plate stand? cake, sandwiches
or sausage rolls?
The questions were written by the author and three research
assistants. Questions were divided into those regarding
“central” or “peripheral” interest in the scene (Rensink,
2000). The group collaborated in choosing whether to define
a certain question as regarding a central item or not, and in
case of disagreement the question was discarded and a new
one written.
Three-alternative forced choice tests were also given for an
object from the scene, with all items sharing a conceptual
category but differing visually (see Figure 1).
Procedure
The first study extended the memory accumulation
methodology used in previous studies (Melcher, 2001;
Melcher & Kowler, 2001) to photographs and drawings
shown for longer periods of time (up to 20 seconds). On each
trial, the stimulus display was presented for a time period of
5, 10 or 20 seconds, run in separate blocks. After each trial,
participants were either given a memory test or instructed to
continue on to the next trial. Participant responses were given
by keyboard press and recorded for later analysis. The order
of conditions was randomized across observers.
Critically, some images were not followed by a memory
test after the first presentation but only after being shown a

Figure 2: Average percent correct performance on the
memory test in Experiment 1 as a function of total viewing
time. Filled symbols show performance after a single,
continuous presentation , while open symbols show
performance after a repeated stimulus.
As shown by the dotted line, performance improved linearly
as a function of total viewing time, with no difference
between re-test trials and normal trials of the same total

1486

viewing time, consistent with our previous study with free
recall (Melcher, 2001).
Performance was analyzed separately for each of the
different question types, with data divided into trials
containing items of central and peripheral interest (see
Methods for more details). Overall, performance was superior
for questions about items judged as of “central interest”
(Figure 3, filled circles), maintaining a consistent advantage
of 10%-15% compared to items of less salience (Figure 3,
filled squares). The same trend was found for repeat trials
(open circles and squares).

questions, consistent with the results of the first experiment.
Recognition performance (leftmost cluster of bars) also
improved as display duration increased. The smallest
improvement as a function of total viewing time was found
for color.

Figure 4: Percentage correct performance as a function of
question type and display duration condition (Experiment 2)
There was no effect of the delay period on performance for
color, location, identity or shape recognition tasks for the
maximum interval tested. Performance on trials containing a
ten second stimulus, followed by a delay with reading and
then a further one second display was similar to that found
after a single ten second trial.

Figure 3: Performance in Experiment 1 divided into questions
about items of central interest (circles, solid line) and
peripheral interest (squares, dotted line)

General Discussion
Overall, the results show that memory for the visual detail
of natural scenes accumulates over time and across separate
glances. There results are in sharp contrast to suggestions that
our visual memory representation is relatively sparse (e.g.
Rensink, 2000; Todd & Marois, 2004), but add support to the
idea that working memory for natural scenes can accumulate
information over a period of minutes (Melcher, 2001;
Henderson et al., 2003; Tatler et al., 2003).
Overall, memory for items judged as “central” to the gist
or meaning of the picture was better than that found for items
of peripheral interest. This is consistent with findings that
changes to these items are noticed more easily (Rensink,
2000). The rate of accumulation of memory across the 20
second time period, however, was similar for central and
peripheral interest items, which did not support the hypothesis
that memory representation might be built up initially of
central items and later with less important details.
The present results provide confirmation of earlier
findings on the accumulation of memory across separate
views of a picture (Melcher, 2001; Melcher & Kowler, 2001).
As in the earlier studies, the rate of memory accumulation for
natural scenes depended on total viewing time across repeated
presentations of the same stimulus. Here, a different task
(recognition versus recall), different stimulus set, and a larger
range of durations was used, but none of these factors
affected the basic finding.

Experiment 2
Methods
The second experiment considered both memory
accumulation (from 1 to 10 second display durations) and the
duration of memory persistence across a delay period of up to
one minute. The experiment was similar to the first
experiment, with the addition of a delay period between the
presentation of the stimulus and the test.
The first two conditions consisted of displays shown once
for 1 or 10 seconds. The third block of 20 trials contained a
10 second display of the stimulus, followed by a delay of 10
seconds and then a 1 second re-display of the stimulus. The
fourth block extended the delay to 60 seconds. During the
delay period, a written paragraph was presented on the screen
and participants were instructed to silently read the paragraph
throughout the delay period, repeating if necessary. The
reading task was designed to occupy visual, verbal and
conceptual working memory. The order of conditions was
randomized across observers.

Results
There was a general improvement in memory test
performance as the display duration increased from 1 second
(Figure 4: leftmost bars in each cluster) to 10 seconds (Figure
4, bars second to left) for color, location and identity
1487

It is not easy to accommodate these findings within the
traditional stage/storage model of memory, nor is it clear how
a single visual-spatial sketchpad could support the
simultaneous storage and accumulation of several pictures at
once.
One possibility is that format of the scene
representation takes into account the inherent structure of the
environment, rather than dividing information into a limited
number of unrelated information chunks.
Previously, physiological studies have given some
evidence for a form of visual-spatial memory that persists
over periods of minutes (McGaugh, 2000; Pierrot-Deseilligny
et al., 2002). Interestingly, recent studies on visual short-term
memory, as measured by change detection, have implicated
the frontal-parietal attention network (Todd & Marois, 2004;
Vogel & Machizawa, 2004). One possibility, based on studies
of animal physiology (Murray & Bussey, 1999; Ranganath &
D'Esposito, 2001) and human brain imaging (PierrotDeseilligny et al., 2002; Ranganath et al., 2004), is that visual
scene memory, unlike VSTM, depends critically on areas of
temporal cortex involved in recognizing and remembering
objects and complex scenes.
The finding that memory builds up from fixation to
fixation may help to explain why demonstrations of failures
of memory in the laboratory are often so surprising. In normal
life, the brain keeps in mind relevant information for
cognition and action, building up a useful but ultimately
disposable representation of the immediate environment.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by grants from the British
Academy (SG37385) and the Royal Society (2003/R2).

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spaial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Brockmole, J. R., Wang, R. F., & Irwin, D. E. (2002).
Temporal integration between visual images and visual
percepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human

Perception & Performance, 28, 315-334.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: a reconsideration of mental storage capacity.
Behavior Brain Science, 24(1), 87-114.
Henderson, J. M., Williams, C. C., Castelhano, M. S., & Falk,
R. J. (2003). Eye movements and picture processing
during recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 65(5),
725-734.
McGaugh, J. L. (2000). Memory—a century of consolidation.
Science, 287(5451), 248-251.
Melcher, D. (2001). Persistence of visual memory for scenes.
Nature, 412(6845), 401.
Melcher, D., & Kowler, E. (2001). Visual scene memory and
the guidance of saccadic eye movements. Vision
Research, 41, 3597-3611.
Melcher, D., & Morrone, M. C. (2003). Spatiotopic temporal
integration of visual motion across saccadic eye
movements. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 877-881.
Murray, E. A., & Bussey, T. J. (1999). Perceptual- mnemonic
functions of the perirhinal cortex. Trends inCognitive
Science, 3, 142-151.
Pierrot-Deseilligny, C., Muri, R. M., Rivaud-Pechoux, S.,
Gaymard, B., & Ploner, C. J. (2002). Cortical control of
spatial memory in humans: the visuooculomotor model.
Annals Neurology, 52, 10-19.
Rensink, R. A. (2000). Seeing, sensing, and scrutinizing.
Vision Research, 40, 1469-1487.
Tatler, B. W., Gilchrist, I. D., & Rusted, J. (2003). The time
course of abstract visual representation. Perception, 32,
579-592.
Todd, J. J., & Marois, R. (2004). Capacity limit of visual
short-term memory in human posterior parietal cortex.
Nature, 428(6984), 751-754.
VanRullen, R., & Koch, C. (2003). Competition and selection
during visual processing of natural scenes and objects.
Journal of Vision, 3(1), 75-85.
Vogel, E. K., & Machizawa, M. G. (2004). Neural activity
predicts individual differences in visual working memory
capacity. Nature, 428(6984), 748-751.

1488

