UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Age of Acquisition in Facial Identification: A Connectionist Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8432x44w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cottrell, Garrison W.
Lake, Brenden M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Age of Acquisition in Facial Identification: A Connectionist Approach
Brenden M. Lake (brenden@stanford.edu)
Torrey Pines High School, 710 Encinitas Blvd.
Encinitas, CA 92024 USA

Garrison W. Cottrell (gary@ucsd.edu)
UCSD Computer Science and Engineering, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093-0114 USA
Abstract
Age of Acquisition (AoA) is the phenomenon that acquiring a
certain piece of information earlier than another results in a faster
response time in adulthood. AoA has been shown to have a
significant role in a variety of human studies. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that connectionist networks that abstractly model
reading and arbitrary mappings can also show AoA effects, and we
extend this to facial identification. We present a connectionist
model of facial identification that demonstrates strong AoA effects
by allowing faces to be acquired in their natural order and by
staging face presentation. This extends previous work by showing
that a network that simply classifies its inputs also shows AoA
effects. We manipulate the staged model in two ways, by either
assuming outputs for the late set are trained to be off early in
learning (or not) and by assuming the representation developed for
the early set is used for the late set (or not). In three of these cases,
we find strong AoA effects, and in the fourth, we find AoA effects
with a recency control.

Introduction
The latency between a visual stimulus (an object, a face, or
a printed word) and the correct response has been the
subject of numerous studies. In an object-naming task,
Oldfield & Wingfield (1964) reported naming latency to be
dependent upon the frequency of the object’s name in the
word corpora. Carroll & White (1973) reanalyzed Oldfield
& Wingfield’s data, establishing that word frequency was
not significant when AoA was accounted for. Since then,
both AoA and frequency have drawn considerable attention.
Despite many conflicting reports, it is generally concluded
that both play significant roles.
In a celebrity face-naming study, Moore & Valentine
(1998) showed independent effects of both AoA and
frequency on naming latency. Facial distinctiveness,
surname frequency, and number of phonemes in the
celebrity’s full name were not significant predictors of
naming latency. Additionally, Moore & Valentine (1999)
found AoA effects when frequency was not significant in a
variety of tasks. They proposed, along with Morrison &
Ellis (1995), that connectionist networks would be incapable
of showing similar AoA effects due to “catastrophic
interference” from more recently presented material.
Ellis & Lambon Ralph (2000) demonstrated AoA effects
in a connectionist network that abstractly models reading.
This task mapped patterns of random binary bits to similar
patterns with some bits flipped. Since orthography and

phonology are highly correlated but not identical (Jared,
McRae, & Seidenberg, 1990), the model was designed to
represent the inconsistencies in skilled reading. Ellis &
Lambon Ralph were able to show AoA effects by training
the network on some patterns initially and adding an
additional set further into training. They found that the
network is more “plastic” at the beginning of training,
allowing the earlier patterns to have a larger impact on the
weights. They also provide evidence that “catastrophic
interference” does not occur unless the earlier patterns are
completely removed from training.
In a similar task, Smith, Cottrell, & Anderson (2001) and
Anderson & Cottrell (2001) demonstrated AoA effects by
presenting all patterns at the beginning of training and
measuring the naturally occurring AoA for each pattern.
They found that earlier acquired patterns had a stronger
correlation with the rest of the training set and had lower
final errors than later acquired patterns. Smith et al. also
found independent effects of frequency and AoA when the
simulation was subjected to a frequency manipulation.
Zevin & Seidenberg (2002) did not find AoA effects in a
connectionist network modeling reading with normal
spelling-sound regularities. However, when they used early
words that were completely unrelated to later words (like
the arbitrary binary mappings of Ellis & Lambon Ralph and
Smith et al.), AoA effects were shown. Zevin & Seidenberg
claimed that AoA effects only exist if little information is
carried over from the early patterns to the late patterns.
Additionally, they suggested that learning the names
associated with faces would produce genuine AoA effects,
because no information would be shared between the stages
of learning. Anderson and Cottrell (2004) have found in
replicating their work that if one measures AoA in their
simulations one still finds AoA effects. This is because
words that they considered to be “late” by their
manipulation were actually acquired early through
generalization. Hence, we continue to use measured AoA in
our first simulation below.
In this study, we provide a connectionist model of a facial
identification task. Our model demonstrates strong AoA
effects. We show that the model produces “natural” AoA
effects (patterns that happen to be learned early show AoA
effects), and we investigate the effects of staging the
presentation of the faces. Unlike the reading simulations
discussed above, in this case there is no opportunity for
generalization to the late set early in training, as the network

1236

is simply performing an identification task. Hence, we
actually can “control” AoA.

Experiment 1: Natural AoA
Our first experiment models a facial identification task
using a simple feedforward neural network. Neither
frequency manipulation nor pattern staging is used in this
experiment, allowing the faces to be acquired in their
natural order. All of the faces in the training set are
introduced at the beginning of training and are presented
once per epoch. We carry out multiple replications on
different networks to simulate replicating a human study
over multiple subjects. The training process is identical for
each replication, differing only on the initial random
weights and the random presentation of the faces. We see if
faces acquired earlier by the network have a lower Sum
Squared Error, equivalent to adult naming latency (Ellis &
Lambon Ralph, 2000; Zevin & Seidenberg, 2002), at the
completion of training.

Model
Our model is a multilayer image classification system
(Figure 1) that has been used in previous work (Dailey et al.,
2002; Zhang & Cottrell, 2004). The raw images are first
aligned. They are then filtered by 2-D Gabor filters, and
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is used to reduce the
dimensionality of the filter responses. In the final stage, a
backpropagation network learns to identify the faces.
Training Set The training set consists of 26 Caucasian
individuals, 13 male and 13 female (Lee, 2004). There are 4
pictures of each person, all of frontal orientation. The 4
pictures consist of a happy expression, a sad expression, a
neutral expression, and a neutral expression with his/her
eyes looking 15 degrees to the right. Examples are shown in
Figure 2. The raw images are first converted to grayscale
from the original color. They are then rotated, scaled,
translated, and cropped so that the eyes in every image are
in the same location. The mouth is also aligned by the ycoordinate (height) value. The aligned images are 240 pixels
wide and 292 pixels high, and the mean is set to zero with
standard deviation one across the image spatially.

Figure 1: Our facial identification model, modified from
Dailey et al. (2002).
1237

Figure 2: Female and male subject with the following facial
expressions: angry, neutral, happy, and eyes averted.
Perceptual Level As in previous models by our group, we
model the early striate cortex processing via Gabor filters,
which are 2-D sine and cosine waves restricted by a
gaussian, resulting in “wavelets.” One of these filters (either
a sine or a cosine) corresponds well with simple cell
processing (Daugman, 1985; Jones & Palmer, 1987). We
use the magnitude of the sine/cosine pair, which provides a
small amount of translation invariance, and hence is a
simple model of complex cells in V1. We use a rigid 35 by
29 grid of overlapping 2-D Gabor filters (Daugman, 1985)
in quadrature pairs at five scales and eight orientations
(Dailey et al., 2002). We thus obtained 35 X 29 X 5 X 8 =
40,600 filter responses in this layer, which we call the
perceptual layer (Dailey et al., 2002). We then z-score each
filter response across the images on a per-filter basis (a local
operation).
Gestalt Level We then perform Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) on the Gabor filter responses from the last
level. PCA reduces the dimensionality of the filter
responses. Daily et al. (2002) suggest this is biologically
plausible since it can be learned by neural networks using
Hebbian learning. We project the Gabor filter responses
down to 50 dimensions. Finally, each principal component
is z-scored and multiplied by 0.8. Therefore, each
component has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 0.8.
This step normalizes the inputs for the tanh hidden units for
more efficient learning (LeCun et al., 1998).
Identification Level Each person is assigned a number
from 1 to 26. A value of 1 in the corresponding output unit
with 0’s for the rest indicate a correct response. We use a
simple 50-20-26 feedforward network implementing the
backpropagation learning algorithm. The tanh activation is
used for the hidden layer and logistic activation for the
output layer. We optimize the Sum Squared Error (SSE)
criterion. For each epoch, each face pattern is presented
once and the weights are updated accordingly. At the end of
the epoch, the patterns are presented a second time, at which
the errors are recorded, but no weight changes are made.
These errors are then averaged across the 4 pictures for each
person. If this average SSE drops below the threshold of
0.1, the person is said to be “acquired” by the network, and

the current epoch of training is recorded as the person’s
AoA. Therefore, AoA is determined for each person, not for
each image. This is realistic because once someone is able
to identify an individual, one can generally identify that
person regardless of facial expression. At this point in
training, the network will be very close to the correct
response when identifying the acquired individual from a
variety of images. We use a learning rate of 0.005 and
momentum of 0.9. The weights are initialized randomly
between -0.1 and 0.1 using a uniform distribution. The task
is trained on 10 networks with different initial weights.
Training lasts for 150 epochs, and patterns are presented in a
different random order for each epoch.

Experiment 2: Staged AoA
After demonstrating naturally occurring AoA effects, we
introduce staging of face presentation into our model.
Humans generally encounter new faces at different times
throughout their lives. We investigate if staging can produce
AoA effects in our connectionist model.

Model

Results

In our simulation, we randomly divide our 26 individuals
into two groups of 13 people each. One group is labeled the
“early” group, and the other the group is labeled the “late”
group. Different random groups are used for each run.
Therefore, the 10 replications of the simulation differ in the
initial random weights and in the distribution of the early
and late groups. We train the network for 200 epochs using
the same frequency distribution as Ellis and Lambon Ralph
(2000) for our early and late set. The early set is presented
once per epoch for the entire length of training. The late set
is not presented to the network at all for the first 100 epochs,
but it is presented twice per epoch for the remaining 100
epochs. Patterns are presented in a random order for each
epoch and multiple presentations of a pattern are distributed
randomly throughout the epoch as well. At the completion
of training, the cumulative frequency of presentation is
identical for all patterns. Otherwise, the model is identical to
the one used in Experiment 1.

We find strong evidence for AoA effects in our model. All
the individuals are acquired by the 150th epoch in the 10
runs. We correlate AoA with final SSE of each person for
each individual run. We then average these correlation
coefficients over the 10 runs. We find the epoch of
acquisition to be strongly correlated with final SSE (average
r = 0.81, p < .001 for all 10 runs). At the end of training,
faces acquired earlier have lower errors than faces acquired
later (Figure 3). This shows that faces that make a larger
impact on the weights early in training maintain their
advantage through extended training.
We then check to see if people are learned in a similar
order in the 10 runs despite the random initial weights. We
correlate the AoA of each person in one run with the AoA
of each person in the other nine runs. We find that people
are not learned in a similar order. On average, any two given
runs yield a correlation coefficient of -0.0030 (average p =
0.54). This suggests that properties of the training set do not
determine which faces are acquired first in our simulation.

Results

Figure 3: Relationship between final SSE and AoA for the
26 individuals averaged across the 10 runs in Experiment 1.

All patterns are acquired in each run. For each run, we
measure the average AoA for the early and late sets. We
then perform a paired t-test comparing the difference in
means between these averages across the 10 runs. We find a
highly reliable difference, t(9) = -106, p < .001. When
averaged across the 10 runs, the mean epoch for an early
face to be acquired is 37 (sd = 2.6), and the mean epoch for
a late face to be acquired is 133 (sd = 1.4). Therefore, the
early set is acquired significantly before the late set, and our
manipulation of AoA “worked.”
Our network shows significant AoA effects. For each run,
we measure the average final SSE for the early and late sets.
We then perform a paired t-test comparing the difference in
means between these averages across the 10 runs. We find a
reliable difference, t(9) = -2.7, p < .05. The mean final SSE
for the early set is 0.0071 (sd = 0.00035), and the mean final
SSE for the late set is 0.0075 (sd = 0.00024). The early set
has a significant advantage over the late set. This is plotted
in Figure 4.

1238

Results

Figure 4: Relationship between average final SSE and
average AoA for the 10 runs in Experiment 2.

Experiment 3: Staged AoA Revisited
During the presentation of the early set exclusively in the
first half of training, the network received feedback from the
late set output units. The network received constant
feedback from these units saying “not this person,” since the
late set was not presented yet. This is unrealistic. Humans
are not constantly reinforced with “not this person” if the
subject is unaware of the late set person’s existence at the
time. Therefore, in this simulation, the network treats the 13
late set output units as though they do not exist while
training exclusively on the early set. This is a more accurate
model of adding additional faces to a person’s repertoire of
identifiable faces.

Model

All patterns are acquired in each run before the period of
recency control begins. For each run, we measure the
average AoA for the early and late sets. We then perform a
paired t-test comparing the difference in means between
these averages across the 10 runs. We find a highly reliable
difference, t(9) = -329, p < .001. The mean epoch for an
early face to be acquired is 27 (sd = 1.2), and the mean
epoch for a late face to be acquired is 146 (sd = 0.73).
Therefore, the early set is acquired significantly before the
late set.
Without the recency control period, our model does not
show statistically significant AoA effects. In fact, the late
set has a statistically significant lower mean error. For each
run, we measure the average SSE at the 250th epoch for the
early and late sets. We then perform a paired t-test
comparing the difference in means between these averages
across the 10 runs. We find a highly reliable difference, t(9)
= 10.5, p < .001. The mean SSE for the early set is 0.0055
(sd = 0.00028), and the mean SSE for the late set is 0.0047
(sd = 0.00012). The late set has a clear advantage over the
early set without the period of recency control. This is
plotted in Figure 5.
During the recency control period, the early set error
drops faster than the late set error, allowing the AoA effects
to emerge. Our network shows very strong AoA effects at
the 300th epoch. For each run, we measure the average final
SSE for the early and late sets. We then perform a paired ttest comparing the difference in means between these
averages across the 10 runs. We find a highly reliable
difference, t(9) = -9.5, p < .001. The mean final SSE for the
early set is 0.0036 (sd = 0.00016), and the mean final SSE
for the late set is 0.0040 (sd = 0.00013). The early set has a
significant advantage over the late set with the period of
recency control. This is plotted in Figure 6.

Late set output units are not trained during presentation of
the early set. Therefore, the weights between the hidden
layer and these output units remain unchanged.
Additionally, these units have no effect in the calculation of
the early set’s SSE. During the second half of training when
the late set is introduced, the network receives feedback
from all the output units as usual. The same staging of face
presentation is used from Experiment 2, except training lasts
for a total of 250 epochs. As it turns out, these networks
actually require longer to learn. Therefore, there are 125
epochs with the early set presented once per epoch. Another
125 epochs follow with the early set presented once per
epoch and the late set presented twice per epoch. As we
describe below, there are no AoA effects at the end of 250
epochs. To check the strength of this result, we add a
recency control by training for another 50 epochs in which
both early and late sets are presented once per epoch.
Otherwise, the model is identical to the one used in
Experiment 2.

1239

Figure 5: Relationship between average SSE (at the 250th
epoch) and average AoA for the 10 runs in Experiment 3.

before. The early set is acquired early (26 epochs, sd = 0.78,
t(9) = -103, p < .001), compared to the late set (262 epochs,
sd = 7.7). Again, significant AoA effects in the final SSE
are found, t(9) = -7.0, p < .001. The mean final SSE for the
early set is 0.011 (sd = 0.0011), and the mean final SSE for
the late set is 0.016 (sd = 0.0026). When assuming the
representation developed by the early set is also used for the
late set, our networks show strong AoA effects, regardless
of whether or not the network receives feedback from the
late set outputs during early set training.

Discussion

Figure 6: Relationship between average final SSE (at the
300th epoch) and average AoA for the 10 runs in Experiment
3.

Our results suggest that connectionist networks trained as
classifiers can show significant AoA effects in the same way
as other network mappings. Previous work with
autoencoders mapped high dimensional patterns to identical
or very similar high dimensional patterns (Anderson &
Cottrell, 2001, 2004; Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000; Smith et
al., 2001). Anderson and Cottrell (2001) showed that even
completely random high dimensional mappings show AoA
effects, and these survive very strong frequency
manipulations. Anderson and Cottrell (2004) showed that
mapping in quasi-regular domains such as from spelling to
sound also show robust AoA effects. In the current work,
we show that for the facial identification task, where a high
dimensional pattern is mapped to an output layer that merely
selects a single output unit, AoA effects are also found. This
suggests that AoA effects in connectionist networks have a
wider scope than previously explored.
In Experiment 1, we show AoA effects by allowing the
faces to be acquired in their natural order. Despite further
training after all the patterns were acquired, the earlier
acquired patterns maintained lower errors. We also find that
the faces were not acquired in a similar order across
replications with different initial random weights. We would
like to explore if the natural order of acquisition can be
predicted by properties of the training set in a facial
identification model. Initial experiments have revealed that
faces may be acquired in similar order across multiple runs
if fewer principal components are used in the Gestalt Level.
Additionally, if the training set includes more variance, it
would be expected that some individuals would be easier to
acquire than others. For example, a training set containing
multiple races or some individuals with exaggerated facial
expressions (imagine the variance in Jim Carrey’s face!) and
others with no facial expression (e.g., Natalie Portman in
Star Wars Episode I) might allow the network to acquire
individuals in a similar order across multiple simulations.
In contrast to our first simulation, however, humans may
be exposed to different people at different times in their
lives. For example, Moore and Valentine (1998) tested
human subjects on a celebrity face-naming task similar to
the one solved by our computational model. They divided
celebrities into early and late groups based on rated AoA,
while familiarity was controlled. They found participants
named early celebrities significantly faster than late
celebrities. In our Experiments 2-5, where we manipulated
the age of first exposure, the faces in the early set had
significantly lower errors than the faces in the late set,
except for Experiment 3 where a recency control was

Experiments 4&5: Effects of an Early
Perceptual Representation
We assume that participants’ perceptual representation
depends on their experience with stimuli. In particular,
models of the Other Race Effect (O’Toole et al. 1994) have
used principal components analysis of faces to model the
effect. The main idea of these models is that fewer faces of
the other race than the own race go into the PCA, resulting
in a poorer representation of the other race. This gives rise
to the false alarms commonly found in recognition
experiments. Could AoA for faces be explained in this way?
In this simulation, we assume that the perceptual
representation given to the model (Figure 1) in the PCA is
formed from the early set. That is, the principal component
eigenvectors are formed from the early set, and the late set
is simply projected onto these and given as input to the
network. In these simulations, we also vary whether the
output units for the late set are trained to be off or not during
acquisition of the early set. We find that the late set takes
longer to learn this way, so we train the early and late sets
for 175 epochs each.

Results
When replicating Experiment 2 in which all the outputs are
trained throughout, one face is not learned in the 7th run, so
that run is not used in the statistics. Using the same analysis
procedure as before, we find the early set is acquired before
the late set, t(8) = -106, p < .001. The mean epoch for an
early face to be acquired is 35 (sd = 0.96), and the mean
epoch for a late face to be acquired is 294 (sd = 7.9). Again,
using the same analysis as before, we obtain significant
AoA effects, t(8) = -7.6, p < .001. The mean final SSE for
the early set is 0.016 (sd = 0.0026), and the mean final SSE
for the late set is 0.026 (sd = 0.0055). The early set has a
significant advantage over the late set.
The replication of Experiment 4 with the late set outputs
untrained during the early phase shows similar effects as
1240

needed. This suggests that early training, as in humans, is
critical in determining the mature network performance.
Of the manipulations we performed, it seems to us that
the most realistic situation is where the early set determines
the representation of face space, such as Experiments 4 and
5. In both experiments, we found strong AoA effects. In
Experiments 2 and 3, when the late set was included in the
face space representation, a significant effect was found in
one case and a recency control restored it in the second. In
the case of the recency control, it appears that the
underlying AoA effects are briefly covered up by an
advantage for recently presented material. In Moore and
Valentine’s (1998) study, it is impossible to know when
each participant last viewed each celebrity in the early
group, but it seems unlikely that such an inadvertent
“recency control” occurred for the subjects. The need for a
recency control period is a potential discrepancy between
our computational results and human studies. However, we
suggest here that the true situation may be closer to that in
Experiments 4 and 5, where the perceptual representation is
biased towards the early set.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Lingyun Zhang and Gary’s Unbelievable
Research Unit for their contributions. Garrison W. Cottrell
is supported by NIH grant MH57075.

References
Anderson, K. L., & Cottrell, G. W. (2001). Age of
Acquisition in Connectionist Networks. Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual Cognitive Science Conference (pp. 2732). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, K. L. and Cottrell, G. W. (2004). Measured Age
of Acquisition effects in quasi-regular domains. Poster
presented at the Annual meeting of the Cognitive
Neuroscience Society, San Francisco, CA.
Carroll, J. B., & White, M. N. (1973). Word frequency and
age of acquisition as determiners of picture naming
latency. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
25, 85-95.
Dailey, M. N., Cottrell, G. W., Padgett, C., & Adolphs, R.
(2002). EMPATH: A neural network that categorizes
facial expressions. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
14(8), 1158-1173.
Daugman, J. G. (1985). Uncertainty relation for resolution
in space, spacial frequency, and orientation optimized by
two-dimensional visual cortical filters. Journal of the
Optical Society of American A, 2, 1160–1169.
Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2000). Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss

of plasticity in maturing systems: Insights from
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 11031123.
Jared, D., McRae, K., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1990). The
basis of consistency effects in word naming. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29, 687-715.
Jones, J. P. & Palmer, L. A. (1987). An evaluation of the
two-dimensional gabor filter model of simple receptive
fields in cat striate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology,
58(6), 1233-1258.
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Orr, G. B., & Muller, K. R. (1998).
Efficient backprop. In G. B. Orr & K. R. Muller (Eds.),
Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
Lee, K. (2004). Multi-race face database. Department of
Psychology, University of California, San Diego.
Moore, V., & Valentine, T. (1998). The effect of age of
acquisition on speed and accuracy of naming famous
faces. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 51A, 485-513.
Moore, V., & Valentine, T. (1999). The effects of age of
acquisition in processing famous faces: Exploring the
locus and proposing a mechanism. Proceedings of the
Twenty-First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 416-421). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Morrison, C. M., & Ellis, A. W. (1995). Roles of word
frequency and age of acquisition in word naming and
lexical decision. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 116-153.
Oldfield, R.C. & Wingfield, A. (1965). Response latencies
in naming objects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 17, 273-281.
O'Toole, A. J., Deffenbacher, K. A., Valentin, D., Abdi, H.
(1994). Structural aspects of face recognition and the
other-race effect, Memory & Cognition, 22(2), 208-224.
Smith, M. A., Cottrell, G.W., & Anderson, K. L. (2001).
The early word catches the weights. In T. K. Leen, T. G.
Dietterich, & V. Tresp (Eds.), Advances in neural
information processing systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Zevin, J. D., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2002). Age of
Acquisition Effects in Word Reading and Other Tasks.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 1-29.
Zhang, L., & Cottrell, G. W. (2004). When holistic
processing is not enough: Local features save the day.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1506-1511). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

1241

