UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ambiguous Idioms Understanding in Italian Aphasic Patients

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c6649b4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cacciari, Cristina
Papagno, Costanza

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ambiguous Idioms Understanding In Italian Aphasic Patients
Costanza Papagno (costanza.papagno@unimib.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia, Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo 1
20126 Milano ITALY
Cristina Cacciari (cacciari.cristina@unimore.it)
Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, via Campi 287
41100 Modena ITALY
Early theories of idiom comprehension were based on a
pragmatic approach to figurative language understanding
that assumed a literal meaning priority. A search for a
figurative interpretation was started only when the literal
one was defective. For example, Bobrow and Bell (1973)
proposed the Idiom List hypothesis according to which
idioms were fixed expressions whose meaning was sought
in an idiom list whenever the literal reading of the string
made no sense in context. Differently, the most influential
Lexical Representation hypothesis posited that idioms
behaved as long, morphologically complex words stored in
the mental lexicon together with the other lexical units
(Swinney & Cutler, 1979). Linguistic processing of the
string and retrieval of the idiomatic meaning was supposed
to proceed in parallel. Gibbs (1980) proposed a more
extreme version of this hypothesis arguing that people did
not engage in any linguistic analysis at all and could
entirely bypass literal meaning directly accessing the
figurative interpretation of the idiom string. Finally
Cacciari and Tabossi (1988) proposed the Configuration
hypothesis according to which idioms were considered as
configurations of words that underwent a linguistic analysis
until a key part was processed that prompted recognition of
the idiomatic nature of the string and activation of the
related figurative meaning.
All these hypotheses implicitly share the assumption
that, in order to understand an idiom, lexical integrity is
required. In fact evidence has already accumulated
suggesting that idioms are processed in much the same way
as any other sentence up to recognition of their figurative
nature that triggers access to the figurative interpretation
(Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988; Cacciari & Corradini, in press;
Tabossi & Zardon, 1993, 1995). Indeed, it has been shown
that a lexical-semantic impairment has a detrimental effect
on figurative language comprehension in aphasic patients
(Papagno et al., 2004).

Abstract
The ability to understand ambiguous idiom was assessed in
aphasic patients with preserved comprehension at a single
word level. A string-to-word matching task was used in
which patients were requested to choose one among four
alternatives: a word associated with the figurative meaning
of the idiom string; a word semantically associate with the
last constituent of the idiom string; and two unrelated
words. The results showed that patients’ performance was
impaired with respect to a group of matched controls. The
most affected patients showed a frontal and/or temporal
lesion.

Introduction
Idioms are among the most common forms of figurative
language, but they do not constitute a unitary class varying
along a number of syntactic and semantic dimensions
(Nunberg et al., 1994; Cacciari & Glucksberg, 1991). First,
idioms are highly conventional expressions in that their
meaning generally cannot be predicted applying the rules
that determine the meaning or use of their constituent parts
when they occur in isolation. Notwithstanding, the
syntactic as well as the semantic features characterizing for
instance the verb are still preserved when this is inserted in
an idiom string (e.g., one cannot slowly “kick the bucket”,
neither idiomatically nor literally, since “to kick” cannot be
used to refer to a slow action; see Glucksberg, 1993;
Hamblin & Gibbs, 1999). Second, idioms vary as to their
semantic transparency, namely in the ease with which the
motivation for their structure can be recovered. Idioms can
involve figuration and can be originally metaphorical (e.g.,
“take the bull by the horns”), even if speakers may not
always perceive the precise motive for the figure involved
(Nunberg et al., 1994). There also are idioms not involving
figuration at all (e.g., “by dint of“). Third, idioms vary as to
their decomposability, namely in the extent to which the
idiomatic interpretation can be mapped onto single
constituents (Gibbs et al., 1989). Fourth, idioms vary in the
extent to which they can be syntactically transformed and
still retain their idiomatic meaning (Gibbs & Gonzales,
1985). Finally, many idioms can also be assigned a literal
interpretation (e.g., “break the ice”), compositionally
determined by the morpho-syntactic and semantic rules of
the language.

Idiom comprehension in aphasic patients
Aphasic patients are particularly interesting for assessing
figurative language comprehension. A consistent body of
evidence already exists (e.g., Oliveri et al., 2004; Papagno
et al., 2004; Papagno & Genoni, 2004; Tompkins et al.,
1992) questioning the received view that the right
hemisphere is particularly, if not solely, involved in idiom

1708

different processing mechanisms might be responsible for
processing different types of idioms.
Ambiguous idioms can be assigned either a literal
interpretation, based on the compositional meanings of its
constituents, or a figurative meaning associated with the
whole string. The evidence on idiomatic meaning
activation in unimpaired speakers is not conclusive: in a
reading time study, Colombo (Colombo, 1993, 1998),
found that idiomatic meaning required a biasing context for
being activated. When the idiomatic expression was
interpreted figuratively, the literal processing of the string
was not terminated (Needham, 1992). Cacciari and
Corradini (in press), using a cross-modal lexical decision
paradigm, found that the availability of an idiomatic
interpretation depended on the point in time in which the
string was recognized as idiomatic: the earlier was its
recognition, the fastest its activation.
In this study the patients were advised that the idiom
string was meant idiomatically even though it also had a
literal interpretation. It should however be noted that the
figurative interpretation of familiar idiom strings, as those
employed in this study, is usually more frequent than the
literal one. Consequently, the idiomatic interpretation is
almost always the dominant one, and the literal one the
subordinate (Popiel & McRae, 1988). If the retrieval of
idiomatic meaning is automatic and independent from
linguistic processes, as suggested by the right hemisphere
hypothesis, we should expect a normal performance in
aphasic patients. Such a result would be consistent with the
view of idioms as long words proposed by the Lexical
Representation hypothesis since our patients had a
preserved single word comprehension skill. On the
contrary, if idioms are not processed holistically, as long
words, but require morpho-syntactic and lexical-semantic
processing up to identification of their figurative nature
(Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988; Cacciari & Corradini, in press;
Nenonen et al., 2002)), then we should expect aphasic
patients to be impaired in understanding idiomatic
expressions as shown for idioms without a literal meaning
(Papagno & Genoni, 2004; Papagno et al., 2004) and for
verb phrase idioms (Nenonen et al., 2002).

understanding (e.g., Kempler et al., 1999; Van Lancker &
Kempler, 1987). Van Lancker and Kempler (1987), for
instance, claimed that idiom processing was especially
subserved by the right hemisphere. They assumed that
idioms are processed like unitary, syntactically non
analysed chunks. However, Peterson et al. (2001) showed
that language-unimpaired participants syntactically parsed
the idiom string even after its idiomatic meaning was
retrieved. Hence, a left hemisphere involvement should be
presupposed for idiom comprehension as well.
Furthermore, many studies now question a strict dichotomy
of roles of the two hemispheres in language processing
(Burgess & Chiarello, 1996).
The results collected so far on aphasic patients show that
they generally are impaired in assigning a figurative
interpretation to an idiom string (Hillert, 2004; Papagno &
Genoni, 2004; Papagno et al., 2004). In particular, these
patients show a strong bias toward the literal interpretation
even when the idiom only has a non-literal interpretation
(Papagno et al., 2004). The modality of testing is extremely
relevant in neuropsychological studies, and figurative
language comprehension assessment is no exception (see
also Tompkins et al., 1992). For instance, the two tasks
more often used in idiom studies with patients, the stringto-picture matching task and the oral explanation task (but
see Hillert, 2004), are both problematic. From one side, the
string-to-picture matching task can underestimate idioms
comprehension, because the picture representing the literal
interpretation (often a bizarre image, especially when there
is no well-formed literal meaning) can strongly interfere
with the correct response, similarly to what happens in the
Stroop effect (Stroop, 1935; MacLeod, 1991). This has
proved to be the case especially for patients with probable
Alzheimer’s disease (Papagno et al., 2003) and with right
frontal patients (Papagno et al., submitted). On the other
side, a deficit in speech output, as that found in non-fluent
aphasic left brain-damaged (LBD) patients, can produce an
underestimation of their ability to understand idioms
insofar as they might be unable to provide a verbal
explanation.

The present study
Method

The aim of this study was to investigate idiomatic meaning
comprehension in aphasic patients, without a semantic
deficit at a word level, using idiomatic expressions that
have both a figurative and a literal interpretation (i.e.,
ambiguous idioms) using a testing modality (a sentence-toword matching task) that should avoid the limitations just
outlined. Since ambiguous idioms have not yet been tested
in aphasic patients, the results of the present study might
extend what we currently know on idiomatic processing,
allowing a more fine-grained assessment of idiomatic
meaning comprehension impairments in aphasia. Given the
heterogeneity of idiomatic expressions in terms of syntactic
structure, literal ambiguity, semantic transparency, and so
forth (see Nenonen et al., 2002), we cannot exclude that

Participants. Fifteen aphasic patients were selected on
the basis of the following criteria: a. they should be left
brain-damaged right-handed with a single focal vascular
lesion. The site and extension of the lesion was evaluated
by means of a CT-scan; b. a minimum of 5 years of
education; c. a diagnosis of aphasia of a mild to moderate
severity, as assessed using a standardised language
examination (AAT) and the Token Test (De Renzi &
Faglioni, 1978), but a good comprehension of single
words and verbs, as assessed using the word
comprehension subtest of the language examination and a
test by Miceli et al. (unpublished) for verbs; d. absence of
further neuropsychological deficits, such as visuoperceptual or non verbal intelligence deficits. Fifteen
1709

participants until a decision was taken. For example, the
examiner read the sentence “he has raised the elbow” and
then the four alternatives (“WINE, LEG, BOX, TREE”)
were presented. As in previous studies (Papagno &
Genoni, 2004; Papagno et al., 2004), participants were
informed that they would be read sentences having a non
literal meaning used in everyday conversations. An
example was provided to clarify that the string was meant
figuratively.

normal participants, matched one by one with the patients
by age, geographical area, sex and education, were
selected as controls.
Materials. Twenty-three familiar verbal idioms were
selected. They were ambiguous in that the string could
have a literal meaning as well. In order to control for the
semantic transparency of the idiom string, a rating study
was run on 30 healthy participants. We also controlled for
the plausibility of the literal meaning that one might
assign to the idiom string.
In order to avoid the interference of the literal
interpretation of the idiom string, observed in previous
picture-to-string matching studies (Papagno et al., 2004)
and the problems of the oral explanation task, we used a
sentence-to-word matching task.
Each idiomatic
expression was paired with four target words matched in
terms of length and frequency: one target word
corresponded to the idiomatic interpretation of the string
(henceforth idiomatic target; e.g., WINE, for “alzare il
gomito”, “to raise the elbow”, i.e. to drink too much); one
was a literal associate of the last constituent word of the
idiom string (henceforth literal associate target; LEG); and
two were different types of unrelated foils (henceforth
unrelated targets) (TREE, BOX). Specifically, the first
type of unrelated target was either an abstract or concrete
word depending on the nature of the idiomatic target: the
unrelated target was abstract if the idiomatic target was
abstract, and concrete if the idiomatic target was concrete.
The second type of unrelated target was a word that could
plausibly complete the verb phrase (BOX). Each idiom
was presented in a syntactically simple sentence (e.g. “He
has raised the elbow”). The sentence and related targets
remained in front of the patient to prevent working
memory limitations. The task was to point to the word that
matched the idiomatic meaning of the sentence.
The word comprehension test administered to the
patients and controls (Laiacona et al., 1993) consisted of
80 common nouns belonging to eight different categories
(fruits, vegetables, animals, furniture, vehicles, tools,
body parts, musical instruments).For each stimulus, five
pictures, corresponding to the target and to four foils
respectively, were arranged vertically in a column on a
card. The foils belonged to the same category. For
example, if the target word was “strawberry”, other four
words denoting fruits were presented together with the
correct one. A stimulus word was read aloud by the
examiner. The task of the patient was to choose the
picture corresponding to the target. Patients also
performed a literal sentence comprehension task, in a
pointing-to-picture modality (from a battery designed by
Miceli & Capasso, unpublished). The task includes 64
sentences. The examiner reads the sentence to the patient,
who had to choose between two, three or four alternatives.
There are 8 different types of syntactically different
sentences.
Procedure. The examiner read the sentence followed by
the four alternatives that were written on cards and
remained in front of the patient or of the control

Results and Discussion
On the basis of their performance on the AAT, six patients
were diagnosed as Broca’s aphasic, five as Wernicke’s
aphasic, and the remaining four as amnesic aphasic. The
severity of aphasia varied from mild to moderate, without
significant difference between non fluent and fluent
aphasics [U (6, 9)=17, p=.24].
All patients showed a good comprehension of single
words ranging from 71/80 to 80/80 (mean 78.2, 97.75%).
Also syntactic comprehension was good, ranging from 34
to 61 (mean 50.8, SD 7.76). The mean number of correct
responses produced in the idiom comprehension task by
aphasic patients was 15.33 (66.67%) (SD 4.43; range of
correct responses produced by the patients: 5-20).
Controls produced on average 22.13 (96.22%) correct
responses (SD 1.19, range 19-23). An ANOVA was
performed with number of errors as dependent variable
and Group (patients vs. controls) and Error type (literal
associate vs. unrelated) as independent variables. Since
the numerical difference between the two types of
unrelated errors was small, and statistically not significant
(14.78% of unrelated abstract/concrete errors vs. 20.86%
of verb completion errors, t <1), the two error types were
pooled together in this ANOVA. A significant effect of
the Group factor was observed [F (1, 28)= 32.91, p <
.0001], being patients’ performance significantly worse
than that of controls. Also the Error type factor was
significant [F (1, 28)= 6.48, p= .01], being literal associate
errors (64.34%) more frequent than unrelated errors
(35.65%). The interaction between Group and Error type
was also significant [F (1, 28) = 7.32, p =. 01]. Post-hoc
analyses (Sheffé test) showed that patients produced
significantly more literal associate errors (p < .0001) and
more unrelated (p < .0001) errors than controls.
Moreover, aphasic patients produced significantly more
literal associate errors than unrelated errors (p < .01),
while this difference was not significant for controls (p =
.99). No significant correlation was found between
number of correct responses and idiom familiarity (r= .19,
p < .38), nor between idiom comprehension and the
following factors: education level (r=.47, p < .07), word
comprehension (r=.23, p <.41), sentence comprehension
(r=.02, p =.95) , and Token Test (r=.06, p <.83). Literal
associate errors in the idiom comprehension test and
semantic errors in the word comprehension test were not
correlated (r=-.35, p < .19), although a ceiling effect in
word comprehension answers (97.75% correct responses)
1710

modalities, as we said, are problematic for patients: in the
former, the presence of a picture (presumably bizarre)
corresponding to some form of literal interpretation
produced a strong interference effect. An oral explanation
can often be problematic in the case of aphasics,
especially when non fluent. In the present study the
string-to-word matching task, used with patients whose
single word comprehension skills were good, minimized
the interference of the literal interpretation of the string.
The interference of the literal meaning of the constituent
words is less robust than that of an image representing a
bizarre and semantically ill-formed literal meaning, as
suggested by the fact that the aphasic patients tested in the
previous study chose the literal picture more often than
the literal associate word in the present study even if the
strings had no well-formed literal meaning.
In a previous study, Papagno et al. (2004) found that the
syntactic ill-formedness of non-ambiguous idioms was a
trigger for the rejection of the literal interpretation of the
idiom string and for the search for a figurative
interpretation. Indeed, aphasic patients gave more
idiomatic responses to syntactically ill-formed idioms
than to well-formed ones. This result was consistent with
a dual stage model of figurative language interpretation
(first detection of a violation followed by the search in
memory for an alternative interpretation) as the one
proposed by Bobrow and Bell (1973). However, the
idioms used in the present study were in general
syntactically well-formed and nonetheless the patients had
a better performance than in previous studies where a
string-to-picture matching task was used.
Our patients were not impaired at a word
comprehension level. However, semantically-based errors
were evident in idiom comprehension: literal associate
errors were indeed significantly more frequent
than unrelated errors (64.35% vs. 35.65%, respectively).
This finding corroborates the view that idioms cannot be
considered just as long words, as posited by the Lexical
Representation hypothesis. On the contrary, idioms strings
are processes in much the same way as any other
sentence, that is via a compositional linguistic processing,
as proposed by the Configuration Hypothesis. What is
deficient in aphasic patients might be the identification of
the idiomatic nature of the idiom string that is necessary
for accessing and retrieving the corresponding figurative
meaning from semantic memory.
Although the mapping procedure we employed has
some important limitations, a general analysis of the
anatomical localization of the lesions suggests that two
sites seem to be relevant for the patients’ performance in
idiom comprehension: a frontal, even subcortical area, and
a cortical temporal region. This is consistent with what
was previously found for non-ambiguous idioms both in
rTMS and lesion studies (Oliveri et al., 2004; Papagno et
al., submitted). After the linguistic analysis of the string is
performed (possibly in the temporal lobe), the choice of
the correct response among four alternatives requires a
selection process coupled with monitoring of the

might account for this lack of significant correlation. No
effect of the semantic transparency of the idiom string
emerged on the choice of the correct (idiomatic) target (r
= .005, p < .98), nor of the plausibility of the literal
meaning of the idiom string (r= -.08, p<.71).
Previous evidence (Franklin, 1989) has showed that
aphasic patients are more impaired in comprehending
abstract/low imageability words than concrete/high
imageability words. In fact abstract targets elicited more
errors than concrete ones [F (1,21) = 4.74, p < .05]. On
the contrary, the abstract vs. concrete nature of the
action/state denoted by the idiom string had no influence
on the errors performed by patients [e.g., “alzare il
gomito”, to lift the elbow, i.e., to drink too much, refers to
a concrete action vs. “perdere la testa”, to loose the head
i.e., to get mad, to an abstract one] [F < 1].
Idiom comprehension was slightly more impaired in
non fluent than in fluent aphasics (57.24% vs. 72.94%),
although these differences were not statistically
significant [U (6, 9)=18, p< .29] and the limited number
of patients does not allow further considerations.
Moreover, Wernicke’s patients produced significantly less
unrelated errors than Broca (6.9% vs. 18.1%).

Conclusion
We assessed the ability of 15 LBD aphasic patients to
understand ambiguous idioms using a string-to-word
matching task. Aphasic patients were significantly more
impaired in idioms comprehension than matched controls.
Previous studies (Papagno & Genoni, 2004; Papagno et
al., 2004) showed that the comprehension of idioms with
only a figurative interpretation (non ambiguous idioms)
was seriously impaired in aphasic patients. In the present
study, another class of idioms proved to be impaired,
namely ambiguous idioms that have a literal interpretation
as well. Interestingly, if we compare the severity of the
impairment of aphasic patients in non-ambiguous and
ambiguous idioms, we can observe that the patients were
less impaired in comprehending ambiguous idioms than
non-ambiguous ones. Apparently this is not due to
familiarity, because this is approximately the same for
non-ambiguous, neither it depends on the semantic
transparency of the idiom strings that had no correlation
whatsoever with patients’ accuracy. Even the level of
impairment of the patients participating in the two studies
was similar. Six of the patients tested in the present study
were also included in the study on non-ambiguous idiom
comprehension (Papagno et al. submitted) and they were
more severely impaired in comprehending non-ambiguous
than ambiguous idioms. A possible explanation for the
less impaired performance of aphasic patients in the
present study has to do with the testing modality: here we
employed a string-to-word matching task, instead of a
string-to-picture matching task. The latter is the most
frequently used task, together with the oral explanation
one (but see (Hillert, 2004; Nenonen et al., 2002)). Both

1711

Cacciari, C. & Corradini, P. (in press). Comprehending
idiomatic expressions: the role of individual speed of
processing. In A. Baicchi (Ed.), Modeling thought and
constructing meaning. Milano: Franco Angeli.
Cacciari, C. & Glucksberg, S. (1991). Understanding
idiomatic expressions. The contribution of word
meanings. In G. Simpson (Ed.), Understanding word
and sentence (pp.217-240). Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Cacciari, C. & Tabossi, P. (1988). The comprehension of
idioms. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 668683.
Colombo, L. (1993). The comprehension of ambiguous
idioms in context. In C. Cacciari & P. Tabossi (Eds.),
Idioms. Processing, Structure and Interpretation (pp. 326). Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum.
Colombo, L. (1998). Role of context in the comprehension
of ambiguous Italian idioms. In D. Hillert (Ed.),
Sentence processing: a cross-linguistic perspective.
Syntax and Semantics, vol. 31. (pp. 405-425). New
York: Academic Press.
De Renzi, E. & Faglioni, P. (1978). Normative data and
screening power of a shortened version of the Token
Test. Cortex, 14, 41-9.
Franklin, S. (1989). Dissociations in auditory word
comprehension: Evidence from nine "fluent" aphasic
patients. Aphasiology, 3, 189-207.
Gibbs, R.B. (1980). Spilling the beans on understanding
and memory for idioms. Memory & Cognition, 8, 449456.
Gibbs, R.W. & Gonzales, G. P. (1985). Syntactic frozeness
in processing and remembering idioms. Cognition, 20,
243-259.
Gibbs, R.W., Nayak, N.P. & Cutting, C. (1989). How to
kick the bucket and not decompose: Analyzability and
idiom processing. Journal of Memory and Language,
28, 576-593.
Glucksberg S. (1993). Idiom meaning and allusional
content. In C. Cacciari & P. Tabossi (Eds.), Idioms.
Processing, Structure and Interpretation (pp. 3-26).
Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum.
Hamblin, J.L. & Gibbs, R.W. (1999). Why you can’t kick
the bucket as you slowly die: verbs in idiom
comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
28, 25-39.
Hillert, D. (2004). Spared access to idiomatic and literal
meanings: A single-case approach. Brain and
Language, 89, 207-215.
Kempler, D., Van Lancker, D., Marchman, V. & Bates, E.
(1999). Idiom comprehension in children and adults
with unilateral brain damage. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 15, 327-349.
Laiacona M, Barbarotto R, Trivelli C, Capitani E. (1993).
Dissociazioni semantiche intercategoriali: descrizione
di una batteria standardizzata e dati normativi. Archivio
di Neurologia, Psichiatria e Psicologia, 54, 209-248.

response. This selection and monitoring process is likely
to be performed by the central executive, the neural
correlates of which are located in the frontal lobe (Stuss et
al., 1994). rTMS and fMRI studies will be necessary to
confirm this hypothesis.
The high percentage of literal associate errors (64.34%)
produced by aphasic patients for the familiar idioms used
in the present study suggests that, when the linguistic
processing of the idiom string is impaired, as in aphasia,
the target word literally associate with the last constituent
of the idiom string is more likely to be available and
selected. Literal errors can indicate that the string is
processed literally with no activation of the
corresponding, and competing, idiomatic meaning of the
string. Unrelated errors can indicate that the activation of
the literal meaning of the words composing the string is
delayed or deficient, hence they can indicate a reduced
lexical processing of the idiom string’s constituents. This
was precisely the case for unrelated errors. The fact that
Broca’s patients produced more unrelated errors than
Wernicke’s ones might signal that these patients refused
the literal interpretation of the idiom string (that is less
frequent than the idiomatic one) and looked for a possible
alternative, being unable to retrieve the idiomatic
meaning. Future work is needed to investigate this
problem.
The choice of a literal answer might depend on several
levels of impairment: first, an impairment of suppression
mechanisms, in that patients are unable to get rid of the
constituent word literal meanings; second, an impairment
in recognition and activation mechanisms, in that the
patients’ ability to access and retrieve the idiomatic
configuration meaning is damaged and they do not
recognize the figurative nature of the string; third, a
simultaneous impairment of both suppression and
activation mechanisms. The current data do not allow us
to distinguish among these three alternatives. However, it
should be noted that aphasic patients are impaired, and
even more, also when idioms do not have any literal
interpretation, suggesting a simultaneous damage to
linguistic processing and to idiomatic meaning
recognition and activation.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Mariarosa Colombo and Silvia Rizzo for
their help. The research has been supported by a FAR
2003 and by two COFIN 2003 grants respectively assigned
to the two authors.

References
Bobrow, S. & Bell, B. (1973). On catching on to idiomatic
expressions. Memory & Cognition, 1, 343-346.
Burgess, C. & Chiarello, C. (1996). Neurocognitive
mechanisms underlying metaphor comprehension and
other figurative language. Metaphor and Symbolic
Activity, 11, 67-84.
1712

equally. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 17, 475487.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18,
643-662.
Stuss, D.T., Eskes, G.A. & Foster J. K. (1994).
Experimental neuropsychological studies of frontal lobe
functions. In F. Boller & H. Spinnler (Eds.). Handbook
of Neuropsychology, Vol 9 (pp. 149-185). Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
Swinney, D. & Cutler, A. (1979). The access and
processing of idiomatic expression. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 18, 523-534.
Tabossi, P. & Zardon, F. (1993). The activation of
idiomatic meaning in spoken language. In C. Cacciari
& P. Tabossi (Eds.). Idioms. Processing, Structure and
Interpretation (pp. 145-162). Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence
Erlbaum.
Tabossi, P. & Zardon, F. (1995). The activation of
idiomatic meaning. In M. Everaert, E. van den Linden,
A. Schenk, & R. Schreuder (Eds.), Idioms: structural
and psychological perspectives (pp. 273-282).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tompkins, C.A., Boada, R. & McGarry, K. (1992). The
access and processing of familiar idioms by braindamaged and normally aging adults. Journal of Speech
and Hearing Research, 35, 626-637.
Van Lancker, D. & Kempler, D. (1987). Comprehension of
familiar phrases by left but not by right hemisphere
damaged patients. Brain and Language, 32, 265-277.

MacLeod, C.M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163-203.
Needham, W.P. (1992). Limits on literal processing during
idiom interpretation. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 21, 1-16.
Nenonen, M., Niemi, J. & Laine, M. (2002).
Representation and processing of idioms: evidence
from aphasia. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 15, 43-58.
Nunberg, G., Sag, I. A. & Wasow, T. (1994). Idioms.
Language, 70, 491-538.
Oliveri, M., Romero, L. & Papagno, C. (2004). Left but not
right temporal lobe involvement in opaque idiom
comprehension: A repetitive transcranial stimulation
study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 848-855.
Papagno, C. & Genoni, A. (2004). The role of syntactic
competence in idiom comprehension: A study on
aphasic patients. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17, 371382.
Papagno, C., Lucchelli, F., Muggia, S. & Rizzo S. (2003).
Idiom comprehension in Alzheimer's disease: The role
of the central executive. Brain, 126, 2419-2430.
Papagno, C., Tabossi, P., Colombo, M. & Zampetti, P.
(2004). Idiom comprehension in aphasic patients. Brain
and Language, 89, 226-234.
Peterson, R. R., Burgess, C., Dell, G. S., & Eberhard, K.L.
(2001). Dissociation between syntactic and semantic
processing during idiom comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 90, 227-234.
Popiel, S. J., & McRae, K. (1988). The figurative and
literal senses of idioms, or all idioms are not used

1713

