UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Exploration of Social Modulation of Syntactic Priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0kn388rj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Balcetis, Emily E.
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Exploration of Social Modulation of Syntactic Priming
Emily E. Balcetis (eeb29@cornell.edu)
Rick Dale (rad28@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA
Abstract

functional tool to assist in social interactions. In addition,
social coordination is found across a multitude of domains.
Recent work shows that language production is one such
domain, further underscoring the evolutionary significance of
the imitative faculty (see also Dunbar, 1997). Garrod and
Pickering (2004) argue that coordinative patterns of behavior
are the consequence of powerful “interactive alignment”
mechanisms in communication. From their perspective,
people do not only model conversation partners’ socially
relevant behaviors, but actively align linguistic
representations at multiple levels of description. One such
level that has sparked considerable research is the alignment
of syntactic patterns in dialogue.

Adoption of other people’s behaviors is a well-documented
tendency termed social mimicry or the “chameleon effect.”
Although social psychologists have begun to document the
subtle nuances that impact mimicry, there is little on the social
variables that influence similar processes in psycholinguistics.
In two experiments, we demonstrate the influence of social
factors on syntactic priming and mimicry. Exp. 1 found
increased syntactic priming of a liked interaction partner and
less priming of a disliked partner. In Exp. 2, we rule out the
influence of mood and argue that the goal to repair social
interactions promotes this syntactic mimicry. In sum, we argue
that social goals constrain syntactic use and mimicry.

Introduction

Syntactic Priming

Most of us have experienced the inadvertent uptake of a close
friend’s curious intonation, gesticulation, or idiosyncratic
word or phrase. Whether so subtle or as deliberate (and
obnoxious) as the shadowing of a sibling’s speech, such
forms of mimicry or emulation (e.g., Tomasello, 1999) seem
inherently intertwined in our everyday social existence.
Subtle behavioral imitation in social interaction, such as facetouching or foot-shaking, recently dubbed “chameleon
effects” (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999), are widespread. Indeed,
under some circumstances even without direct social
interaction, adults are compelled to walk slower in imitation
of the elderly (Bargh, Chen, & Burrows, 1996) or perform
with greater accuracy on a general knowledge quiz in
imitation of professors (Dijksterhuis & van Knippenberg,
1998).
Certainly, examples of mimicry are many, but these effects
can be attenuated. For example, not all people are mimicked
to the same degree (Lott & Lott, 1961). Early correlational
studies found that those who are liked or have an established
rapport with the mimicker are more likely to be imitated than
those with whom the same types of relationships are not
established (Charney, 1966). In addition, nonconscious
behavioral mimicry appears motivationally driven. Neuberg
and colleagues (Neuberg, Smith, Hoffman, & Russell, 1994)
demonstrated that imitation can be reduced by the
characteristics of the marked target. To avoid the damage that
follows from seeming similar to them, would-be imitators
avoid mimicking a stigmatized target. That is, the desirability
of associating oneself with another influences mimicry.
Some suggest that this behavioral coordination is deeply
entrenched in our species, having direct evolutionary
relevance (e.g., Lakin, Jefferis, Cheng, & Chartrand, 2003).
Mimicry can be used, consciously and nonconsciously, as a

Many components of language are coordinated. For example,
people imitate accents (Giles & Powesland, 1975), tone of
voice (Neumann & Strack, 2000), pauses within speech
streams (Capella & Panalp, 1981), rate of speech (Webb,
1972), stress patterns (Roelofs & Meyer, 1998), and the
structure of syllables (Sevald, Dell, & Cole, 1995). As
Garrod and Pickering (2004) argue, adult language seems to
be continually modified through a process of aligning to the
speech patterns and idiosyncrasies of verbal interaction
partners.
These modifications of speech patterns can be produced by
solely self-generated speech. Many have demonstrated the
use of a particular syntactic structure increases the likelihood
of its use in a new sentence when the individual generates
both sentences. Basic demonstrations of syntactic priming
suggest that the use of specific syntax can be influenced by
previous exposure to the same type of syntax (Bock, 1986;
Lombardi & Potter, 1992).
Bock (1986) pioneered such an enterprise. In a picture
description task, she asked participants to read aloud priming
sentences containing either double-object (DO) constructions
(1) or object-preposition (OP) constructions (2):
1.
2.

The waiter brought the customers a tray of drinks
The waiter brought a tray of drinks to the customer.

After repeating a prime sentence aloud, participants described
a picture containing an agent, a recipient, and an action.
Participants were more likely to describe the picture in
accordance with the prime type. For example, participants
more frequently supplied a DO type construction after
repeating the DO sentence than after repeating a OP sentence.
Similarly, more pictures were constructed in passive voice
after a passive prime than after an active one. Likewise, Fox
184

Tree and Meijer (1999) demonstrated that participants’
memory for the dative form biases the dative construction of
a target sentence used in a distracter sentence.
More recently, Ferreira (2002) offered that syntactic
priming is the result of an autonomous syntactic process,
independent of external, perhaps social, constraints. In these
experiments, Ferreira suggests that the role “that” plays is
integral to the grammatical use of “that” in the recalled
sentence. Although there are caveats, this line of research
provides evidence that using a particular structure in speech
encourages the renewed use of that structure in upcoming
speech.

recipient, and an action that could be described in either
active or passive voice. In addition, we selected 12 drawings
at random that added an indirect object and could thus be
described with either a DO or OP structure. Ten fillers were
selected from Bock’s set and a database of photographs. All
fillers lacked either an action or a recipient thus could not be
described in active or passive voice or with DO or PO
structures (i.e. a photograph of a dog’s large tongue). The
order of these pictures was randomized for each participant.
Bock’s original paradigm had participants read a scripted
sentence meant to prime a grammatical structure. After
reading this scripted sentence, participants generated a
description of a drawing. In the current research, we intended
to use the sentences spoken by an interaction partner as a
prime. The partner in these studies was always a same-sex
confederate. Instead of freely generating descriptions of
drawings, the confederate read scripted sentences that served
as a controlled prime for the sentences participants generated.
Before drawings that lacked an indirect object and could thus
be described in either the passive or active voice, confederates
read 1 of 10 sentences in either active or passive voice (i.e.
“The woman hugged the astronaut”). Before drawings that
included an indirect object, confederates read 1 of 12
sentences in either DO or OP form (i.e. “The waitress took
the man the drink”). Before the filler pictures, confederates
read 1 of 10 filler sentences (i.e. the man looks like Jesus).
The priming sentence that preceded a picture was randomly
selected.
As a counterbalancing tactic, between participants a prime
sentence was alternated between passive and active voice or
alternated between DO and PO forms. That is, in one
counterbalancing condition, a confederate would read, “The
cheerleader saved her boyfriend a seat.” In the other
counterbalancing condition, a confederate read “The
cheerleader saved a seat for her boyfriend.” Thus the content
of priming sentences read by the confederate was consistent
across all participants however the structure was
counterbalanced between participants. There was no effect of
this counterbalancing measure on the pattern of mimicry and
will not be discussed further.

Current studies
Our goal is to take a first step towards connecting
psycholinguistic and social research. Specifically, we
demonstrate that syntactic priming effects can be modulated
by social function, much as other imitative behaviors
reviewed above. Chartrand and Bargh (1999) demonstrated
that people develop a rapport with those who mimic foot and
hand movements, indicating they like their mimickers more.
Conversely, others (e.g., Charney, 1966) have observed that
we mimic those we like. The current experiments seek to
manipulate likeability of the to-be-mimicked target and
investigate the consequences of such interpersonal dynamics
on syntactic priming in Bock’s (1986) picture-description
task. We propose that reuse of structures can be scrutinized
under a social mimicry spotlight: selection of syntactic
structure will be in part a function of the desirability to mimic
the interaction partner. It is expected then that participants
will reuse or “imitate” the grammatical structure of an
amiable confederate while refraining from imitating the
syntax of one who is considerably less so. In addition, our
second experiment addresses a concern regarding the
influence of mood on mimicry, while suggesting that the goal
to repair social interactions promotes mimicry.
The theoretical goal, discussed in more detail later, is to
bridge the rift between linguistic and social processes. In
theories of language production, the social environment and
goals within such an interactive setting may be relevant. We
argue that such theories should address the possible
integration of multiple sources of information. Whatever the
proposed autonomy enjoyed by grammatical abilities, it may
be tempered by influences coming from the social relevance
of its operation.

Procedure
Participants expected to complete a task on memory and
listening skills. The experimenter explained that this study
investigated how well we communicate ideas to each other
and how well we retain information presented to us verbally
by a partner. After this brief explanation, the experimenter
explained that in order to improve performance, the two
partners should get to know each other. The experimenter
handed both people a survey asking them general questions
about themselves including hobbies, pet peeves, goals, and
less common questions such as “if you could be any food,
what would you be and why?” The confederates completed
this survey with scripted responses pretested to either make
the confederate seem mean or nice.
For those participants randomly assigned to a mean
confederate condition, the female confederate stated her

Experiment 1
Participants
Thirty Cornell undergraduates participated for extra credit in
their psychology or human development course.

Materials
The task participants completed was modeled after Bock’s
(1986) picture-description task. From Bock’s original set, we
selected 10 drawings at random that contained an agent,
185

hobbies included trying on Manolo Blahnik heels, making her
boyfriend buy them for her, and collecting Coach purses. The
male confederate described such hobbies as watching
NASDAQ tickers, sailing on the yacht his father bought him,
and drinking expensive scotch. When asked about pet peeves,
mean confederates claimed annoyance that people wear a
particular style of clothing actually worn by the participant in
that session. Finally, mean confederates described themselves
most similar to Russian vodka because “it’s expensive. It’s
rare…everyone wants it and only a select few get to have it.”
The nice female confederate proclaimed a love for Frisbee
and talking with friends, considered herself most like
chocolate because it makes people happy, and is most
annoyed that not enough people smile on the streets. The nice
male confederate liked playing pool and soccer, considered
himself most like pizza because it is enjoyed with a group of
friends, and wishes there was more time to relax with friends.
After completing this survey, the two partners exchanged
surveys to read the others’ responses. By request of the
experimenter, each person listed their initial impressions of
their partner. The mean confederate always indicated that
they would not be friends with such a person outside of the
lab and thought it improbable that the participant would
accomplish his/her goals. The nice confederate always
indicated they would choose this type of person as a friend,
found their partner’s goals exciting, and thought the person
ambitious.
After establishing the confederate as either nice or mean,
the experimenter explained the procedure for the second
phase, a picture-description task. The partners were seated in
front of their own computer in such a way that neither could
see the other’s screen. The experimenter reiterated that the
purpose of the study was to investigate how well ideas are
communicated and retained. For this reason, an audio
recording was made of the session to record the responses of
both partners. In 1 round, each member of the team was
shown a picture on their screen from the set of 32 described
above. In alternation, the partners described in a single
sentence the contents of the drawing. After each described 4
pictures, both wrote down the sentences produced by their
partner as a test of memory. The confederate was always
selected ostensibly at random to describe the first picture and
thus begin the alternation. Although the participant actually
saw drawings, the confederate’s computer screen displayed
only the scripted sentences that served as primes for the
pictures shown to the participant. The partners completed 1
practice round where they were given example descriptions
meant to encourage the use of complete sentences. Then, in
alternation, the confederate and participant each described 32
pictures across 8 rounds. After these 8 rounds, participants
completed a questionnaire that asked about their performance
and their impression of their partner.

passive, or other. To be scored as active, a description needed
to include a transitive verb with the agent of the action as the
subject of the sentence and contain a direct object. To be
scored as passive, the object of the action (the patient) had to
appear as the subject with the main verb preceded by one
form of “be” or “get” and followed by the agent of the action
contained within a “by” phrase. Any sentences that contained
verbs that could not be transformed into the other voice were
coded as other.
Descriptions of the dative pictures were scored as doubleobject, prepositional, or other. Double-object constructions
required that the indirect and direct objects followed the verb.
Prepositional descriptions required a dative verb followed by
a direct object and a prepositional phrase incorporating the
indirect object. If prepositional phrases could not be
transformed into double object forms, they were scored as
other.
Sentences that were constructed in the same style as the
prime that preceded them received a score of +1. Those
constructed in the alternative form as the prime that preceded
them received a score of 0. We then summed within each of
the four prime types to compute a score representing the
amount of mimicry of each prime type: active, passive, DO,
PO.

Results
Manipulation checks. In comparison to those partnered with
a nice confederate, those partnered with the mean confederate
clearly liked their partner less, t(28) = 3.44, p <.01, did not
get along as well with their partner, t(28) = 5.52, p < .001, did
not find them personable, t(28) = 3.97, p < .001, and would
not like having the same partner in future tasks, t(28) = 2.48,
p <.05.
Mimicry. We used a 2 (confederate style: mean, nice) X 4
(prime type: active, passive, DO, OP) repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with prime type as a withinsubjects factor. In addition, we included as a covariate the
number of sentences that were coded as other to control for
the unequal number of descriptions that received such a
coding.
First, there was a main effect of prime type, F(3, 25) =
3.32, p < .05, suggesting some sentence structures were
generally mimicked more regardless of likeability of the
confederate. In addition, the marginally significant effect of
the number of sentences coded as other argues for the
importance of its inclusion, F(1, 27) = 3.63, p = .07.
We expected more mimicry of all prime types when
working with a nice partner in comparison to a mean partner.
The average number of mimicked structures in each prime
type suggests that participants mimicked a nice partner (M =
2.76) more than a mean partner (M = 2.54), yet the main
effect of confederate style did not reach a conventional level
of significance, F (1, 27) = 1.69, p = .20. Importantly though,
the interaction between prime type and confederate style
suggests we look specifically at the pattern of mimicry at the
level of the particular prime, F (3, 25) = 2.49, p = .08. As can

Scoring
Descriptions of the target pictures were transcribed and
scored for syntactic form. Modeled after Bock (1986),
descriptions of the transitive pictures were scored as active,
186

be seen in Table 1, the expected pattern emerged in 3 of the 4
prime types. That is, participants mimicked the active,
passive, and object-preposition primes of the nice partner
more than the mean partner. In fact, an investigative post-hoc
2 (confederate style) X 3 (prime type: active, passive, OP)
repeated-measures ANOVA supports this. When looking at
the influence of confederate style on mimicry of these 3
prime types, the main effect of confederate style supports our
prediction. F (1, 27) = 7.63, p = .01. Unexpectedly, the
pattern of mimicry within DO primes, the 4th structure, does
not differ between confederate styles, F (1, 27) = 2.5, p = .13.

To generate such an environment, we changed the manner
in which the confederates behaved at the beginning of the
session. Instead of using the self-descriptive surveys as in
Exp. 1, we manipulated the degree to which the confederate
made salient the problems within the social interaction. In one
condition, the confederate acted annoyed and reacted rudely
to the inefficient experimenter. In another condition, the
confederate reacted patiently to the problems the
experimenter experienced. That is, the annoyed confederate
made salient the problematic nature of the social interaction
and thus activated the need to repair social relations. The
patient confederate did not make salient such issues or needs.
Importantly though, the annoyed confederate presumably
elicits negative affect while the patient confederate elicits
relatively more positive affect. If affect simply drives the
amount of mimicry, we should see greater mimicry of the
patient confederate in comparison to the annoyed one.
However, the social repair mechanism predicts greater
mimicry of the annoyed confederate than the patient one.

Table 1: Percent of mimicked sentences in each prime type as
a function of confederate style
Prime Type
Confederate

Active

Passive

DO

OP

M

Nice

73.6

55.2

39.5

37.2

50.2

Mean

62.4

35.4

55.0

32.8

46.2

Participants
To earn extra credit in their psychology and human
development course, 46 Cornell undergraduates participated.

Discussion

Materials

This study offers preliminary support for the position that
likeability of an interaction partner influences the priming of
syntactic structure. Participants were more likely to mimic the
active, passive, and OP structures in subsequently generated
sentences when a likable interaction partner first used these
structures. Participants mimicked these structures less when
working with a dislikable partner. While the DO structure
nonsignificantly trends towards the reverse pattern, it was not
reliably nor statistically affected by confederate conditions.
Nevertheless, 3 of 4 structures were significantly influenced by
the likeability of the confederate in the expected direction.

The materials used here were those in Exp. 1.

Procedure
Participants again expected to complete a task on memory
and listening skills. In exactly the same manner as in Exp. 1,
the experimenter explained the general instructions for how
the picture description task would proceed. As the
experimenter was providing this overview, he/she was also
setting up the computer program and recording device for the
partners. In all cases, the experimenter acted out technical
difficulties at this point. The annoyed confederate partner
responded to the experimenter’s problems by tapping his/her
pen on the table rapidly and asked in an annoyed tone, “How
long is this going to take? Do you want me to just do it for
you?” When the experimenter replied that no help was
needed, the confederate rolled his/her eyes. The patient
confederate, however, smiled, sat patiently and said, “It’s not
a problem. Don’t worry about it” while backing his/her chair
up to give the experimenter more space.
After this manipulation, participants and confederates
completed the interactive picture description task and their
statements were coded in exactly the same manner described
in Exp. 1.

Experiment 2
Although the results of Experiment 1 are a first step towards
uncovering an influence of social mimicry on syntactic
processing, an alternative mechanism could explain the
findings. Some have found that social mimicry occurs more
when in a positive mood and less when in a negative mood
(Chartrand, 2005). Despite the goal to manipulate the
likeability of the interaction partner, it is possible that such
manipulations directly influenced participants’ mood. Exp. 2
serves to rule out such a mediating influence.
To do so, we created a situation where syntactic priming or
mimicry might serve a social function. That is, we created the
feeling that a social interaction was off to a bad start and was
in the need of repair. If a social interaction is problematic,
mimicry is arguably a means to repair as it leads to smoother
and more harmonious social interactions (Lakin, et al., 2003).
Thus, we sought to investigate the use of syntactic priming as
a potential means of ameliorating a troubled social
interaction.

Results
Manipulation checks. In a pretest of these two scenarios, a
group of participants independent of those who participated in
the actual experiment described their reactions towards the
two types of confederates. These pretest participants read a
description of either the annoyed or the patient confederate.
Although they did not perceive any differences in the quality

187

of the experimenter’s work, t(57) = .01, p = .996, participants
indicated that the annoyed confederate seemed to make
salient the problems the experimenter was having (M = 3.4)
more so than did the reaction of the patient confederate (M =
2.7), t(57) = 3.50, p = .001.

general content of the sentence was correct but lacked a key
component (e.g., “referee got punched”), it received a score
of 1. We created a total score representing the breadth and
accuracy of participant’s memory by summing across the
score each sentence received. We found no significant
differences in the accuracy of participants’ memory for the
sentences spoken by each type of confederate, t(42) = 1.20, p
= .24. If anything, there was a slight tendency for greater
accuracy when partnered with the patient confederate (M =
44.6) than the annoyed confederate (M = 38.9), which runs
counter to the predictions of the attention-capture alternative
explanation.

Mimicry. To analyze the data, we once again used a 2
(confederate style: annoyed, patient) X 4 (prime type: active,
passive, DO, OP) repeated-measures ANOVA with prime
type as a within-subjects variable. In addition, we included as
a covariate the number of sentences that were coded as other.
We found a main effect of prime type, F(3, 41) = 3.00, p <
.05. There was also an effect of the covariate, F(1, 43) =
18.20, p < .001. However, the 2-way interactions between
prime type and confederate style and prime type and the
covariate were not significant, F’s < 1.
Most importantly, we expected a main effect of confederate
style, and this is in fact what we found, F(1, 43) = 5.15, p <
.05. As can be seen in Table, 2, participants generally were
more likely to mimic the annoyed confederate than the patient
confederate.

General Discussion
These studies aimed to open a relationship between two
usually disparate fields: social psychology
and
psycholinguistics. More importantly, they aim to foster a
union between two assumed disparate cognitive processes:
social mimicry and syntactic processing. For social
psychology, we provide additional experimental evidence that
people mimic those they like but also provide one of the first
demonstrations that people mimic less those they do not like.
Within language, we argue for a modulation of sometimes
presumed autonomous language processes by both linguistic
information and complex social information. Although it is
well established that basic linguistic processes and related
phenomena (e.g., lexical repetition, activation of syntactic
structures, etc.) contribute to sentence construction, this work
proposes an impact of social influences: The unfolding of
sentence production may be constrained by information
concerning the social context. These data contribute to the
current debate on the nature of linguistic mechanisms and
have implications for the presence of broader integration of
information in an interactive cognitive system.
Both mood and attention were ruled out as obvious
mediators of syntactic priming. First, both forms of unusual
confederate behavior (mean and annoyed) likely produce
negative affect or mood. However, these behaviors resulted in
opposite patterns of mimicry. Secondly, if the annoyed
confederate simply attracted more attention than the patient
one, memory for sentences spoken by the annoyed
confederate would be more accurate. However, we find no
differences in accuracy between confederate conditions. Our
data instead suggest that syntactic priming is influenced by
the nature of the social interaction. The relevance of the
confederate’s behavior implies differing functions for
syntactic mimicry that depend on the social context.
In this paper, we have finessed the often-detailed
discussion of “mimicry” and its various definitions (e.g.,
emulation, Tomasello, 2000). This is not to imply that these
distinctions and definitions are not important, but rather to
emphasize the potential for a relationship between such
psycholinguistic processes as syntactic priming, and those
more often associated with “higher-order” social happenings,
under such headings as imitation, mimicry, or emulation. One
direction this research recommends is exploring online
measures of syntactic priming. For example, Smith and

Table 2: Percent of mimicked sentences in each prime type as
a function of confederate style
Prime Type
Confederate

Active

Passive

DO

OP

M

Nice

75.0

34.6

52.8

27.0

47.3

Mean

84.0

48.4

59.3

27.3

53.6

Attention capture. It is possible though that the actions of
the annoyed partner are simply more attention capturing
given that these behaviors were more unusual than one would
normally expect in the laboratory. In fact, a group of
participants on whom these scenarios were pretested strongly
agreed that the actions of the annoyed partner captured their
attention and were more unusual than one would normally
expect, (M = 3.87 out of 5 where higher numbers indicate
more agreement), one sample tested against the midpoint 3,
t(22) = 5.74, p < .001. The behaviors, including syntactic use,
may simply be attended to more when the confederate acts in
an unusual manner. If attention is the mechanism, then we
should find that memory for the sentences spoken by the
annoyed confederate should be more accurately remembered.
To test this possibility, we had an assistant blind to the
purpose of the study and condition of the participant code the
sentences the participant recalled during the memory test after
each round. Each of the confederate’s sentences a participant
recalled was scored using the following system. If all key
components were present and the wording exact (e.g., “the
referee was punched by one of the fans”), it received a score
of 3. If all key components were present but the specific
phrasing of the sentence was not exact (e.g., “referee got
punched and a fan did it”), it received a score of 2. If the
188

Wheeldon (2001) demonstrated speeded construction of a
sentence to describe a picture when a prime sentence had a
similar syntactic structure. Likewise, such online measures in
production and comprehension under the conditions of
possible social influences may reveal that online production
of sentences, which reflects more on the participant’s social
goals, would be more amenable to social influences than
passive comprehension of sentences, which may have little
direct relevance to social evaluation or social goals of the
participant. Finally, future work might address the seemingly
disparate influence of social information on DO construction.
Although the impenetrability of DO construction only
appears in Exp. 1, further study might look into why social
influences appear less powerful here.
Several decades of work have led to the often-assumed
cognitive autonomy of language. Currently, social and
linguistic cognition are held to be separate fields, composed
of different literatures, and disparate subject matters. The past
two decades, however, are seeing a trend away from such
cognitive balkanization (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith, 1995). In this
paper, we have recommended realms of social psychology
and language that may serve as a valuable theoretical and
empirical intersection. The many dimensions of interaction
between social information and language processing may
serve to further the goal of unifying our separate
compartments of cognitive processing.

Dunbar, I. (1997). Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of
language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ferreira, V. S. (2002). The persistence of optional
complementizer production: Why saying “that” is not
saying “that” at all. Journal of Memory and Language, 48,
379-398.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Meijer, P. J. A. (1999). Building syntactic
structure in speaking. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 28, 71-92.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation so
easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8-11.
Giles, H., & Powesland, P. F. (1975). Speech style and social
evaluation. London: Academic Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1995). Beyond modularity: A
developmental perspective on cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lakin, J. L., Jefferis, V. E., Cheng, C. M., & Chartrand, T. L.
(2003). The chameleon effect as social glue: Evidence for
the evolutionary significance of nonconscious mimicry.
Journal of nonverbal behavior, 27, 145-162.
Lombardi, L., & Potter, M. C. (1992). The regeneration of
syntax in short-term memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 713-733.
Lott, A. J., & Lott, B. E. (1961). Group cohesiveness,
communication level, and conformity. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 62, 408-412.
Neuberg, S.L., Smith, D., Hoffman, J., & Russell, F. (1994).
When we observe stigmatized and “normal” individuals
interacting: Stigma by association. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 20, 196-209.
Neumann, R. & Strack, F. (2000). Approach and avoidance:
The influence of proprioceptive and exteroceptive cues on
encoding of affective information. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 79, 39-48.
Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1998). Metrical structure in
planning and production of spoken words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 922-939.
Sevald, C. A., Dell, G. S., & Cole, J. S. (1995). Syllable
structure in speech production: Are syllables chunks or
schemas? Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 807-820.
Smith, M. & Wheeldon, L. (2001). Syntactic priming in
spoken sentence production: An online study. Cognition,
78, 123-164.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Webb, J. T. (1972). Interview synchrony: An investigation of
two speech rate measures in an automated standardized
interview. In B. Pope & A. W. Siegman (Eds.), Studies in
dyadic communication. New York: Pergamon.

References
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity
of social behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and
stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 230-244.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Cappella, J. N., & Panalp, S. (1981). Talk and silence
sequences in informal conversations: Interspeaker
influence. Human Communication Research, 7, 117-132.
Charney, I. W. (1966). Integrated individual and family
psychotherapy. Family Process, 5, 179-198.
Chartrand, T. L. (2005, January). I am too just like you: The
effects of ostracism on nonconscious mimicry. Paper
presented at the annual conference of the Society for
Personality and Social Psychology. New Orleans, LA.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social interaction.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893-910.
Dijksterhuis, A., & van Knippenberg, A. (2000). Behavioral
indecision: Effects of self-focus on automatic behavior.
Social Cognition, 18, 55-74.

189

