UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Inspection-Time Analysis of Figural Effects and Processing Direction in Syllogistic
Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/33f3r12s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ball, Linden J.
Stupple, Edward J.N.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Inspection-Time Analysis of Figural Effects and Processing Direction in
Syllogistic Reasoning
Edward J. N. Stupple (E.J.N.Stupple@derby.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Derby
Derby, DE3 9GX, UK

Linden J. Ball (L.Ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
reasoners construct a model representing the information in
the premises of a given argument. During the description
stage they integrate the premises to formulate a putative
conclusion. Finally, reasoners search for contradictory
alternative models in the validation stage. Reasoners
compare their putative conclusion with alternative models of
the premises. If no counterexample model is found the
putative conclusion is accepted as valid. The mental model
theory of deduction has achieved substantial support from a
variety of studies (for a review see Johnson-Laird, 2001).
However, disputes in the literature question whether
reasoning might be better understood in terms of a ‘mental
logic’ (e.g., Braine, 1978; Rips, 1994), or as probabilistic
Bayesian computations (e.g., Chater & Oaksford, 2001).
The main aim of the present paper is to test predictions
derived from the mental models theory about the
representation of premise information during deductive
reasoning. The experiments test models-based predictions
by using a technique that directly monitors the amount of
time that processing effort is focused on premise and
conclusion components of syllogisms. However,
consideration is also given to the extent to which alternative
theories of deduction can account for our data.
Syllogisms are a standard deductive reasoning task, and
consist of two premise statements and a conclusion, each
containing one of four logical quantifiers. These quantifiers
determine the mood of a syllogism, and are referred to by
letters of the alphabet, where A = All, E = No, I = Some, and
O = Some…are not. The validity of a syllogism depends on
the mood of the premises and conclusion and upon the order
in which terms are arranged in the argument, that is, the
syllogism’s figure. In this paper we follow the convention
(Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984) of referring the three terms in
a syllogism as A, B and C, where A is linked to B in the first
premise, B to C in the second premise, and A to C in the
conclusion. Thus, four figures can be defined as follows:
AB-BC, BA-CB, AB-CB, and BA-BC.

Abstract
Two experiments are reported that tested core assumptions of
the mental models theory of syllogistic inference (e.g.,
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991) by examining inspection times
for syllogistic components. Results supported mental models
predictions of: (1) increased cognitive load across syllogistic
figures, with differences in processing demand arising for
BA-CB versus AB-BC problems for both conclusionevaluation and conclusion-production tasks; and (2)
conclusion-order preferences across figures – again in both
the evaluation and the production paradigms. These findings
challenge views of figural biases as being confined to
conclusion-production tasks (Geurts, 2003; Rips, 1994) and
theories that reject the assumption of figure-induced cognitive
load (Chater & Oaksford, 1999). Since figural effects are
typically viewed as being indicative of premise-driven
processing, these results are also inconsistent with proposals
that premise-driven processing prevails in conclusionproduction, and conclusion-driven processing dominates in
conclusion-evaluation (Morley, Evans, & Handley, 2004).
The results also clarify the role of processing demands
associated with conclusion validity: Valid conclusions were
scrutinised less than invalid ones in the evaluation paradigm
(as predicted by Hardman & Payne, 1995), supporting the
notion that invalid syllogisms have at least two mental
models. Although our specific results are not entirely
consistent with recent models-based proposals, our basic
findings remain broadly compatible with a models approach
rather than alternative theoretical positions.
Keywords: Syllogistic reasoning; figural effects; processing
direction; mental models; strategies; inspection times.

Introduction
Deduction and Mental Models
Deduction is the process by which we integrate information
and infer what was previously implicit in such information.
Studies of deduction have provoked fundamental debates
concerning the functioning of the human mind and the
extent and limits of human rationality (e.g., see Evans &
Over, 1996). One of the dominant theories posited to
account for deductive processes is that based upon the
concept of mental models (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). According to this account, people achieve deduction
through three processing stages. In the comprehension stage

Figural Effects
Research on syllogistic inference has demonstrated that a
major influence on reasoning performance derives from the
figure of presented arguments (e.g., Bara, Bucciarelli, &
Johnson-Laird, 1995; Bara, Bucciarelli, & Lombardo, 2001;
Dickstein, 1978; Ford, 1994; Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984).

2092

Figural effects have been extensively studied in syllogistic
reasoning, however, there is evidence that the premise order
plays a significant role in performance in other deduction
paradigms (e.g., Garcia-Madruga, Moreno, Carriedo,
Gutiérrez, & Johnson-Laird, 2001).
Johnson-Laird and Bara (1984) argued that figural effects
occur when participants integrate premises. A figure where
middle terms are contiguous (AB-BC) is less cognitively
demanding than a figure where they are not (BA-CB).
Based on Hunter (1957), Johnson-Laird and Bara (1984)
proposed two mental manipulations to bring middle terms
into contiguity: (1) reorder the representation of premises
(BA-CB becomes CB-BA); or (2) switch around premise
representations (Some A are B becomes Some B are A,
however, All A are B does not switch around to be All B are
A, but logically converts to Some B are A). Johnson-Laird
and Bara (1984) also showed that participants preferred
conclusions for figure AB-BC in the order A-C and for
figure BA-CB in the order C-A. Broadbent’s (1958) ‘first-in
first-out’ (FIFO) rule combined with the mental
manipulations outlined is used to explain these preferences.
Bara et al. (2001) developed a computational model
(UNICORE) that assembles integrated mental models by
overlapping matching middle terms in the two premises.
This process is undemanding when the middle terms are
contiguous, however, when the terms are not adjacent the
cognitively demanding mental manipulations are invoked.
Within this mental models theory, the FIFO property of
working memory (WM) and the associated notion of
cognitive demand are central in explaining the emergence of
figural effects and conclusion-direction preferences.
Espino, Santamaria, and Garcia-Madruga (2000b) have
proposed that the difficulty of syllogisms should be evident
by increases in inspection times for the second premises of
presented problems. They demonstrated support for this
models-based prediction using a methodology whereby
people’s time spent processing second premises was
examined. However, during the experiment participants
were unable to refer to the first premise after viewing the
second premise, thus creating an additional WM load.
Gilhooly, Logie, and Wynn (2002) have argued that a WM
load induced by the serial presentation of premises can
inhibit the deployment of preferred reasoning strategies.
Some theorists have proposed that figural effects are
restricted to conclusion-production paradigms (e.g., Geurts,
2003; Rips, 1994; Wetherick, 1989), whilst others dispute
the notion that cognitive loads are induced by the figure of a
syllogism (e.g., see Chater & Oaksford’s, 1999, probability
heuristics model – PHM). Mental models theory appears to
be alone in its explicit argument for a WM load in reasoning
induced by figure. Ford (1995) suggests an alternative
explanation of figural effects to mental models, in the form
of a verbal algebra, an explanation that does not directly
specify WM involvement, but lends itself to an implicit
assumption of WM load if reasoners cannot externalize their
mental representations. Stenning and Yule (1997) proposed
an explanation of figural bias that suggests the order of end

terms in a conclusion is determined by the order of the terms
in a ‘source premise’. According to this theory, the source
premise provides the so-called ‘necessary individuals’
whose existence is entailed by the premises. The sourcefounding hypothesis claims that the terms from the source
premise will tend to precede the other end term in the
conclusion and will also retain the order in which they
appear in the source premise. However, it does not specify a
cognitive load induced by figure.
Stenning (2002) is also critical of the mental models
explanation of figural effects upon conclusion order. He
suggests that it is insufficient merely to claim a role for the
FIFO principle (Broadbent, 1958), but that further evidence
is needed to support this explanation as such a mechanism is
not necessitated by the representational system proposed.
Stenning further argues that while the investigation of the
order of terms in working memory is of psychological
interest, evidence of this should not be claimed as
supportive of any particular representational system. He
suggests that any representational system could be modified
to incorporate such effects. However, it remains that any
theory failing to account for such evidence cannot be said to
be a complete account of syllogistic reasoning performance.
Accordingly, consistent evidence for a figural WM load in
both evaluation and production tasks suggests that
modifications may be needed for all of the leading theories
of syllogistic reasoning - mental models theory apart.

Processing Direction

2093

The figural effects outlined above tend to dominate
syllogistic reasoning performance in the conclusionproduction paradigm (Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984),
whereas figural effects are not well established in the
conclusion-evaluation paradigm (Evans, Handley, Harper,
& Johnson-Laird, 1999; Quayle & Ball, 2000). The standard
models theory of syllogistic inference has tended to
underplay the distinction between production and evaluation
paradigms. Instead, the emphasis is upon the sequence of
initial model construction, conclusion description and
validation. Moreover, a theoretical debate concerning the
direction of reasoning processes in the evaluation paradigm
is developing (e.g., Morley et al., 2004), which concerns
whether processing on evaluation tasks involves either: (1)
‘forward reasoning’ from the premises to the conclusion, as
advocated in the standard models account and some of its
recent variants (e.g., Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1999;
Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Quayle & Ball, 2000); or (2)
‘backward reasoning’, whereby people use a presented
conclusion to guide the construction of a model of the
premises (e.g., Evans, Handley, & Harper, 2001; Hardman
& Payne, 1995; Klauer, Musch, & Naumer, 2000). The
backward-reasoning view is clearly a rather different
proposal to the standard models claim that premise-driven
processing underpins syllogistic inference.
Morley et al. (2004) argue that forward reasoning prevails
in conclusion-generation tasks whereas backward reasoning
prevails in conclusion-evaluation tasks. It is through this

distinction that they explain the lack of figural effects in
conclusion-evaluation tasks. Backward-reasoning processes
that use presented conclusions as initial models would be
unlikely to show a cognitive demand induced by combining
initial models with premises to form integrated models.
A further distinction can be drawn in the predictions of
the standard mental models theory versus more recent
variants of the theory in the context of the conclusionevaluation paradigm. The standard theory assumes that
participants need to construct all possible models of the
premises to confirm the validity of the presented conclusion,
whereas invalid conclusions require the discovery of only a
single disconfirming model to enable its rejection. However,
recent versions of models theory suggest that valid
conclusions can be accepted as necessary without the
exploration of falsifying models, while invalid conclusions
require construction of a falsifying model to be refuted
(Garnham, 1992; Hardman & Payne, 1995; Quayle & Ball,
2000). Others propose that only a single model is considered
in either case (e.g., Klauer et al., 2000).
The experiments that we report here refined Espino et
al.’s (2000b) inspection-time methodology by employing a
more flexible problem-presentation technique, whereby
clicking the mouse cursor on designated screen areas
revealed a syllogism’s first or second premise, or its
conclusion. Once the cursor was removed from an active
area this portion of the screen was instantly re-masked. This
methodology reduces artifacts arising from the serial
presentation of premises inhibiting participants’ reasoning
strategies (Gilhooly et al., 2002) because participants could
refresh their mental representations of syllogistic
components whenever they wished to.

Production Task Predictions
As there are no available conclusions that can guide a
backward-reasoning process in the production paradigm
then a forward-reasoning process (as espoused in the
standard mental models theory) would be most likely to
prevail. As such, the BA-CB figure would be predicted to
have greater premise inspection times than the AB-BC
figure. Participants would also be expected to produce more
conclusions that are consistent with a figural bias than ones
that are inconsistent with such a bias.

Experiment 1: Evaluation Paradigm
Method
Eight syllogisms were presented: four in the figure AB-BC,
with the quantifiers IA, and four in the figure BA-CB with
the quantifiers AI. Syllogisms were presented with a
logically valid (I) conclusion or an invalid (O) conclusion.
Valid and invalid conclusions were also presented either in
figurally preferred or non-preferred orders (i.e., Some A are
C vs. Some C are A conclusions for valid problems; Some A
are not C and Some C are not A conclusions for invalid
problems). The content of all syllogisms consisted of
professions (e.g., Policemen), pastimes, and hobbies (e.g.,
Cyclists). Participants were asked to evaluate the logical
validity of the presented syllogisms. The inspection time for
each problem component formed the dependent variable.
Authorware 5.1 was used to create displays and to collect
data. Problems were presented with premises and
conclusions masked. These components were revealed with
a mouse pointer as participants evaluated the argument’s
logical validity. Forty-one undergraduates from the
University of Derby participated in the experiment; none
had been taught about reasoning or logic.

Evaluation Task Predictions
According to the standard models theory, AB-BC figure
syllogisms are easier to process than BA-CB ones, and
should be associated with lower premise inspection times.
However, backward-reasoning theories predict no such
inspection-time imbalance across these figures. In addition,
according to standard models theory, participants should
prefer C-A conclusions for BA-CB syllogisms, whilst they
should prefer A-C conclusions for AB-BC syllogisms. In
line with such preferences it might also be expected that
non-preferred conclusions would be associated with longer
inspection times. Again, no such inspection time imbalance
would be predicted by theories emphasising backwardreasoning processes. In relation to the validity status of
conclusions it is possible to derive differential inspectiontime predictions from variants of mental models theory.
Some theories posit no difference in inspection times for
valid over invalid conclusions because only one possible
model of the premises is considered (e.g., Klauer et al.,
2000). Contrasting theories (e.g., Quayle and Ball, 2000)
predict lower inspection-times for valid conclusions because
they only require the consideration of a single, initial model
to be accepted, whereas invalid conclusions require further
model construction to refute the fallacy.

Results and Discussion
Premise Analysis Premise inspection times (see Table 1 for
summary data) were positively skewed in all conditions, so
a square-root transformation was conducted prior to
inferential analysis. A 2 (Figure) by 2 (Quantifier) ANOVA
revealed a main effect of Figure, F(1, 40) = 18.2, p < .001.
Premises in the BA-CB figure were inspected significantly
longer than those in the AB-BC figure, supporting the
mental models argument for greater cognitive load when
middle terms are not contiguous. This result was contrary to
theories that do not predict an additional processing demand
from figural effects (e.g., Chater & Oaksford, 1999).
Premises with the quantifier ‘Some’ were scrutinised
significantly longer than premises with the quantifier ‘All’,
F(1, 40) = 7.9, p < .01, suggesting that quantifiers vary in
representational complexity (cf. Anderson, 1981, who has
argued that the ‘Some’ is a more demanding quantifier to
represent than ‘All’). There was also an interaction between
Quantifier and Figure, F(1, 40) = 7.2, p < .05, which is
consistent with a premise reordering strategy for the BA-CB
figure that is moderated by quantifier complexity.

2094

Table 1: Mean premise inspection times as a function of
Figure and Quantifier.
AB-BC

BA-CB

Conclusion acceptance rates showed a significant effect of
Validity, with more valid conclusions accepted (84%) than
invalid conclusions (65%), F(1, 40) = 22.7, p < .001,
providing evidence of participants distinguishing between I
and O conclusions. There was a significant effect of Figure,
F(1, 40) = 6.1, p < .02, such that more AB-BC syllogisms
were accepted as valid (79%) than BA-CB (70%) ones.
There was a trend toward a conclusion-order preference,
F(1, 40) = 2.6, p = .11, with slightly more preferred
conclusions accepted (76%) than non-preferred conclusions
(72%).

M

ND

TD

ND

TD

ND

TD

Some

5.75

5.33

5.99

5.68

5.87

5.51

All

4.50

4.32

6.19

5.85

5.34

5.09

M

5.13

4.83

6.10

5.76

5.61

5.30

Summary The results indicate a more salient role for figure
in evaluation tasks than that suggested by many theorists
(e.g., Geurts, 2003; Rips, 1994; Wetherick, 1989). The
results are also incompatible with current mental models
proposals (e.g., Morley et al., 2004) concerning the direction
of cognitive processing arising in syllogistic inference. The
observed effects of figure upon processing demand are not
predicted by backward-reasoning theories that emphasise
conclusion-driven processing, but are predicted by
traditional forward-reasoning theories where people work
from premises toward the presented conclusion (e.g.,
Bucciarelli & Johnson-Laird, 1999). The observation that
invalid conclusions are inspected for longer than valid ones
supports the proposal that valid conclusions require the
construction of fewer models than invalid conclusions (e.g.,
Hardman and Payne, 1995; Quayle & Ball, 2000).

Note. ND = natural data in seconds. TD = transformed data
(square root of natural data) converted into original measurement
units (seconds). Standard errors for the natural data ranged from
0.31 to 0.52, and from 0.07 to 0.10 for transformed data.

Conclusion Analysis Conclusion inspection times (Table 2)
were also transformed to remove positive skew prior to
ANOVA. The analysis revealed a reliable effect of Validity
F(1, 40) = 27.9, p < .001. Valid conclusions were
scrutinised less than invalid conclusions. This supports the
proposal that valid syllogisms require the construction of
only one model, whereas invalid conclusions require
additional model construction to disconfirm the presented
conclusion (Garnham, 1992; Hardman & Payne, 1995;
Quayle & Ball, 2000). However, rules theorists such as Rips
(1994) could argue that increased inspection time for invalid
conclusions occurs because of the need to search for a proof
that does not exist. There was also a reliable effect of
Preferred Conclusion Order F(1, 40) = 18.12, p < .001.
Participants inspected conclusions consistent with figural
bias for less time than conclusions that were inconsistent
with figural bias. The validity effects on conclusion
inspection times are consistent with either forward- or
backward-reasoning processes as described in recent
variants of the mental models theory. However, the
conclusion preference findings are more usually associated
with theories that advance a forward-reasoning process.
There was no significant interaction between Validity and
Preferred Conclusion Order F(1, 40) = 0.02, p > .05.

Experiment 2: Production Paradigm
Method
In the production-task experiment we presented participants
with eight syllogisms: two in the AB-BC figure, with the
quantifiers IA, and two in the BA-CB figure with the
quantifiers AI. Distracter items were in the moods IE and
EI. All procedural aspects of the experiment were the same
as those in the previous evaluation study, with the exception
that there were only two masked areas (corresponding to the
premises) and a region where participants typed their
responses to each pair of presented premises. Fifty-two
University of Derby undergraduates participated in this
study and none had been taught about reasoning or logic.

Table 2: Mean conclusion inspection times as a function of
Validity and Preferred Conclusion Order.
Valid

Invalid

Results and Discussion

M

ND

TD

ND

TD

ND

TD

Preferred

2.99

2.89

4.09

3.88

3.54

3.37

Non-preferred

3.82

3.62

5.13

4.71

4.47

4.14

M

3.41

3.25

4.61

4.29

4.01

3.75

Note. ND = natural data in seconds. TD = transformed data (square
root of natural data) converted into original measurement units
(seconds). Standard errors for the natural data ranged from 0.17 to
0.52, and from 0.05 to 0.10 for transformed data.

Premise Analysis The inspection-time data obtained in this
study were positively skewed and were subjected to the
same square-root transformation procedure as had been
employed in Experiment 1 (see Table 3 for summary data).
A 2 (Figure) by 2 (Quantifier) ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of Figure, F(1, 51) = 18.9, p < .001,
with premises in the figure BA-CB being inspected
significantly longer than premises in the AB-BC figure.
Premises with the quantifier ‘Some’ were scrutinised longer
than premises with the quantifier ‘All’ F(1, 51) = 10.5, p <
.001, again supporting the idea that ‘Some’ is a more
demanding quantifier to represent than ‘All’.

2095

Table 3: Mean premise inspection times as a function of
Figure and Quantifier.
AB-BC

BA-CB

M

ND

TD

ND

TD

ND

TD

Some

9.85

8.78

15.19

13.29

12.52

11.03

All

7.03

6.59

14.14

12.35

10.59

9.47

M

8.44

7.68

14.67

12.82

11.55

10.25

Note. ND = natural data in seconds. TD = transformed data
(square root of natural data) converted into original measurement
units (seconds). Standard errors for the natural data ranged from
0.51 to 1.80, and from 0.09 to 0.19 for transformed data.

Conclusion Analysis There were no significant differences
between figures for the quantifiers produced, χ2(4) = 5.4, p >
.05, and 79% of responses were valid (i.e., ‘Some… are…’
conclusions). There was a highly significant association
between the preferred conclusion direction and participants’
responses, χ2(2) = 138.2, p < .001, with 72% of responses
being in the preferred direction. However, this association
was stronger for the figure AB-BC (82%) than BA-CB
(63%), χ2(2) = 10.5, p < .01. This supports the FIFO
property of working memory, whilst also suggesting
possible individual differences in mental manipulations
when they do occur. These conclusion-direction findings are
consistent with a ‘forward reasoning’ process as advanced
in standard mental models theory.

General Discussion
Our experiments aimed to test central predictions of the
mental models theory of syllogistic reasoning. These
predictions concerned the way in which the figure of
presented problems should impact upon the processing
effort required to formulate models of given premises and to
establish the logical validity of conclusions. We set out to
test such predictions using a computer-based, inspectiontime methodology similar to that pioneered by Espino et al.
(2000b). However, Espino et al.’s (2000b) study, prevented
participants from referring back to the first premise of a
problem once the second premise had been revealed, and
thus restricted the detection of the precise locus of figural
effects on processing, and did not allow for a conclusioncentered backward-reasoning process - as proposed in recent
accounts of evaluation-task performance (e.g., Evans et al.,
2001; Hardman & Payne, 1995; Klauer et al., 2000).
The two experiments presented provide evidence that
generally concurs with the standard mental models theory of
syllogistic inference (e.g., Bara et al., 2001; Johnson-Laird
& Bara, 1984). This is the only contemporary account that
explicitly posits a WM demand arising from syllogistic
figure. Our experiments support the notion of a cognitive
load that is induced by reasoning with syllogisms that have
non-contiguous middle terms for both conclusion
2096

production and evaluation tasks. This evidence replicates
findings from Espino et al. (2000b) whilst using different
syllogisms and a methodology that allows for more flexible
strategy deployment than in their study. The findings also
broadly replicate the results of a process tracing experiment
by Stupple and Ball (2005) that found similar effects of
figure, validity and conclusion preference using multiplemodel syllogisms with a conclusion-evaluation paradigm.
The consistency of findings across both evaluation and
production formats is contrary to theories that suggest
figural effects are a quirk of production tasks (e.g., Geurts,
2003; Rips, 1994; Wetherick, 1989). Although Chater and
Oaksford’s (1999) model is able to predict the most
frequently endorsed and generated conclusions in both
experiments, as well as the observed tendency for ‘Min’
premises to be viewed consistently longer, their account
predicts no figurally-induced cognitive load in syllogistic
reasoning. In response to Espino et al.’s (2000a) experiment
that claimed evidence for figural effects based on the
activation of end-terms in memory, Oaksford argued that:
“Their [Espino et al.’s] finding does not address the issue of
processing difficulty, so it is difficult to see how it bears on
PHM's prediction of no differences in processing difficulty
between figures” (Oaksford, 2001, p. 208). So, whilst
Oaksford disputes the validity of Espino et al.'s (2000a)
measure, he indicates that if a measure of processing
difficulty demonstrated a difference between figures this
would challenge the current formulation of the PHM.
Although the figure-induced load is inconsistent with
several contemporary theories, we agree with Stenning
(2002) that this does not provide fundamental evidence
against the core principles of those theories, as it is quite
possible to modify a heuristics-driven or rules-based theory
to incorporate a component specifying a cognitive load
induced by the non-contiguity of middle terms. One possible
avenue would be through a mental algebra akin to that
proposed by Ford (1994). However, it is suggested that until
these theories develop an explicit account of how figure
impacts upon WM they remain less complete than mental
models theory as an explanation of syllogistic inference.
The evidence we present for figural influences on premise
and conclusion processing are also not entirely in
accordance with all current model-based theories. For
example, a figural influence in an evaluation paradigm calls
into question proposals from Morley et al. (2004) for a
dissociation between the reasoning strategies employed in
conclusion-evaluation compared with conclusion-production
tasks. They propose that forward reasoning may dominate in
the conclusion-production paradigm, whereas backward
reasoning may prevail in the conclusion-evaluation
paradigm as presented conclusions can motivate the
construction of models incorporating those conclusions. Our
evidence for figural effects on processing for evaluation
tasks and their similarity to the patterns of inspection-times
for production tasks is not easily reconciled with Morley et
al.’s position. It is possible, however, that Morley et al.’s
use of belief-oriented materials might explain the strategic

differences observed across studies (see also Ball, Phillips,
Wade, & Quayle, in press, for evidence supporting
conclusion-driven processing in a belief-bias paradigm).
The standard mental models theory also failed to account
for our full range of findings. The longer inspection time for
invalid conclusions relative to valid ones was inconsistent
with the proposal that there would be no difference between
them because there is only one possible model of the
premises that we employed. This validity effect instead
supports the view that valid conclusions can be accepted as
necessary without the exploration of falsifying models,
while invalid conclusions require construction of a
falsifying model to be refuted (e.g., Garnham, 1992;
Hardman & Payne, 1995; Quayle & Ball, 2000). An
alternative explanation may be that the invalid conclusions
are more difficult to represent due to the more complex ‘O’
quantifier (Anderson, 1981). However, Stupple and Ball
(2005) have recently shown a similar difference, when all
evaluated conclusions have the ‘O’ quantifier.
In summary, it would appear that current theories of
syllogistic reasoning do not simultaneously accommodate
evidence for: (1) processing imbalances across the premises
of different figures - as reflected in differential premise
inspection times in both evaluation and production
paradigms; and (2) the effects of validity and preferred
conclusion direction observed in the conclusion components
for evaluation tasks. Although most key theories of
syllogistic reasoning might be able to extrapolate their
central principles to account for figural influences on
premise and conclusion processing, it remains for the
proponents of these theories to take up this challenge.

Acknowledgments
We thank Nicki Morley and Kevin Paterson for their advice
and the University of Derby for its financial support.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1981). Memory for logical quantifiers.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20,
306-321.
Ball, L. J., Phillips, P., Wade, C. N., & Quayle, J. D. (in
press). Effects of belief and logic on syllogistic reasoning:
Eye-movement evidence for selective processing models.
Experimental Psychology.
Bara, B. G., Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1995).
Development of syllogistic reasoning. American Journal
of Psychology, 108, 157-193.
Bara B.G., Bucciarelli M., & Lombardo V. (2001). Mental
model theory of deduction: A unified computational
approach. Cognitive Science, 25, 839-901.
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication.
London: Pergamon.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Strategies in
syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 23, 247-303.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). The probability
heuristics model of syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive
Psychology, 38, 191-258.

Espino O., Santamaria C., & Garcia-Madruga J. A. (2000a).
Activation of end-terms in syllogistic reasoning. Thinking
and Reasoning, 6, 67-89.
Espino, O., Santamaria, C., & Garcia-Madruga, J. A.
(2000b). Figure and difficulty in syllogistic reasoning
Current Psychology of Cognition 19, 417-428.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Harper, C. N. J. (2001).
Necessity, possibility and belief: A study of syllogistic
reasoning.
Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology, 54A, 935-958.
Garnham, A. (1993). A number of questions about a
question of number. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16,
350-351.
Geurts, B. (2003) Reasoning with quantifiers. Cognition, 86,
223-251.
Garcìa-Madruga, J. A., Moreno, S., Carriedo, N., Gutiérrez,
F., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Are conjunctive
inferences easier than disjunctive inferences? A
comparison of rules and models. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54A, 613-632.
Gilhooly, K. J., Logie, R. H., & Wynn, V. (2002).
Syllogistic reasoning tasks and working memory:
Evidence from sequential presentation of premises.
Current Psychology 21, 111-120.
Hardman, D. K., & Payne, S. J. (1995). Problem difficulty
and response format in syllogistic reasoning. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48A, 945-975.
Hunter, I. M. L. (1957). The solving of three term series
problems. British Journal of Psychology, 48, 286-298.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and deduction.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 434-442.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Bara, B. G. (1984). Syllogistic
inference. Cognition, 16, 1-61.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Klauer, K. C., Musch, J., & Naumer, B. (2000). On belief
bias in syllogistic reasoning. Psychological Review, 107,
852-884.
Morley, N. J., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Handley, S. J. (2004).
Belief bias and figural bias in syllogistic reasoning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A, 666692.
Quayle, J. D., & Ball, L. J. (2000). Working memory,
metacognitive uncertainty, and belief bias in syllogistic
reasoning.
Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology, 53A, 1202-1223.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: Deductive
reasoning in human thinking. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Stenning, K. (2002) Seeing reason: Image and language in
learning to think. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Stenning, K., & Yule, P. (1997) Image and language in
human reasoning: A syllogistic illustration. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 109-159.
Stupple, E. J. N., & Ball, L. J. (2005). Figural effects in a
syllogistic evaluation paradigm. Unpublished Manuscript,
Centre for Psychological Research in Human Behaviour,
University of Derby, UK.
Wetherick, N. E. (1989). Psychology and syllogistic
reasoning. Philosophical Psychology, 2, 111-124.

2097

