UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogy and Transfer: Encoding the Problem at the Right Level of Abstraction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ww0n0nq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Ritt, Nikolaus

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogy and Transfer: Encoding the Problem at the Right Level of Abstraction
Emmanuel Sander (sander@univ-paris8.fr)
University Paris 8, Department of Psychology, 2 Rue de la Liberté
Saint-Denis Cedex 02, 93526 France

Jean-François Richard (richard@univ-paris8.fr)
University Paris 8, Department of Psychology, 2 Rue de la Liberté
Saint-Denis Cedex 02, 93526 France

Abstract
Analogy and transfer studies belong to distinct research areas
regarding both the theoretical frameworks and the experimental
paradigms, although they both contribute to the fundamental
question of the generalization of learning. The aim of this paper
is to show that those fields might be reanalyzed within a
common framework, emphasizing the role of the abstraction
level at which the problem is encoded, which might contribute
to an unified theory of generalization of learning.

Analogy and transfer
Analogy and transfer of learning, which are two distinct areas
in cognitive psychology as the lack of cross references
between the two fields illustrates, are both concerned with the
same basic questions: how can what has been learned in a
specific situation be generalized to new situations and what
conditions are necessary and/or sufficient to generate transfer
from one situation to another? We shall attempt to reanalyze
both phenomena within the same theoretical framework and
show how this analysis contributes to the fundamental
question of the generalization of learning.

Differences and similarities in the study of analogy
and transfer.
The prevailing theory of transfer, proposed originally by
Thorndike and Woodworth (1901), is transfer between the
learning and the test situations relies on common elements.
This theory has more recently been revived in the contexts of
learning complex devices and programming languages. In
these contexts, the common elements are production rules,
which have both a stimulus side (their conditions) and a
response side (the action triggered by the conditions). The
idea that the degree of transfer between two tasks is
proportional to the relative number of productions rules they
have in common, each task being described by a set of
production rules corresponding to the allowable procedures,
has received substantive confirmation in text editing and
computer programming (Anderson & Singley, 1993; Bovair,
Kieras & Polson, 1990).
On the other hand, the analogy theories have been developed
in the last two decades mainly through the works of Gentner
(1983, 1989) and Holyoak (e.g. Holyoak & Thagard, 1989;
Hummel & Holyoak, 1997, 2003) and their co-workers.

While differing in many respects, both theories decompose
the analogy process into several basic constituent processes
(access, mapping, inference, evaluation, generalization) and
distinguish several kinds of similarities (pragmatic, semantic,
superficial, structural), which govern analogy process
differently depending on the constituent at hand. Theories
differ in the kind of similarities taken into account and in the
way these similarities are involved within the constituent
processes.
Several differences distinguish the experimental paradigms
used between transfer and analogy studies. (i) Most of the
problems in the analogy studies concern story problems that
may be solved by pure reasoning and do not involve any
physical action. The solution consists in the verbal statement
of a procedure in order to attain the goal and not in the
effective attainment of the goal (e.g. Ross, 1989). The reverse
is true for transfer studies: solution is reached through
physical actions from initial to final states of the problem (e.g.
Kotovski, Hayes & Simon, 1985). (ii) Due to the prominent
use of verbal material in the analogy studies, the semantic
content of the tasks is usually much richer and irrelevant
features are more numerous than in the transfer studies;
therefore the selection of features for mapping is more critical
in analogy studies than in transfer studies. (iii) In analogy
studies, the solution to the source problem is usually not
worked out by the participant but provided by the
instructions, as it is the case in traditional teaching situations,
whereas in transfer studies, the solution is discovered by the
participant; thus, what is transferred is more likely to be
declarative knowledge in the analogy studies and procedural
knowledge in transfer studies. (iv) In analogy studies, a
problem, or several isomorphic problems, is (are) usually
given only once, while in transfer studies, several trials may
be given for the same task by varying the initial state and the
goal. In this way it is possible to control the degree of prior
training in transfer studies and to observe its effect on
successive trials with the transfer problem.
In spite of these differences, many similarities may be
emphasized in the way tasks are analyzed and in the results
obtained. In both approaches, a sharp distinction is made
between the elements that belong to the structure of the
problem, and for this reason are relevant to the solution, and
those that should be ignored. The theorists of analogy
distinguish between the structural features that are relevant to

1925

the task and the surface features that are not (Holyoak & Koh,
1987). In the transfer studies of problem solving, structure is
defined through the notion of problem-space. This is an
abstract structure that requires an embodiment, which results
in irrelevant features being incorporated into the task
(Kotovsky, Hayes & Simon, 1985).
This distinction has been used in both fields to control and
analyze the effects of the context of the task on the difficulty
of the solution. Three cases have been considered: (i) the
source and the target problems have similar structural features
but different surface features, (ii) both problems are similar
with regards to both types of features or (iii) they are similar
with regards to surface but not to structural features. Some
converging phenomena were observed:
In the absence of surface similarity, transfer is seldom
observed between the source and the target problem unless
the participant is informed of the relevance of the first
problem. This has been shown for the tumor problem among
others in analogy studies, with the military problem of the
attack on a fortress as the source problem (Gick & Holyoak,
1980,1983) as well as for the MC (missionaries and
cannibals) problem and its isomorphs, with the Jealous
Husbands problem (Reed, Ernst & Banerji, 1974) as the
learning problem, in transfer studies.
In contrast, positive spontaneous transfer is obtained when the
source and the target problems are similar as regards both
content and structure. For instance, in analogy studies,
Holyoak and Koh (1987) have observed positive transfer on
the tumor problem (to be treated with X-rays) with an analog
problem involving the division and convergence of laser rays.
In transfer studies, massive transfer has been observed by
Luger and Bauer (1978) from the tea ceremony problem, first
studied by Hayes and Simon (1974), to the tower of Hanoi
problem (TOH). Reed, Ernst and Banerji (1974) have
observed the same result with an isomorphic version of the
MC problem.
In cases where both problems are similar as to surface
features but structurally different, transfer is negative: the
procedure learned first is transferred but is inappropriate to
the new problem as it has been show in analogy studies
(Novick, 1988; Ross, 1989) and in transfer studies (Zamani &
Richard, 2000).

The importance of the interpretation of the
situation: a factor neglected in both approaches
Despite the numerous experimental results in both fields that
confirm the heuristic value of distinguishing structural and
surface features, an intriguing question originates from the
fact that the distinction between structural and surface
features is made from the point of view of the expert, but has
no meaning for a participant who tries to solve the problem.
This distinction is useful in planning experiments but its
relevancy to exploring the processes involved in the
recognition of analogy is questionable. Experiments that
show no transfer between situations very similar regarding
physical cues but different regarding semantic interpretation
of these cues illustrate this issue. Kotovsky and Fallside

(1989) devised two isomorphic TOH problems using two
displays with identical stimulus that could be interpreted in
two different ways. A change in the apparent size was
presented either as a real change of the object or as an
apparent change due to a change in distance of the object.
Three colored spheres were presented on a graphic display
inside a square box at the intersection of the diagonals and the
size of the sphere could be changed by positioning a joystick
and pressing one of three keys. In the size condition, the box
was presented as a frame and the keys were labeled small,
medium and large. In the depth condition the box was
presented as a tunnel along which the sphere could be moved
and the keys were labeled far, middle and near corresponding
respectively to the small, medium and large sphere. In that
way the same physical changes were interpreted either as
changes in the size of the sphere either as moving the sphere
from front to rear or vice-versa. Four groups of participants
were given size-size, size-distance, distance-size, and
distance-distance interpretations for the training and the
transfer problems, respectively. A marked transfer was
observed when both problems pertained to the same
representation, but there was no transfer when the
representation was different in spite of the fact that the
display was exactly the same. In another experiment in the
same study, three situations were considered: Peg Move,
which is the standard TOH situation except that the three
disks are replaced by three balls that are stacked. In the Dish
Move problem, the material is the same, but as the balls are
not stacked, it is not immediately apparent which ball is
moveable. In the Dish Change problem, the situation is
physically similar but the interpretation is different. A ball is
placed on each dish and behind each dish there is a reserve
dish containing the two balls which are different in size from
the ball placed in the front dish. It is possible to exchange the
ball placed in the front dish with a ball from the reserve dish
and in this case the result of an exchange is a change in size
of the ball in the front dish. The constraints for exchanging
balls are the same as the constraints for changing the size of a
globe in a change problem: they depend on the size of the
balls in the other locations, instead of on the size of the balls
in the same location, as in move problems. Interestingly, there
is positive transfer from a Peg Move problem to a Dish Move
problem and vice-versa but not from these two problems to
the Dish Change problem. That means that although change
of location and change of size should be conceived as a single
operator, since they define the same transitions in the problem
graph, the similarity of these operators is not perceived. This
is a case in which the physical similarity of the actions is
blurred by a difference in the semantic interpretation of these
actions.
The same conclusions may be derived from Bassok, Wu and
Olseth (1995) study who oppose what they call the objectmapping hypothesis to the interpreted structure hypothesis. In
a study by Ross (1989), participants first learned to solve a
permutation problem in which cars were randomly assigned
to mechanics and then had to apply the equation in a transfer
problem where scientists were randomly assigned to

1926

computers. Although scientists and cars have similar roles
(the randomly assigned set), participants erroneously
instantiated the unknown value in the equation by matching
scientists with mechanics and computers with cars. According
to the object-mapping hypothesis, participants remember that
one variable was associated with animate objects and the
other with inanimate ones and therefore placed the scientists
in the role of mechanics, because both are animate, and
computers in the role of cars, because both are inanimate.
Bassok, Wu and Olseth (1995) suggest that it is not the
attribute similarity, animate versus inanimate, that is mainly
responsible for the erroneous matching, but the semantic
relation x gets y: Scientists get computers in the same way as
mechanics get cars. Because the Ross (1989) results are
compatible with both hypotheses, an experiment was devised
using three sets of elements: carts, caddies and golfers, the
same variable, caddies, being present both in the training and
the transfer problems. All the participants initially learned to
solve the permutation problem in which caddies are randomly
assigned to golfers. In the transfer problem, for some
participants, caddies were randomly assigned to carts, while
for the remaining participants, carts were randomly assigned
to caddies. According to the interpreted structure hypothesis,
in the training problem participants infer that golfers get
caddies to carry equipment and will place carts in the role that
caddies had in the first problem since they consider that
caddies get carts to carry equipment. The results are
consistent with the hypothesis: performance is high when
carts are assigned to caddies and very poor when caddies are
assigned to carts.
These converging results support the view that the properties
of objects in a situation are not considered in isolation but
rather in relation to the other properties with which they are
linked through prior knowledge related to them. These
relationships between properties are as salient as the isolated
properties detected through perception (Richard & Tijus,
1998; Sander & Richard, 1998). As such, the measurement of
similarity is more complex than a measurement based on the
properties that are present in the source and the target: it
should include the interpretations that are inferred from the
relationships between the properties as they are encountered
in everyday life. The question “how do people recognize the
analogy between a given situation and another situation?”
becomes one of “what mechanisms make two interpretations
compatible?” and “how do people change their interpretations
of situations?” It means that if the initial encoding of a
situation is not adequate, people must not only eliminate the
non-relevant features but also change their representation.
This process, called re-representation, is addressed in the
following paragraph.

The generalization of learning
Re-representation
Until recently, the observation of failures to spontaneously
retrieve a relevant source once few surface features are shared
did not initiate studies aiming at identifying how such a

failure may be overcome. Participants were led to change
their representation of the task by means of explicit hints that
the learning problem could be useful; The re-representation
process was cut short. Initiating work on this point, Gentner
and Medina (1998) propose that comparison promotes
learning by inviting a re-representation of the situation. A
recent body of research addresses this question explicitly and
shows that the process of encoding, which had been somehow
put aside so far in analogy studies, turns out to be actually
crucial: Gentner, Loewenstein and Thomson (2004), as well
as Kurtz and Lowenstein (2004), showed that the comparison
of two partially understood situations or two unsolved
problems could be beneficial, since it influences encoding and
favors re-representation. Our claim is that, when not
provoked by an experimental setting, the process of rerepresentation may be due to a spontaneous search and that
this process is basic in situations where a source is not
provided and is actively searched for. In our study of learning
text editing (Sander & Richard, 1997), we have shown that,
during a first phase, the typewriter is a source of analogy. The
text editor is first categorized as a typewriter, as this is the
known domain which shares the greatest number of salient
features. The general goal is the same: to type a text, and
objects are shared: a keyboard and a surface on which what is
typed appears. This analogy is limiting and it is crucial to
provide a mechanism explaining how this can be overcome,
that is, how another source, other than the first one selected,
can be used if the first analogy turns out to be limiting. We
have shown that progress in learning was guided by analogies
with sources at a higher level of abstraction, defined along the
class inclusion relation. We considered two categories more
abstract than typewriting, ordered by an abstraction relation,
namely writing in general (typewriting is a specific way of
writing in general, as handwriting is another specific way);
and manipulating objects (we manipulate the components of a
text when we write it, when we correct it, when we duplicate
and move parts of the text from one place to another). We
first identified the knowledge concerning each of these
categories by placing the participants in the relevant context
(for instance manipulating tokens for the context of
manipulating objects) and asking them to solve tasks
isomorphic to the ones that can be solved on a text editor (a
task of moving a string of contiguous colored tokens was
isomorphic to a task of moving a word with a text-editor).
Doing this with all of the objects and all of the goals allowed
us to identify the knowledge about the hypothesized sources
and to compare the learning that was actually observed with
the successive use of these sources. Once knowledge about
typewriting turns out to be inadequate, tasks were solved by
using knowledge about writing in general, or, if the writing
level turns out to be inadequate, knowledge about
manipulating objects. Participants progressively discovered
the properties of the text editor in this order. Thus, the
analogy with typewriting was only the first step of learning;
the entire learning process turned out to be guided by analogy
through recategorization at increasingly higher levels of
abstraction.

1927

Interpreting at the relevant abstract level
Although few studies looked for successive analogies, many
other results of the literature may be reinterpreted as
indicating that interpreting at the relevant level of abstraction
is crucial in analogy making. Sander and Richard (1997,
1998) provide converging analyses for several analogical
problem solving situations (the candle problem, Duncker,
1945; the tumor problem Gick & Holyoak, 1980, 1983; the
genie problem, Holyoak, Junn & Billman, 1984; Archimedes
problem, Goswami, 1992). For instance, for the well-known
candle problem (Duncker, 1945), in which participants,
provided with tacks, matches and boxes, had to fix a candle
on a wall, the required solution was to tack the box onto the
wall and to use it for supporting the candle; one major
difficulty was to consider the box not only as a container but
also as a platform and it has been shown that the task was
easier if the box was empty than if it was provided full with
tacks (Adamson, 1952). Finding the solution with tacks in the
box requires two levels of abstraction, and is thus more
difficult than finding it with empty boxes, which requires one
level of abstraction and is still not as obvious as would be
using the box as a container. In Archimedes’ analogy between
a crown and his own body, encoding both entities at the same
abstract level implied neglecting specific properties such as,
for the crown, symbol of kingship, made of precious metal,
etc.; as well, the human body is a living body and has to be
considered as a lifeless body.
In the situations just considered, the spontaneous retrieval of
potential sources presupposes that these sources are very
familiar and overlearned: such a degree of learning is not
attainable in experimental tasks on transfer. Moreover, the
success of this retrieval depends on the existence of a relevant
source in existing knowledge. This is probably not the case in
difficult transfer problems, such as in the TOH situation,
where the transfer of learning is from the dimension of
location to the dimension of size. These dimensions have very
different properties in our familiar environment as Richard,
Clement and Tijus (2002) have shown. For instance, several
objects may have the same size, but not the same location: if
they are on the same peg, one is necessarily above or below
the other, so that additional cues are involved which do not
exist for size. Given these differences, it cannot be expected
that a spontaneous search for abstraction will succeed.
Actually, the type of conception that is necessary to map a
change of size onto a change in location problem is very
abstract, since it is necessary to exchange the role of the
dimensions. Clément and Richard (1997) have shown that the
difference in difficulty between the TOH isomorphs with a
move operator and those with a change of size operator is due
to the point of view induced by the situation, which is
adopted in encoding the action. A change (of location, size...)
may be considered from two different points of view: it may
be perceived as a mere change of state, without considering
the process which has taken place between the initial and the
final state or it may be seen as a process of transition, as a
path leading from the initial to the final state, with all of its
intermediate steps. According to the first interpretation, the

change is an all or nothing process; according to the second
one, it is a graded process. The second interpretation is more
specific since it concerns the way the change is made, the first
one is more abstract, since it posits only that a change has
happened. In TOH isomorphs, the adequate interpretation
happens to be the perception of a change as an all or nothing
process: it allows interpreting the second rule of the
instructions as a condition for leaving a state and the third
rule as a condition for entering a new one. Adult participants
faced with a standard TOH problem interpret a move as a
pure change of location, because of the way it occurs on a
computer screen following a click: the object appears in one
place, then it appears in another, and no intermediate state
appears. When faced with a change of size problem, they
assume there are intermediate stages: they perceive the
change of size as a graded process, as a kind of growth
process and do not break down the action of changing the size
into two sub-actions: removing a given size from an object
and endowing it with a new one.
In order to attain the relevant degree of generalization, it is
probably necessary to relearn, in the new situation, what has
been learned in the previous one, possibly with fewer trials.
This hypothesis is supported by the discovery of the
importance of solution failures experienced in the training
problem (Gick & McGarry, 1992) with the problem of the
mutilated checkerboard as a transfer task (Wickelgren, 1974).
In this task, two squares have been cut off at opposite
diagonal corners of the board, so that they are of the same
color. The question is thus: is it possible to cover the
remaining 62 squares with 31 dominoes? The response is
obviously “no” if one thinks of the color of the dominoes.
The problem actually is difficult, because participants do try
to cover the checkerboard. As a training problem participants
are given an isomorphic version of the checkerboard problem
which is either easier to solve or more difficult depending on
the semantic cues which are provided. Only when the more
difficult problem was given in the learning phase, was
transfer significantly higher than for a control group. These
results indicate that presenting a difficult training problem
that tends to induce solution failures analogous to those
produced in the target problem facilitates spontaneous
transfer. The conclusion is that solution failures experienced
in the source problem are instrumental in recognizing its
similarity to the target problem, because similar solution
failures are experienced in the target problem. Richard and
Zamani’s (2003) study of the Passalong test supports this
hypothesis about the role of impasses. The authors
demonstrate that impasses provide information that is useful
for discovering which of the properties of a situation are
relevant to the problem and to encode the situation at the
relevant level of abstraction. We would like to observe that
the conditions necessary to produce deep semantic changes
such as those just considered are not present in the analogy
paradigm since solution to the source problem is usually
provided. This is probably the reason why few transfer is
observed when surface similarities and hints are absent. We
suggest that benefits resulting from analogical encoding

1928

(Gentner & al., 2004; Kurtz & Lowenstein, 2004) may be
interpreted within that framework: comparing two partially
understood situations or two unsolved problems favor
encoding at the relevant abstraction level in the same way that
impasses favor recoding the problems in the case of transfer
studies.
Chen (2002) has also been concerned with the role of
abstraction in transfer. It is informative to situate our view
relatively to his. Chen (2002) argues that another kind of
similarity, namely procedural similarity, may be manipulated
independently of structural similarity and surface similarity
and consequently is distinct. In a series of experiments where
the problem is how to measure the weight of an elephant with
only small objects available, he has shown that the amount of
transfer depends on the degree of abstraction shared by the
target and the source problems. The problems may have in
common the principle (equivalence of weights), the method
(compression device or balance device) as well as the specific
procedure implementing the method (for instance, measuring
the equivalence by the resistance of a spring or the resistance
of water); they may share the principle and the method but
not the procedure, or they may share the principle only. The
comparison of problem-solving performance shows that
spontaneous transfer is effective only when the procedure is
common to both problems, and hints have either no effect or
very limited ones. Chen’s claim is that the difference between
conditions lies in the implementation of the principle: when
the target and the source problems are similar at an abstract
level only, the procedural details are missing, therefore the
procedure is difficult to work out; Since the hints have little
effect, the difficulty is not in accessing the source but in
implementing the procedure.
We shall illustrate our position by showing how it makes
possible to reinterpret the experimental situation and data
reported in this study. The three levels of similarity compared
by Chen (2002) correspond to different descriptions of the
objects and the descriptions required to recognize the analogy
are more and more abstract as we move from the higher to the
lower level of similarity. When target and source problems
share a similar procedure, the coding of events does not need
to be changed to recognize the analogy: a boat floats like a
vessel in water; it sinks when it is too heavy, like a vessel.
The only difficulty consists in mapping the objects. When the
method is similar but not the procedure, there are important
differences in the way actions are conceived and named. Let
us consider the compression method. The effect of putting a
weight on the holder is perceived as compressing the spring;
the effect of putting a weight in a boat is that the boat sinks.
In both cases the result is a difference in height, but although
the difference in height seems physically the same, it is
semantically different: the spring changes in height, the boat
changes in depth. The height is measured from the level of
the ground to an upper level; the depth is measured from the
level of water to a level under water. In order to consider the
spring device and the boat device as similar, weight has to be
thought as acting against a resistance: two weights are equal if
they compensate the same resistance. The ground to cover is

still bigger when the source and target problems differ in
methods. In the balance device, the weights are compared
directly, while in the case of the compression device they are
compared indirectly by means of a resistance. In order to
consider the balance device as similar to the spring or boat
devices, the weights have to be viewed as forces. According
to this point of view, it is not surprising that participants do
not recognize analogy at an abstract level: the difficulty does
not lie in the implementation of the procedure, it is due to the
fact that the difficult concepts necessary to draw the analogy
do not exist or, if they do, they have to be retrieved. In other
words, the differences reported by Chen are not procedural
but conceptual differences.

Conclusion
We have shown that:
-(i) Neither physical nor surface similarities are directly
responsible for analogy recognition and transfer of learning.
In fact, the way the object properties are coded and the way
the actions and events are interpreted is the major factor in the
process.
-(ii) constraints of the task (or the structural relations) require
a definite type of coding of the properties of the objects and
of their relations for the analogy to be recognized: this is
particularly manifest in TOH isomorphs and permutation
problems
-(iii) recognition of analogy is a matter of recoding at the
appropriate level of abstraction, which depends on the
relations between the source and target problems. Actually it
may happen that situations are not perceived as similar
because they are coded at a too specific level. If they were
coded at a more general level, the same situations would be
seen as similar.

Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the four anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments on a first draft of the paper.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Singley, M. K. (1993). The identical
elements theory of transfer. In J.R. Anderson (Ed.) Rules
of the mind. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate
Publishers.
Bassok, M.,Wu, L.L. & Olsseth, K.L. (1995). Judging a book
by its cover: Interpretation effects of content on
problem-solving transfer. Memory and Cognition, 23,
354-367
Adamson, R.E. (1952). Functional fixedness as related to
problem solving: a repetition of three experiments.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44, 288-291.
Bovair, S., Kieras, D.E., & Polson, P. (1990). The acquisition
and performance of text-editing skill: a cognitive
complexity analysis. Human Computer Interaction, 5, 148
Chen, Z. (2002). Analogical Problem Solving: A Hierarchical
Analysis of Procedural Similarity. Journal of

1929

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 28, 81-98
Duncker, K. (1945). On Problem Solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58, Whole n¡ 270.
Clément, E. & Richard, J.F. (1997). Knowledge of domain
effects in problem representation: The case of Tower of
Hanoi isomorphs. Thinking and reasoning, 3,133-157.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: a theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning,
in S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning, (pp. 199-241). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L. (2004).
Analogical encoding: facilitating knowledge transfer and
integration. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds).
Proceedings of the 26th meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 452-457) Chicago. August 4-7 2004.
Gentner, D. & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and
analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Gick, M. & McGarry S.J. (1992). Learning from mistakes:
Inducing analogous solution failures to a source problem
produces later successes in analogical transfer. Journal of
Experimental Psychology :. Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18 , 623-639
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical reasoning in children.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hayes, J.R., & Simon, H.A. (1974). Understanding written
problem instructions. In L.W. Gregg (Ed.). Knowledge
and Cognition (pp. 167-200). Potomac, Ma. Erlbaum.
Holyoak, K.J. & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and
Cognition,15,332-340.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman D. O. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55, 2042-2055.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J.E., & Holyoak, K.J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: a theory of analogical access
and mapping, Psychological Review,104,427-466.
Hummel, J.E., & Holyoak, K.J. (2003). A SymbolicConnectionist Theory of Relational Inference and
Generalization, Psychological Review,110,220-264.
Kotovsky K. & Fallside D. (1989). Representation and
Transfer in Problem Solving . In K. Kotovsky (Ed)
Complex information Processing (What has Simon
wrought?). 21st symposium of the Carnegie Mellon
Institute (pp.69-108). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Kotovsky, K., Hayes J.R. & Simon H.A. (1985). Why are
some problems hard? Evidence from Tower of Hanoï.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 248-294.
Kurtz, K.J., Loewenstein, J., (2004). Converging on a new
role for analogy in problem solving and retrieval. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds). Proceedings of
the 26th meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
452-457) Chicago. August 4-7 2004.
Luger, G.F. & Bauer, M.A. (1978) - Transfer in isomorphic
problem situations. Acta Psychologica, 42, 121-131.
Novick L.R. (1988). Analogical Transfer, Problem Similarity,
and Expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14 , 510-520
Reed, S.K., Ernst, G.W. & Banerji, R. (1974) - The role of
analogy in Transfer between Similar Problem States.
Cognitive Psychology,6, 436-450.
Richard, J.F. & Zamani, M. (2003). A Problem-Solving
Model as a Tool for Analyzing Adaptive. In R.J.
Sternberg, J. Lautrey & T. Lubart (Eds) Models of
intelligence : Internatioal Perspective. . Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. pp.213-226.
Richard, J.F., Clément,E. & Tijus, C.A. (2002). Les
différences de difficulté dans la résolution des problèmes
isomorphes comme révélatrices des composantes
sémantiques dans la construction de la représentation du
problème, Revue d’Intelligence Artificielle.16, 191-219
Richard, J.F., & Tijus, C.A. (1998). Modelling the
affordances of objects in problem solving. In A.C.
Quelhas, & F. Pereira. (Eds.). Cognition and Context (pp.
293-317). Special Issue of Analise Psicologica. Lisboa.
Ross, B.H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Sander, E., & Richard, J.-F. (1997). Analogical transfer as
guided by an abstraction process: the case of learning by
doing text editing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 1459-1483.
Sander, E., & Richard, J-F. (1998). Analogy making as a
categorization and an abstraction process. In K. Holyoak,
D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in Analogy
Research : integration of theory and data from the
cognitive, computational and neural sciences (pp. 381389). Sofia, Bulgarie : NBU Series in Cognitive Science.
Thorndike, E.L., & Woodworth, R.S. (1901). The influence
of improvement in one mental fonction upon the
efficiency of other functions. Psychological Review, 8,
247-261.
Wickelgren, W. (1974). How to solve problems. New York:
Freeman.
Zamani, M. & Richard, J.F. (2000). Object Goal Similarity
and Analogical Transfer. Memory and Cognition, 28,
873-886.

1930

