UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are There Two Kinds of Reasoning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/58k5m8k3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Heit, Evan
Rotello, Caren M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are There Two Kinds of Reasoning?
Evan Heit (E.Heit@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

Caren M. Rotello (caren@psych.umass.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst MA 01003-7710, USA

people use a common set of reasoning processes for both
deductive and inductive arguments. For example, Chater
and Oaksford (2000) have applied an account of
probabilistic reasoning, explicitly non-deductive in nature,
to a range of deductive problems. Likewise, Harman (1999)
has argued that people reason in an essentially nondeductive way, and bring these same reasoning processes to
bear on both inductive and deductive reasoning problems.
Taking a related approach, Johnson-Laird (1994) has
extended the mental models account, more frequently
applied to deductive problems, to a range of inductive
problems as well. Finally, some researchers have proposed
accounts that focus mainly on reasoning about inductive
arguments, and have treated deductively correct arguments
as special cases that would be covered by the same accounts
(Heit, 2000; Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir,
1990; Sloman, 1993).
In contrast, other researchers have emphasized a
distinction between two kinds of reasoning (e.g., Evans &
Over, 1996; Sloman, 1996; Stanovich, 1999). In these twoprocess accounts there is one system that is relatively fast
but heavily influenced by context and associations, and
another system that is more deliberative and analytic or
rule-based. Although these two systems do not necessarily
correspond directly to induction and deduction, it is
plausible that induction would depend more on the first
system whereas deduction would depend more on the
second system.
In addition there is some
neuropsychological evidence, based on brain imaging, for
two anatomically separate systems of reasoning (Goel,
Gold, Kapur, & Houle, 1997; Parsons & Osherson, 2001).
These one- and two-process proposals are mainly aimed
at accounting for a range of phenomena rather than drawing
a sharp line between deduction and induction. In contrast,
the proposal by Rips (2001) does not aim for a detailed
description of reasoning processes but instead focuses on a
key commonality and a key difference between deduction
and induction. In his account, there is a single scale for
evaluating arguments. This account will be referred to as
the criterion-shift account, and it is illustrated in Figure 1.
Here, the unitary scale of argument strength is shown, with
different points on the scale corresponding to arguments of
different strengths. Criterion 1 indicates the dividing line
between arguments that are inductively weak, or
implausible, and arguments that are inductively strong, or

Abstract
Two experiments addressed the issue of how deductive
reasoning and inductive reasoning are related. According to
the criterion-shift account, these two kinds of reasoning
assess arguments along a common scale of strength,
however there is a stricter criterion for saying an argument
is deductively correct as opposed to just inductively strong.
The method, adapted from Rips (2001), was to give two
groups of participants the same set of written arguments but
with either deduction or induction instructions. Signal
detection and receiver operating characteristic analyses
showed that the difference between conditions could not be
explained in terms of a criterion shift. Instead, the
deduction condition showed greater sensitivity to argument
strength than did the induction condition. Implications for
two-process and one-process accounts of reasoning, and
relations to memory research, are discussed.
Keywords: reasoning; deduction;
detection theory; memory; modeling.

induction;

signal

Introduction
How do convincing arguments differ from non-convincing
arguments? Rips (2001) has referred to the intuitive case
for a single psychological dimension of argument strength,
in which arguments can range from utterly worthless to
completely compelling. Hence, the convincingness of an
argument could be judged by assessing its position on the
scale, in a similar manner to how judgments of loudness or
brightness would use a psychophysical scale.
This intuition of a unitary scale needs to be reconciled
with the notion that there are different kinds of reasoning.
In particular there is the textbook distinction between
deduction and induction, with deduction being concerned
with drawing logically valid conclusions as opposed to
induction which involves drawing plausible inferences.
Strictly speaking, there are different kinds of arguments,
such as deductively correct arguments, with respect to a
well-defined logic, and inductively strong arguments
(Skyrms, 2000). It is still an open question whether there
are different kinds of reasoning, such as deductive reasoning
and inductive reasoning.
Some researchers have suggested that rather than having
specialized cognitive processes for each kind of reasoning,
923

of other background knowledge (e.g., Heit, Hahn, &
Feeney, 2005; Skyrms, 2000). So it is still possible that the
induction and deduction conditions did use a common scale
of argument strength, but the participants were relying on
different information in the two conditions, and therefore
reached different conclusions.
The present experiments were aimed at testing another,
closely-related, prediction of the criterion-shift account,
while avoiding the potential problem of people introducing
different background knowledge in the deduction and
induction conditions. Referring back to Figure 1, note that
any two arguments, such as A and B, will have a fixed
distance between them regardless of the response criterion.
That is, whether people are making judgments of inductive
strength, and applying Criterion 1, or are making judgments
of deductive correctness, and applying Criterion 2, the
distance should be constant. In terms of signal detection
theory (SDT) (e.g., Macmillan & Creelman, 2005), the
difference in responses to A and B, expressed in
standardized units like d′, should be the same in the
deduction and induction conditions. On this view, the only
change between conditions is the more conservative
response criterion in the deduction condition.
Both experiments were closely modeled on the method of
Rips (2001), giving either deduction or induction
instructions to two groups of participants who otherwise
saw the same set of arguments. Because the results could
depend on how exactly the participants are instructed to
perform deduction or induction, Rips had compared three
different versions of instructions for both deduction and
induction. However, there were no differences found, so the
present experiments only used one version for deduction
and one version for induction.
The arguments in Experiment 1 were created by
modifying arguments from the Rips (2001) study, in effect
stripping out their meaning so that background knowledge
would not be useful. For example, “Jill rolls in the mud”
was replaced with “Jill does D”. There were two types of
arguments, deductively correct and deductively incorrect.
Hence this experiment allowed an assessment of the
criterion-shift account without the problem of possibly
different use of background knowledge for deduction versus
induction. Experiment 2 had somewhat different stimuli,
that allowed participants to use knowledge of category
inclusion, which would be relevant in both the deduction
and induction conditions.
For example, one correct
argument was “All birds have property C, therefore all
robins have property C”, after taking account of category
membership. The criterion-shift account would predict for
both experiments that the difference in responses to correct
arguments and incorrect arguments, expressed in d′ units,
should be the same in the deduction and induction
conditions. In contrast, a substantial change in d′ from
induction to deduction would make it difficult to explain
deduction and induction as following the same scale of
argument strength but varying only in response criterion.

plausible. In order to make an assessment of deductive
correctness, the criterion would be shifted rightwards, to
Criterion 2. Some arguments might be strong enough to be
judged plausible but not strong enough to be judged
deductively correct, whereas other arguments might be so
strong that they are also judged to be deductively correct.
Criterion 2

Deductively
Invalid
Mininum
Argument
Strength

A
Inductively
Weak

Deductively
Valid

B

Maximum
Argument
Strength

Inductively
Strong

Criterion 1

Figure 1: Criterion-shift account of deduction and
induction.
An important virtue of the criterion-shift account is that it
makes a number of testable predictions regarding the
relations between deduction and induction. One prediction
is that the relative ordering of two arguments should be the
same whether people are judging deductive correctness or
inductive strength. If one argument is more likely to be
called deductively correct than another, then this argument
should also more likely be called inductively strong. Rips
(2001) assessed this prediction by comparing two types of
arguments in two experimental conditions, in which
participants were instructed to judge either deductive
correctness or inductive strength (see Parsons & Osherson,
2001, for a related technique). One type of argument was
deductively correct but causally inconsistent, such as “Jill
rolls in the mud and Jill gets clean, therefore Jill rolls in the
mud”, and the other type was deductively incorrect but
causally consistent, such as “Jill rolls in the mud, therefore
Jill rolls in the mud and Jill gets dirty”. Participants in the
deduction condition gave more positive judgments to the
correct but inconsistent arguments, whereas participants in
the induction condition gave more positive judgments to the
incorrect but consistent arguments. Rips concluded that this
result contradicted the criterion-shift account, which
predicted a monotonic ordering of arguments in the two
conditions.
However, it may be possible to rescue the criterion-shift
account by making the reasonable assumption that
participants who judged inductive strength were more likely
to use background knowledge than participants who judged
deductive correctness.
In effect, participants in the
induction condition considered other premises, such as
“Rolling in the mud tends to make people dirty”, based on
their own knowledge. The uncertain nature of inductive
inferences makes it particularly appropriate to take account

924

and the corresponding proportion for incorrect arguments
was .22. Although this proportion of “valid” responses for
incorrect arguments may seem somewhat high, Rips (2001)
reported a similar value (20%). For the induction condition,
the mean proportion of positive or “strong” responses for
correct arguments was .93 and the proportion for incorrect
arguments was .55. The results were examined using a twoway analysis of variance (ANOVA), with instructional
condition and correctness of argument as independent
variables. The overall proportion of positive responses was
significantly higher in the induction condition than in the
deduction condition, F(1,78)=20.28, MSE=.07, p<.001. The
overall proportion of positive responses was higher for
correct arguments than for incorrect arguments,
F(1,78)=122.06, MSE=.09, p<.001. There was also a
significant interaction between these two variables,
F(1,78)=9.67, MSE=.09, p<.01.
In terms of sensitivity, that is, ability to distinguish
between correct and incorrect arguments, the greater
difference in the deduction condition suggests a greater
level of discrimination. For each participant, a d′ measure
was calculated. (Comparable conclusions were obtained
with alternative measures such as da.) The average d′ was
significantly higher in the deduction condition, 1.68, than in
the induction condition, 0.93, t(78)=3.11, p<.01. Response
criterion was not calculated because this is difficult to
compare between two conditions that differ in d′
(Macmillan & Creelman, 2005; see also Heit, Brockdorff, &
Lamberts, 2003).
A further analysis used not only choice proportions but
also confidence ratings, to allow the plotting of receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves and estimation of
their slopes. In this case, an ROC curve plots the
probability of a positive (“valid” or “strong”) response to
valid arguments on the y-axis and to invalid arguments on
the x-axis; the points indicate varying levels of confidence,
with higher-confidence positive decisions appearing to the
left in the space (see Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). Figure
2 shows the zROC curves (normal-normal transformations
of the ROCs) for this experiment. The curves are
approximately linear, as they should be when derived from
underlying Gaussian distributions of argument strength. It
should also be clear that the curve for the deduction
condition is more distant from the origin than is the curve
for the inductive condition, corresponding to the previous
conclusion that sensitivity is greater for deduction. If
deduction and induction had equal sensitivity and different
response criteria, then the curves for the two conditions
would be co-linear. The deduction instructions did also lead
to more conservative responding, as can be seen in the
leftward and downward translation of the points in that
condition. Finally, it should be noted that the slopes in
Figure 2 differ. The slope for deduction is .84 and the slope
for induction is .60. The slope indicates the ratio of
standard deviations of the invalid and valid argument
distributions. This result suggests that the range of

Experiment 1
Method
There were 40 participants in the deduction condition and
40 in the induction conduction, all University of Warwick
undergraduates.
The instructions for the deduction
condition gave a brief definition of a valid argument,
“assuming the information above the line is true, this
necessarily makes the sentence below the line true”.
Likewise for the induction condition, there was a definition
of a strong argument, “assuming the information above the
line is true, this makes the sentence below the line
plausible”.
Each questionnaire contained 8 questions, presented in
one of two random orders. The questions were of the
following form in the deduction condition.
Jill does D and Jill does R
------------------------------Jill does D
Assuming the information above the line
is true, does this necessarily make the
sentence below the line true?
Circle one: VALID or NOT VALID
In the induction condition, questions were of the following
form.
Jill does D and Jill does R
------------------------------Jill does D
Assuming the information above the line
is true, does this make the sentence
below the line plausible?
Circle one: STRONG or NOT STRONG
Each forced-choice judgment was followed by a confidence
rating, on a 1 to 7 scale, with 7 corresponding to maximum
confidence.
The 8 arguments themselves were the same for the two
conditions. There were 4 deductively correct arguments as
in the above example, and 4 deductively incorrect
arguments, such as “Robert does not do V, therefore Robert
does S”. The arguments were adapted from Rips (2001),
replacing elements of the arguments with uninformative
letters so that participants could not use background
knowledge. For example, the corresponding argument for
Jill used by Rips was “Jill rolls in the mud and Jill gets
clean, therefore Jill rolls in the mud”.

Results and Discussion
For the deduction condition, the mean proportion of
positive or “valid” responses for correct arguments was .89
925

acceptable items was narrower in the deduction condition
than in the induction condition.
In sum, the results were not consistent with the criterionshift account, which would represent differences between
deduction and induction solely as a change in response
criterion. Instead, there were also changes in sensitivity,
and in slopes of zROC curves, that would not be predicted
by the criterion-shift account. Hence, the results fit those of
Rips (2001) who also found differences between deduction
and induction that could not be explained by a change in
criterion.

Experiment 2
Method
The method was like Experiment 1 except for the following.
There were 48 participants in the deduction condition and
48 in the induction condition. The same 16 arguments were
used in the two conditions. There were 4 types of critical
arguments. The first type was correct-typical, such as “All
birds have property C, therefore all robins have property C”.
The second type was correct-atypical, such as “All birds
have property D, therefore all penguins have property D”.
The third type was incorrect-typical, such as “All robins
have property E, therefore all birds have property E”. The
final type was incorrect-atypical, such as “All penguins have
property F, therefore all birds have property F”. There were
3 versions of each type of critical argument, hence there
were 12 critical arguments in total. One version used
“birds” as a category; another used “mammals” as a
category, with “horses” and “dolphins” as typical and
atypical category members; and the third used “fruits” with
“apples” and “blueberries”. Finally, there were 4 filler
arguments that were deductively incorrect and indeed not
especially plausible, such as “All bees have property A,
therefore all elephants have property A”. The filler
arguments were intended to give the stimuli a wide range of
plausibility.

2.5
Induction
2.0
1.5
Deduction

1.0
0.5

zF
-2.5

-1.5

0.0
-0.5
-0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

-1.0
-1.5

Results and Discussion

-2.0

The proportions of positive responses for types of critical
arguments are shown in Table 1. The main result was that,
as in Experiment 1, the proportion of positive responses on
correct arguments was about the same for the deduction and
induction conditions, but there was a higher proportion of
positive responses on incorrect arguments in the induction
condition than in the deduction condition. It appeared that
participants more sharply distinguished between correct and
incorrect arguments in the deduction condition than in the
induction condition.

-2.5

zH

Figure 2: zROC curves for Experiment 1, comparing
deduction and induction instructions
Next, we present a second experiment, which applied a
similar method to different materials, adapted from previous
studies of inductive reasoning (Osherson et al., 1990;
Sloman, 1993, 1998). Osherson et al. (1990) had suggested
that correct arguments such as “All birds have property C,
therefore all robins have property C” would be considered
perfectly strong, but Sloman found that such arguments
were not considered perfectly strong when participants were
asked to judge convincingness or conditional probability.
Furthermore, Sloman reported a typicality effect (which was
referred to as inclusion similarity) in which other correct
arguments like “All birds have property D, therefore all
penguins have property D” were considered even weaker, in
terms of inductive strength, because they involved atypical
rather typical category members. However, Sloman did not
ask participants to judge deductive correctness.
In
Experiment 2, these correct arguments, as well as other
incorrect arguments, were compared using deduction and
induction instructions.

Table 1
Proportion of Positive Responses for Experiment 2.
Argument Type

Deduction
Condition

Induction
Condition

Correct-Typical
Correct-Atypical
All Correct

.94
.89
.92

.90
.85
.88

Incorrect-Typical
Incorrect-Atypical
All Incorrect

.25
.24
.24

.60
.53
.57

In addition, there appeared to be a small effect of
typicality, that is, there was a higher proportion of positive
responses for arguments with typical category members
than for arguments with atypical category members. For the
926

Next, the confidence ratings were used to plot zROC
curves, as shown in Figure 3. The pattern is similar to
Experiment 1. The deduction curve is more distant from the
origin, corresponding to greater sensitivity compared to
induction. Again, the slope is steeper for deduction, .82,
compared to .71 for induction.
In sum, the main result again was greater discrimination
between correct and incorrect arguments in the deduction
condition compared to the induction condition. It is not
possible to explain this result in terms of the criterion-shift
account

correct arguments in the induction condition, this finding
corresponds to the inclusion similarity phenomenon
reported by Sloman (1993, 1998). For the incorrect
arguments, the finding corresponds to the premise typicality
phenomenon previously reported in studies of inductive
reasoning (Osherson et al., 1990; see Heit, 2000, for a
review).
Responses to the critical items were analyzed with a
three-way ANOVA, with instructional condition,
correctness of argument, and typicality as independent
variables. The overall proportion of positive responses was
significantly higher in the induction condition than in the
deduction condition, F(1,94)=10.25, MSE=.19, p<.01. The
overall proportion of positive responses was higher for
correct arguments than for incorrect arguments,
F(1,94)=143.29, MSE=.16, p<.001, and there was a
significant interaction between these two variables,
F(1,94)=19.22, MSE=.16, p<.001. Finally, the main effect
of typicality was significant, F(1,94)=6.91, MSE=.03,
p<.01. None of the remaining interactions approached
statistical significance, all F’s < 1.
For each participant, a d’ measure was calculated,
comparing the overall proportion of positive responses on
correct arguments versus incorrect arguments. The average
d’ was significantly higher in the deduction condition, 1.69,
than in the induction condition, 0.78, t(94)=4.39, p<.001.
For the deduction condition, d’ was almost the same as in
Experiment 1; for the induction condition d’ was again
relatively poor.

General Discussion
There is a striking parallel between the issue of whether
there are two kinds of reasoning and a central issue in
memory research. In memory research there is an important
distinction between one- and two-process accounts (Rotello
& Heit, 1999; Yonelinas, 2002). According to two-process
accounts of recognition memory, recognition judgments
depend on a quick, approximate, familiarity-based process
and a slower, more deterministic process based on specific
item recollection. In effect, there are two different kinds of
recognition, because either process could dominate a
recognition judgment. In contrast, according to one-process
accounts, it is not necessary to assume two processes in
order to explain experimental results. This distinction has
come up in the context of whether remembering and
knowing correspond to different processes. According to
some researchers (Donaldson, 1996; Dunn, 2004; Wixted &
Stretch, 2004) the distinction between remembering and
knowing is simply a matter of a criterion shift, i.e., both
judgments are based on a common scale of memory
strength, but there is a stricter criterion for saying that
something is directly remembered. Hence, in terms of SDT,
the difference between remembering and knowing should
appear as a change in response criterion rather than
sensitivity.
However, recent assessments (Gardiner,
Ramponi, & Richardson-Klavehn, 2002; Rotello,
Macmillan, & Reeder, 2004) have rejected a onedimensional signal detection model. In particular, in
memory research there are standard signs taken as evidence
against a single process, such as unequal sensitivity for
different types of judgments on the same memory probes,
slope differences in ROC curves, and a non-monotonic
relationship between the two types of judgments across a set
of probes. On this basis, Rotello et al. have proposed a twodimensional model, incorporating information from
familiarity and recollection.
By the standards of memory research, there is already a
good case against a single process account of reasoning.
Putting together the present two experiments with the
experiment reported by Rips (2001), there is already
evidence for sensitivity differences, slope differences, and
non-monotonicity. Still, we think it is too early to rule out
single-process accounts of reasoning. Often with signal
detection analyses, it is valuable to examine the pattern over
a large set of experiments, e.g., the Dunn (2004) and Rotello

2.5
2.0
Induction
Deduction

1.5
1.0
0.5

zF
-2.5

-1.5

0.0
-0.5
-0.5

0.5

1.5

2.5

-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5

zH

Figure 3: zROC curves for Experiment 2, comparing
deduction and induction instructions

927

meta-analysis of remember, know, and guess responses.
Memory, 10, 83–98
Goel, V., Gold, B., Kapur, S., Houle, S. (1997). The seats of
reason: A localization study of deductive and inductive
reasoning using PET (O15) blood flow technique,
NeuroReport, 8, 1305-1310.
Harman, G. (1999). Reasoning, meaning, and mind.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569-592.
Heit, E., Brockdorff, N., & Lamberts, K. (2003). Adaptive
changes of response criterion in recognition memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 718-723.
Heit, E., Hahn, U., & Feeney, A. (2005). Defending
diversity. In W. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B.
Markman, & P. Wolff, (Eds.), Categorization inside and
outside of the laboratory: Essays in honor of Douglas L.
Medin, 87-99. Washington, DC: APA.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1994). Mental models and
probabilistic thinking. Cognition, 50, 189-209.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection
theory: A user's guide (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990).
Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Parsons, L. M., & Osherson, D. (2001). New evidence for
distinct right and left brain systems for deductive versus
probabilistic reasoning. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 954-965.
Rips, L. J. (2001). Two kinds of reasoning. Psychological
Science, 12, 129-134.
Rotello, C. M., & Heit, E. (1999). Two-process models of
recognition memory: Evidence for recall-to-reject?
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 432-453.
Rotello, C. M., Macmillan, N. A., & Reeder, J. A. (2004).
Sum-difference theory of remembering and knowing: A
two-dimensional signal detection model. Psychological
Review, 111, 588–616.
Skyrms, B. (2000). Choice and chance: An introduction to
inductive logic. (Fourth edition).
Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22
Sloman, S. A. (1998). Categorical inference is not a tree:
The myth of inheritance hierarchies. Cognitive
Psychology, 35, 1-33.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of
individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Wixted, J. T., & Stretch, V. (2004). In defense of the signaldetection interpretation of remember/know judgments.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11, 616-641.
Yonelinas, A. P. (2002). The nature of recollection and
familiarity: A review of 30 years of research. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 441-517.

et al. (2004) analyses were based on hundreds of previous
recognition experiments.
Furthermore, it would be desirable, on the basis of further
experimentation, to develop a two-process account of
reasoning, using two-dimensional SDT (e.g., Ashby & Gott,
1988; Rotello et al., 2004). It could be assumed that both
induction and deduction rely on two sources of information,
one derived from quick and context-dependent associations
and the other from more controlled, and possibly-rule based,
deliberations. The criterion for distinguishing convincing
from non-convincing arguments would be a line in this twodimensional space. For judgments of deductive correctness,
the criterion would depend heavily on information from the
controlled deliberations and less on contextual information.
The criterion for judgments of inductive strength could be
less strict in terms of the dimension for controlled
deliberations and also take more account of the other
dimension, corresponding to contextual associations.
Hence, it would be predicted that inductive judgments have
less sensitivity in distinguishing deductively correct from
deductively incorrect arguments, and are more likely to take
account of other background knowledge in evaluating
arguments.
It is best to think of these signal detection accounts as
analytical tools, allowing some predictions of one- and twoprocess models to be sharpened and tested, in particular
allowing clearer predictions regarding the relations between
deduction and induction, and allowing these models to be
developed further. In conclusion, the novel technique
applied by Rips (2001), of directly comparing deductive and
inductive judgments on the same set of arguments, when
combined with signal detection analysis, appears to have
considerable promise for developing accounts of reasoning
that more explicitly address the fundamental distinction
between deduction and induction.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Lance Rips for providing stimuli from
Rips (2001) and to Elisabeth Blagrove and Yana Weinstein
for assistance in conducting this research.

References
Ashby, F. G., & Gott, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 14, 33-53.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (2000). The rational analysis of
mind and behavior. Synthese, 122, 93-131.
Donaldson, W. (1996). The role of decision processes in
remembering and knowing. Memory & Cognition, 24,
523-533.
Dunn, J. C. (2004). Remember-know: A matter of
confidence. Psychological Review, 111, 524-542.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove: Psychology Press.
Gardiner, J. M., Ramponi, C., & Richardson-Klavehn, A.
(2002). Recognition memory and decision processes: A
928

