UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attention and Working Memory in Insight Problem-Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z89m2s8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Byrne, Ruth M.J.
Murray, M. Aisling

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attention and Working Memory in Insight Problem-Solving
M. Aisling Murray (murray.aisling@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland

Ruth M. J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
Department of Psychology, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland

Abstract
Individuals differ in their ability to solve insight problems. We
suggest that differences in attention switching and working
memory skills underlie differences in insight problem solving
ability. We consider the results of an experiment that shows that
correct performance on a range of insight problems is related to
correct performance on measures of attention-switching and
working memory storage and processing, but not to measures of
selective attention and sustained attention. We discuss the
implications of the results for understanding the component
processes in insight problem solving.
Keywords: Insight; problem-solving; individual differences;
attention; working memory.

Introduction
Suppose you are asked to describe how to throw a ping-pong
ball so that it will travel a short distance, come to a dead stop
and then reverse itself (Ansburg and Dominowski, 2000).
You are not allowed to bounce it off any surface or tie
anything to it. Some individuals solve the problem readily.
Others never do. Some people suggest putting a back-spin on
the ball (which will not work), or throwing it to another
person (which violates the requirement for the ball to stop and
return by itself). Although the problem initially seems
impossible, there is a simple answer. Throw the ball straight
up in the air and gravity will cause it to stop for an instant
before falling back to earth. Many people assume that the ball
must travel forward and back but once they realise it can also
go up and down, the solution follows readily (Murray and
Byrne, 2005a). Why do individuals differ in their ability to
solve insight problems? Our aim in this paper is to consider
some of the component skills upon which insight problem
solving depends (see also Murray and Byrne, 2005b).
Insight problems usually require some kind of change to
the initial interpretation of the problem and its anticipated
solution (Weisberg, 1995). For example, in the ping-pong ball
problem, a successful solution requires a change from a
horizontal trajectory to a vertical one. People must possess
some knowledge to solve insight problems, for example,
knowledge about the effects of gravity. Insight problems tend
to be ‘ill-defined’, that is there is some ambiguity about what
the problem requires, or what form the solution will take.
They are often more difficult to solve than they at first appear
and sometimes the solution occurs suddenly to the solver in
an ‘aha’ moment (e.g. Duncker, 1945).
1571

One view is that solving insight problems may not require
different processes from solving non-insight problems such as
mathematics problems (Weisberg & Alba, 1981; review in
Mayer, 1995). Another view is that there are key differences
between the two sorts of problems (e.g., Metcalfe and Wiebe,
1987). For example, participants can more accurately predict
their future success given a second chance at an unsolved
non-insight problem compared to an unsolved insight
problem. Their ratings of how close they feel to a solution
when they work on a non-insight problem exhibit an
incremental pattern as they neared a correct solution, but for
insight problems it remained uniformly low until a sudden
increase just before the solution (Metcalfe and Wiebe, 1987).
Many studies have identified empirical differences between
insight and non-insight problems (Schooler, Ohlsson and
Brooks, 1993; Lavric, Forstmeier and Rippon, 2000; Gilhooly
and Murphy, 2004; Jung-Beeman, Bowden, Haberman,
Frymiare, Arambel-Liu, Greenblatt, Reber and Kounios,
2004).
Our aim is to consider the component skills required in
insight problem-solving. We have suggested that people need
to keep in mind several alternative possibilities to solve
insight problems (Murray and Byrne, 2005a). Individuals
may have difficulty in keeping in mind alternatives because
multiple possibilities can exceed their working memory
capacity (Byrne, 2005; Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 1991;
2002). They also need to be able to switch their attention
between the alternative possibilities to reach a solution. On
this account, key component skills required in insight
problem solving include attention switching and working
memory skills. To test this view, we examined a range of
insight and non-insight problems. We measured attention
switching, sustained attention, and selective attention, and
several aspects of working memory, including working
memory storage and working memory storage plus capacity.
Attention and working memory may be crucial for different
aspects of successful insight problem solving. Planning a
number of moves in advance may be important to solve
insight problems such as the well-known nine-dot problem
(Chronicle, Ormerod and MacGregor, 2001). Attention may
play a role in helping people to decide what elements of a
problem to focus on or in helping them to direct the search for
relevant information internally and externally. Successful
insight problem-solvers are more likely to switch strategies
when they realize their current strategy is not working
(Davidson, 1995).
Some studies have suggested that
directing people’s attention to a particular element of a

problem can improve performance (e.g. Glucksberg and
Weisberg, 1966) and people who pay more attention to
peripherally presented information make better use of that
information in a subsequent task (Ansburg and Hill, 2003).
We measured attention switching skills by using two tasks:
the visual elevator task, taken from the Test of Everyday
Attention battery (Robertson, Ward, Ridgeway & NimmoSmith, 1994) requires participants to count the floors an
elevator passes, switching from counting up to counting
down. The plus-minus task (Miyake, Friedman, Emerson,
Witzki and Howerter, 2000) requires participants to change
from adding three to numbers to subtracting three from other
numbers. We hypothesized that individuals who correctly
solve insight problems will perform well on these measures
of attention switching.
We also measured selective attention and sustained
attention. We measured selective attention by using the map
search test, from the Test of Everyday Attention battery
(Robertson et al, 1994) which requires participants to find all
the symbols for a restaurant on a detailed area map, within a
time limit. The participant has to ignore other symbols as well
as distracting information such as place names and
topographical information. We measured sustained attention,
by using the Sustained Attention Response Task (Robertson,
Manly, Andrade, Baddeley and Yiend, 1997), which
measures how successful people are at inhibiting an
automatic response when a target appears. A series of
numbers are presented very quickly and the participant must
press a button when each number appears except when that
number is three, and instead they must refrain from
responding. We hypothesized that individuals who correctly
solve insight problems would not perform well on these
measures of selective and sustained attention (see Murray and
Byrne, 2005b for details).
We measured working memory storage capacity by using
the digit span task which requires participants to memorize a
sequence of numbers. We measured working memory storage
plus processing capacity by using the sentence span task
which requires participants to process information in a
sentence as well as memorizing the last word of that sentence.
We hypothesized that individuals who correctly solve insight
problems would perform well on these measures of working
memory storage and processing capacity. To ensure a clear
measure of the role of working memory during the problemsolving process, we asked participants to work on solving
each problem without recourse to any memory aids such as
pen-and-paper.
We examined attention and working memory for both
insight and non-insight problems and we consider the results
for insight problems here (see Murray and Byrne, 2005b).

Method
There were 33 participants who were undergraduates from
Trinity College, University of Dublin and they were paid 10
euro for one hour. They received eight insight problems that
required a single insight to reach solution, half of them were
1572

action problems, such as the ping-pong problem described
earlier, and other half were ‘conundrum’ problems (e.g., how
can a man marry twenty women in one town without
breaking any law? The man did not divorce and all the
women are still alive). We also gave them four well-defined,
non-insight problems, such as an algebra problem (for details
of the problems see Murray and Byrne, 2005b).
Participants also received four attention tasks and two
working memory task as follows:
Attention switching: visual elevator The task measures the
ability to switch attention from counting upwards to counting
downwards. Participants must follow the journey of an
elevator, as represented on a test card, by counting the floors
as it goes up and down. There were two practice trials
followed by ten timed test trials. The dependent measures
were an accuracy measure of how often the participant ends
on the correct floor after a trial and a time measure based on
the total time taken for correct trials divided by the number of
switches in counting direction needed in those trials. This
measure gives an indication of how long it took the
participant to switch between counting strategies. Both
measures were then transformed to scale scores according to
the participant’s age as described in the test manual for the
Test of Everyday Attention Battery (Robertson et al, 1994).
Attention switching: plus-minus The task measures
switching between the strategies of addition and subtraction
(Miyake et al, 2000). Participants were given a sheet of paper
with three columns of 30 numbers each. The numbers used
were all the two digit numbers, with each number from 10 to
99 used once only, and randomly mixed to form the three
columns. In the first column, participants added the number
three to each number in the column and wrote the answer in
the space next to it; in the second column, they subtracted and
in the third column they alternated between addition and
subtraction. The dependent measures were the time cost of
switching by subtracting the mean time of the first two
columns from the time on the third column, and an accuracy
measure based on the errors each participant made. Where a
mistake in the plus-minus alteration occurred, this switching
error was counted as one error rather than counting each
number that was incorrect as a direct result of the incorrect
switch.
Selective attention: map search Participants are asked to
find all the knife-and-fork symbols on a detailed map of
Philadelphia. They have two minutes to circle as many as
they can (maximun 80). The task aims to measure how
distracted participants are by the other information on the
map, such as other symbols and place names, by how many
symbols they can find in the time limit. The dependent
measure is how many symbols are found within the time
limit, which is then scaled according to the participant’s age
as prescribed in the test manual (from the Test of Everyday
Attention Battery, Robertson et al, 1994).
Sustained Attention Response Task This computer-based
task requires participants to make a response (press the

spacebar) every time they see a number, except when that
number is three in which case they have to withhold the
response. We wrote a random sustained attention response
task program in Superlab (based on the details given in
Robertson et al, 1997). A total of 225 single digits were
presented, 25 of which were the target number three. Each
number was presented for 250msec followed by a 900msec
mask. Participants were told that they could still respond
while the mask was on the screen if they had not had time to
respond to the number. Before commencing the test trial
each participant did a practice trial consisting of eighteen
digits, two of which were targets. The dependent measure
was the number of targets to which the participants
responded when they should have withheld a response.
Working memory: digit span This task is taken from the
WAIS-R (Weschler, 1981) and measures the storage capacity
of working memory. Participants were asked to recall everincreasing strings of digits read out by the experimenter. The
participants had to recall each string of a given length in a
forward direction for two trials. The experimenter read out a
practice three-digit sequence before starting. The forward
sequence started with three single digits up to a maximum of
nine digits with two trials of each length. When all forward
trials were completed, participants attempted to recall strings
of numbers in reverse. The backward sequence was similar to
the forward sequence but started with two digits up to a
maximum of eight. Participants were given one point for each
string correctly recalled. The procedure used was that
described by the WAIS-R Manual and testing was halted if a
participant made an error in two consecutive trials of the
same length. The dependent measure was the number of
correctly recalled strings with a maximum possible score of
28. This score was then scaled according to the age of the
participant in keeping with the procedure advised in the
WAIS-R manual.
Working memory: sentence span This task was used to
measure the capacity of working memory when both
processing and storage of information was required (Sub,
Oberauer, Wittman, Wilhelm and Schulze, 2002).
Participants were asked to rate a series of sentences as true
or false and, in addition, to remember the last word of each
sentence within a block. The task was presented on a
computer using a Superlab program. All sentences were
easily true or false and no longer than seven words. The last
word of each sentence was always a singular noun between
one and three syllables in length. The sentences took the
form “The letter k is a vowel” to which the participant
responded by pressing a key to indicate if the sentence was
true or false. Each sentence was displayed for three seconds
and if no true/false response had been given within that time
a prompt appeared for one second, giving participants four
seconds in total to read the sentence and indicate true or
false. Participants started with a practice trial of two
sentences and after that attempted two blocks of three
sentences eventually increasing to two blocks of six
sentences. At the end of each block, participants had to
1573

recall the last word of each sentence in that block, in order.
Before each trial participants were told how many sentences
would be in the following block. As with the digit span,
testing was halted if participants made errors in two
consecutive trials of the same length. The dependent
measure was the total number of words recalled correctly up
to a maximum of 36.
During the experiment participants were first presented
with the insight and non-insight problems one at a time and
were not allowed to write while attempting to solve the
problems. Participants were tested individually and said aloud
their answers to the experimenter when they were ready,
within a two minute time limit. Scores on the twelve
problems were compared with performance on the four
measures of attention and two measures of working memory.
All participants started with the insight problems, the order of
which was randomized for each participant. The other tasks
were then given in the following order: non-insight problems
(in random order), visual elevator, digit span, map search,
plus-minus task, sentence span, sustained attention response
task.

Results
The mean proportion of insight problems that participants
solved correctly was .52. (SD = .28). The mean scores of the
attention and working measures are summarized in Table 1.
The results corroborated our predictions.
Table 1: Mean scores, standard deviations and correlation
values for insight problems with attention and working
memory tasks
Mean SD
r
______________________________________________
Attention switching
Visual elevator
11.39
2.66
0.515**
Plus-minus
1.56
2.11 -0.511**
Selective attention
Map search
12.64
3.3
0.23
Sustained Attention
Response Task
6.58
4.67 -0.079
Working memory
Digit span
18.29 10.24
0.390*
Sentence span
12.58
3.33
0.511**
______________________________________________
Key: * p < .05, one-tailed; ** p < .01, one-tailed

Insight problem solving and attention switching
Individuals who are good at solving insight problems are
also good at switching attention. Correct performance on the
insight problems was associated with correct performance
on the visual elevator task (r = .515, p < .01). 1 Correct
1
All correlations are Pearson’s r, n = 33, one-tailed unless otherwise
stated.

performance on the insight problems was associated with
correct performance on the plus-minus problems (r = -.511,
n = 32, p < .001).

Insight problem solving and selective and sustained
attention

results suggest that there may not be a single ‘insight skill’
but that the ability to solve insight problems may rely on a
combination of specific executive functions.

Acknowledgements

Individuals who are good at solving insight problems are
not necessarily good at tasks requiring selective or sustained
attention. Correct performance on the insight problems was
not related to correct performance on the selective attention
map search task (r = .023, p = .449). Correct performance on
the insight problems was not related to correct performance
on the sustained attention response task (r = -.079, n = 312, p
= .336), as Table 1 shows.

Regression Analysis
We also analyzed insight problem score as the dependent
variable in a regression analysis with all the attention and
working memory measures. From a stepwise regression, the
most efficient model that emerged accounted for nearly 72%
of the variance in insight problem score. The predictor
variables were: greater accuracy on the plus-minus task (β =
-.439, p < .01), greater capacity on the digit span task (β =
.498, p < .01), greater accuracy on the visual elevator task (β
= .420, p < .01) and more time taken to switch on the plusminus task (β = .248, p < .05). The adjusted R square was
.717 and the model was significant (F[4,23] = 18.067, p <
.01).

Discussion
Individuals who are good at solving insight problems are also
good at working memory storage and processing, as
measured by the digit span and sentence span tasks. Solving
insight problems may require individuals to keep in mind
several alternative possibilities (Murray and Byrne, 2005a,
2005b). Multiple possibilities may exceed working memory
capacity (Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 2002). Consistent with
this account individuals who are better at storing and
processing information in working memory are better at
solving insight problems. Individuals who are good at solving
insight problems are also good at switching attention, as
measured by accuracy in the visual elevator and plus-minus
tasks. Solving insight problems may require individuals to
switch their attention between the alternative possibilities
they have in mind in order to reach a conclusion. Consistent
with this account, individuals who are better at switching
attention are also better at solving insight problems.
Individuals who are good at solving insight problems are not
necessarily good at focusing their attention or sustaining their
attention, as measured by the selective attention map search
task, and the Sustained Attention Response Task. The results
have implications for theories of insight problem solving. The
2
Scores for two participants on this measure were lost as a result
of a technical error.

1574

We thank Ian Robertson and Richard Roche for their help in
choosing attention and memory measures. We are grateful for
support from the Irish Research Council for the Humanities
and Social Sciences, Enterprise Ireland, the Trinity College
Arts and Social Sciences Benefaction Fund, and the School of
Clinical Speech and Language Studies, Trinity College
Dublin.

References
Ansburg, P.I. and Dominowski, R.L. (2000). Promoting
insightful problem-solving. Journal of Creative Behaviour,
34, 1, 30-60.
Ansburg, P.I. and Hill, K. (2003). Creative and analytic
thinkers differ in their use of attentional resources.
Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 1141-1152.
Byrne, R. M. J. (2005). The Rational Imagination: How
People Create Alternatives to Reality. Cambridge MA:
MIT Press
Chronicle, E. P., Ormerod, T. C. and MacGregor, J.N. (2001).
When insight just won’t come: The failure of visual cues in
the nine-dot problem. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54A, 903-919.
Davidson, J.E. (1995). The suddenness of insight. In R.J.
Sternberg and J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Insight.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58 (Whole no. 270)
Gilhooly, K. and Murphy, P. (2004). Differentiating insight
from non-insight problems. In submission.
Glucksberg, S. and Weisberg. R. W. (1966). Verbal
behaviour and problem solving: Some effects of labelling
in a functional fixedness problem. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 71, 5, 659-664
Johnson-Laird, P.N., and Byrne, R.M.J. (1991) Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. and Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 4, 1-33
Jung-Beeman, M., Bowden, E. M., Haberman, J., Frymiare, J.
L., Arambel-Liu, S., Greenblatt, R., Reber, P. J. and
Kounios, J. (2004). Neural activity when people solve
verbal problems with insight. PloS Biology, 2, 4, 500-510
Lavric, A., Forstmeier, S and Rippon, G. (2000). Differences
in working memory involvement in analytical and creative
tasks: An ERP study. NeuroReport, 11, 8, 1613-1618.
Mayer, R. E. (1995). The search for insight: Grappling with
Gestalt psychology’s unanswered questions. In R.J.
Sternberg and J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of Insight.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Metcalfe, J. and Wiebe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
non-insight problem solving. Memory and Cognition, 15, 3,
238-246.

Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.
and Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of
executive functions and their contributions to complex
“frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive
Psychology, 41, 49-100
Murray, M. A. and Byrne, R. M. J. (2005a). Representation
and search space in insight problem solving. In submission
Murray, M. A. and Byrne, R. M. J. (2005b). The role of
imagery, attention and working-memory in insight
problem-solving. In submission
Robertson, I. H., Manly, T., Andrade, J., Baddeley, B. T. and
Yiend, J. (1997). ‘Oops!’: Performance correlates of
everyday attentional failures in traumatic brain injured and
normal subjects. Neuropsychologist, 35, 6, 747-758
Robertson, I. H., Ward, T., Ridgeway, V. and Nimmo-Smith,
I. (1994). The Test of Everyday Attention. Bury St
Edmunds, England: Thames Valley Test Company

1575

Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S. and Brooks, K. (1993). Thoughts
beyond words: When language overshadows insight.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 2, 166183.
Süß, H-M. Oberauer, K. Wittmann, W. W., Wilhelm, O. and
Schulze, R. (2002). Working memory capacity explains
reasoning ability – and a little bit more. Intelligence, 30, 3,
261-288.
Weisberg, R. W. (1995). Prolegomena to theories of insight
in problem-solving: A taxonomy of problems. In R.J.
Sternberg and J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The Nature of
Insight. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Weisberg, R. W. and Alba, J. W. (1981). An examination of
the alleged role of “fixation” in the solution of several
“insight” problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 110, 2, 169-192
Weschler, D. (1981). Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale –
Revised. New York: Psychological Corporation

