UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Augmenting Worked-Out Examples by Pictorial Representations: When Do They Aid
Learning?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vb2w9xp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Catrambone, Richard
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Augmenting Worked-Out Examples by Pictorial Representations:
When Do They Aid Learning?
Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)

Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)

Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Richard Catrambone (rc7@prism.gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0170, USA
Abstract

to static displays (e.g., diagrams, pictures, written text), but
the representations used can involve changes over time (e.g.,
dynamic visualizations, spoken text).
In the current paper we are interested in the effects of
augmenting a purely text-based hypertext environment
called HYPER COMB by different kinds of visualizations.
H YPER C OMB teaches how to calculate the probability of
complex events. Problems of calculating complex event
probabilities are related to situations where the probability
of selecting a particular configuration of elements randomly
out of a set of elements has to be determined (cf. Figure 1).

In this paper we investigate the effects of different kinds of
computer-based visualizations on the acquisition of problemsolving skills in the domain of probability theory. Learners
received either purely text-based worked examples, text plus
an instruction to mentally imagine the examples’ contents, or
they could retrieve either static pictures or concrete animations that depicted the problem statement and the problem
states achieved by applying a specific solution step. It could
be shown that frequently using static pictures or imagining the
examples’ contents both improved problem-solving performance. However, there were no positive effects of using animations. Rather, the frequent use of animations led to substantial
increases in learning time, while it slightly decreased performance at the same time. Thus, the use of concrete animations to visualize solution procedures was more harming than
helpful for conveying problem-solving skills.

At the Olympics 7 sprinters
participate in the 100m-sprint.
What is the probability of
correctly guessing the winner of
the gold, the silver, and the
bronze medals?

Keywords: skill acquisition; problem solving; worked-out
examples; visualization; imagery; multimedia
Find 1st event probability:

Learning from Visualizations
Understanding mathematical solution procedures is a necessary prerequisite in order to be able not to solve only familiar problems, but also to work on novel problems requiring
an adaptation of known solution procedures. However, it
has been noted that students often face severe difficulties in
understanding solution procedures even when they have
received elaborated instructional explanations of the individual solution steps. This may result from the fact that the
solution steps are often conveyed in a rather abstract way so
that learners experience difficulties in imagining which
changes in the problem state are achieved by applying a
specific solution step to a problem. The use of multimedia
systems may offer ways to overcome these difficulties that
can hardly be achieved by traditional instructional means
(Mayer, 2001). In multimedia environments information
presentation can be accomplished by using different representational formats (textual and pictorial) which may be
processed in different sensory channels (auditory and visual). Additionally, information presentation is not restricted

In order to find the first event
probability you have to consider
the number of acceptable
choices and the pool of possible
choices. The number of acceptable choices is 1 because only 1
sprinter can win the gold medal.
The pool of possible choices is 7
because 7 sprinters participate
in the 100m-sprint. Thus, the
probability of correctly guessing
the winner of the gold medal is
1/7.

Find 2nd event probability:

1/6

In order to find the second
event probability you again
have to consider the number of
acceptable choices. The number
of acceptable choices is still 1
because only 1 sprinter can win
the silver medal. The pool of
possible choices is reduced to 6
because only the remaining 6
sprinters are eligible to receive
the medal. Thus, the probability
of correctly guessing the winner
of the silver medal is 1/6.

Figure 1: Screenshot of a worked-out
example with external visualization

779

The main instructional principle underlying HYPERCOMB is
the use of worked-out examples for conveying knowledge
on different problem categories. Research over the last 20
years has shown that worked-out examples are of great help
for knowledge acquisition in particular in well-structured
domains like mathematics, physics, or programming (Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000). However, although
we have identified a way of designing worked-out examples
that boosts performance compared to conventionally designed examples (Gerjets, Scheiter, & Catrambone, 2004)
there is still space left for improvements. We assumed that
this space might be claimed by the benefits achieved
through the use of visualizations.
According to the multimedia principle (Mayer, 2001) embellishing textual learning materials by static pictures or
dynamic visualizations (i.e., animations) helps to promote
learners’ understanding of instructions. With regard to the
acquisition of problem-solving knowledge visualizations of
worked-out examples may first help learners to understand
the situation described in the problem statement (i.e., the
initial problem state) and thus to correctly represent its
meaning in a situation model (Nathan, Kintsch, & Young,
1992). Second, visualizations of the solution steps may
promote an understanding of changes with regard to the
initial problem state that are achieved by applying a solution
step to a problem. Visualizing worked-out examples can be
done by presenting either static pictures, animations, or an
instruction to mentally imagine the examples’ contents.

Animations. An animation is „any application which generates a series of frames, so that each frame appears as an
alteration of the previous one, and where the sequence of
frames is determined either by the designer or the user"
(Betrancourt & Tversky, 2000, p. 313). Thus, animations do
not only depict the current status of objects; rather they
additionally deliver information concerning changes of
objects and of their position over time (motion) as well as
information concerning the direction of these changes (trajectory, Rieber, 1990). Several findings suggest that animations can be used successfully for delivering abstract contents like mathematical rules, Newton’s laws, or computer
algorithms (Baek & Layne, 1988; Byrne, Catrambone &
Stasko, 1999; Catrambone & Seay, 2002; Rieber, 1990).
With respect to conveying problem-solving knowledge the
visual-spatial properties of the visualization may be used to
deliver information on the current problem state and its
relevant structural features. Moreover, the changes over
time may be used to reflect the changes in problem states
that result from applying a solution step to a specific problem state– without the need to compare multiple representations as it is necessary when learning from static pictures.
However, learning from animations is known to impose
certain requirements onto the learners that may be difficult
to meet (Betrancourt & Tversky, 2000). Pane, Corbett, and
John (1996) showed that learners often fail to use animations sufficiently and thus miss important information. The
results of Lowe (1999) suggest that learners have trouble
focusing on the most relevant parts of an animation and are
often distracted by irrelevant details. Furthermore, due to
the dynamic changes of the display the information can only
be viewed for a limited amount of time and may therefore
have vanished before learners have identified it. Finally,
animations may lead to an overly passive information processing and prevent learners from performing effortful cognitive processes required for a deeper understanding
(Palmiter & Elkerton, 1993; Salomon, 1984).

Static Pictures. Static pictorial representations are known
to foster the retention of facts contained in the accompanying text (cf. for a review Levin, Anglin, & Carney, 1987).
Moreover, with regard to the acquisition of problem-solving
knowledge in mathematics and physics the added value of
abstract diagrammatic and graphical representations has
been acknowledged (e.g., Shah & Hoeffner, 2002). These
visualizations are said to be computationally effective in
that they facilitate specific inferential processes needed for
some learning tasks (Larkin & Simon, 1987). However,
there is no research to our knowing on whether concrete
pictures that depict a problem statement and its associated
solution procedure promote the acquisition of problemsolving knowledge. Representing the problem statement in a
picture might help to understand which object features and
interrelations are relevant to the solution of the problem. For
instance, in the sprinter example shown in Figure 1 seven
sprinters on the racetrack are depicted out of which three
can win the gold, silver, and the bronze medal – represented
by the pedestal. Visualizing the solution steps may support
learners in inferring which change is achieved by applying a
solution procedure when they compare the new problem
state to the previous one. For instance, comparing the picture illustrating the second solution step to the one of the
first step helps to clarify the fact that only six sprinters are
eligible for guessing the winner of the silver medal, because
one sprinter has already won the gold medal in the first
solution step and thus already stands on the pedestal.

Imagery. To circumvent the problem of passive information
processing we implemented a third visualization condition
in our experiment in which we instructed learners to imagine the contents of a text-based worked-out example. That
is, learners did not receive any pictorial representations at
all; rather, they were told to construct their own visualizations. Hodes (1992) compared the effectiveness of imagery
and instructional visuals for fact recall and understanding.
Both instructional methods were helpful in inducing an
imagery strategy and in improving posttest performance;
however, for some performance measures achievements due
to presenting external visuals were larger than for the imagery instructions. Ginns, Chandler, and Sweller (2003)
showed that imagining (vs. studying text-based materials)
was helpful only for learners who possessed sufficiently
high prior knowledge in the domain. The authors explained
this finding by assuming that “to successfully imagine a
procedure or a concept, all of the relevant elements must be

780

processed simultaneously in working memory. That may be
possible only after a schema had been constructed” (p. 231).
Comparing the three different visualization methods
(static pictures, animations, and imagery) to each other
yields insights on specific promises as well as on drawbacks
associated with them, which both determine learning outcomes. Static pictures may engage learners in a more active
way, because they have to compare multiple visualizations
to understand the to-be-learned solution procedures. As this
information is permanently visible these comparisons may
be conducted without overloading the cognitive system.
However, learners may make wrong inferences and they
may miss important information so that their internal representation of the solution procedures may be incorrect as well
as incomplete. Moreover, because the external representations cannot be modified by a learner they are not adapted to
his or her preferences or prior knowledge level. Animations
may on the other hand reduce learner activity and induce a
rather passive style of processing. The cognitive demands
imposed by the need to extract the relevant information
from a changing display may be rather high. Unless animations are highly interactive they do not allow for any adaptation to a learner’s preferences or prior knowledge. However, an advantage of animations of solution steps is that all
the information that is needed to understand problem states
and their changes is in principle contained in the representation and thus it is correct as well as complete. Finally, imagery instructions should foster learner activity in an optimal way; however, the need to envision all information may
at the same time require rather demanding processes (Ginns
et al., 2003). There is also the danger that learners may miss
important information or that they make incorrect inferences. A possible advantage of mental imagery is that because it is based on self-generated images, these images are
adapted to a learner’s preferences and prior knowledge
level. These trade-offs between possible promises and
drawbacks were investigated in the experiment outlined in
the remainder of the paper.

A questionnaire was used to measure participants’ prior
knowledge. In the first part of HYPER C OMB learners were
given a short technical introduction to the system and to the
experiment. Consequently, the basic notion of random experiments and the general rationale behind calculating the
probability of outcomes were explained. In the subsequent
example-based learning phase learners had to acquire
knowledge on four different problem categories, whereby
each category was explained by means of two worked-out
examples. Depending on the experimental condition participants additionally received an imagery instruction or they
could retrieve static pictures or dynamic visualizations that
augmented the worked-out examples. Participants were not
forced to process these visualizations; rather, they had to
select them by clicking on a button in order to view them.
The visualizations depicted the contents of the worked-out
examples in a concrete way (cf. Figure 1). For every
worked-out example there was always one visualization of
the problem statement and one of every worked-out solution
step. Participants could decide by themselves when to start
working on the test problems. The instructional materials
were no longer available during problem solving. For the
eleven problems we varied the transfer distance with respect
to the worked-out examples by presenting isomorphic as
well as novel problems. Isomorphic test problems differed
from the instructional examples only with regard to their
surface features. Novel test problems were constructed in a
way that two complex-event probabilities had to be considered whose outcomes had to be multiplied in order to calculate the required probability.
Design and Dependent Measures. Participants learned in
one of four conditions. In the text-only condition only the
written worked-out examples were available. In the imagery
condition learners were additionally told to mentally imagine the contents as vividly and with as many details as possible. Imagery was trained at the beginning of the experiment by instructing learners to imagine the contents of a
short text passage describing a traffic situation involving
multiple cars, which approach a crossing from different
directions. Moreover, they were constantly reminded to use
imagery in the example-based learning phase by a sticker
“imagine the situation” attached to the computer screen. In
the pictures condition static visualizations could be retrieved
for each component of the worked-out examples, whereas in
the animation condition clicking the play-button for any of
the example components resulted in the presentation of a
dynamic visualization (cf. Figure 1). For instance, in the
sprinter animation the sprinters were first entering the racetrack (problem statement) and were then running across the
racetrack. The visualization of the solution steps always
depicted one sprinter passing the finishing line and ascending the pedestal. As static pictures we always used the last
frame of the animations that depicted the problem state
resulting from the application of the respective solution step.
As dependent measures we registered performance for
solving isomorphic and novel problems and learning time.

Experiment
Method
Participants. Participants were 124 students (88 female, 36
male) of the University of Tuebingen, Germany, who participated for either course credit or payment. One participant
in the static-pictures condition had to be excluded from the
analysis, because the person’s learning time was more than
four standard deviations above the mean learning time in
this condition. Average age was 23.7 years. Most of the
participants were familiar with the domain of probability
theory and were experienced computer users.
Materials and Procedure. H YPER C OMB consisted of a
technical instruction, a short introduction to the domain, an
example-based learning phase and a subsequent test phase.

781

alizations by clicking on the respective button in the two
visualization conditions. There were a total of 31 visualizations available in each of the conditions. In general, external
visualizations were only seldom retrieved. Static pictures
were retrieved 7.0 times on average, whereas animations
were played 10.3 times. For the further course of the statistical analyses we conducted a median split within each of
the two conditions to distinguish between learners who used
external visualizations only sparsely and those who made
frequent use of the representations. The resulting variable
was used as a second factor in an ANOVA (instructional
condition x visualization utilization). Analyzing performance in the conditions with external visualizations by means
of this ANOVA revealed no significant effects for performance on novel problems (instructional condition: F < 1;
information utilization: F(1, 58) = 1.30; MSE = 474.28; p >
.20) nor interactions (F(1, 58) = 1.12; MSE = 474.28; p >
.20). However, for performance on isomorphic test problems (Figure 4) there were significant main effects of external visualization and visualization utilization. Learners
showed a superior performance when learning from static
pictures (F(1, 58) = 5.56; MSE = 743.58; p < .05). Furthermore, learners who made use of the visualizations more
frequently tended to outperform those who only used them
sparsely (F(1, 58) = 3.08; MSE = 743.58; p < .10). Finally,
there was a significant interaction (F(1, 58) = 7.20; MSE =
743.58; p < .01) indicating that – when frequently used –
static pictures were superior to animations (t(25) = 3.44; p <
.01), while there were no differences when the visualizations were retrieved only sparsely (t(33) = -0.24; p > .80).

Results
Overall Analyses. Prior knowledge was comparable across
all four conditions. In a first step we analyzed problemsolving performance and learning time across all conditions
by means of one-factorial ANOVAs. Performance on isomorphic problems (Figure 2, left) varied slightly as a function of instructional condition (F(3, 119) = 2.32; MSE =
769.06; p < .10), while performance on novel problems
(Figure 2, right) was unaffected by the experimental manipulation (F < 1). Learning time (Figure 3) increased rather
naturally with the more materials being available for processing (F(3, 119) = 6.21; MSE = 48052.96; p = .001).

% correct

60
45
30
15
0
Isomorphs
Text

Imagery

Novel
Pictures

Animation

Figure 2: Problem-solving performance (in % correct)
for isomorphic (left) and novel problems (right)
as a function of instructional condition
800

sec

600

80

400
200

% correct

60

0

Learning Time
Text

Imagery

Pictures

Animation

Text only
40
20
0

Figure 3: Learning time (in sec)
as a function of instructional condition

Sparse

Frequent
Pictures

Thus, at first sight it seems that although presenting external
visualizations increased the time learners devoted for learning, these increases in learning time were not accompanied
by respective gains in performance. On the contrary, performance for isomorphic problems was worst in the animation condition. However, it is not clear whether the finding
that problem-solving performance was only slightly affected
by variations of the instructional materials is due to the
ineffectiveness of these variations or if it is due to the fact
that learners did not sufficiently use the external visualizations. To address this question we analyzed learners’ frequencies of visualization retrieval in a next step.

Animation

Figure 4: Performance on isomorphic
problems (in % correct) as a function of
external visualization and visualization utilization
Furthermore, analyzing the learning times (Figure 5) revealed that this deterioration in performance due to frequently using animations was accompanied by an increase
in time learners needed to study the instructional materials.
Learning times were longer for students in the animation
condition than in the static pictures condition (F(1, 58) =
7.97; MSE = 44333.61; p < .01) and increased dramatically
with a frequent use of visualizations (F(1, 58) = 18.02; MSE
= 44333.61; p < .001). Moreover, a significant interaction
(F(1, 58) = 8.78; MSE = 44333.61; p < .01) revealed that

Utilization of External Visualizations. For every participant we determined how often he or she had retrieved visu-

782

frequently using static pictures compared to retrieving them
only sparsely had no impact on learning time (t(33) = 0.11;
p > .90), while the frequent use of animations almost doubled the time spent for learning (t(25) = -3.95; p = .001).

agery vs. frequent picture use: (t(42) = 2.30; p < .05; imagery vs. frequent animation use: t(45) = 7.32; p < .001),
whereas the sparse use did not yield any longer learning
times (imagery vs. sparse picture use: t(48) = 0.88; p > .30;
imagery vs. sparse animation use: t(47) = 0.71; p > .40).
Thus, imagining the contents of the worked-out examples
was as effective as viewing static pictures that depicted
these contents and more efficient because it required less
time for learning. Moreover, mental imagery was more
effective than receiving dynamic visualizations and was
again accompanied by less learning time.

900

sec

600

Text only
300

Discussion

0
Sparse
Pictures

Frequent

In this paper we presented evidence for the differential effectiveness of external and internal visualizations for cognitive skill acquisition. Our results support the assumption that
learners might benefit from a concrete visualization of
problem states that is tied to the cover stories of worked-out
examples. However, while we were able to show that a
frequent use of static pictures fostered performance at least
on isomorphic problems, including dynamics in the external
visualizations in our case worsened performance. The initial
idea of using animations had been that the dynamics of an
animation might be used to depict information on changes in
problem states that occur due to applying a specific solution
step. However, it seems that representing these changes
explicitly was more harming than helpful in that it may even
have distracted learners. These results are in line with prior
findings (Lowe, 1999; Pane et al., 1996) showing that learners are often overwhelmed by the number of details they
need to identify, select, and to remember in a limited period
of time (i.e., while the information is present on the changing display) when learning from animations.
In our current research we thus pursue the idea of further
reducing the cognitive demands imposed by animations by
using abstract rather than concrete dynamic visualizations of
the worked-out examples. These abstract animations are
characterized by the fact that the visualizations of all examples share a common representation of objects and of the
relevant relations among them. That is, irrespective of an
example’s cover story objects like the sprinters are represented by marbles, which are selected from an urn. This
common representation across examples should help learners to focus on the structural similarities and differences
between the examples while being able to ignore their surface features. Thus, there is not only less information that
needs to be processed in total; moreover, the ratio between
relevant and irrelevant information is improved compared to
the concrete animations investigated in the current paper.
Thus, this simplified representation should be less demanding and should leave free cognitive resources in order to
cope with the dynamics of the animation. Schuh, Gerjets,
and Scheiter (in press) have provided initial evidence that
the usefulness of animations very much depends on whether
the visualization is designed in a way to support cognitive

Animation

Figure 5: Learning time (in sec) as a function of
external visualization and visualization utilization
To sum up, using static pictures frequently did not increase
learning time demands and nevertheless improved performance. On the other hand, frequently using animations was
rather damaging in that it required more learning time and
even worsened performance compared to the text-only condition. Therefore, while concrete visualizations of the contents of the worked-out examples proved beneficial for
learning, the dynamics contained in the animations were
unnecessary or even harmful. If complex dynamic visualizations cannot be recommended for learning, the question
arises whether there is a need for external visualizations at
all. That is, if already simple visualizations like static pictures help to achieve an understanding of the principles,
then maybe learners are able to generate these images by
themselves. The question whether external visualizations are
more helpful than the instruction to imagine the worked-out
examples’ contents was addressed in the last analysis.
The Benefits of Imagery Compared to External Visualizations. In this final section we compared the imagery condition to the two external-visualization conditions whereby
in the latter two we further distinguished between sparse and
frequent use of visualizations. Because none of the analyses
revealed any effects for performance on novel problems, we
will report the results for isomorphic problems only.
The imagery condition had no impact on performance
when compared to the group of learners, who had frequently
used static pictures (t(42) = 1.42; p > .10); whereas imagery
improved performance slightly compared to a sparse use of
static pictures (t(48) = -1.96; p < .10).
Using animations frequently was worse than receiving an
imagery instruction only (t(45) = -2.51; p < .05), while there
were smaller differences between the sparsely use of animations and the latter condition (t(47) = -1.70; p < .10).
With regard to learning time, the frequent use of external
visualizations increased the time spent studying the instructional materials compared to the imagery instruction (im-

783

processes (e.g., abstraction from irrelevant surface features)
required for achieving a deeper understanding.
Additionally, we want to continue our work based on the
promising results with regard to cognitive skill acquisition
from static pictures and imagery. First, we would like to
investigate means of improving learners’ use of static pictures. In particular, we aim at testing the effectiveness of
retrieval prompts, which guide learners to use static pictures
more often. In prior studies we were able to demonstrate
that prompting learners to retrieve profitable information
units is an effective means to foster problem-solving performance in particular for students with low prior knowledge (Gerjets, Scheiter, & Schuh, 2004). Second, once
static pictures have been retrieved to a sufficient extent,
their processing should be supported by additional instructional guidance. In particular, learners may receive instructions to compare multiple static pictures to enable them to
extract changes in problem states that have occurred due to
applying a solution step more easily. Finally, we are also
convinced that the use of imagery might be further improved. In the current experiment learners were instructed to
use imagery only at the beginning of the experiment and the
reminder during the learning phase could be easily overlooked. Thus, we would like to investigate the use of computer-based prompts that frequently remind learners to envision the examples’ contents. All three instructional devices
(retrieval prompts, comparison instruction, and imagery
prompts) aim at increasing the time learners devote for
studying the instructional materials as well as at improving
the quality of processing the worked-out examples.

load: Molar versus modular presentation of solution procedures. Instructional Science, 32, 33-58.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Schuh, J. (2005). Instruktionale
Unterstützung beim Fertigkeitserwerb aus Beispielen in
hypertextbasierten Lernumgebungen. Zeitschrift fuer
Paedagogische Psychologie, 19, 25-38.
Ginns, P., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (2003). When imagining information is effective. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 28, 229-251.
Hodes, C. L. (1992). The effectiveness of mental imagery
and visual illustrations: A comparison of two instructional
variables. Journal of Research and Development in Education, 26, 46-56.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99.
Levin, J. R., Anglin, G. L., & Carney, R. N (1987). Validating functions of pictures in prose. In D. M. Willows &
H. A. Houghton (1987). The psychology of illustration .
New York: Springer.
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an animation during complex visual learning. European Journal of
Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nathan, M. J., Kintsch, W., & Young, E. (1992). A theory
of algebra-word-problem comprehension and its implications for the design of learning environments. Cognition
and Instruction, 9, 329-389.
Palmiter, S., & Elkerton, J. (1993). Animated demonstrations for learning procedural computer-based tasks. Human-Computer Interaction, 8, 193-216.
Pane, J. F., Corbett, A. T., & John, B. E. (1996). Assessing
dynamics in computer-based instruction. In M. J. Tauber
(Ed.), Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems . Vancouver: ACM.
Rieber, L. P. (1990). Animation in computer-based instruction. Educational Technology Research & Development,
38, 77-86.
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is "easy" and print is
"tough": The differential investment of mental effort in
learning as a function of perceptions and attributions.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 647-658.
Schuh, J., Gerjets, P. & Scheiter, K. (in press). Fostering the
acquisition of transferable problem-solving knowledge
with an interactive comparison tool and dynamic visualizations of solution procedures. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou
& M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Shah, P., & Hoeffner, J. (2002). Review of graph comprehension research: Implications for instruction. Educational Psychology Review, 14, 47-69.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation (TransCoop-Program). We thank the participants of the practical course in experimental psychology
(summer semester 2003) for conducting the experiment.

References
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. A., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
Baek, Y. K., & Layne, B. H. (1988). Color, graphics, and
animation in a computer-assisted learning tutorial lesson.
Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 15, 131-135.
Betrancourt, M., & Tversky, B. (2000). Effect of computer
animation on users' performance: A review. Le Travail
Humain, 63, 311-329.
Byrne, M. D., Catrambone, R., & Stasko, J. T. (1999).
Evaluating animations as student aids in learning computer algorithms. Computers & Education, 33, 253-278.
Catrambone, R., & Seay, F. A. (2002). Using animations to
help students learn computer algorithms. Human Factors,
44, 495-511.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Catrambone, R. (2004). Designing instructional examples to reduce intrinsic cognitive

784

