UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Case Studies in Learning by Teaching Behavioral Differences in Directed versus Guided
Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5cq729tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Adebiyi, Bilikiss
Belyenne, Kadira
Biswas, Gautam
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Case Studies in Learning by Teaching
Behavioral Differences in Directed versus Guided Learning
Gautam Biswas, Krittaya Leelawong, Kadira Belynne, and Bilikiss Adebiyi
(gautam.biswas@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of EECS/ISIS, Box 1824, Sta B
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235. USA.
Details of the Betty’s Brain system, and experiments that we
have conducted with this system are presented elsewhere
(Biswas et al., 2004a, 2004b; Davis et al., 2003; Leelawong et
al., 2002). Our experiments in fifth grade science classrooms
showed that learning by teaching with self-regulated learning
(SRL) (Zimmerman, 1989) led to better transfer than situations where the students were taught by a pedagogical agent
(Johnson et al., 2000).
The encouraging results from the Betty’s Brain experiments prompted us to take a more detailed look at how students used the different versions of the system, especially the
feedback they got from Betty and the mentor. This called for
more in-depth analysis of student activities and behaviors that
can be attributed to the self-regulation strategies. In this paper, we perform a case analysis of the log files of student activities during the main and transfer studies. The next section
briefly outlines the teachable agent system and the experimental study we conducted in the fifth grade science classrooms.

Abstract
Our studies with Betty’s Brain, a learning by teaching environment, have shown that the system is effective in helping
fifth grade students gain a good understanding of river ecosystem concepts. The use of self-regulation strategies demonstrated that the learning gains transferred to new domains where
students worked without the self-regulation system. This paper
analyzes the log files of the student activities to determine
which activities in the learning environment contribute to the
students developing metacognitive strategies that contribute to
their preparation for future learning.
Keywords: learning by teaching; self-regulation strategies;
teachable agents; behavior log analysis.

Introduction
An important challenge for computer-based learning environments is to demonstrate that they develop students’ abilities to learn, even after they leave the computer environment
(Anderson et al., 1995). The cognitive science and education
literature have established that understanding and transfer are
greatly aided by constructivist, exploratory, and anchored
learning environments (Bransford et al., 2000). Relevant social interactions can add motivation and also enhance effective learning (Soller, 2001).
We have adopted the learning by teaching paradigm
(Palincsar et al., 1984) as the basis for designing learning environments. Researchers (Bargh et al., 1980; Biswas et al.,
2001) have shown that people learn more when they teach
others as opposed to when they prepare to take tests themselves. Teaching involves a number of constructivist activities. Teachers prepare and organize their knowledge in anticipation of the needs of their students. They provide explanations and demonstrations during teaching and reflect on the
questions and feedback they receive from the students. Effective teaching also requires the explicit monitoring of students
during and after the teaching process. This helps teachers to
evaluate their own understanding and the methods they have
used to convey this understanding to students (Artzt et al.,
1999).
We have implemented a software agent, Betty’s Brain,
that students can teach using concept maps (Novak, 1996).
Once taught, Betty uses qualitative reasoning methods
(Forbus, 1984) to answer questions. Students reflect on
Betty’s answers, revise their own knowledge, and make corresponding changes to the concept map to teach Betty better.

Betty’s Brain
The main interface to the Betty’s Brain system is shown in
Figure 1. This interface implements three primary components of teaching: (i) teach Betty using a concept map, (ii)
query Betty to see how much she has understood, and (iii)
quiz Betty to see how well prepared she is to take the test,
which will gain her admittance to the Science club. These
components model the primary constructivist activities involved in various phases of the teaching process: preparation,
teaching, and monitoring (Colton et al., 1993).
Students teach Betty about entities in river ecosystems, e.g.,
fish, algae, macroinvertebrates, waste, and bacteria, and the
relations between these entities, e.g., fish consume dissolved
oxygen, algae replenish it, waste is consumed by bacteria to
produce nutrients, and nutrients help algae grow. Betty is
equipped to reason about the knowledge that she has been
taught to answer questions like “if macroinvertebrates increase what happens to bacteria?” She uses qualitative reasoning methods (Leelawong et al., 2001) to make inferences
through chains of links. She determines that on the one hand
macroinvertebrates create more waste and waste feeds bacteria, but on the other hand, macroinvertebrates also consume
algae and dissolved oxygen, and, therefore, there is less oxygen for bacteria to breathe, and this inhibits their growth.

274

what she was taught, and sometimes generated spontaneous
responses. For example, when Betty had been taught a causal
path with multiple links, she would say, “O.k. I think I know
how this works. …” and go on to reason with the path and explain her reasoning. Second, to get students to monitor
Betty’s and their own learning, she would encourage them to
ask her questions. Betty refused to take the quiz for the first
time till she had been taught a few causal links, and been
asked a causal query for which she could generate an answer.
Third, if her student-teacher did not periodically ask her questions, Betty would refuse to take the quiz stating: “I do not
feel prepared to take a quiz. I don’t understand enough about
causal relationships in the river. Please ask me some causal
questions to see if I understand. Mr. Davis can help you learn
more about being a good teacher.” Last, unlike the other two
groups, the SRL students were not offered direct feedback on
how to correct their concept maps by the mentor. Mr. Davis
provided more general feedback about reasoning through
chains of events to derive answers to questions.
Our experimental results showed that students in all three
groups learnt the same amount in the main study that included
five 45 minute sessions with their respective systems (Biswas
et al., 2004b). Figure 2 shows the average quiz performance
by group at the end of every session (maximum score = 15).
All three groups showed improved performance with time.
On the average, the ITS and LBT groups had higher quiz
scores than the SRL group, but the differences were not statistically significant. It is interesting to note that the SRL group
started slowly, but performed better from session 3 on.

Figure 1: Betty’s Brain Interface
Betty presents her answers and explanations for her derivations using text, speech, and animation. Students query Betty
or get her to take quizzes to see how much she has learnt. Indirectly, this helps them reflect on how much they themselves
know. Since students using the system are novices in domain
knowledge and teaching practices, we provide online resources that contain all the relevant material that students
need to teach Betty. The students and Betty also have access
to a mentor agent, Mr. Davis, who can answer a variety of
questions when asked. The feedback provided along with the
students’ motivation to help Betty, results in their revising
and adding to the concept maps to help Betty improve her
performance on the quizzes.
Our experimental study included 54 students in a 5th grade
science classroom in Southeastern USA. The experiment
compared three different versions of the system: (i) Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (ITS), (ii) Learning by Teaching (LBT),
and (iii) LBT with Self Regulated Learning (SRL). The students were divided equally into the three groups using a stratified random sampling method. All three groups had access to
identical resources on river ecosystems, the same quiz questions, and similar access to the query feature and the mentor
agent, Mr. Davis.
The ITS group was taught by the mentor agent, Mr. Davis.
He asked students to construct a concept map to answer three
sets of quiz questions that were designed to meet science curriculum guidelines. When students submitted their maps for a
quiz, Mr. Davis provided directed feedback to help them correct errors in the quiz.
The LBT and SRL groups were told to teach Betty and help
her pass a test so she could become a member of the school
Science club. In the LBT system, students could query Betty
and ask her to take a quiz. Mr. Davis’ feedback to Betty after
she took the quiz, was the same as in the ITS system.
The SRL groups Betty persona was redesigned to incorporate self-regulation learning strategies like monitoring, assessing, goal setting, seeking assistance, and reflecting on feedback. Betty’s behavior illustrated the self-regulation strategies
in four ways. First, like a good student, Betty reflected on

Figure 2: Average Quiz scores at the end of each session
(max score = 15)
Three weeks after the main test we conducted a preparation for future learning transfer test, where students were
asked to construct a concept map and answer questions about
the land-based nitrogen cycle. The nitrogen cycle was not
taught in class so they had to learn from resources provided
during the transfer task. All three groups used a version of the
system where the mentor agent graded the quiz answers, but
provided no additional help.
Table 1 summarizes the results of the preparation for future
learning test. The SRL and LBT groups had significantly
more valid links than the ITS group, and the LBT groups had
significantly more valid concepts than the ITS group. Even
though the SRL group had more expert links than the ITS and
LBT groups and more expert concepts than the ITS group,
these differences were not statistically significant. Overall,
the learning by teaching groups outperformed the ITS group,

275

a pattern of taking a quiz, checking quiz results and mentor
feedback, reading the resources, editing the map again, and
taking the quiz to check the effect of his changes on his quiz
performance. Occasionally he asked causal questions and
traced the answer by asking Betty to explain her answer. By
the end of his third session, he had successfully constructed a
map that answered all of the questions on all three quizzes.
Overall, he did read the resources periodically, but mostly
used the quiz, mentor feedback, edit, and quiz again feature to
build his concept map.
Sally used the quiz-edit-quiz pattern of behavior but unlike
Josh did not pay much attention to the mentor feedback, nor
did she read the resources much. Only toward then end of the
session 4, she began to use a strategy similar to Josh’s: she
edited her map, took a quiz, checked feedback, read the resources, asked a question to see how her map answered it,
checked resources again, and took the quiz to check her performance. In her fifth session, Sally went back to the quiz,
edit, quiz strategy, and was unable to complete the quizzes.
She had 6 out 10 correct on quiz 1 and 2, and did not attempt
quiz 3.
The LBT logs analyzed are those of Rose and Devon. Rose
demonstrated an effective strategy for finding information
and teaching Betty, and was successful in getting her to pass
all of her quizzes. Devon’s pattern of behavior during the five
sessions was similar to Sally’s in the ITS condition. He could
not get Betty to pass all three quizzes.
Rose’s initial concept map had more descriptive information than causal and Betty could not answer any quiz question. After this, she went through a process of reading the resources and teaching Betty about causal relations. Betty still
could not answer any of the quiz questions. Rose used the
quiz questions and the mentor’s feedback to determine what
needed to be in the map, and taught Betty by editing her concept map. This pattern of sending Betty to take a quiz, checking quiz questions and feedback, and then editing the concept
map continued till she succeeded in getting Betty to answer
all the quiz questions correctly.
Devon also began by teaching Betty descriptive information and Betty could not answer any of the questions. He
looked at the quiz questions and mentor feedback, and then
began teaching her causal relations. He checked the resources
but spent very little time reading them. Devon mostly followed the quiz, edit, quiz pattern and mainly taught Betty
concepts that were on the quiz. Most of his queries to Betty
were descriptive questions, and he could not get Betty to pass
all three quizzes.
Rose and Devon parallel Josh’s and Sally’s patterns of behavior with very similar outcomes. Note that feedback from
the mentor was the same for the two systems, and, Rose and
Josh used them in the same way – check the concept map errors pointed out by the mentor, read the resources, and correct
the errors. Sally and Devon did not use the mentor feedback
well, they spent very little time reading the resources, and
their quiz performances were not as good.
The SRL participants selected were Ashley and Sarah.
Ashley successfully taught Betty to pass all three quizzes, and
demonstrated an effective strategy for finding information
while teaching Betty. Sarah failed to identify all of the concepts that Betty needed to learn in order to pass the quizzes.

but the effects of teaching self-regulation strategies on the
students’ abilities to learn a new domain are not clear from
these results. The SRL group did better than the LBT group in
terms of expert and valid links, and the LBT group had more
valid concepts than the SRL group, but none of these results
are statistically significant.
Table 1: Results of the Transfer Study
Student Map Included:

SRL
Mean (sd)

LBT
Mean (sd)

ITS
Mean (sd)

Expert Concepts
4.6 (.7)
4.6 (.4)
Expert Links
0.6 (.3)
0.3 (.2)
Valid Concepts
7.7 (3.0)
8.3a (3.2)
a
Valid Links
6.4 (1.0) 6.1a (1.0)
a
Significantly greater than ITS, p < .05

3.5 (.4)
0.3 (.1)
5.3 (3.0)
3.3 (.7)

To get a better understanding of these results, we have performed a more detailed analysis of the students’ activities that
was logged by the Betty’s Brain system.

Analysis of Log Data
Student activities recorded were classified into the following
categories: (i) editing the concept map (i.e., teaching Betty),
(ii) reading resources to learn more about river ecosystems,
(iii) asking queries of Betty, (iv) asking Betty to explain her
answer to a query, (v) asking Betty to take a quiz, and (vi)
asking the mentor agent for help on a specific topic. Each of
these activities is directly associated with buttons on the system interface (see Fig. 1). For each category, more specific
information was also recorded. For example, if a student created a new concept, the name of the concept was recorded in
the log file. The period of time students spent on each activity
was also recorded.
Hard copies of the log files were analyzed by the researchers and a summary log file that contained the activity name,
specific information about the activity, and time spent on the
activity was created in tabular form. The case study summaries generated from the log files to study qualitative differences in students’ use of the system are described next.

Case Study Analysis
For the case studies, we picked two subjects each from the
three groups. One of the subjects in each group performed
well, i.e., they created maps that answered all of the quiz
questions correctly. The second subject picked did not do as
well, i.e., some of their quiz answers were incorrect. Within
each category we picked randomly. The names in the case
study are not the real names of participants.
The two ITS participants were Josh and Sally. Josh constructed a map that correctly answered all of the questions on
the quizzes, while Sally’s behavior was typical of many participants in the ITS condition. She could not construct a map
that answered all of the quiz questions.
Josh began by checking the quiz questions, and then read
the online resources to get information about river ecosystems. When constructing the concept map, he kept going back
to the quiz questions to determine if he was selecting the entities that appeared there. From the second session on he began

276

Note the SRL Betty discouraged use of the quiz, edit, quiz
pattern. She refused to take quizzes if she hadn’t been taught
enough causal relations, and if she was not asked causal queries to see if she was prepared. This behavior encouraged the
SRL participants to ask Betty more causal questions.
Ashley began by teaching Betty four concepts and corresponding causal links but when she asked Betty to take a
quiz, she refused. When Ashley succeeded in getting Betty to
take a quiz, she used the quiz questions to find relevant concepts. From session 2 on, Ashley began a pattern of teaching,
querying Betty, checking the resources for a couple of minutes, and then sending Betty to take a quiz. Toward the end,
Ashley didn’t need to check the resources much, and at the
end of session 4, Betty answered all questions correctly.
Sarah was not as successful as Ashley. She started off
teaching Betty about fish and plants then got stuck and asked
the mentor for help. However, she did not get into the details
of the help topics. In the sessions that followed, Sarah kept
trying the quiz/edit/quiz strategy, but Betty refused most of
the quiz requests. Sarah persisted and Betty would eventually
relent. She asked few causal queries, and failed to teach Betty
to pass the three quizzes.

maps. This is clearly illustrated in the plots shown in Fig. 4.
From session 3 on, the SRL group asked more queries than
the other two groups, and a large percentage of their queries
were causal (all pairwise differences were significant using
Tukey’s HSD, p < .05). However, the number of explanation
requests after a query was about 1/4th of total number of queries asked. This may be an indication that the explanation
mechanism was not used as much as it should have been to
understand and debug the concept map structure, especially in
the early stages of the teaching and learning process.

Summary of Log Analysis
A number of interesting patterns emerge from the case study
analysis. Like our previous study (Biswas et al, 2004a), it is
clear that participants who primarily used the quiz/edit/quiz
pattern did not do as well on the quizzes as those participants
who spent blocks of time reading the resources, querying
Betty, and then looking through her explanations. Further,
those who seemed to look at the resources for very short time
periods, primarily to seek information that they had been directed by the mentor, did not perform as well.
The quiz questions turned out to be the important scaffold
that helped students realize the importance of causal relations.
Independent of group, students’ initial concept maps primarily had descriptive links. Betty’s inability to answer quiz
questions, and in some cases her refusal to take the quiz (SRL
group) made the students realize the differences between descriptive and causal links. Fig. 3 shows that on the average all
three groups made the same number of quiz requests initially,
but in later sessions, the LBT and SRL groups used the quiz
feature more than the ITS group (only the pairwise difference
between the LBT and ITS groups was significant based on
Tukey HSD, p < .05).

Figure 4: Average Numbers of Queries per Session
Figure 5, shows that the groups did not differ much in the
number of resource requests. Overall, though the SRL group
seems to have spent much less time reading the resources
than the other two groups. This can be attributed to what happened in the first two sessions. The SRL Betty refused to take
a quiz until the students had created a map with at least four
concepts and two causal links. This was unlike the other two
groups where Betty took a quiz whenever she was asked, and,
therefore, students had access to the quiz questions and directed mentor feedback from the time they took the first quiz.
It took most SRL students through the middle of the second
session to figure out what causal links were. We discuss this
issue in greater detail in the next section.

N
um
bers of Requests

Averages of Resource Requests
10.00
8.00

ITS

6.00

LBT

4.00

SRL

2.00
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

Sessions

Figure 5: Average number of resource requests
Figure 3: Quiz Requests per Session
Many students did not realize the importance of queries and
explanations as a mechanism for (i) debugging their concept
maps, and (ii) understanding reasoning through chains of
links. The SRL group was forced to ask queries, and this
made them realize the importance of causal links in their

Implications on Learning and Transfer
If quiz scores are used as the sole measure of learning performance (Fig. 2, at the end of session 5, mean score for ITS
group = 11.6, LBT group = 11.7, and SRL group = 8.0; pairwise comparison of means using Tukey’s HSD not significant
277

at the .05 confidence level), one may come to the conclusion
that directed learning approaches are more effective than
guided learning environments. A dominant behavior observed in the ITS and LBT groups was the quiz/edit/quiz pattern, with the mentor’s directed feedback being employed to
make local changes to the concept map till the quiz answers
were correct. Students who took this approach used the resources, mentor feedback, and the query and explanation
mechanisms sparingly could not complete all three quizzes in
the main study. It is very likely that this group of students did
not develop a good overall understanding of the river ecosystem domain, nor did they pick up the self regulation strategies
required to become good learners.
Figs. 2-5 also established that it took the SRL group more
time before they started using the quiz and query features. As
discussed earlier, this can be attributed to self regulation features built into the system. Betty refused to take a quiz till the
students had (i) taught her at least four concepts and two
causal links, and (ii) asked her at least one causal query to see
if she understood what she had been taught. When the SRL
students asked Mr. Davis for help, his initial feedback to them
was general: read the resources, find important concepts, and
use this information to build the concept map to teach Betty.
However, the students did not find this to be very useful, and
as is evident from Figs. 3-5 the SRL students did not achieve
much in the first two sessions. If anything, they learnt some
about self-regulation learning strategies.

cant using Tukey HSD, p < .05). Not surprisingly, more than
80% of the concepts in ITS group maps were expert concepts.
For the LBT and SRL groups, only 53% and 50%, respectively, of the valid concepts were expert concepts. These percentages were similar when one compares the percentage of
expert links in the student maps. A concept or link was
termed valid by our raters, if they appeared in the expert concept map (created by the science teacher), or if they were
considered to be relevant to the river ecosystem domain
These numbers clearly indicate that the ITS groups focus was
mainly on the mentor feedback, and they made very little effort to learn on their own. The two learning by teaching
groups showed greater desire for learning on their own, perhaps because of their motivation to teach Betty and get her to
succeed on the quiz questions.
Even though the SRL group did not illustrate significantly
better performance in the transfer test discussed in section 2,
this group, using their learnt self regulation strategies, demonstrated better learning characteristics in the transfer test than
the other two groups. This is clearly illustrated in Table 2.
There was no mentor feedback to help the learning process in
the transfer study. The only feedback the mentor provided
was whether Betty’s quiz answers were right or wrong. The
quizzes did not have the scaffolding structure of the main
study. In the main study the quiz questions helped students
progressively build the concept map structure to the point
where the map contained most of the information to answer
the main question in each quiz. The three quiz questions in
the transfer study were the main questions. There were no intermediate questions that gave students clues about concepts
and links they needed to add to the concept map.
Table 2: Log Analysis of the 2nd Session of the Transfer
Test
Activity

ITS
Mean (sd)

LBT
Mean (sd)

Numbers of Resource
2.8 (1.4) 9.3 a (4.7)
Requests
Time Spent Accessing
8:31
8:59
Resources (minutes)
(4:2)
(4:4)
Numbers of Causal Que0.8 (0.2) 1.2 (0.7)
ries (Times)
Numbers of Explanation
0.2 (0.1) 0.6 (0.3)
Requests (Times)
Numbers of Quiz Re3.8 (3.5) 5.6 (3.1)
quests (Times)
a
Significantly greater than ITS, p < .05
b
Significantly greater than LBT, p < .05

Figure 6: Valid Concepts & Links in the Students’ Maps
We believe that the focus on SRL strategies may have produced positive long-reaching outcomes in terms of the students’ abilities to learn new domains. Toward the end of the
second session, the SRL students realized the importance of
causal links and the query feature. After the students asked
Betty a causal query, she agreed to take the quiz. Access to
the quiz questions provided the reinforcement and direction
this group needed to learn about river ecosystems, and create
the maps that improved Betty’s quiz performances significantly. However, because of the late start, they were not able
to catch up with the ITS and LBT groups.
When one looks at the quality of the concept maps (see
Figure 6), the LBT and SRL groups had more valid concepts
than the ITS group (pairwise comparisons were significant
using Tukey HSD, p < .05) and the LBT group had more
valid links than the ITS group (pairwise comparison signifi-

SRL
Mean (sd)

8.7 a
(3.5)
13:33 a.b
(4:5)
2.4a,b
(0.7)
0.7a
(0.2)
6.2 (3.5)

It is clear from the results of Table 2 that the SRL group
outperformed the ITS group in all but one category, i.e.,
number of quiz requests, and they also outperformed the LBT
group in two very important categories: time spent reading
resources and the number of causal queries asked (all significant at the p < 0.05 level). These results show that the SRL
group developed better learning and debugging strategies than
both the LBT and ITS groups, a clear indication that the SRL
strategies helped students develop the necessary attributes for
future learning in new domains. Perhaps, if the students were

278

given more time in the transfer study, the SRL group would
have truly outperformed the other two groups in terms of the
performance measures in table 2.

7th Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Maceió, Brazil (pp.
730-740).
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Belynne, K., Viswanath, K., Vye, N. J.,
Schwartz, D. L., et al. (2004b, Aug. 2004). Incorporating Self
Regulated Learning Techniques into Learning by Teaching Environments. 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Chicago, Illinois (pp. 120-125).
Biswas, G., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J., & TAG-V. (2001). Technology Support for Complex Problem Solving: From SAD Environments to AI. In Forbus & Feltovich (Eds.), Smart Machines in
Education (pp. 71-98). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (eds.). (2000). How
People Learn (expanded ed.). Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Colton, A. B., & Sparks-Langer, G. M. (1993). A Conceptual
Framework to Guide the Development of Teacher Reflection and
Decision Making. Journal of Teacher Education, 44(1), 45-54.
Davis, J. M., Leelawong, K., Belynne, K., Bodenheimer, R., Biswas,
G., Vye, N., et al. (2003, Jan.). Intelligent User Interface Design
for Teachable Agent Systems. International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, Miami, Florida (pp. 26-34).
Forbus, K. (1984). Qualitative Process Theory. Artificial Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Johnson, W. L., Rickel, J. W., & Lester, J. C. (2000). Animated
Pedagogical Agents: Face-to-Face Interaction in Interactive Learning Environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
in Education, 11, 47-78.
Leelawong, K., Davis, J., Vye, N., Biswas, G., Schwartz, D., Belynne, K., et al. (2002, Oct.). The Effects of Feedback in Supporting Learning by Teaching in a Teachable Agent Environment. 5th
International Conference of the Learning Sciences, Seattle, Washington (pp. 245-252).
Leelawong, K., Wang, Y., Biswas, G., Vye, N., & Bransford, J.
(2001). Qualitative reasoning techniques to support learning by
teaching: The Teachable Agents project. 15th International Workshop on Qualitative Reasoning, San Antonio, Texas (pp. 73-80).
Novak, J. D. (1996). Concept Mapping as a tool for improving science teaching and learning. In D. F. Treagust, R. Duit & B. J. Fraser (Eds.), Improving Teaching and Learning in Science and
Mathematics (pp. 32-43). London: Teachers College Press.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of
comprehension-fostering and comprehension -monitoring activities. Cognition and instruction, 1, 117-175.
Soller, A. L. (2001). Supporting Social Interaction in an Intelligent
Collaborative Learning System. International Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 12(1), 40-62.
Zimmerman, B. J. (1989). A Social Cognitive View of SelfRegulated Academic Learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(3), 329-339.

Conclusions
In conclusion, the two directed learning groups, ITS and
SRL did well in terms of incorporating mentor feedback and
improving their quiz performances. The SRL group did not
show immediate performance gains, but outperformed the
other groups in their preparation for future learning. The LBT
group was intermediate; they used the directed feedback from
the mentor to improve immediate performance, but like the
SRL group the social interactions with Betty motivated them
to learn on their won so that they could teach her better.
Table 3: Summary Characteristics
Immediate performance
Motivation to learn
Preparation for future learning

ITS
√
×
×

LBT
√
√
×

SRL
×
√
√

This study demonstrates that the learning by teaching environments outperform the environment in which the student is
taught. The analysis has informed us that we need to refine
the SRL strategies to give students better guidance on how to
learn and debug their knowledge early in the learning process.
The new version of Betty is more insistent on students using
the query and explanation feature. She also makes sure that
students focus on chains of links, and keeps more detailed
accounts of how her quiz performances change with time. A
new study run in Spring 2005 will determine whether the new
system helps students become more efficient learners.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by a NSF ROLE grant #0231771.

References
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier, R.
(1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. The Journal of Learning
Sciences, 4, 167-207.
Artzt, A. F., & Armour-Thomas, E. (1999). Cognitive Model for Examining Teachers' Instructional Practice in Mathematics: A Guide
for Facilitating Teacher Reflection. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 40(3), 211-235.
Bargh, J. A., & Schul, Y. (1980). On the cognitive benefits of teaching. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72(5), 593-604.
Biswas, G., Leelawong, K., Belynne, K., Viswanath, K., Vye, N. J.,
Schwartz, D. L., et al. (2004a, Aug. 2004). Developing Learning
by Teaching Environments that support Self-Regulated Learning.

279

