UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorization vs. Inference: Shift in Attention or in Representation?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15p5w118

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Niyogi, Sourabh

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorization vs. Inference: Shift in Attention or in Representation?
Håkan Nilsson (hakan.nilsson@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
SE-741 42, Uppsala, Sweden

Henrik Olsson (henrik.olsson@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
SE-741 42, Uppsala, Sweden

A. B. Markman, B. H. Ross, and colleagues have provided recent contributions to the literature on how concepts
are formed, stored, and used. In a range of studies they
trained participants in the same environment using either an
inference learning paradigm or a categorization learning
paradigm. The aim has been to study how these different
learning paradigms shape the concepts (for a review see
Markman & Ross, 2003). Among the main findings is that
inference learners are much more sensitive to withincategory correlations than categorization learners (ChinParker & Ross, 2002) and that while categorization learners
appear to store information about diagnostic features or exemplars, inference learners store the prototypical value on
each feature dimension (Anderson, Ross, & Chin-Parker,
2002).
The idea that there is a fundamental difference in how
inference learning and categorization learning shape our
concepts has important implications. The majority of research on how concepts are formed and used has focused on
categorization tasks (Solomon et al., 1999). If concepts are
formed in a qualitatively different way when people learn
through inference, then the contemporary understanding of
how concepts are formed and used must be revised.
The present study address the question of whether the
differences found between inference learning and categorization learning are likely to be due to a representational shift
or a shift in attention. The inference learning task used is
hypothesized to focus the attention of the participants differently than the inference learning tasks typically used in
the literature.

Abstract
Recently it has been found that people that learn through inference create qualitatively different cognitive representations
than those who learn through categorization. The present
study addresses the question of whether the findings supporting this claim generalize to a design where both learning tasks
have a probabilistic relation between each stimulus cue and
the category label. It was shown that participants in the categorization condition learned faster than participants in the inference condition. Further, participants in the inference condition did not rely on prototypical values when making one-cue
categorizations. The results suggest that shifts in attention
must be considered as a viable explanation of some of the results in studies that investigate differences between inference
and categorization.

Introduction
It has been argued that “cogito ergo sum” (Descartes,
1637/1994) and that “concepts are the building block of
thought” (Solomon, Medin, & Lynch, 1999, p. 99). If these
statements are true, then concepts are a prerequisite for our
existence. A concept is the knowledge or beliefs a person
has about members (objects) of a real-world category. Since
the ways in which we interact with the world influence what
information we store about it (Solomon et al., 1999), people
operating in the same environment, but with different tasks
and goals, will often form concepts with dissimilar content.
There is a dynamic relationship between concepts and
the environment. Concepts determine how people choose to
act in the environment at the same time as they are shaped
by the interaction that emerges. A frequently debated question is whether all concepts are represented qualitatively
equal or if there are qualitatively different modes of representations. One theme in the literature highlights the importance of multiple representation systems that is adaptively
activated depending on the task at hand (e.g., Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, & Waldron, 1998; Juslin, Olsson, &
Olsson, 2003; Juslin, Jones, Olsson, & Winman, 2003;
Johansen & Palmeri, 2002). On the other hand, others have
argued that different tasks will direct the attention to different aspects of the stimulus of the environment and that this
alone can explain the results that have been attributed to
uses of different representations (e.g., Nosfsky & Johansen,
2000; Pothos, in press).

Inference vs. Categorization

1642

A categorization is defined as a judgment where one or
more cues of a stimulus are known and the task is to predict
the category label. An inference is defined as a judgment
where the category label together with one or several cues
of a stimulus is known and the task is to predict the value on
an unknown target cue (Markman & Ross, 2003).
The most investigated category structure in inference vs.
categorization experiments is the linearly separable (i.e., a
category structure in which an additive evidence rule can
correctly classify all exemplars) Family Resemblance Category structure (FRCS) (e.g., Anderson et al., 2002; ChinParker & Ross, 2002, 2004; Yamauchi & Markman, 1998,
2000). For an example of an FCRS, see Table 1 (the FRCS

used in Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). A FRCS includes
two categories (A and B) and the exemplars have a set of
binary cues. All members of a category share all but one
cue-value with the prototype of its category. The two prototypes typically act as critical exemplars in the test-phase,
that is, exemplars for which the difference between the
judgments made by inference learners and the judgments
made by categorization learners is predicted to be especially
large. These critical exemplars are withheld in the learningphase.
Table 1: A family-resemblance category structure with two
categories, eight four-featured Learning Exemplars (LE) and
one prototype (Pr) for each category.

time category label = B, they will make no errors. Thus, the
categorization task is probabilistic when focusing on only
one cue, while there is a deterministic relationship between
cue and category label in the inference task if the participants learn to ignore the exemplars.
An alternative to the claim that the inference task and
the categorization task “has been demonstrated to yield very
different category representations” (Markman & Ross,
2003, p. 592) is that the differences between the two are due
to attention being focused differently in the two tasks. If we
instead replace the standard inference learning task with a
probabilistic one that includes inference judgments of exception features, we should be able to move the participants’
attention toward the cues of the exemplars. If how concepts
are formed is a question of where the attention is focused
this manipulation should change the way IL make judgments in the test-phase. If qualitatively different representations are formed for IL and CL the differences found by
Markman, Ross and colleagues should persist also after this
manipulation.

Pr
LE

0
0
0
0
1

Cat A
0 0
0 0
0 1
1 0
0 0

0
1
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
0

Cat B
1 1
1 1
1 0
0 1
1 1

1
0
1
1
1

The Present study

Categorization Learners (CL) are shown an exemplar and
they are asked to predict the category label (i.e., A or B).
For perfect performance in the FRCS the participants have
to focus on at least three cues. If they focus on only one cue,
for example judging A each time cue X has value 0, they
will make incorrect judgments in 20% of the cases (Markman & Ross, 2003).
Inference Learners (IL) are shown all but one cue for an
exemplar together with the category label. The task is to
predict the value on the missing cue (the target cue). For
perfect performance, focus on the other three cues is needed.
To see this, consider the inference judgment on the first cue
dimension on exemplar [1,0,0,0]. To know that the correct
answer is 1, the participant has to take into consideration
that all other cues have value 0. As for CL, if IL rely on
only the relationship between target cue and category label
they will be wrong in 20% of the judgments. Thus, the relationship between each cue and category label is probabilistic
in both conditions.

Shift in Representation or Attention?

This study focuses on the generalizability of three of the
main findings in the literature on inference vs. categorizations. First, IL learns linearly separable category structures
more easily than CL (Yamauchi & Markman, 1998; Anderson et al., 2002). For example, in Yamauchi and Markman
(1998) the learning-phase ended when the participant proportion of correct judgments in the last 24 judgments reach
.9. That the criterion is reached faster by IL than by CL is
argued to be an effect of that IL learns linearly separable
category structures more easily. However, remember that if
IL ignore the exemplars and judge on the basis of target cue
and category label they will be able to reach this criterion by
only focusing on one cue. CL on the other hand, have to
incorporate knowledge about three cues to reach this criterion. Thus, the difference between the two conditions could
be due to the fact that one of the learning tasks is deterministic while the other is probabilistic. In this study, the inference learning-phase task is made probabilistic by including judgments of exception features. As a result, to reach
perfect performance, also IL have to take several cues under
consideration in every judgment. Despite of this change,
will IL still learn the linearly separable category structure
more easily?
Second, while CL appear to store information about diagnostic features or exemplars, IL appear store the prototypical value on each feature dimension (Yamauchi &
Markman, 1998; Anderson et al., 2002). In Anderson et al.
(2002) participants in both conditions carried out a one-cue
categorization task in the test-phase. A stimulus with one
cue was presented and the participants were to categorize it
as A or B. In both Experiment 1 and 2 IL categorized the
one-cue exemplar as belonging to the category for which
that cue-value was prototypical more often than CL did
(percentage of times the category for which the cue was

A potential limitation of the designs typically used to investigate inference learning and category learning is that the
participants never make inferences for exception features
(the italicized values in Table 1) in the learning-phase. The
reason for this is that inference judgments on exception features are argued to be analogous to a categorization judgment of the prototype (Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). Since
the two prototypes are to act as critical exemplars in the
test-phase, inference judgments of exception features is excluded in the learning-phase. Unfortunately, this has the
effect that if IL learns to ignore the presented exemplar and
only choose on the basis of the category label, the task becomes deterministic. If they choose value 1 on cue X every
1643

prototypical was chosen; Exp. 1: IL = .84 and CL=.62; Exp.
2: IL = .92 and CL=.70). This was taken as support for the
hypothesis that IL stores the prototypical values. However,
an alternative hypothesis is that since the inference learning
task is deterministic, IL give more consistent judgments in
the test-phase. Since the task in the present experiment includes exception cue inferences, and thereby makes the inference learning task probabilistic, it provides a stronger test
of the claim that IL primarily store the prototypical values.
Third, IL appears to learn within-category correlations
while CL does not (Chin-Parker & Ross, 2002). Withincategory correlations are correlations that do not add to the
predictiveness of the features (Chin-Parker & Ross, 2002).
In other words, the within-category correlation is uninformative in a categorization task but it is informative in an
inference task. That IL are much more sensitive to withincategory correlations is interesting since if it is true, it accentuates the importance of using a range of learning paradigms in research on concept formation and usage. People
are obviously capable of learning within-category correlations. That they have trouble learning them through categorization indicates that they learn different aspects of an environment through different interactions.

Method
Participants Forty undergraduate students (17 men and 23
women) in the age of 18 to 46 (average age = 24) participated. The participants were compensated with one or two
movie tickets depending on their performance in the learning-phase.

When making inferences on C5 and C6 knowledge about
this correlation is crucial. In determining whether an exemplar belongs to A or B, however, knowledge about the correlation is of little value.
There were two conditions, one Categorization-Learning
condition (CLC) and one Inference-Learning condition
(ILC). The experiment included a learning-phase and a testphase. In the test-phase the participants were introduced to a
computerized trainee-program that would teach them about
stock development on a fictive market. In the CLC the participants were presented with a six-featured company and
were to judge if the stock of that company had increased or
decreased in value during the last year. During three seconds, directly following the judgment, they received feedback concerning the actual stock-value development (the
feedback was written in red if the answer had been wrong
and in green if it had been correct). Participants made 180
judgments in the learning-phase (the 30 exemplars at the top
of Table 2 presented in six consecutive blocks).
Table 2: The category structure used in the experiment. Top:
14 unique exemplars presented in the learning-phase (f =
times presented in one learning block), divided into two
categories (A and B). Exemplars marked with a star are also
presented in the test-phase. Bottom: Exemplars presented in
the test-phase only.

Materials The experiment was carried out on a PCcompatible computer. The stimuli used were descriptions of
30 six-featured companies (see Table 2). The companies
were all different combinations of the same six binary cues
(se Table 3). The cues where chosen to be as neutral as possible.

Presented in training
Category A
Category B
Exemplar
f
Exemplar
000000*
2
111111*
000011*
3
110111*
001000
1
110011*
010000*
1
101111*
000100
1
011111*
001100*
1
111011
100000
1
111100*
Included in test-phase
Category A
Category B
001011
001101
100011
101100
111000
110100
110010
110001
010101
000111

Design and procedure The category structure includes two
linearly separable categories, A and B (see Table 2). There
are six binary cue dimensions (C1-6, C1 is the leftmost cue).
Among the twenty-four exemplars two are prototypes (prototype of category A = [000000] and the prototype for Category B =[111111]). The prototypes are maximally separated
(i.e., they share no features). In the learning-phase participants are presented with the fourteen exemplars on the top
of Table 2. The exemplars vary in the frequency of presentation and there are two times as many Category B exemplars
as there are Category A exemplars. The cue-validity of the
cues vary, C1-C2 have a cue-validity of .9, C3-C4 have a
cue validity of .8, and C5-C6 have a cue-validity of .7.
In the test-phase task ten old exemplars from the learning-phase (marked with * in Table 2) were presented together with ten new exemplars. Category B has the highest
base-rate also in the test-phase.
Note that among the learning-phase exemplars there is a
perfect within-category correlation between C5 and C6.

f
2
2
2
2
2
4
6

1644

A company presented in the ILC included information about
five cue-values and category label. The task was to judge
which of the two values on the missing binary cue dimension that belonged to the company. Feedback was given as
in the CLC. They made one decision for each cue dimension
for each company (exemplars in Table 2), thus, they also
made a total of 180 judgments.
Exemplar presentation order, which cue in Table 3 that
belonged to which cue dimension in Table 2, and which cue
value that more often belonged to companies with stocks
that increased in value were randomized across all partici-

pants. Due to difference in base-rates of exemplars belonging to category A and B (Table 2), Category A included the
companies with positive stock-value development for half
the participants (ten in each condition) and the companies
with a negative one for the other half.

results, this linearly separable category structure was easier
to learn in the CLC. Thus, when both learning tasks are
probabilistic it appears as if it is harder to learn from category to cue than from cue to category (for similar findings
see Nilsson & Björkman, 1982).

Table 3: Descriptions of the 6 binary cues.
Descriptions
1) Listed at the NKB/IPEK stock exchange
2) Less/more than 1000 employees
3) Give money to charity/sponsor sports team
4) Active in specific region/whole country
5) Is in the service/industrial sector
6) Primarily export-based/import-based
The test-phase, identical for the two conditions, consisted of four probability judgment tasks 1 . In the first testphase task, one cue value was presented and the task was to
judge the probability that the stock of a company with that
cue had increased/decreased in value during the last year
(p(cat.│cue)). The participants made 12 judgments (both
p(A) and p(B) for the two cue values on C1, C3, and C5 in
Table 2). The second test-phase task was the complete opposite. The participants were to judge the probability of cuevalue given category (p(cue│cat.)) (12 judgments). The
third test-phase task was an inference judgment task. Companies were presented as in the inference learning condition
and the participants judged the probability that it had a particular value on C6. In the third and fourth test-phase tasks
the participants made two probability judgments for each of
the ten old and the ten new exemplars (see Table 2) (40
judgments). The forth task was similar to the third but here
the participants were only presented with the five cues and
not prior stock development (40 judgments).
In all four tasks in the test-phase the participants were
told to give their answer in percent and even up to 0,
10,…100. The entire procedure took about 45 min - 1 ½
hour.

Results and Discussion
Did IL learn more easily? In the last 60 judgments the
participants in the CLC made significantly more correct
judgments than did the participants in the ILC (proportion
of correct judgments among the last 60 judgments; CLC =
.93 and ILC = .69; t38=7.401, p<.001). In contrast to earlier
1

When the number of judgments for each exemplar in the testphase is low, probabilities are a more sensitive measurement than
forced choices. For example, if the participants makes two judgments for one exemplar the proportion of times they choose A
rather than B can only be 1.0, .5 or .0, the mean probability judgment, on the other hand, can take any value between 1.0 and 0.
Usually in studies on inference vs. categorization the task is to
choose category or cue value rather than judging the probability of
cue value or category. It has been shown, however, that there is a
high correlation between response proportions and probability
judgments (Peterson & Beach, 1967).

Figure 1. Mean probability judgments with 95% confidence
intervals for the probability of category given cue
(p(cat.│cue)) and the probability of cue given category
(p(cue│cat.)) for both conditions (filled squares=ILC and
transparent circles=CLC).
Did IL rely more on the prototypical values? Figure 1
shows both the mean probability judgments that a company
with cue-value X belongs to the category for which X is the
prototypical cue value (p(cat.│cue)) and the mean probability judgments that a company that belongs to category Z
have the feature-value that is prototypical for Category Z (
p(cue│cat.)).
In both tasks (p(cat.│cue) and p(cue│cat.)) there is a
slight tendency, though far from significant, for the CLC
participants to rely relatively more on the prototypical cuevalue (p(cat.│cue): t38=.939, p=.35; p(cue│cat.)= t38=.597,
p=.55). Note that the tendency is in the opposite direction
compared to the trend in Anderson et al. (2000). A power
analysis of the one-cue categorization task (p(cat.│cue))
based on the standard deviation taken from the data in this
experiment (s=.11) showed power of finding a difference of
half the magnitude of the difference in Anderson et al.
(2002) 2 in our study was more than 99% (δ=4.43). Thus, by
changing the characteristics of the task and the environment,
but holding the mode in with inference decisions was made
in the learning-phase constant, the relatively higher preference for the prototypical values for IL vanished.

1645

2

In Anderson et al. (2002) the difference in proportion of times the
participants choose the category for which the cue was prototypical
between IL and CL was .22. Given the high correlation between
response proportions probability judgments (Peterson & Beach,
1967), half the difference in Anderson et al. (2002) is assumed to
be equal to a difference in probability judgments of .11.

Figure 2. Mean probability judgment, with 95% confidence intervals, that C6=0 (the data from the probability judgments that
C6=1 was re-coded in the form of a probability judgment that C6=0) when C5 is either 0 or 1 for both conditions (filled
squares=ILC and transparent circles=CLC).
It could be argued that this is due to IL having less
knowledge, and if they were trained more they would rely
more on the prototypical value. There are two aspects of the
data that speaks against such a claim. First, if the participants had made random judgments the mean judgment
would end up around .5. As can be seen in Figure 1 the confidence intervals for IL in both test-phase tasks are clearly
separated from .5, thus indicating that IL were not ignorant.
Second, it should also be noted that for IL the mean judgment of p(cat.│cue) for C1 (p(cat.│cue) =.71) was higher
than for C3 (p(cat.│cue) =.68) and the mean judgment of
p(cat.│cue) for C3 was higher than for C5 (p(cat.│cue)
=.52). That they had learned the correct “hierarchy” of cue
validities further indicates that although the participants in
the ILC had rather good knowledge of the environment they
still did not rely on the prototypical value. A repeated measures ANOVA showed that the difference in p(cat.│cue)
between cues was significant in the ILC (F2,38=8.804;
MSE=.023; p=.001).
Thus, IL participants did not appear to rely relatively
more on the prototypical values. Rather than being an effect
of qualitatively different cognitive representations the finding that IL focus more on prototypical value could be, at
least in part, an artifact of the deterministic learning task
that is typically used.

ability that C6 = 0 to be above .5 when C5=0 and to below
.5 when C5=1.
As in previous findings, the participants in the ILC made
inference judgments consistent with the within category
correlation both when category label was known and when
it was unknown. Also consistent with previous finding was
that when category label was presented (Figure 2A), the
participants in the CLC made inference judgments that were
inconsistent with the within-category correlation. However,
when category label was not presented (Figure 2B), participants in the CLC made judgments that were consistent with
the within-category correlation. Thus, participants in the
CLC appeared to use different judgment strategies in the
two tasks. This was confirmed by an ANOVA with Value
on C5 (1 or 0) and Test-phase inference task (with and
without category label) as independent variables and Probability judgment as dependent variable that showed that
neither of the two main effects were significant for CLC
(Value on C5: F1,19=.008, MSE=.089, p=.93; Test-phase
inference task: F1,19=1.295, MSE=.012, p=.269). However,
the interaction effect was significant (F1,19=6.948,
MSE=.033, p=.02).

Concluding Remarks

Were the categorization learners incapable of learning
the within-category correlations? Figure 2 shows the results from the inference judgments on C6 in the form of
probability judgments for new exemplars (i.e., exemplars
not seen in the learning-phase), with (A) and without (B)
category label. In order to facilitate presentation the data
from the probability judgments that C6=1 was re-coded in
the form of a probability judgment that C6=0. Figure 2 illustrates to what extent the participants made judgments consistent with the within-category correlation between C5 and
C6 that existed in the training-phase. To be consistent with
the within-category correlation they should judge the prob-

It has been argued that inference learning and categorization
learning lead to qualitatively different cognitive representations (Markman & Ross, 2003). Phenomenons that have
been attributed to this difference are that IL learns linearly
separable category structures more easily than CL (Anderson et al., 2002) and that IL stores the prototypical values of
the objects of a category (Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). In
this study it was shown that these findings do not generalize
to a design where both learning tasks have a probabilistic
relation between cue and category label. The results of the
present study suggest that rather than being due to qualitatively different cognitive representations, the differences
that previously have been found in judgments made by IL

1646

Descartes, R. (1994). Discours de la méthode. Niotre Dame,
University of Notre Dame Press (original work published 1637).
Johansen, M. K., & Palmeri, T. J. (2002). Are there representational shifts during category learning? Cognitive
Psychology, 45, 482-553.
Juslin, P., Jones, S., Olsson, H., & Winman, A. (2003). Cue
abstraction and exemplar memory in categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 924-941.
Juslin, P., Olsson, H., & Olsson, A-C. (2003). Exemplar
effects in categorization and multiple-cue judgment.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 133156.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., & Gluck, M. A. (1994).
Probabilistic classification in amnesia. Learning and
Memory, 1, 106-120.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592-613.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning, Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Nilsson, R., & Björkman, M. (1982). Prediction and diagnosis: Task variable revealed. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology, 23, 253-262.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Johansen M. K. (2000). Exemplarbased accounts of ”multiple-system” phenomena in perceptual categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
7, 375-402.
Peterson, C. R., & Beach, L. R. (1967). Man as an intuitive
statistician. Psychological Bulletin, 68, 29-46.
Poldrack, R. A., Prabhakaran, V., Seger, C. A., & Gabrieli,
J. D. E. (1999). Striatal activation during acquisition of a
cognitive skill. Neuropsychology, 13, 564-574.
Pothos, E. M. (in press). The rules versus similarity distinction. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Solomon, K. O., Medin, D. L., & Lynch, E. (1999). Concepts do more than categorize. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3, 99-105.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (1998). Category learning
by inference and classification. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 124-148.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 776-795.

and CL were due to attention being focused differently in
the two tasks. Our results do not, however, imply that inference learning never leads to reliance on other cognitive representations or memory systems than categorization learning. Recent research shows that a full understanding of category learning must go beyond the explanations provided by
traditional categorization models and investigate the relationship between category learning and the major memory
systems identified in the literature (Ashby & O’Brien,
2005). In a probabilistic classification task, for example, it
seems that people rely on procedural knowledge early in
training and on declarative memory later in training
(Knowlton, Squire, & Gluck, 1994). The process switching
during learning has been confirmed in neuroimaging studies
showing changes in the neural networks involved early and
late in training (e.g., Poldrack, Prabhakaran, Seger, & Gabrieli, 1999).
Regarding the finding that CL are insensitive to withincategory correlation (Chin-Parker & Ross, 2002) the results
were more ambiguous. The inference judgments made by
the CL were inconsistent with the within-category correlation when category label was provided. However, when less
information was provided (when category label was absent)
CL made inference judgments consistent with the withincategory correlation. Interestingly, inference without category label has as far as the authors know never been tested
before. Thus, the results suggest that the claim that CL are
insensitive to within-category correlations might be premature. However, the question of when CL uses knowledge of
within-category correlations has to be investigated further.
This study show that several of the findings previously
attributed to differences in cognitive representation can be
better explained by how attention is focused in the different
learning tasks. The results indicate that the differences
found might just as well be explained by a shift in attention
as by a shift in representation.

References
Anderson, A. L., Ross, B. H., & Chin-Parker, S. (2002). A
further investigation of category learning by inference.
Memory and Cognition, 30, 119-128.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., & Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in category learning. Psychological Review, 105, 442-481.
Ashby, F. G., & O’Brien, J. B. (2005). Category learning
and multiple memory systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 83-89.
Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B. H. (2002). The effect of category learning on sensitivity to within-category correlations. Memory and Cognition, 30, 353-362.
Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B. H. (2004). Diagnosticity and
prototypicality in category learning: A comparison of inference learning and categorization learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 216-226.

1647

