UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Determinism and Preschoolers' Causal Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zn4b9cs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gopnik, Alison
Schulz, Laura E.
Sommerville, Jessica

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Determinism and Preschoolers’ Causal Inferences
Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Jessica Sommerville (sommej@u.washington.edu)
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Box 357988
Seattle, WA 98195, USA

Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California Berkeley, 3317 Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

(Bullock, et al.,, 1982; Gelman, et al., 1994; Luhmann &
Ahn, 2003).
However, causal determinism can also reflect a much
stronger belief; the belief that causes act deterministically.
This belief was perhaps most famously articulated by the
mathematician, Pierre-Simon Laplace, who noted that if
there were “an intelligence knowing all the forces acting in
nature . . . (and) its intellect were sufficiently powerful to
subject all data to analysis, to it nothing would be uncertain"
(1814/1951). From the perspective of Laplacian
determinism, the appearance of stochastic causation implies
that the causal account is incomplete; there must be
unobserved causal factors we are failing to consider. If
children are Laplacian determinists, they should infer the
existence of unobserved causes, not only whenever effects
occur spontaneously but also whenever observed causes
produce effects stochastically.
We do not want to claim that Laplacian determinism
provides an accurate picture of causal relations in the world.
However, a belief in causal determinism need not be
metaphysically accurate to be functionally adaptive. Indeed,
assuming determinism may be adaptive precisely because it
induces human beings to search for the existence of
unobserved causal factors in indeterminate causal scenarios.
A belief in Laplacian determinism might also lead
children to prefer certain causal hypotheses to others. It
seems plausible that children infer the existence of
unobserved causes parsimoniously; that is, they do not infer
the existence of unobserved causes when observed causes
could deterministically account for the available evidence.
If so, then given a choice between two hypotheses: 1) a
potential cause that deterministically produces an effect, or
2) another potential cause that produces the effect
stochastically due to an unobserved variable, children
should prefer the former account. Critically however, if
children are causal determinists, their commitment to
determinism should be specific to causal contexts. Thus we
expect that even though children should resist inferring
probabilistic causation, they should accept probabilistic
associations.

Abstract
Three studies investigated children’s belief in causal
determinism. If children are causal determinists, they should
infer the existence of unobserved causes whenever effects
occur stochastically. In Experiment 1, preschoolers saw a
stochastic generative cause and inferred the existence of an
unobserved inhibitory cause. In Experiment 2, preschoolers
appropriately traded-off inferences about the presence of
unobserved inhibitory causes and the absence of generative
causes. Experiment 3 suggested that children resist inferring
stochastic causation even though they accept non-causal
stochastic relationships. Children’s belief in determinism
seems to support inferences about causal relations not
obtainable from other cues

Introduction
Many researchers have suggested that children’s
knowledge about the world takes the form of causal
theories, in which unobserved causes play a central role
(e.g., Carey, 1985; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Keil, 1989;
Wellman, 1990). However, children's theories, and the
unobserved causes they posit, seem to change with evidence
(Bartsch & Wellman, 1995;Slaughter & Gopnik, 1996).
This suggests that children actually learn about unobserved
causes from the pattern of events they see in the world. But
what mechanisms might support this sort of learning? How
could children learn about unobserved causes from observed
events?
Recent research suggests that both adults and children can
use patterns of evidence and interventions to infer an
unobserved common cause of correlated events (Gopnik, et
al., 2004; Griffiths, Baraff, & Tenenbaum, 2004; Kushnir,
Gopnik, Schulz, & Danks, 2003). However, such findings
do not explain how children infer unobserved causes of
single events. Some researchers have suggested that a belief
in causal determinism may play a role in this type of
inference (Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon, 1982; Gelman,
Coley, & Gottfried, 1994). If children believe that all events
have causes, they should infer the existence of unobserved
causes whenever effects occur spontaneously. Considerable
research suggests that both adults and children do this
1979

In this paper, we look at whether children are causal
determinists in the domain of physical causality. Experiment
1 looks at whether, consistent with Laplacian determinism,
children infer the existence of unobserved inhibitory causes
when observed causes behave stochastically. Experiment 2
looks at whether children appropriately trade-off inferences
about the presence of unobserved inhibitory causes and the
absence of unobserved generative causes. Experiment 3
looks at whether children resist inferring stochastic
causation and whether this resistance is specific to causal
contexts.

Experiment 1

box lit up. She then slid the switch back and the light
extinguished. The experimenter repeated this three times.
Children thus had evidence that pushing the switch forward
was a generative cause of the effect.
Children were then given evidence for an inhibitory cause
that could prevent the effect. The experimenter said, “The
toy only works if this ring is on top of the toy. If I remove
the ring, the switch won’t work and the toy won’t light up.”
The experimenter removed the ring from the top of the toy
and pushed the switch. The toy failed to light up (in fact,
because the experimenter surreptitiously pushed the switch
only part way). From the child's perspective, however,
removing the ring prevented the switch from working and
the toy from lighting up. The experimenter pushed the
switch forward twice more and each time the toy failed to
light up.
The experimenter then put the ring back on top of the toy.
The experimenter pushed the switch (all the way) and the
toy lit up. For the remainder of the experiment, the ring
remained on top of the toy. This procedure provided the
children with an observed inhibitory cause that could
prevent the effect; the children in both conditions knew that
removing the ring would stop the switch from working and
the toy from lighting up.
Stochastic Causation Condition, The experimenter gave the
remote control switch to the confederate and said, “Now my
friend Catherine is going to try to make the toy light up.”
The confederate pushed the switch and the toy failed to light
up (even though the ring was on the toy). The experimenter
said, “Hmm . . .the toy didn’t light up.” The confederate
pushed the switch again. This time the toy lit up. These
interventions were repeated so that the confederate pushed
the switch a total of eight times according to the following
pattern: no effect, light, no effect, no effect, no effect, no
effect, light, no effect. From the child's perspective, the
confederate pushed the switch eight times but the toy only
lit up twice.
After the confederate pushed the switch forward and back
for the eighth time, the experimenter opened the palm of her
right hand, and said, “Look what I have in my hand". This
revealed the flashlight, which the experimenter had held
surreptitiously concealed in her hand throughout the trials.
Children did not know about the concealed flashlight and
had never seen it until that moment. The experimenter then
placed the flashlight on the table. She took the remote
control from the confederate and told the child, “We’re
going to play a game. On the count of three, I’m going to
push this switch to make this toy turn on. Can you make it
so the switch won’t work and the toy won’t turn on?” She
placed the toy with the ring on top and the flashlight within
reach of the child (left/right position counterbalanced
between subjects), put her own hand on the remote control
switch, and counted to three.
The children had both observed and been told that
removing the ring would prevent the switch from working
and the toy from turning on. However, the children had also
observed that sometimes the switch succeeded in making

In Experiment 1, we show preschool children a generative
cause of an effect and lead them to believe that the
generative causal account is complete. We then show the
children that the generative cause sometimes fails to
produce the effect: 1 > p (Y | X) > p (Y). If children are
strong causal determinists and believe that effects should be
perfectly predictable from their causes, children should infer
the existence of an unobserved inhibitory cause. 1 In the
control condition, the generative observed cause perfectly
predicts the effect: p (Y | X) = 1, and children should not
infer the existence of an unobserved inhibitor.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-two children ranging in age from 3;8 to 5;5 (mean
age: 4;7) were assigned to either a Stochastic Causation
condition or a Deterministic Causation condition.
Materials
A specially designed remote-operated toy was used. The
toy consisted of a light encased in a 12 cm x 17 cm x 8 cm
wooden box with an orange Lucite top. The box was
attached to a remote control switch. When the sliding
switch on the remote was put in the “on” position, the light
turned on and the top glowed orange. When the remote was
put in the “off” position, the light turned off. In addition, if
the switch was pushed all the way the effect occurred and if
it was pushed almost but not quite all the way forward the
effect failed to occur. However, children were never able to
see how far the switch was pushed; from the children’s
perspective, the switch was activated on every trial, and the
toy sometimes lit up and sometimes did not.
A 7 cm diameter metal ring and a 3 cm black, disc-shaped
squeezable keychain flashlight were also used. The bulb on
the flashlight was inconspicuous and no child identified the
squeezable object as a flashlight.
Procedure
The experimenter set the toy box and the remote control
switch on the table. The experimenter placed the ring on top
of the toy box. Then she pointed to the remote control and
said, “See this switch? This switch makes my toy light up.”
The experimenter pushed the switch forward and the toy
1980

the toy light up and sometimes the switch failed -- even
when the ring was on top of the toy.
If children believe in Laplacian determinism and are
sensitive to instances of imperfect causation, children
should infer the existence of an unobserved, inhibitory cause
during the test trials. If so, the flashlight concealed in the
experimenter's hand might plausibly be the unobserved
inhibitor of the effect. (Conceivably, the experimenter might
have sneakily prevented the effect some of the times the
confederate had tried to generate it.) Thus although the
children never saw the flashlight do anything at all, they
might try to inhibit the effect by intervening on the
flashlight rather than on the ring.
Deterministic Causation Condition. This was identical to
the Stochastic Causation condition except that all eight
times that the confederate pushed the button, the toy lit up.
In this condition, the children should not infer the existence
of an unobserved inhibitory cause, and should not identify
the flashlight with that cause. When asked to inhibit the
effect, children should pick the known inhibitory cause and
remove the ring.

flashlight and imitated the experimenter's intervention on
the ring. Note that the two conditions were identical in all
other respects so children could not have been using
pragmatic, spatio-temporal, or mechanical cues to make this
inference – the pattern of probabilities was the only
difference between conditions.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion

The results of Experiment 1 suggest that children will
infer the existence of an unobserved inhibitory cause if
effects occur stochastically. However, in some cases, a
generative cause might appear to act stochastically even if
no inhibitory cause exists. Apparent violations of
determinism might occur for instance, if you assume that the
generative cause is present on every trial when in fact, it is
only present some of the time. Thus, it is not always correct
(even under the assumptions of Laplacian determinism) to
infer the existence of an unobserved inhibitory cause to
explain stochastic effects; children should only infer the
existence of an unobserved inhibitory cause if they believe
the generative cause is present and the generative causal
account is complete.
In Experiment 2, we looked at what children would
conclude if they were led to believe that the generative
cause might have been absent when the effect failed to
occur. We replicated the Stochastic Causation condition of
Experiment 1 with a single modification. After seeing the
evidence, children were led to believe that the switch might
not have been activated on every trial. Thus the stochastic
absence of the generative cause (although unobserved)
could in principle account for the stochastic effects. If
children are sensitive to the tradeoff between explaining
stochastic causation as the absence of a generative cause or
the presence of an inhibitory cause, they should be
significantly less likely to infer the presence of an inhibitory
cause in this experiment than in the Stochastic causation
condition of Experiment 1.

Children were coded as choosing the unobserved cause if
they picked up the flashlight, aimed it at the toy, and either
activated it or attempted to activate it by pushing on its
surface. Children were coded as choosing the observed
inhibitory cause if they removed the ring.
In the Stochastic Causation condition, 15 of the 16
children (94%) intervened on the unobserved inhibitory
cause (the flashlight) and only one child (6%) intervened on
the observed inhibitory cause (the ring). By contrast, in the
Deterministic Causation condition, two of the 16 children
(12.5%) intervened on the unobserved inhibitory cause
while 14 children (87.5%) intervened on the observed
inhibitory cause.
Children were significantly more likely to choose the
unobserved inhibitory cause in the Stochastic Causation
condition than in the Deterministic Causation condition and
significantly more likely to choose the observed inhibitory
cause in the Deterministic Causation Condition than in the
Stochastic Causation condition (χ2 (1, n = 32) = 21.21, p <
.001). Within the Stochastic Causation condition, children
were significantly more likely to choose the unobserved
inhibitory cause than the observed inhibitory cause (χ2 (1, n
= 16) = 12.25, p < .001) and within the Deterministic
Causation condition, children were significantly more likely
to choose the observed inhibitory cause than the unobserved
inhibitory cause (χ2 (1, n = 16) = 9.00, p < .005).
These results are consistent with the idea that children are
strong causal determinists. When the observed generative
cause behaved stochastically, children inferred the existence
of an unobserved inhibitory cause; they prevented the effect
by creating a novel intervention on a previously unobserved
variable. However, when the observed generative cause
behaved deterministically, children did not infer the
existence of an unobserved cause; they ignored the

Methods
Participants
Sixteen children were tested, ranging in age from 3;8 to 5;5
(mean age: 4;7).
Materials
The same materials used in Experiment 1 were used in this
experiment.

1981

Procedure
The procedure was identical to the procedure in the
Stochastic causation condition of Experiment 1, except that
after the confederate pushed the button for the eighth time,
the experimenter took the switch from the confederate and
said, “You know, in order to make the toy work, you have
to push the switch all the way forward. If you just push the
switch part of the way, the toy won’t work.” Children
received this information after all the trials were completed,
so they had no opportunity of observing, on any given trial,

whether the confederate moved the switch into the correct
position or not.

relations when the relationships are causal but will accept
probabilistic relations when the relationships are non-causal.

Results and Discussion

Methods

The children's responses were coded as in Experiment 1.
Twelve of the sixteen children (75%) chose the observed
inhibitory cause (the ring) while only four of the 16 children
(25%) chose the unobserved inhibitory cause (the flashlight)
Children were significantly more likely to choose the
observed inhibitory cause than the unobserved inhibitory
cause (χ2 (1, n = 16) = 4.00, p < .05). Critically, children
were significantly less likely to choose the unobserved
inhibitory cause in this experiment than they were in the
otherwise identical Stochastic causation condition of
Experiment 1 (χ2 (1, n = 32) = 15.68, p < .001. Indeed,
children were no more likely to choose the unobserved
inhibitory cause in this experiment than were children in the
Deterministic causation condition of Experiment 1 (χ2 (1, n
= 32) = .82, p = ns).
The Stochastic Causation conditions of Experiments 1
and 2 were identical except for a single manipulation: in
Experiment 2, children were cued to the possibility that the
generative cause might have been absent when the effects
failed to occur. This manipulation had a dramatic effect on
children’s inferences. When the stochastic effects could
plausibly be due to the failure of the switch, children were
significantly less likely to infer the existence of an
unobserved inhibitory cause.
Together with the results of Experiment 1, the results of
Experiment 2 suggest that preschool children are capable of
remarkably nuanced causal inferences. If children observe
that a generative cause produces an effect stochastically,
they infer the existence of an unobserved inhibitory cause.
However, if children are given reason to believe that the
failures of the effect might be due to the absence of the
generative cause, they are less likely to infer the existence of
an unobserved inhibitory cause.

Participants
Sixty-four children ranging in age from 3;11 to 5;3 (mean
age: 4;6) were randomly assigned to one of four conditions:
Causal Novel Pairing, Causal Unexpected, Associative
Novel Pairing, and Associative Unexpected.
Materials
A black cardboard box (30 cm x 15 cm x 10 cm) was used
in this experiment. One side of the box had a wax-paper
cutout of a moon; the other had a cut-out of a flower. Two
colored lights (green and purple) were on top of the box and
two lights (red and yellow) were hidden inside the box.
(See Figure 1.) A blue cellophane filter was also used. The
lights were wired so that one concealed switch turned on the
green and yellow lights (simultaneously); another concealed
switch turned on the purple and red lights (simultaneously).
The lights underneath the box were positioned so that the
wax paper cutout glowed (red or yellow) when the
appropriate switch was flipped. The red and yellow filters
on top of the lights could be removed, allowing the lights to
turn white (when no filter was on top) or blue (when the
cellophane filter was used) instead of red or yellow. A black
cardboard screen was also used.

Figure 1: Schematic of the toy used in Experiment 3

Experiment 3

Procedure
Causal Novel Pairing Condition. The experimenter set the
box on the table and said "Look, here's my toy. See?
There's a moon on this side, and on top, there's a purple
button and a green button." (The lights protruded from the
box and could resemble colored buttons.) The experimenter
turned the toy box around and said, "Look, there's a flower
on this side and here's the green button and the purple
button on top." Half the participants saw the moon first; half
saw the flower first.
The experimenter turned the box so that one shape (e.g.,
the flower) faced the child and the child could not see the
shape on the other side. She said, "I'm going to push the
purple button and let's see what happens." She pushed the
top of the purple light and simultaneously (surreptitiously)
flipped the switch. The "button" turned purple and the
flower turned red. Pilot work with adults suggested that this
provided a strong illusion of causality; it looked as if the
experimenter had pushed a purple button that
simultaneously lit up and caused the flower to turn red.
The experimenter said, "Oh look, I pushed the purple
button and the flower turned red!" She then removed her

Experiment 1 showed, not only that children infer the
existence of unobserved causes when effects occur
stochastically, but also that children do not infer the
existence of unobserved causes when effects occur
deterministically. That is, children seem to be parsimonious
about inferring the existence of unobserved causes. If
children are causal determinists but are parsimonious about
inferring the existence of unobserved causes, then they
should resist attributing an effect to a stochastic cause
whenever alternative (potentially deterministic) candidate
causes are present.
Critically however, if children are causal determinists,
then their belief in determinism should be restricted to
causal contexts. Even if children resist inferring that X is a
probabilistic cause of Y, they should accept that X and Y
might be probabilistically associated. Experiment 3 tests the
possibility that children will resist inferring probabilistic

1982

hand from the purple light and simultaneously
(surreptitiously) flipped the switch off.
The lights
extinguished. The experimenter then turned the box so the
moon faced the child and the child could not see the flower.
She said, "I'm going to push the green button and let's see
what happens." She pushed on the green light and
simultaneously (surreptitiously) flipped the switch. The
"button" turned green and the moon turned yellow. She
said, "Oh look, I pushed the green button and the moon
turned yellow!" She repeated the entire procedure two more
times. The order of presentation (moon vs. flower) was
counterbalanced between participants.
The children were then given two inference tasks (order
counter-balanced between participants). In one inference
task, the experimenter placed a black cardboard screen over
the top two lights so that the "buttons" were no longer
visible. She told the children, "I'm going to hide the buttons
now." The children saw a novel effect: either the moon
turned red or the flower turned yellow. The experimenter
asked, "Which button did I push?"
The other inference task was similar except that children
were asked to make an intervention of their own. The black
screen was not used. The experimenter turned the toy so
that one of the shapes faced the child and asked the child to
produce a novel effect: "Can you make the flower turn
yellow?" or "Can you make the moon turn red?"
The children had never seen these effects before (the moon
turning red or the flower turning yellow). However, for
each choice, one button suggests stochastic causation (we
will call this the Stochastic choice) while the other does not
(the Alternative). The children knew for instance, that the
green button caused the moon to turn yellow. If the children
inferred that the green button also caused the moon to turn
red, they would have to infer that the green button behaved
stochastically: sometimes turning the moon yellow and
sometimes not (i.e., when turning the moon red). The
children had no information about what the purple button
did to the moon; the experimenter had only pushed the
purple button in the presence of the flower. However, if
children resist inferring stochastic causation, they should
consistently prefer the Alternative to the Stochastic choice.
The children know that the purple button can turn things
red, so they should readily infer that the purple button made
the moon turn red. This condition thus provided a baseline
measure of children's ability to make novel causal
inferences in this task.
Causal Unexpected Condition. This condition was identical
to the Causal Novel Pairing condition except that just before
the inference tasks, the experimenter surreptitiously
removed the yellow filter from one light and replaced it with
a blue cellophane filter and removed the red filter from the
other light (so the light would shine white). The novel
effects for the inference tasks were now the moon turning
blue or the flower turning white. As in the Causal Novel
Pairing condition, one button for each event suggests
stochastic causation while the other does not. When for
instance, the moon turns blue, the children could infer that

the green button behaved stochastically (sometimes turning
the moon yellow and sometimes turning the moon blue).
Alternatively, the children could infer that the purple button
turned the moon blue, although they had no information
about what the purple button did to the moon and no
information that the purple button could turn anything blue.
However, if the children are determinists, they should resist
the stochastic inference and prefer the purple button.
Associative Novel Pairing Condition. The Associative
Novel Pairing condition was identical to the Causal Novel
Pairing condition except that the top lights were identified
as lights rather than buttons. Children were given a noncausal cover story: "The lights are on a timer. Sometimes
the lights go on and off. Let's see what happens." The
experimenter pointed to the purple light (instead of pushing
it) and simultaneously (surreptitiously) flipped the switch.
The light turned purple and the flower turned red. She said,
"Oh look, the flower turned red and the purple light went
on!" The same procedure was followed for the moon and
the green light.
In the inference task, the experimenter placed the black
cardboard screen over the lights and told the children, "I'm
going to hide the lights now." On one trial, children saw the
moon turn red, on the other they saw the flower turn yellow
(order counterbalanced between participants). In each case
the experimenter pointed towards the screen and asked,
"Which light do you think went on?" (Because the
Associative condition was non-causal, children were given
two inference tasks rather than one inference and one
intervention task.)
In this condition, the children might make either of two
associative inferences. They might associate the buttons
with the shapes and accept the probabilistic association with
color, or they might associate the buttons with the color and
accept the probabilistic association with the shape. In the
non-causal context, neither inference violates causal
determinism. If determinism is specific to causal contexts,
then in this condition, the children should reason
associatively and choose between the lights at chance.
Associative Unexpected Condition. This condition was
identical to the Associative Novel Pairing Condition except
that, as in the Causal Unexpected condition, just before the
inference tasks the experimenter replaced the filters so the
lights would turn blue or white. We predicted that the
children would make the Stochastic inference in this
condition. When, for instance, the moon turned blue, the
children should choose the green light (accepting that the
green light might be stochastically associated with the color
yellow) because the alternative, the purple light, is not
associated with either the color or the shape. If the children
are reasoning associatively, they should consistently prefer
the Stochastic choice to the Alternative in this condition.

Results and Discussion

1983

There were no significant differences between the
inference and intervention task in either Causal condition or
between the two inference trials in either Associative

condition so for all conditions, we will report the data across
both trials.
All the predictions were confirmed. The children were
significantly more likely to make the Stochastic inference
across trials in the Associative Novel Pairing Condition than
in the Causal Novel Pairing condition (χ2 (1, N = 32) =
5.00, p < .05); in the Associative Unexpected condition than
in the Causal Novel Pairing condition (χ2 (1, N = 32) =
10.49, p < .01); in the Associative Novel Pairing condition
than in the Causal Unexpected condition (χ2 (1, N = 32) =
7.31, p < .01); and in the Associative Unexpected condition
than in the Causal Unexpected condition (χ2 (1, N = 32) =
13.33, p < .001). Within both the Causal Novel Pairing and
the Causal Unexpected conditions, children were children
were significantly more likely to make the Alternative
inference across trials than to make the Stochastic inference
across trials (p < .025 by binomial test). Within the
Associative Novel Pairing condition, children were exactly
as likely to make the stochastic inference as the alternative
inference across trials. Within the Associative Unexpected
condition children were significantly more likely to make
the Stochastic inference than the Alternative inference
across trials (p < .025 by binomial test). In every condition,
some children perseverated on a single light (i.e., they chose
purple on both trials or green on both trials.) See the graph
in Figure 2 for children’s responses.

children to use probabilities to learn about unobserved
causes. It also allows children to trade-off inferences about
the presence of unobserved inhibitory causes and the
absence of unobserved generative causes. Moreover, the
assumption of causal determinism seems to constrain
children's inferences about the cause of novel effects: given
an alternative, children seek to avoid inferring probabilistic
causation.
Finally, children's assumptions about
determinism are causally specific. Preschoolers are sensitive
to the difference between causal interventions and observed
associations and they draw different conclusions when the
context is causal than when the context is associative. In all
these respects the assumption of causal determinism seems
to play an important role in shaping children’s causal
learning. Such inferences might allow children to discover
new unobserved causal structures and might support
changes in children's intuitive theories.

References

Number of children making each type of response across both trials
(N= 16 per condition)

16

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk about
the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. J. Friedman
(Ed.), The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209254). New York: Academic Press.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D., Gottfried, G. M., (1994).
Essentialist beliefs in children: The acquisition of
concepts and theories. In L. A. Hirschfeld, S. A. Gelman
(Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in
cognition and culture,
(pp. 341-365). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1997). Words, thoughts and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Laplace, P.-S. (1951).
A philosophical essay on
probabilities (F. W. Truscott & F. L. Emory, Trans.).
New York: Dover. (Original work published 1814).
Luhmann, C. C. & Ahn, W. (2003). Evaluating the causal
role of unobserved variables. In R. Alterman and D.
Kirsh (Eds.) Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, New Jersey:
Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Slaughter, V., & Gopnik, A. (1996). Conceptual coherence
in the child’s theory of mind: Training children to
understand belief. Child Development, 67, 2967–2988.
Wellman, H. M. (1990). The child’s theory of mind.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

14

12

10

Perseverated on a single light
Alternative
Stochastic

8

6

4

2

0

Causal Novel Pairing

Causal Unexpected

Associative Novel
Pairing

Associative Unexpected

Conditions

Figure 2: Children’s responses in Experiment 3
These findings suggest that children's belief in determinism
helps constrain their inferences about the cause of novel
events. Children resist making causal attributions that
would suggest stochastic causation. They look instead for
alternative causal accounts. The results also suggest that
children's belief in determinism is specific to causal
contexts.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Award (#99-136)
and an American Association of University Women
American Dissertation Fellowship to L. S. and a National
Science Foundation grant (DLS0132487) to A.G.

General Discussion
Children seem to believe that physical causes produce
their effects deterministically. This assumption allows
1984

