UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Change of Mental Representation with the Expertise of Mental Abacus

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8r80c5j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Atsumori, Hirokazu
Kato, Masaharu
Kawaguchi, Hideo
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Change of Mental Representation with the Expertise of Mental Abacus
Hidenari Negishi (negi10@s2.dion.ne.jp)
Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Mitsugu Kuriyama (kuri-mitsu0511@nifty.com)
Department of General System Studies, University of Tokyo,
3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

Masaharu Kato (pieko@abmes.twmu.ac.jp)
Tokyo Women's Medical University,
8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan

Hideo Kawaguchi (kawaguti@rd.hitachi.co.jp)
Hirokazu Atsumori (h-atsu@rd.hitachi.co.jp)
Advanced Research Laboratory, Hitachi, Ltd.,
2520 Akanuma, Hatoyama, Saitama 350-0395, Japan

Abstract
The purpose of the study is to experimentally demonstrate that
intermediate abacus learners depend on their (spatially) clear
mental representations of abacus during making their mental
calculation while experts or grand masters do not. If he/she
highly depends on his/her mental abacus during mental
calculation, the insertion of subliminal stimuli (random
configurations of abacus beads) into mental calculation task
(Flash Mental Calculation task) will interfere with the mental
representation and his/her ratio correct will get worse. We
made an experiment to test it. As a result, it was found that the
apprentices (practicing abacus for only a few years) were more
interfered with the subliminal stimuli than the experts
(practicing abacus for ten years and more), when they counted
on abacus in their minds. Then we measured, using a NIRS
(Near-infrared Spectroscopy), the difference in brain activity
during mental calculation between the apprentices and the
experts. As a result, we found that activity near BA6 of the
apprentices was deactivated by the insertion of subliminal
stimuli and (2) the activity of the apprentices’ DFC during
mental calculation was greater than that of the experts’, which
were consistent with the result of the first experiment. The
above (2) was also interpreted to show an inverse relationship
between skill level and brain activity. In conclusion, we could
clarify, both by a psychological experiment and by a
measurement of brain cortical activity, the difference, in the
degree of dependency on mental representation during mental
calculation, between apprentices and experts.

Figure.1: The shape of abacus

Introduction
To perform complex calculations, most people have relied
on physical devices such as pencils and papers; nowadays
we can use digital computers instead of them. Among such
devices is an abacus (Figure.1), or “soroban” in Japanese.
The abacus is a mechanical aid used for counting; it is not a

1606

calculator in the sense we use the word today. A bead above
the middle horizontal bar of an abacus has a value of 5; each
bead below the bar has a value of 1. When moved towards
the bar, the beads are considered counted. Interestingly,
abacus experts can not only manipulate the tool skillfully in
its physical form but also gain the ability to count on the
abacus in their minds: They can mentally calculate
extraordinarily large numbers –often more than 16 digits–
with unusual speed and accuracy. It is an important research
question how the cognitive process and brain activity of the
experts differ from those of the apprentices who learn for
only a few years.
According to previous studies about the process of
expertise in mental abacus, the following explanations were
provided about how abacus learners acquire such speed and
accuracy (Hatano, 1983): (1) a few specific productions to
add numbers are merged into a single production to get the
calculation result directly, and the execution of these
merged specific productions becomes automatic; (2) actual
operation of abacus beads comes to be interiorized as mental
operation on the mental imagery of a configuration of
abacus beads. The speed of the operation is hereby no more
limited by the speed of muscle movement; (3) a module-like
system to represent mentally a number or series of digits in
a form of the configuration of abacus beads, which is
activated without any conscious effort; (4) the mental
abacus becomes simplified, by losing the properties
unnecessary for calculation, such as the frame, the
horizontal bar and the color of beads, and monitoring of the
operation is removed.

Some psychological studies have showed the existence of
mental abacus or a specific mental device to represent a
series of digits visuo-spatially (Hatano et al., 1977; Hatano
& Osawa, 1983). For example, it was reported that the
experts could remember sequences of 16 digits forward and
14 digits backward, and that, when they were asked to
reproduce a series of digits forward and backward, their
reproduction time was almost the same between the two
ways while backward reproduction took much longer for the
object names. Including the evidence showing that their
digit memory was more disrupted by concurrent visuospatial tasks than aural-verbal tasks, the authors suggested
that abacus experts utilized a visuo-spatial mental
representation, that is to say mental abacus in working
memory.
In these experiments, the experts were compared with the
subjects who had no experience of learning abacus, and they
were asked to only memorize series of digits; they were not
to perform calculation actually. Namely, in the previous
studies, the use of visuo-spatial mental representation by
experts was experimentally confirmed only by using
memory tasks, not by using an actual calculation one which
is one of the visuomotor cognitive tasks. This study focuses
on clarifying the use of visuo-spatial mental representation
in performing a kind of actual calculation, based on an
experimental paradigm of subliminal perception.
In addition, the previous studies paid no attention to the
difference between the process of the above (2) and (3) and
that of (4). In fact, twelve of fourteen grand masters, when
we interviewed, answered that they were not attending,
during mental calculation, to the configuration of the beads
of their mental abacuses: They have only a slight feeling of
moving beads in their mental calculation. The result of the
interview indicates that there are two levels in the expertise
of mental abacus: One is the intermediate abacus learners
who are in the process of the above (2) and (3) and count on
their (especially spatially) clear mental representations of
abacus, and the other is the real experts or grand masters
who are in the above (4) and come to have no use for such
(spatially clear) representations. So we can hypothesize that
intermediate abacus learners depend on their (spatially)
clear mental representations of abacus during making their
mental calculation while experts or grand masters do not.
The purpose of the study is to experimentally test this
hypothesis using an experimental paradigm of subliminal
perception (Experiment 1) and to clarify, using a NIRS,
brain cortical activity that is related to the use of the mental
representation (Experiment 2).

(hereafter, we call them experts or expert group). Two kinds
of tasks were given to all subjects; one was a normal mental
calculation task (after-mentioned Flash Mental Calculation),
and the other was a task where a random configuration of
the beads of abacus was inserted, as a subliminal stimulus,
into Flash Mental Calculation. If he/she highly depends on
his/her mental abacus during mental calculation, the
insertion of the subliminal stimuli will interfere with the
representation and his/her ratio correct will get worse.
Therefore, if only the apprentices’ ratio correct get worse
due to the insertion of the subliminal stimuli during doing
Flash Mental Calculation, the hypothesis is shown to be
correct.

Subjects
The apprentice group consisted of four males and one
female, ranging between 7 and 9 (mean = 8.0, SD = 0.7)
years old. They were learning abacus for only a few years
and their skills ranked 5 kyuu, in which class they were
thought to be in the process of (2) or (3) described above.
The expert group consisted of three males and two females,
ranging between 12 and 19 (mean = 15.4, SD = 2.7). Their
skills ranked from 6 dan to 10 dan (mean = 8.4, SD = 1.8).
Dans are classes for masters and 10 dan is the highest class.
Six dan or above are considered as grand masters, so all the
experts in this experiment were thought to have had finished
the process of (4). So the apprentice group was considered
to be in the “associative stage” of the three stages, which
had been insisted in Fitts (1964), while the expert one was
thought to be in the “autonomous stage”.

Task
Flash Mental Calculation (hereafter, FMC for short) was
used as a task. FMC was a kind of mental calculation task in
which the subjects were required to add up random numbers
on a display at a regular interval of time (Figure.2). The
ratio of the display time for each number to be added and
the display time for each blank was 3:2. If one cycle of
displaying a stimulus took 1000 msec, each cycle became as
shown in Figure.2. Because it was easy to insert directly the
visual stimuli during calculation, and it was also easy to
adjust the difficulty of the task to the ability of each subject,
we chose FMC as a task.

Experiment 1
Purpose
The purpose was to test the above-mentioned hypothesis, by
comparing the percentage of the problems answered
correctly (hereafter, “ratio correct” for short) between the
intermediate abacus learners (hereafter, we call them
apprentices or apprentice group) and the real experts
1607

Figure.2: Display of FMC (One cycle takes 1000 msec)

.,64

.,631

p_rgmamppcar

.,62
.,60
.,6

.,60

.,60

.,56
.,54
.,52
.,50

_nnpclrgac
cvncpr

.,54

.,5
DKA

Figure.3: Display of sFMC (One cycle takes 1000 msec)
Another task, into which a random configuration of the
beads of abacus is inserted, given to the subjects, as a
subliminal stimulus, immediately after each number to be
added was presented, is shown in Figure.3. The
configurations of beads shown were irrelevant to the
numbers that should be added and just before presented,
which was considered to work as an interferential stimulus
if the subjects strongly depended on their mental abacuses.
These visual stimuli were inserted as subliminal ones
because it was preferable that the subjects did not notice the
difference between normal FMC and FMC into which the
visual stimuli were inserted (hereafter, sFMC for short).
Considering the refresh rate and the rate of rise and decay of
liquid crystal display, the mean subliminal time was 31
msec. Actually, none of the subjects noticed this difference
through the experiment. We used E-Prime Version 1.1
(Psychology Software Tools, Inc.) to make the tasks and
displayed them with ThinkPad R40 (IBM Japan, Ltd. OS:
Windows XP, CPU: Pentium4 1.80GHz)1.

Procedure
Before the experiment, the subjects were asked to do about
five normal FMC tasks to identify the appropriate speed and
digit number for each subject. Then the subjects were asked
to do ten normal FMC tasks in the identified condition of
speed and digit number to check whether the ratio correct
was 70% or more. In this way, the appropriate condition
was identified conclusively. Consequently, the conditions of
the two groups were decided as follows.
• The apprentice group
Two digit numbers was appropriate for all the subjects, and
one cycle of display ranged between 700 and 1000 msec.
• The expert group
Three digit numbers was appropriate for all the subjects, and
one cycle of display ranged between 300 and 400 msec.
All the subjects were asked to do thirty FMC tasks and
thirty sFMC tasks where the two tasks were randomly
provided. The time of each task was ten sec2.
1

We had to conduct this experiment at the abacus school of the subjects, so
a notebook-size personal computer was used.
2
Because the speeds differed in each subject, the number of figures that
should be added was also different in each subject.

1608

qDKA

Figure.4: The ratio correct of FMC and sFMC
for the apprentice and experts

Result
The ratio correct of the apprentice and expert group are
shown in Figure.4. This figure shows that ratio correct (yaxis) of the apprentice group declined when doing sFMC
while that of the expert group did not. A two-way repeated
measures ANOVA with between-subjects factor (apprentice
and expert), within-subject factor (FMC and sFMC)
revealed that the interaction between two factors were
significant (F(1,8) = 7.580, p = 0.025<.05). This means that
the insertion of the visual stimuli had an interferential effect
on the apprentices’ performance while it did not on the
experts’, which supports our hypothesis.
From the above result, it was experimentally suggested that
the apprentices of mental abacus used the clear-cut mental
representation –that is the configuration of abacus beads–
while the experts did not depend on such a representation. It
is, therefore, expected that the activating areas of the brain
are also different between the apprentices and the experts.
So we will make another experiment to confirm it using a
NIRS (Near-infrared Spectroscopy).

Experiment 2
Background
A NIRS is a spectroscopy which measures the change of the
amount of blood hemoglobin at the cerebral cortices, twodimensionally and at “real-time” (only 100 msec to perform
one cycle of measurement), using the blood hemoglobin’s
absorption characteristic in the near-infrared. When a ¸
specific area of the brain is activated, the localized blood
volume in that area changes quickly. Because the amount of
oxy-hemoglobin is highly correlated to the localized blood
volume (Hoshi et al., 2001), we consider the increase of
oxy-hemoglobin as the neural activity. The reason why we
use a NIRS is that it is non-invasive and the measurement
can be made under more natural condition than the other
equipments to measure brain activity such as fMRI
(functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging). To perform a
task that requires mental concentration such as mental
calculation, a NIRS is thought to be suitable.

Figure.5: The activating area of the experts during mental
calculation (Hanakawa et al., 2003)
By using a fMRI, the brain activity of experts during doing
mental calculation was compared with that of novices
(Hanakawa et al., 2003). As a result, in experts, the activity
was observed bilaterally in the superior precentral sulcus
(Brodmann area: BA6) and the intraparietal sulcus (BA40/7)
(see Figure.5). Especially, dorsolateral premotor cortex is
located in BA6, which cortex is known to be active when
we acquire some patterns in visuo-motor sequential learning
(Hanakawa et al., 2002). Because the apprentices of mental
abacus are thought to make use of and to be in the process
of acquiring calculation rules based on their clear-cut mental
representations, activity near BA6, during normal mental
calculation, in the apprentices is expected to be greater than
that in the experts.
In addition, the frontal cortex, especially the dorsal frontal
cortex (DFC) is associated with higher brain function such
as thought and planning. Since the mental calculation is also
a kind of higher brain function, activity of the apprentices’
DFC during mental calculation could be greater than that of
the experts’. Two probe gears were fixed at the positions
shown in Figure.6, so that BA6 and DFC could be measured.
The position of them follows the international 10-20 system.
ETG-4000 (Hitachi Medical corp.) was used as a NIRS.

Purpose
The purpose was to find the difference in brain activity
during mental calculation between the apprentices
(apprentice group) and the experts (expert group). From
Experiment 1 and earlier studies, activation of the
apprentices at the channels near BA6, when the visual
stimuli were inserted as interferential stimuli (FMC), was
expected to be smaller than that when only normal
calculation tasks (sFMC) were given, and at the same time,
activation of the apprentices at the channels near DFC was
expected to be greater than that of the experts during mental
calculation.

Subjects
The apprentice group consisted of two males and three
females, ranging between 7 and 9 (mean = 7.8, SD = 0.8)
years old. Their skills ranked 5 kyuu, and they were thought
to be in the process of (2) or (3) explained in Introduction.
The expert group consisted of three males and two females,

Figure.6: 1~24 were the channels to be measured.
ranging between 12 and 20 (mean = 15.6, SD = 3.0). Their
skills ranked from 6 dan to 10 dan (mean = 8.4, SD = 1.8),
so all the experts in this experiment were thought to have
had finished the process of (4) explained in Introduction.

Method
FMC and sFMC were also used as tasks in this experiment.
To remove fluctuations and artifacts from the data of brain
activity, the each measurement was designed using a block
design: Six controls and five tasks were alternately
presented to the subjects. In the task period, the subjects
were asked to perform FMC or sFMC (not changed in a
series of measurement). In the control period, the subjects
were asked only to watch the images in which digits were
made asunder and the separated parts of the digits were
again connected to each other at random (see Figure.7). The
images have the same physical amount of stimulus as the
digits used in FMC and sFMC. Therefore, by subtracting the
data of the control from those of the task, we could get the
pure data concerning mental calculation. A task period and a
control period were 20 sec respectively. The average oxyhemoglobin data of the five tasks were used for analysis.

Procedure
The same as in Experiment 1, the appropriate condition for
each subject was first identified. Two probe gears were then
fixed at the positions shown in Figure.6. After the subjects
practiced in that condition, the measurements, in which the
FMC task was given, were carried out twice. After the
subjects having a break, the measurements, in which the
sFMC task was given, were conducted twice. In
consideration of habituation, the second data of each task
were used for the analysis.

Result
First of all, the average oxy-hemoglobin data of the five
1609

Figure.7: The stimulus of the control period
tasks were normalized in order to unify the data between the
subjects. Then we took the average of these data for 15 sec
(except the rise time of 5 sec) for each channel, and these
values indicated the amount of blood, that is to say the
amount of neural activity during mental calculation.
The normalized average oxy-hemoglobin data was
assumed to be an induced variable, and a three-way
ANOVA with between-subjects factor (apprentice and
expert), within-subject factor (task and control) and task
factor (FMC and sFMC) revealed that the interaction
between between-subjects factor and task factor were
significant only at channel 8 (F(1,28) = 6.694, p =
0.015<.05). Channel 8 was thought to be located in BA6, so
this supported the hypothesis that activity near BA6, during
normal mental calculation, of the apprentices was greater
than that of the experts (see Figure.8). At the same time,
activity near BA6 of the apprentices became smaller, when
the subliminal stimuli were inserted (sFMC), than that when
only normal calculation tasks were given (FMC), which was
consistent with the result of Experiment 1 (see Figure.8).
In addition, the interaction between between-subjects
factor and within-subject factor was significant at channel 2
(F(1,28) = 5.002, p = 0.033<.05), 3 (F(1,28) = 6.750, p =
0.015<.05), 5 (F(1,28) = 12.266, p = 0.002<.01), 8 (F(1,28)
= 4.608, p = 0.041<.05), 10 (F(1,28) = 12.022, p =
0.002<.01) (see Figure.9). Because these channels were
thought to be located in DFC (especially 8 and 10), the
hypothesis was supported; activation of the apprentices’
DFC during mental calculation was greater than that of the
experts’. These results were consistent with that of
Experiment 1, in the sense that the results supported that the
apprentices strongly depended on their mental abacuses.

mvw+fckmejm`gl

4

3,1055

3
2
1
0
/
.

_nnpclrgac
cvncpr
.,2570
DKA

/,/43
.,5/2
qDKA

Figure.8: The interaction between between-subjects factor
and task factor at channel 8.
1610

Figure.9: A channel with blue circle (ch.8) had the
interaction between between-subjects factor and task factor.
Channels with red circle (ch.2, 3, 5, 8, 10) had the
interaction between between-subjects factor and withinsubject factor.

Discussions and Conclusion
From the result of Experiment 1, we can say as follows;
intermediate abacus learners (apprentices in the
experiments) depended on their (spatially) clear mental
representations of abacus during making their mental
calculation while experts or grand masters (experts in the
experiments) did not. Experiment 2 revealed that (1) the
activity near BA6 of the apprentices was deactivated by the
insertion of subliminal stimuli and (2) the activity of the
apprentices’ DFC during mental calculation was greater
than that of the experts’, which were consistent with the
result of Experiment 1. The results of the two experiments
suggested that intermediate learners of mental abacus
strongly depended on their mental abacuses while experts or
grand masters did not.
Then, on what kind of representation do the experts of
mental abacus depend during mental calculation?
Considering from the expert’s point of view, which was
explained in Introduction, the movement of abacus beads
itself is thought to be important. The speed of the experts’
mental calculation is so fast that they seem not to be
attending to the configuration of the beads of their mental
abacuses during mental calculation, and they have only a
slight feeling of moving abacus beads. To confirm this
hypothesis, we need to insert three sequential images which
express the movement of abacus beads, instead of the visual
stimuli used in this study.
On the other hand, is it good to say that the apprentices
were highly dependent on their mental abacuses just
because their ratio correct got worse and their activity near
BA6 was inhibited by the insertion of the configuration of

abacus beads? It is possible that the insertion itself caused
them to lose concentration. In the future, it needs to be
investigated whether the insertion of the other kind of
stimuli, such as alphabet, works similarly, as an
interferential stimulus, for the apprentices. If apprentices are
proved to be interfered only by the configuration of abacus
beads used in this study, our hypothesis will be more
strongly supported.
The result of Experiment 2 could be interpreted to show
emerging economy of cerebral cortical processes with
expertise (Milton et al., 2004): Overall activation in critical
cortical (motor) planning was smaller for experts than for
apprentices. This inverse relationship between skill level
and brain activity has also observed both for chess players
(Altherton et al, 2003) and for golf players (Milton et al.,
2003). Milton et al. (2003) also found that expert golfers
showed relatively more activation in dorsolateral premotor
cortex than beginners, which was not consistent with our
result (i.e. the tendency of BA6 activation during normal
mental calculation tasks, which is shown in Figure.8). This
difference is considered to be caused by the difference in
types of task given: The task given in this study was
performing a visuomotor cognitive task while that given in
(Milton et al., 2003) was a kind of motor-planning.
In Experiment 2, the data of some channels around DFC of
the experts showed negative values, which implied that the
area near DFC was deactivated during mental calculation.
There is a similar research to obtain the result that the
activity of DFC decreased when the subjects were playing
video games and were also accustomed to play them
(Matsuda, 2004). Here Matsuda (2004) claimed as follows;
the one reason for deactivation of DFC was that the subjects
who were accustomed to play video games did not need to
learn the movement of visual information. The same thing
was considered to be true of the experts in this study.
There was, in fact, an age difference between the experts
and the apprentices in this study. The population of the
abacus trainees concentrated in young children, so the mean
age of the apprentices resulted in about eight and that of the
experts did in about fifteen. We do not think that this age
gap between the two groups greatly influences the result,
both because we minimized the gap by applying the
international 10-20 electrode system when we decided the
positions of channels and because a NIRS is used even for
the measurements of babies. But there might be somewhat
difference in the positions of channels, by the size of head,
between subjects. So we need to presume the positions
strictly by overlapping with the corresponding MRI data.

Acknowledgement
This research is supported by grant (Grants-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (A), No.16200019) from Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.

1611

References
Altherton, M., Zhuang, J., Bart, W. M., Hu, X. & He, S.
(2003). A Functional MRI Study of High-level Cognition:
The Game of Chess, Cognitive Brain Research, 16, 26-31.
Fitts, P. M. (1964). Perceptual-motor Skill Learning. In A.
W. Melton (Ed.) Categories of Human Learning, 243-285,
New York: Academic Press.
Hanakawa, T., Honda, M., Sawamoto, N., Okada, T.,
Yonekura, Y., Fukuyama, H. & Shibasaki, H., (2002).
The Role of Rostral Brodmann Area 6 in Mentaloperation Tasks: an Integrative Neuroimaging Approach.
Cerebral Cortex 12, 1157-1170.
Hanakawa, T., Honda, M., Okada, T.,Fukuyama, H. &
Shibasaki, H. (2003). Neural Correlates Underlying
Mental Calculation in Abacus Experts: Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. Neuroimage 19,
296-307
Hatano, G., Miyake, Y. & Binks, M.G. (1977). Performance
of Expert Abacus Operators. Cognition 5, 57-71.
Hatano, G. (1983). Becoming an Expert in Mental Abacus
Operation: A Case of Routine Expertise (in Japanese).
Advances in Japanese Cognitive Science 1, 141-160.
Hatano, G. & Osawa, K., (1983). Digit Memory of Grand
Experts in Abacus-derived Mental Calculation. Cognition
15, 95-110.
Hoshi, Y., Kobayashi, N. & Tamura, M., (2001).
Interpretation of Near-infrared Spectroscopy Signals: a
Study with a Newly Developed Perfused Rat Brain Model.
Journal of Applied Physiology 90, 1657-1662.
Matsuda, G., (2004). The Change in Blood Flow at Frontal
Cortex on Playing Video Games: Investigation by NIRS.
Doctoral thesis, Department of General Systems Studies,
University of Tokyo.
Milton, J. G., Solodkin, A., Hlu_tik, P., Crews, D. & Small,
S. S., (2003) Expert Motor Performance: Limbic
Activation is Inversely Related to Skill Level, Neurology,
60, A345.
Milton, J. G., Small, S. S. & Solodkin, A. (2004) On the
Road to Automatic: Dynamic Aspects in the
Development of Expertise, Journal of Clinical
Neurophysiology, 21, 134-143.

