UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Use of Relevance in Open-Ended Induction in the Domain of Biology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8386128b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Coley, John D.
Hu, Ruiwen
Vitkin, Anna Z.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Use of Relevance in Open-Ended Induction in the Domain of Biology
Anna Z. Vitkin (vitkin.a@neu.edu)
John D. Coley (j.coley@neu.edu)
Ruiwen Hu (hu.r@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology
360 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115 USA
Abstract
Induction refers to the process by which we use our existing
knowledge to make predictions in the face of uncertainty.
Recent research in the domain of biology suggests that
existing similarity-based models of categorical induction
cannot adequately account for the performance of populations
with domain-relevant experience. Other research has
suggested that the relations among the premises of an
inductive argument may provide relevant information that
further constrains inductive inferences. This study uses an
open-ended task to examine induction children with differing
experience with the biological world. 85 school-aged children
from diverse environments in Massachusetts were given 18
pairs of premise animal categories and taught that each pair
shared a property (disease or “stuff inside”). Pairs were either
taxonomically close or far and were either related by
predation, shared habitat, or unrelated. We asked participants
to project what other kinds of things would share the property
and explain their answers. Reponses were coded as similaritybased (related to class inclusion or shared features) or
interaction-based (related to contact through environment).
Results suggest that children use inductive selectivity, making
more similarity-based responses when reasoning about “stuff
inside” and more interaction-based responses when reasoning
about a disease. Children from rural environments also used
the relations among premises to constrain their reasoning
whereas urban children did not. Reliance on similarity-based
reasoning decreased with age for all children and rural
children showed an increase in the use of interaction-based
reasoning. Taken together the results suggest that children’s
experience plays a role in the development of sensitivity to
relevant factors that constrain inductive reasoning.

Introduction
In our everyday life we are often unaware of how
confidently we navigate a world full of novelty and
uncertainty. One way we do this is to extend our existing
categorical knowledge about the world to new kinds of
things and we do so in a principled way. This process is
commonly called category-based induction and such an
argument generally takes the form “A’s all have property X
therefore B’s must have property X.” How we construct
such arguments and how we determine the set of B’s to
generalize property X over has been the focus of research
for many years.
The study of category-based induction has often focused
on the domain of biology. The natural world is ubiquitous
and well known to children (just browse a handful of
children’s books). There are several reasons why this
2319

domain is well suited for the study of induction. For one,
biological categories are naturally structured in a
hierarchical taxonomy so a poodle called “Fluffy” is
necessarily also a dog, a mammal and an animal. Another
attractive aspect of the domain is the existence of naturally
orthogonal alternative category structures; natural categories
can be organized by the relations between them, such as
habitat (e.g. polar animals, jungle animals, etc.) or
biological niche (e.g. predation).
Researchers have attempted to model category based
induction. One attempt, the Similarity Coverage Model
(Osherson et al. 1990) proposed a specific mechanism of
similarity to explain induction. In this case similarity refers
to the idea that inductive arguments are strong as a function
of the similarity between the premise and conclusion
categories. For example, if you know that robins have sarca
then you might be more likely to conclude that sparrows
might have sarca rather than penguins since robins are more
similar to sparrows than penguins. On the other hand the
principle of coverage concerns the representativeness of a
premise category as a function of the conclusion category.
In this example if you know robins have sarca you might be
more willing to conclude that all birds have sarca than if
you knew that penguins have sarca. According to the SCM
this is a result of the fact that robins are more similar as a
whole to all instances of the category bird (robin covers the
category) than penguins. The SCM has had a great deal of
success predicting the reasoning of university
undergraduates, who are the primary population of this
research, however it fails to model results looking at
induction in alternative populations. In fact research looking
at the Itza’ Maya of Guatemala (Lopez et al. 1997), Chicago
landscapers (Medin et al. 1997), and commercial fisherman
in Boston, among others, has shown that factors like
expertise can influence category-based induction to diverge
from reasoning predicted by the SCM.
One way to address these differences in reasoning is to
consider what the characteristics of expert-like reasoning
might be. Several converging findings suggest that experts
use their specific knowledge about a domain to determine
the relevant dimensions of comparison used in their
generalizations. For instance, Lynch et al. (2000) found that
in a comparison of tree experts and undergraduates
reasoning about trees, experts used the dimensions of height
and “weediness” as the organizing dimension for the
category of trees. Shafto and Coley (2003) found that
commercial fisherman used their specific knowledge of

local marine habitats and food chains to make inductive
inferences about disease transmission.
Another hallmark of expert-like reasoning is the use of
inductive selectivity. Generally inductive selectivity refers
to the notion that the property being projected provides an
important context for an inference. For instance, if you
know that penguins have hemo inside, you might infer that
this is a property shared by flightless birds. In contrast if
you know that penguins have the disease hemo you might be
more likely to infer that seals might get hemo since they live
with penguins. The consideration of property of projection
as a constraining factor on induction can be seen as a way of
integrating specific knowledge within the context of the
induction problem. For instance Shafto and Coley also
found that commercial fisherman used different relations
between marine creatures as a function of the property of
projection. Specifically when asked to generalize a blank
property across marine categories fisherman tended to rely
on taxonomic relations; however, if the property was a
novel disease they used their specific knowledge of the local
ecology to generalize along ecological dimensions such as
food chains.
Apart from expertise effects, several other factors have
been shown to contribute to differences in category-based
induction. Medin et al. (2003) proposed a framework for
investigating induction that centers on the idea of relevance.
Briefly, relevance refers to the fact that people are sensitive
to the relations between premise and conclusion categories
and assume that these relations are informative with respect
to strength of the conclusion. Specifically they offer two
related principles that might guide induction. First that the
projection of a property from premise categories is
associated with the most distinctive feature shared by the
premise categories. For instance, if you are told that
penguins have andro you might assume that having andro is
related to living in cold climates. The second principle
concerns the relationship between the premise categories
and the conclusion category. Specifically that comparing the
premise and conclusion categories should further constrain
the relevant dimensions of induction. For instance if you
were told that penguins have andro therefore zebras have
andro you might augment your earlier conclusion and
believe that andro is actually a property related to being
black and white. Likewise adding more premise categories
such as penguins and pandas have andro should make you
even more certain of your conclusion.
Using this framework we can look to phenomena in
category based induction that are not accounted for by the
SCM. Divergence from reasoning predicted by the
similarity coverage model has also been shown in children.
Ross et al. (2003) compared the performance of urban and
rural majority culture and rural Native American children
reasoning about animals. Native American and older
children tended to give justifications for their projections for
items like bee and bear in terms of the ecological relations
between them. Their results suggest that young school age
children can also display expert-like use of specific domain

2320

knowledge and inductive selectivity. Furthermore, Vitkin,
Coley & Kane (2004) investigated children’s inductive
reasoning about plants and animals. Using a forced choice
triad task. They taught children a property (disease or
internal substance) about a premise category and asked
children which of the two animal categories (related by
common superordinate category or ecology) might share
this property. Children were more likely to select
ecologically related items when reasoning about diseases
and more likely to select taxonomic alternatives when
reasoning about internal substances. Taken together these
results suggest that young children also use inductive
selectivity when alternative relations are familiar.
Research with both children and adults looking at
induction has mainly employed forced choice methods.
Often this takes the form of an inductive premise with two
alternative conclusions. The relations between the premise
and the alternatives are manipulated to contrast inferences
based on taxonomic similarity and ecological relations.
These methods can potentially obscure the complexity of
the reasoning process. For instance it is not clear what
salient relations determine the choice between any two
alternatives. The inference also depends on whether or not
participants are aware of the relations between the given
alternatives. Results from forced choice methods also
necessitate an inverse relationship between inference kinds
since choosing one alternative means not choosing the other.
Although theories of induction in the biological domain
predict such a pattern of results it is not clear if these results
are an artifact of task demands.
Little is known about the extent to which children
spontaneously use knowledge of the natural world to
selectively constrain category-based induction. In the
present research we have attempted to address the problems
inherent in forced choice tasks by employing an open-ended
induction procedure. By providing the premises of an
inductive argument and asking children to provide both the
conclusion categories and justifications for their projections
we hope to capture the robustness and complexity of
children’s knowledge and their sensitivity to different kinds
of relations among biological categories.
To this end we employed premise pairs that differed on
two orthogonal dimensions: ecological relatedness
(predatory/prey, habitat, no relation) and taxonomic distance
(same or different superordinate category). We asked
children to reason about a novel disease or “stuff inside”
and subsequently analyzed the basis of their projections.
Using this method we were able to investigate whether
under little task constraint children would spontaneously use
specific knowledge of biological relations to guide their
inferences. Specifically, we examine the following
questions: (1) Do inferences about disease differ
systematically from inferences about insides? (2) Do
children spontaneously utilize relevant relations among
premise pairs to constrain inferences? (3) Do these
sensitivities change with age or with opportunities for direct
experience with plants and animals?

Methods
Participants
A total of 85 children in kindergarten through 6th grade
were recruited through elementary schools and after-school
programs in 9 communities in Massachusetts. Participants
ranged in age from 5-11 to 12-8 with a mean age of 8-10.
Communities ranged in population density from 22 to 13488
people per square mile.

Materials and Design
Stimuli consisted of 36 5 x 7 in. laminated cards. Each
card depicted detailed color line drawings of two animals,
arranged vertically. We manipulated the relations between
the base pair of animals on two dimensions, taxonomic
distance and ecological relatedness. Pairs were either
taxonomically close (same superordinate category) or far
(different superordinate category). Each pair of animals was
also ecologically related by predation (one of the animals
eats the other), habitat (both animals are found in the same
place), or unrelated (have no discernable ecological
relationship). See Table 1 below for examples. These
relations were varied within subjects and each participant
saw 3 pairs from each cell in Table 1, for a total of 18 items.
Animals and relations among them were carefully chosen to
be familiar to a wide range of children. Two sets of items
were used; one depicted local species, and the other
depicted exotic species. Children were randomly assigned to
one of these conditions.
For each item children were taught a property about the
premise pair of animals and were asked what other kinds of
things might also share this property and why. We varied
the property children were asked to project between
subjects. One group reasoned about a novel physioanatomical property (“have a stuff inside called cyto”) and
the other group reasoned about a novel disease (“have a
sickness called cyto”).

Procedure
Children who received parental consent were interviewed
individually at their school or after-school program. They
began with a warm-up task asking children about their
hobbies and interests. Children then performed this and two
related tasks in counterbalanced order across subjects.
Overall children only saw any given species or relation once
across all tasks.
Table 1: Example of Manipulated Relationships Among
Premise Pairs
Ecological
Relations
Predatory/Prey
Habitat
No Relation

Taxonomic Relations
Close
Far
Spider / Fly
Salmon / Black Bear
Moose / Porcupine Lobster / Tuna
Newt / Box Turtle
Raccoon / Pelican

2321

For this task children were shown 18 cards containing
inductive pairs in random order. For each pair children were
told, “There’s this stuff / sickness called X. Lots of things
can have X. A’s and B’s have X. What other kinds of things
do you think might also have X and why?” where A and B
are animals and X is the property of projection (disease or
stuff inside). Responses were tape recorded and transcribed
for coding.
After the data was collected four trained coders classified
each child’s responses to each item. For each response
coders evaluated the kinds of relations that formed the basis
of the projection from the premises as being. For purposes
of this paper, we consider two broad classes of responses.
Projections were coded as similarity based if the property
was projected on the basis of shared features, overall
similarity, or shared category membership. Projections were
coded as interaction based if the property was projected on
the basis of spatio-temporal interactions among species. See
Table 2 for sample responses. A single response could
receive multiple codes.
Table 2: Sample Similarity-based and Interaction-based
Responses
Type of
Response
Similarity-based

Interaction-based

Examples
-- Monkeys because monkeys come from
the same family as a gorilla.
-- Foxes in the arctic because they have
hair like a polar bear.
-- Fish because newts and box turtles
bring the disease to the water.
-- Field mice because owls might eat
them.

Results
For each subject there were 3 items of each type. We
computed the number of similarity-based and interactionbased responses for each item type. Scores could be higher
than 3 because of multiple subcategories of similarity-based
and interaction-based projections. Preliminary analyses
revealed no differences between response patterns for local
versus exotic pairs, so we do not analyze that factor further.
For clarity of presentation, children were divided into
urban and rural groups based on population density; rural
children came from communities ranging from 22-245
people per square mile, and urban children came from
communities ranging from 6851 to 13488 people per square
mile. We also performed a median split on age to derive
older and younger age groups. The younger group ranged
from 5-11 to 8-4 with a mean age of 7-7, and the older
group ranged from 8-4 to 12-8 with a mean age of 10-0. We
analyzed patterns of similarity-based and interaction-based
projections separately for urban and rural children,
conducting four separate 2 (Age: younger, older) x 2
(Property: disease, stuff inside) x 2 (Taxonomic Distance:

Urban Children
Similarity-based Projections
Urban children showed use of inductive selectivity, they
made more similarity-based projections in the insides (M =
3.26) than disease (M = 1.94) condition (F (1, 37) = 10.09,
MSe = 120.86, p = .003).
We also found a main effect of age (F (1, 37) = 4.25, MSe
= 50.93, p = .05) such that younger children relied on
similarity-based inference (M = 2.86) more than older
children (M = 2.05).
We observed no effects of taxonomic distance between
premises or ecological relatedness on similarity-based
projections.
Interaction-based Projections
Urban children’s interaction-based projections were also
selectively sensitive to the kind of property being projected
(F (1, 37) = 22.54, MSe = 164.59, p < .0001). Interactionbased projections were more common for the disease
condition (M = 1.83) than the insides condition (M = .26).
We observed no developmental effects of age on the
frequency of interaction-based reasoning. We also observed
no effects of taxonomic distance between premises or
ecological relatedness for interaction-based projections
Rural Children
Similarity-based Projections
Rural children also showed evidence of inductive
selectivity; there was a main effect of property condition,
disease or insides, (F (1, 40) = 17.82, MSe = 45.25, p = .01).
Rural children’s similarity-based inferences were also
constrained by the kind of property they were reasoning
about with more similarity-based projections for the insides
(M = 3.30) than disease (M = 1.92) condition.
Like urban children, rural children also showed a decline
in the use of similarity-based reasoning with age (F (1, 40)
= 7.07, MSe = 45.26, p = .01). Younger children made more

2322

similarity-based projection (M = 3.22) than older children
(M = 2.28).
Unlike urban children, we observed a main effect of
taxonomic distance between premises, as predicted by the
relevance framework. for rural children (F = 4.61, MSe =
5.59, p = .04). Rural children made more similarity-based
projections for taxonomically close items (M = 2.88) than
taxonomically far items (M = 2.53). This main effect was
further qualified by an interaction between taxonomic
distance and age (F (1, 40) = 4.19, MSe = 5.08, p = .05)
revealing that older children’s sensitivity to manipulation of
taxonomic distance was driving the effect (See Figure 1).
Rural children’s similarity-based projections were not
affected by our manipulation of ecological relatedness
among premises.

Mean Frequency of Projections

close, far) x 3 (Ecological Relation: habitat, predation,
unrelated) mixed ANOVAs on frequency of response.
If children exhibit inductive selectivity, we would expect
relatively high levels of similarity-based inferences from
children reasoning about insides, and relatively high levels
of interaction-based inferences for children reasoning about
disease. If children are sensitive to relevant relations among
premise pairs, we expect more similarity-based projections
from taxonomically close than far pairs, and more
interaction-based projections from ecologically related than
unrelated pairs. If greater potential for interaction with
living things increases context-sensitive induction, then
rural children might be more sensitive to manipulation of
relations among premise pairs than urban children. Finally,
we are also interested in differences between younger and
older children.

4
Close Pairs
Far Pairs

3
2

1
0
Younger

Older

Figure 1. Mean frequency of Similarity-based Projections
by Age and Taxonomic Distance for Rural Children
Interaction-based Projections
Rural children’s interaction-based projections also
showed evidence of inductive selectivity. There was a main
effect of property condition (F (1, 40) = 8.83, MSe = 61.86,
p = .01) such that rural participants made more interactionbased responses in the disease (M = 1.77) than insides (M =
0.71) condition.
There was also a main effect of age (F (1, 40) = 6.21, MSe
= 43.53, p = .02) such that older children made more
interaction-based projections (M = 1.56) than younger
children (M = 0.71).
We found a main effect of taxonomic distance for
interaction-based projections (F (1, 40) = 6.30, MSe = 3.82,
p = .02). Rural children made more interaction-based
projections for taxonomically far items (M = 1.32) than
taxonomically close items (M = 1.02).
Unlike urban children, we observed a main effect of
ecological relations among premises for rural children (F (2,
80) = 3.40, MSe = 1.82, p = .04). As expected rural children
showed more sensitivity to the ecological relations among

premises such that items containing predator / prey relations
had significantly more interaction based-projections (M =
1.35) than both items related through habitat (M = 1.08) and
unrelated items (M = 1.08).

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to use a new methodology
to explore the role of relevance-based reasoning in
children’s category based induction. Overall our findings
suggest that children are in fact sensitive to the context
provided by an inductive argument to constrain their
reasoning. Furthermore this sensitivity develops as a
function of experience afforded by a child’s local
environment.
Our results support the notion that children use inductive
selectivity to guide their reasoning. Effects of condition
(reasoning about disease or “stuff inside”) were seen for
both similarity and interaction based projections for both
urban and rural children. Specifically children reasoning
about disease used fewer similarity-based justifications than
those reasoning about an internal substance. Conversely
more interaction-based projections were observed for
children reasoning about disease than those reasoning about
internal substances. These results suggest that children can
constrain their inferences based on the nature of the property
of projection. Reasoning about disease seems to make
ecological relations relevant to the inference whereas
internal substance provides cues for the relevance of
taxonomic relations.
The relevance framework offers another constraint on
category-based induction. It suggests that people are
sensitive to relations among a set of premises and that these
relations might further constrain their conclusion. With this
in mind we manipulated taxonomic and ecological relations
among premise pairs. We found that rural children in
particular showed a systematic sensitivity to the relations
among premises while urban children did not.
In particular we found that taxonomic distance between
premises was a relevant cue for rural children’s responses.
Similarity-based responses were more common for
taxonomically close than taxonomically far premise pairs
suggesting that taxonomic closeness was a salient cue for
making generalizations over this dimension. We also found
that rural children made more interaction-based responses
for taxonomically far than close pairs suggesting that in the
absence of strong taxonomic cues rural children relied on
relevant ecological knowledge to guide their projections.
With regard to ecological relations among premises we
observed that rural children made more interaction-based
projections when the premises were related by predation
than both habitat-related and unrelated items. Ecological
relations among premises did not have an effect on
similarity-based projections. Ecological relations among
premises were only relevant in the context of reasoning
based on interaction through ecology and did not affect
similarity-based responses.

2323

As previously stated urban children did not show any
sensitivity to manipulation of relations among premises.
There was no difference in similarity- or interaction-based
reasoning as a function of either taxonomic or ecological
relatedness of the premise pairs. This motivates questions
about the contribution of experience in the local
environment to the use of relevant relations to guide
reasoning. We found significantly different patterns of
reasoning for urban and rural children. In particular, as we
predicted the opportunity to directly experience relatively
intact ecosystems did promote sensitivity to relevant
relations among biological kinds.
Finally, we also found evidence for the developmental
emergence of reasoning predicted by the relevance
framework. Generally older children relied less on
similarity-based explanations for their projections, they
made fewer similarity-based projections than younger
children. It may be the case that as children get older they
move away from a reliance on similarity cues to guide their
reasoning. However, only rural children showed an increase
in the use of interaction-based explanations as they get
older. This suggests that experience may play a role in the
emergence of ecologically informed reasoning.
Previous accounts of category-based induction may have
overestimated children’s reliance on similarity in their
reasoning. This study suggests that children are sensitive to
both taxonomic similarity and ecological relations and take
into account the properties they are reasoning about to
determine which relations are relevant to their inferences.
Both urban and rural children showed evidence of inductive
selectivity, however only rural children were sensitive to
taxonomic and ecological relations among premises. The
emergence of this sensitivity to relevant information used to
inform category-based induction appears to develop
differently in children as a function of their environment.
Using an open-ended task we hope to have captured a more
veridical picture of how children use existing contextual
factors to facilitate their reasoning about the domain of
biology.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by National Science Foundation
Grant # BCS-0236338 to J.D. Coley. We would like to
thank Robin Kane, Claire Seaton, Jennelle Yopchick,
Konstantin Feigin, Allison Baker, and the rest of the
Categorization and Reasoning Lab for their tireless work
and incalculable contributions to this project. We would also
like to acknowledge the support of participating
administrators, teachers, parents, and children, without
whom this research would not be possible.

References
Lopez, A., Atran, S., Coley, J., Medin, D., Smith, E. (1997).
The tree of life: Universals of folk-biological taxonomics
and inductions. Cognitive Psychology, 32, 251-295.
Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions, and graded

category structure among tree experts and novices.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D. & Atran, S. (1997).
Categorization and Reasoning among Tree Experts: Do
All Roads Lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32, 4996.
Medin, D. L., Coley, J. D., Storms, G., Hayes, B. K. (2003).
A Relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10(3), 517-532.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Ross, N, Medin, D., Coley, J. D., Atran, S. (2003). Cultural
and experiential differences in the development of
folkbiological induction. Cognitive Development, 18, 2547.
Shafto, P., Coley, J. D. (2003). Development of
Categorization and Reasoning in the Natural World:
Novices to Experts, Naïve Similarity to Ecological
Knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29,
641-649.
Vitkin, A., Coley, J.D. & Kane, R. (2004). The Role of
Experience in the Development of Biological Reasoning
in Children. Paper presented at the 45th Annual Meeting
of the Psychonomic Society, Minneapolis, MN.

2324

