UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Clarifying the Role of Alignability in Similarity Comparisons

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9171d7n9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bartels, Daniel
Chrisite, Stella
Colhouna, Julie
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Clarifying the Role of Alignability in Similarity Comparisons
Jason Jameson, Dedre Gentner, Samuel Day, Stella Christie, Julie Colhoun, and Daniel Bartels
Northwestern University
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Abstract
Structure-mapping theory has successfully predicted a number
of empirical results concerning ordinary literal similarity
processing. In particular, it predicts a distinction between
alignable differences—those connected to the common
structure derived in a comparison—and nonalignable
differences, which are not so connected and which are held to
be less salient than alignable differences (Markman & Gentner,
1993). Recently, Estes and Hasson (2004) have challenged the
claim that alignable differences are more salient than
nonalignable differences. In this paper, we address their
criticisms and present data supporting an alternative
interpretation of their results.

Introduction
Similarity is an important construct in cognitive science. It
plays a central role in research on categorization and
classification (e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky,
1984), induction (e.g., Osherson, et al., 1990; Sloman, 1993),
decision-making (e.g., Medin, Goldstone, & Markman,
1995), and learning and transfer (Gentner, Ratterman, &
Forbus, 1993). Structure-mapping theory treats similarity as
the outcome of a comparison process that yields a maximal
alignment between structured mental representations (e.g.,
Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Markman, 1997; Markman &
Gentner, 1996).
The structure-mapping theory of similarity has its roots in
analogy (Gentner, 1983). Similarity is claimed to involve the
alignment and mapping of conceptual structure from one
concept to another. The theory assumes that concepts are
represented as structured descriptions comprising object
attributes, objects, relations among objects, and higher order
relations among relations. As in a feature-based theory of
similarity (Tversky, 1977), structure-mapping assumes that
similarity is a positive function of common properties and a
negative function of distinctive properties.
However, a unique aspect of structure-mapping theory is its
distinction between two kinds of differences, alignable
differences (ADs) and nonalignable differences (NDs), and its
claim that these differentially affect the similarity
computation. ADs are related to the conceptual structure
common to the compared items, and take the form of
different values of a common predicate or along a common
dimension. For example, a car has 4 wheels, a motorcycle 2;
though this is a difference, the values derive from the
common property of having wheels. NDs are not connected
to the common system and generally take the form of an
assertion about one term that is denied for the other: e.g.,

kittens have claws, but hoses do not. This difference is
nonalignable—there is no clear common predicate along
which these properties could be aligned.
Evidence that this distinction is psychologically real comes
from several studies (Gentner & Gunn, 2001; Gentner &
Markman, 1994; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Markman &
Gentner, 1996; Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1990). For
example, people can list differences more quickly for similar
pairs (e.g., hotel and motel) than between dissimilar pairs
(e.g., hotel and banana)(Gentner & Markman, 1994). A
further claim is that ADs are more salient than NDs, and
therefore serve as better memory cues (Markman & Gentner,
1997).
Some important evidence for the claim that ADs count
more against similarity than NDs (all else being equal)1
comes from Markman and Gentner (1996). In one study,
participants were presented with similarity triads comprising
a standard scene plus two alternatives, from which one was to
be chosen as most similar to the standard. In Figure 1, the
standard consists of an archer aiming at a bull’s-eye. There is
an implied relational structure in the scene, namely,
AIMS(archer, bull’s-eye). In both alternative scenes a bird
appears. In the right scene, the bird replaces the bull’s-eye
and thus becomes part of the scene’s implied causal relational
structure, namely, AIMS(archer, bird). In this case, the bird is
an AD, because it is connected to the common predicate
AIMS (relative to the standard). This is not the case in the left
alternative where the bird is simply added to the scene, but
does not participate in the common causal relational structure.

Figure 1: Sample stimulus item, Markman and Gentner
(1996). The bird is a nonalignable difference on the left,
and an alignable difference on the right.

1048

1

Of course, alignable differences will not win out in every case. For
example, suppose the ND were an elephant and the AD were a flea.

According to structure-mapping theory, the alternative
scenes will be aligned with the standard, and differences
connected to the common structure (i.e., ADs) will become
more salient, and will reduce similarity more than differences
unrelated to the common structure (i.e., NDs). As predicted
by structure-mapping, the AD alternative was judged less
similar to the standard.
Recently, Estes and Hasson (2004) have carried out studies
that challenge the claim that ADs are more salient than NDs,
and the corollary claim that ADs reduce subjective similarity
more than NDs. They aimed to provide a fair test of the
predictions of structure-mapping by using stimuli patterned
after a figure that was used by Markman and Gentner (1996)
to illustrate the distinction between ADs and NDs.
In their first experiment, Estes and Hasson addressed the
question of whether ADs are more important than NDs in
judgments of similarity. Figure 2 presents a set of sample
stimuli. In the example, the standard comprises a shaded
square above an unshaded circle. One alternative (the
“Standard + ND” alternative) contains the standard and an
added nonalignable object (i.e., the triangle). The other
alternative is partly alignable with the standard but has an
internal object (an attribute AD or a relation AD) that does
not match the corresponding object in the standard. Note that
in the AD alternatives, the internal structure changes from
that of the standard. In the ND alternative, the standard’s
structure is preserved: the new object is simply added on the
side.
Standard

triangle) was more salient than the AD and that the ND
detracted more from similarity than either the attribute AD or
the relation AD. This runs contrary to the structure-mapping
prediction that the S+ND alternative would be considered
most similar to the standard (because its nonalignable
difference—the extraneous object—should have mattered less
than the alignable difference in the AD alternative—which, as
noted above, leads to a difference in internal structure). Estes
and Hasson concluded that these results support the
distinction between alignable and nonalignable differences
(consistent with structure mapping theory), but not that ADs
are more “important” than NDs.
However, these conclusions hinge critically on the
assumption that the number of objects (i.e., 2 vs. 3) is not
being used as an alignable dimension. But if participants take
number as an alignable dimension then they can process
alignments (and notice ADs) based either on the number of
objects or on the internal structure of the objects. If
participants attend to internal structure, then they will choose
the S+ND alternative in Fig. 2 as most similar to the standard.
But if they align on the basis of number, then they will choose
the alternative with the same number as most similar—the
AD alternative. Estes and Hasson take the latter response as
contradicting structure-mapping theory. We suggest it results
from a different dimension of alignment. If so, the problem
then becomes determining which kind of alignable difference
will be chosen.
In their second study, Estes and Hasson adopted the logic
of Markman and Gentner’s (1996) Experiment 3 to test a
more specific prediction of structure-mapping theory. Figure
3 shows sample stimuli.
Standard:

Attribute AD
Standard

High-Similarity
AD:

Standard + ND

Low-Similarity
AD:

Standard +
High-Similarity
ND:
Relation AD

Standard + ND
Standard +
Low-similarity
ND:

Figure 2: Sample comparisons, Estes and Hasson, Expt 1.
The results of interest for this paper involve those triads in
which the Standard + ND alternative (S+ND) was paired
with one of the AD alternatives. In these cases, the S+ND
alternative was judged less similar to the standard than either
the attribute AD item or the relation AD item. Estes and
Hasson interpreted these results to suggest that the ND (the

1049

Figure 3: Sample stimulus set, Estes and Hasson, Expt. 2.

If ADs are more salient than NDs, then variations in ADs
should matter more than variations in NDs in judging
similarity to the standard. In their experiment, similarity
ratings were obtained between pairs of figures formed by
pairing a standard with one of 4 alternative items, as in
Figure 3.
In Figure 3, the common relational structure is assumed to
be the vertical spatial relation “square above circle.” If (as
predicted by structure-mapping) ADs matter greatly in
judging similarity, then similarity-to-standard will vary
greatly between the AD pairs. That is, replacing the circle in
the standard with a triangle will lower similarity more than
replacing the circle with an oval, a more similar object. If
NDs are less important than ADs in judging similarity, then
(1) similarity-to-standard will be relatively unaffected by
adding an object on the side; and (2) similarity-to-standard
will be relatively unaffected by which object is added—an
oval or a triangle. In other words, the difference between the
oval and the triangle should matter greatly when they occupy
an alignable difference slot, and should matter very little
when they occupy a nonalignable difference slot.
Consistent with structure-mapping, judged similarity-tostandard was greater for high-similarity AD items than for
low-similarity AD items, and did not differ between the highand low-similarity ND items. However, contrary to the
structure-mapping account, the overall similarity ratings for
the AD items were higher than those for the ND items.
(Structure-mapping predicts lower similarity for AD items,
because the differences matter.)
But these findings can be reconciled with structuremapping if we make the assumption that participants were
treating the number of objects as an alignable dimension. In
this case, they would essentially be saying that two objects
align better with two objects than with three objects. To
clarify: the S+ND alternatives, whether high-similarity or
low-similarity, both have three objects. Thus, if number is
treated as an alignable dimension, structure-mapping would
predict no difference in their similarity to the standard.
However, because both of the AD items have two objects, for
participants who aligned on the basis of number, these items
would be considered more similar to the standard than the
three-object S+ND alternatives.
Estes and Hasson assumed instead that participants aligned
only along the common spatial configuration and not on the
number of objects. They argued against the possibility that
participants treated number as an alignable dimension but did
not provide direct empirical evidence to support their claim.
(We return to this point in the discussion).
What is needed, then, is a direct test of whether number of
objects can act as an alignable dimension. To that end, we
adopted the design and stimuli of Estes and Hasson’s first
experiment, but asked participants about the information that
figured in their decisions. If people’s choices of the samenumber (AD) alternative are motivated by considering
number as a salient alignable dimension, then when people
choose the same-number alternative, they should mention
sameness of number as the reason for their choice. In

contrast, if they choose the S+ND alternative (with its
nonalignable object) as most similar to the standard, then
their comments should indicate a focus on the fact that it
matches the standard, despite the extra object.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty-seven Northwestern undergraduates
participated for either course credit or monetary
compensation.
Materials The materials comprised six picture triads, with
each triad composed of a standard figure and a pair of
alternative figures. These triads were the same as those in
Estes and Hasson’s first experiment. As in their study, we ran
all possible pairs of alternatives against each standard.
However, the triads of interest for the present discussion were
of the form shown in Figure 3. Given a standard consisting of
two objects in a configuration, the two-object alternative
always had one change in internal structure (either in an
attribute or in the spatial relation), and the three-object
alternative comprised the standard and an added object on its
side. Finally, the standard and the paired alternatives were
presented in the same triad format as in Estes and Hasson’s
first experiment. A sample item is presented in Figure 4.

Is

more similar to:

OR

?

Figure 4: Sample item, Estes and Hasson, Expt. 1
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Estes and
Hasson’s first experiment, with the addition of a response
justification at the end of every item. Triads were presented
on computer, and for each, participants were instructed to
pick the alternative most similar to the standard by clicking
on the chosen item. After each response, the question
appeared, “What factors influenced your decision?” After the
response was typed in, the participant was presented with the
next triad. Left-right presentation was counterbalanced, and
order of triad presentation was randomized.

1050

Response coding The justification responses were sorted into
three categories: (1) number, (2) nonalignable difference, and
(3) other. Responses were coded as number if they referred to
number: e.g., “2 items as opposed to 3.” Responses were
categorized as nonalignable difference if they referred to the
extra object: e.g., “the same basic elements are present, just
with the addition of an extra triangle.” The category other
was reserved for all responses that did not refer either to
number or the extra object: e.g., “the shading trumps” or
“same shapes with same shading, though in wrong positions.”
Results We first looked at responses across triads:
participants’ similarity choices showed a strong advantage for
the two-object alternative over the three-object alternative (M

= 0.76, SDtwo-item = 0.24), t(36) = 6.4, p < .0001. This closely
replicates Estes and Hasson’s main finding, which is
important, because it suggests that providing justifications did
not alter the similarity judgments.
The question is what best explains this pattern. Estes and
Hasson interpreted participants’ preference for the two- object
alternative over the three-object alternative as due to the high
salience of the nonalignable difference (the extra object).
However, examination of participants’ justifications
undermines this conclusion in two ways. First, we found no
significant difference between the likelihood of mentioning
the alignable difference (M = 0.40, SD = 0.37) and of
mentioning the number of objects (M = 0.31, SD = 0.33),
t(36)paired = .87, p = .40. If attention to the nonalignable
difference were driving the similarity choices, we would have
expected a large majority to mention the nonalignable
difference in their justifications.
Second, and more importantly, there was a strong
relationship between participants’ justifications and their
similarity preferences. Participants who gave number
justifications were more likely to choose the AD alternative
(which, like the standard, contains two objects), r(36) = .43, p
< .01. In other words, when participants mentioned number,
they treated it as an alignable dimension that mattered to
similarity, and mostly chose the same-number alternative as
most similar. In contrast, participants who mentioned the
nonalignable difference (the added object) behaved as though
it did not much matter: they tended to choose the ND
alternative as most similar to the standard despite noting that
difference, r(36) = .38, p < .05. Apparently these latter
participants were aligning on the basis of common internal
structure, while the former group (that mentioned number)
was aligning on the basis of numerosity.
Note that this relationship is in the opposite direction to
what Estes and Hasson would predict. Their claim is that
nonalignable differences were more salient than alignable
differences. However, our findings show that their pattern of
results is consistent with alignable differences mattering more
than nonalignable differences if number of objects is treated
as an alignable dimension.

If so, then alignable differences in internal structure may
outweigh differences in numerosity.
We tested this idea in Experiment 2. The design was
similar to that of Experiment 1, but the stimulus items were
composed of many geometrical shapes arranged in a rich,
well-structured configuration (see Figure 5). We predict that
number will become less salient as a potential alignable
dimension than in Experiment 1, both because the change in
number is less noticeable, and because the more systematic
relational match between the standard and the alternatives
will compete more strongly with the numerical match. Thus,
similarity-to-standard should be higher for the S+ND
alternative (which preserves internal structure but differs in
number) than for the AD alternative (which changes internal
structure but matches in number).

Method
Participants
Fifty-six
Northwestern
participated for course credit.

undergraduates

Materials There were four picture triads, each consisting of
a standard, an AD alternative that had the same number of
objects as the standard, and a Standard + ND alternative that
had one more object than the standard (see Figure 5 for a
sample set). The triads were arranged so that the two
alternatives were presented below the standard, one to the left
of the standard, the other to the right of it. The standards
consisted of simple geometrical shapes arranged regularly in
a 3 X 3 grid. The AD alternative was similar to the standard,
except that one shape within the grid was replaced by a
different shape. The Standard + ND alternative was identical
to the standard (and therefore matched the configuration of
the standard), but had an extra shape outside the grid, making
a mismatch in the number of elements. The AD alternative
matched the standard in number but mismatched its
configurational structure (since the different object replaced
an original object within the grid).
Standard

Experiment 2
So far, Experiment 1 shows that number can serve as an
alignable dimension, and can even win out over common
spatial relational structure in some cases. Now let us step
back and ask when we should expect the numerical dimension
to be more salient than other bases for alignment. Two
obvious possibilities come to mind. First, a given change in
the number of objects should matter more for figures with
few objects than for figures with many objects (by WeberFechner’s law). The second factor is the degree of structure
present. According to structure-mapping, people prefer
alignments based on common systematic relational structure.
The figures used in Experiment 1 represent a minimal level of
structure. Perhaps greater levels of matching structure would
compete more successfully against the numerical dimension.

AD alternative

Standard + ND

Figure 5: Sample stimulus set, Expt. 2
Procedure Participants were shown triads with two
alternatives labeled A and B, and were instructed to indicate
which alternative was most similar to the standard. They then
provided a justification for their response.

1051

object alternative), they were highly likely to choose that
alternative as most similar to the standard. In other words, the
nonalignable difference did not matter enough to determine
the output of the comparison process.
Finally, in Experiment 2 we found that attention to the
numerical dimension diminished sharply when the materials
had more internal objects and more systematic internal
structure. We suggest that this kind of richness is
characteristic of most real-life comparisons.

Results We computed the proportion of times each
participant chose the Standard + ND alternative as most
similar to the standard and compared these proportions to
chance (0.5). Consistent with our prediction, participants
showed a significant preference for the S+ND alternative (M
= 0.81, SD = 0.56), t(55) = 6.55, p < .0001. This finding
contrasts strongly with the pattern in Experiment 1. In that
study, 76% of the participants preferred the same-number
alternative, whereas in this study, 81% preferred the differentnumber (but same configuration) alternative. Further, across
all participant justifications, only one participant mentioned
number as influencing the similarity comparison. This pattern
of results suggests that number plays a less prominent role in
determining similarity when the stimuli have richer, more
systematic relational structure.

Numerical and spatial alignment in the Estes and
Hasson studies

Discussion

Estes and Hasson considered the possibility that participants
treated number as an alignable dimension, but argued that the
results of their Experiment 2 ruled out this possibility. (Figure
3 in this paper provides an example of one of their items.)
They granted that the AS and AD alternatives differed in
similarity (as predicted by structure-mapping), but went on to
state that “[i]f the NS and ND alternatives were also
conceived as alignable, then they should have exhibited an
effect of variation. However they didn’t; the alignable and
nonalignable alternatives exhibited qualitatively different
patterns of results” (p. 1091).
But the NS and ND alternatives have the same number of
objects (namely, three) relative to the standard (which has
two), so a lack of difference between them is exactly what
would be predicted if participants were aligning on the basis
of number. Because the numerical mismatch relative to the
standard is the same for both alternatives, number provides no
basis for preferring one alternative to the other.
The AS and AD alternatives also don’t differ in numerical
alignability with the standard (both have two objects). But
unlike the NS and ND alternatives, the AS and AD
alternatives do differ in the similarity of their structurally
aligned objects (following the logic of Markman and
Gentner’s (1996) study); and, as predicted, they differ in
similarity-to-standard. In contrast, because the NS and ND
pairs are equally alignable (or nonalignable) with the standard
both on the basis of internal spatial structure and on the basis
of numerical match, there is no reason for structure-mapping
to predict a difference in similarity.
In summary, our evidence suggests that contrary to Estes
and Hasson’s assumption, number was treated as an alignable
dimension in these triads. We have provided converging
evidence from protocols that number was often seen as
alignable by participants; and that when it was, then
participants chose the same-number alternative, just as
structure-mapping would predict.

In recent years, structure-mapping theory has been gaining
ground as a theory of similarity; and more generally, as a
theory of the comparison process. With its emphasis on
treating the process of computing similarity as one that seeks
maximal alignment of conceptual structure, structuremapping theory has met with a great deal of empirical success
(for a review, see Gentner and Markman, 1997).
Estes and Hasson (2004) challenged structure-mapping’s
predicted role of kinds of differences in similarity
comparisons. Estes and Hasson argued that nonalignable
differences can affect similarity judgment as much or more
than alignable differences, contrary to the predictions of
structure-mapping theory. They argued further that their data
provide an important counterexample to a key prediction of
structure-mapping because the stimuli they used were simple
and were designed to be good candidates for testing structuremapping’s key predictions. Indeed, the standard figures in
their studies were taken from Markman and Gentner’s (1996)
paper, so it seemed reasonable that they should qualify as a
fair stimulus choice.
In fact, Markman and Gentner used those geometrical
stimuli only as a simple way to demonstrate the distinction
between alignable and nonalignable differences, and never
used them as stimuli in an experimental context. But at the
very least, Estes and Hasson have shown that Markman and
Gentner should have chosen better figures to demonstrate
their point.
That said, however, the results of the present studies
undermine Estes and Hasson’s conclusions. First, against
their claim that number did not play a role as an alignable
dimension in their studies, we gathered direct empirical
evidence that participants did indeed consider number as a
salient alignable dimension. In Experiment 1, participants
who mentioned number were highly likely to choose the
same-number item as most similar to the standard. This is
what would be expected if these participants treated number
as an alignable dimension. Second, against their claim that
nonalignable differences are highly salient in similarity
judgments, we found that even when participants mentioned
the nonalignable difference (the extra object in the three-

When is number alignable?

1052

These findings lead to the question of exactly when number
will be treated as alignable. One answer would be that
number will matter in the comparison process when
participants notice number, and otherwise not. After all,
structure-mapping is a model of the comparison process. Its
input representations depend on people’s prior knowledge,

goals, and other factors over which the analogy process itself
need have no sway. But this is unsatisfying. We can go
further in laying out some principles as to when the numerical
dimension will be important in alignment.
According to structure-mapping, the comparison process
acts to find a maximal alignment of conceptual structure. If
the common structure is relatively impoverished, numerosity
should play a more prominent role in the similarity
comparison. When the common structure is highly
systematic, number should play a less prominent role as an
alignable dimension. In this case, alignable differences that
arise within the aligned relational structure will dominate.
This is indeed what we found in Experiment 2. When we
used figures that comprised many geometrical shapes
arranged in a richer, more systematic relational structure,
number did play a less salient role.
Another factor that may influence the relative importance of
number versus common configurational structure is the
degree of variation in the number of objects. The difference
between two and three objects looms much larger than the
difference between nine and ten objects. In Experiment 2 both
numerical variation and configurational structure acted to
diminish the importance of number as the salient alignable
dimension. A third factor is the sheer number of objects in the
figures: if the number is too large to subitize, then changes in
number might not matter even if the change itself is rather
large. We are currently conducting studies to tease apart these
three factors.
As this discussion reveals, although we disagree with Estes
and Hasson’s conclusion, their challenge has had the positive
effect of helping to illuminate the role of alignability in
similarity comparisons.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ONR grant N00014-92-J-1098
and NSF ROLE grant 21002/REC-0087516 .

References
Estes, Z. & Hasson, U. (2004). The importance of being
nonalignable: A critical test of the structural alignment
theory of similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 1082-1092.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 565-577.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural alignment
in comparison: No difference without similarity.
Psychological Science, 5, 152-158.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability from
inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 24, 235-249.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1990).
Similarity involving attributes and relations: Judgments of
similarity and difference are not inverses. Psychological
Science, 1, 64-69.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1997). The effects of
alignability on memory storage. Psychological Science, 8,
363-367.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., Markman, A. B. (1995).
Comparison and choice: Relations between similarity
processes and decision processes. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 2, 1-19.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207–238.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the exemplar
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Osherson, D., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lòpez, A., & Shafir,
E. (1990). Category based induction. Psychological
Review, 97, 185–200.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Lewis, C. (1978). Production system models of practice
effects. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Shrager, J., & Langley, P. (Eds.) (1990). Computational
models of scientific discovery and theory formation. San
Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

1053

