UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Learning Protocols: Writing-To-Learn in Networked and Face-To-Face
Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qd4q1j3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Rhemtulla, Mijke
Xu, Fei

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Collaborative Learning Protocols:
Writing-To-Learn in Networked and Face-To-Face Environments
Rolf Schwonke (rolf.schwonke@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
Engelbergerstr. 41, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
In this study, we explored the potential of enriching a wellworking individual writing-to-learn approach in a face-to-face
setting and a net-mediated setting. Thirty-six undergraduate
psychology students worked in dyads on a common learning
protocol in each of these settings. Effects on the collaboration
process and on strategy use in the learning protocols were assessed. Participants evaluated the ftf-setting to be both more
effective and efficient to reach their individual learning goals.
Cognitive and metacognitive learning strategies were used
more often, and more effectively, in the ftf-setting, what was
attributed to a richer mutual strategic support. The results
suggest instructional procedures in order to improve communication and interaction as well as to encourage learners to a
more productive use of existing tools and techniques.
Keywords: collaborative learning; CSCL; collaborative writing; writing-to-learn.

Introduction
Writing is a difficult and complex task. It is usually performed alone which adds to that difficulty. However, writing holds the strong potential to change the way we think
and what we know. This is called the epistemic effect of
writing (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987). A learning protocol
as a written explication of one’s own learning processes and
outcomes serves this purpose (Nückles, Schwonke, Berthold, & Renkl, 2004). The main goal of writing learning
protocols instead of, for example, writing a summary, is to
induce a thorough processing of and reflection on the material to be learnt and thereby foster a deeper understanding. It
is quite possible to include a summary of a learning episode’s contents in a learning protocol. Yet, in that case such
a summary should merely be used as a basis for further
elaboration and reflection. Empirical or theoretical findings
described in the summary may, for example, undergo a
critical analysis, and highly abstract concepts should be illustrated by generating examples of use or by making references to personal experiences.
Contemporary theoretical accounts of the mechanisms by
which individual thinking and learning might be influenced
by group contexts stress the internalization of social processes (Vygotsky, 1978), socio-cognitive conflict (Piaget,
1985), cooperative goal structures (Slavin, 1992), and learning by observation (Bandura, 1986). In connection with
writing, Hayes (1996) points out that writing is above all a
social activity. Texts themselves are social artifacts and

writing is carried out in social settings. It is argued that collaborative writing is valuable for writing-to learn because it
allows different individuals to bring in their ideas and their
expertise, and because others’ points of views have to be
taken into account (Speck, Johnson, Dice, & Heaton, 1999).
The social processes mediated and stimulated through writing (i.e., negotiation of meaning, discussion of conflicting
points of view) should facilitate the development of a shared
understanding of meanings and conventions and should help
to overcome idiosyncratic views or beliefs. A learning protocol supports these kinds of collaborative processes by
functioning as a shared external memory (Donald, 1991), or
a common object to think with (Papert, 1980).
On the other hand, collaborative knowledge-building
processes themselves can be difficult and, therefore even
add to the complexity of a writing-to-learn task. It is argued
that net-mediated environments have the potential to support
collaborative knowledge-building processes effectively.
Therefore, they may also be valuable to support collaborative writing-to-learn tasks. As a result of a growing interest
of collaborative writing, a number of computer systems are
available that support asynchronous as well as synchronous
collaborative writing (e.g., Neuwirth, Kaufer, Chandhok, &
Morris, 2001; Pargman, 2003). Especially synchronous exchanges hold the potential to facilitate the internalization of
collaboratively developed strategies, negotiated meanings,
and shared understandings. Occurring socio-cognitive conflicts might be resolved faster, and collaborators may profit
from receiving advice, scaffolds, and coaching by their
counterparts as well as from giving explanations (e.g.,
Webb, 1989). In addition, collaborators may learn by observing and imitating their peers’ problem solving activities.
Yet, both asynchronous and synchronous net-mediated
collaboration have to cope with known restrictions of computer-mediated communication (CMC) that might impede
learning. These restrictions refer to the lack of extralinguistic cues such as nonverbal signals for mood, agreement, or disagreement, and to difficulties in the coordination
of turn-taking. These costs of CMC hinder grounding, that
is, the process of developing a shared understanding of the
task at hand (Clark & Brennan, 1991), and therefore they
may impair the benefits of net-mediated environments.
In this study, a tried-and-tested individual writing-to-learn
approach (called the learning-protocol method) is analyzed
in two collaborative settings, a face-to-face setting and a
net-mediated setting. The scenarios differed with regard to

1985

communication, the writing medium, and the work mode
while producing and editing the common document:
Communication: In the net-mediated setting, communication was restricted with regard to the number of communication channels (text vs. speech and gestures). On the other
hand, the chat-protocols provided the opportunity to review
previous discussion (external memory, discussion thread).
Writing medium: Documents written with pencil and paper provide a better overall view than documents presented
on a computer screen. Furthermore, creating references between different parts of the text, for example, by making use
of graphical representations (e.g., lines or arrows) is easier.
On the other hand, text processors are more convenient and
efficient to edit and rearrange sentences or paragraphs.
Work mode: The task of producing a common text synchronously using pencil and paper almost inevitably induces
a division of responsibility. It can be expected that collaborators will spontaneously distribute the roles of producer
(i.e., the one who writes the text) and consultant or critic.
This role division can be expected to be less rigid in a netmediated setting (using a shared editor). As a result, text
production can be expected to be distributed more evenly
between the collaborators. This way, both collaborators
would have an opportunity to profit from observing their
partner’s problem solving activities.

Method
Participants
Thirty-six undergraduate psychology students (25 female
and 11 male, mean age: M = 22 years) who were taking a
course in motivational psychology took part in this study.
Among other course requirements, the students had to prepare two collaborative learning protocols. Alternatively,
they were free to hand in a total of four individual learning
protocols (no one actually did that); hence, participation in
the study was voluntary.

Design
In two sessions of the seminar (the ninth session, t1, and
eleventh session, t2, of a total of twelve sessions), the students were asked to write a learning protocol together with a
randomly assigned collaborator in both a net-mediated
learning setting (net-setting at t1), and a face-to-face learning setting (ftf-setting at t2). Hence, each participant took
part twice.

Procedure
At each session, (t1 and t2), the students attended a lesson
on a topic of motivational psychology (45 minutes). Immediately after the lesson, they were asked to fill in a questionnaire on demographic variables, beliefs, and attitudes towards individual and collaborative learning. After that, each
student was randomly assigned to another student, and participants were introduced to the writing task. In the ftfsetting, the writing instruction consisted of the request to
write a learning protocol in close collaboration with the
partner. In the net-setting, the same writing assignment was
given complemented by a short introduction to the net-based
learning environment. Then, the dyads worked on a common learning protocol on the topic of attribution (at t1), or
volition (at t2) respectively (about 30 minutes). At t1, they
collaborated in the net-based working environment; at t2,
they collaborated face-to-face. After finishing the learning
protocol, all participants filled in a second questionnaire on
different aspects of the collaboration.

Aims and Research Questions
Although some work has been done on computer-supported
collaborative writing (Barile & Durso, 2002; Hodges, 2002;
Noel & Robert, 2003), little is known about the potential
benefits and drawbacks of collaborative writing as a means
to learn and on the potential impacts of the writing medium.
Therefore, the goal of this explorative study is to compare
different collaborative writing-to-learn settings and thereby
derive testable hypotheses as well as to formulate recommendations on how to enhance writing-to-learn approaches.
Specifically, this study addressed the following questions:
1. How do changes in the task environment (face-to-face
vs. net-mediated collaboration) affect process and outcomes of a writing-to-learn task?
2. What differences can be expected with respect to important characteristics of the writing process (e.g.,
planning, text production, revising), the focus of collaboration (e.g., content or coordination), and the use
of learning strategies (e.g., organizational, repetitive,
elaborative, and metacognitive strategies)?
3. Which demands do the different settings pose on the
collaborators (e.g., coordination demands)? Which opportunities do the different settings offer (e.g., to receive as well as to offer support)?
4. How do potential differences between the settings affect the perceived value of collaborative learning protocols?
5. How do the above-mentioned process variables relate
to outcome variables (e.g., how does support received
from a collaborator relate to the perceived attainment
of individual learning goals)?

Materials
A variety of possibly relevant variables referring to individual and collaborative learning, to experiences with computers and relevant software, and to subjective judgments of
the collaboration as well as critical aspects of the learning
settings were assessed with paper-and-pencil questionnaires
(e.g., coordination demands; focus on topic, structure, and
form; relative amounts of planning, text production, and
revision; amount of received and given support). Ratings
were made on six-point rating scales. In addition, a number
of control variables were assessed at each point of measurement (e.g., experience with the collaborator, and experiences with and attitudes towards collaboration, collaborative
writing, and learning protocols). As none of these measures
changed significantly from t1 to t2, we took this as an indication of the comparability of the two settings.

1986

Net-based Learning Environment (Net-Setting)
Under practical considerations, it was reasonable to use a
usability-tested, easy-to-use, and readily available groupware tool that supports synchronous collaboration and the
sharing of documents. A computer program that meets these
requirements is Microsoft NetMeeting™. It provides a variety of net-conferencing tools in an integrated environment.
For present purposes, the text chat and file sharing capabilities of the program were of special interest.
In the net-setting, two participants shared a Microsoft
WordPad™ document, employing the file sharing facility of
Microsoft NetMeeting. For communication purposes, they
were asked to use the text chat tool of NetMeeting. The collaborative setting was implemented on personal computers
with flat-screens that were connected via a local area network in a computer pool.

thereby adds structure to the mental model of the learner.
Each segment was assigned to exactly one category.
In order to control for effects of the different lessons (t1
and t2) that the participants attended to, they were asked to
rate the quality of the lessons on several aspects (i.e., structure, clarity, activity of peers, quality of discussions, quality
of the presentation, quality of handouts). These indicators
were aggregated to an overall quality score of the lesson.
Comparing these overall scores, no significant differences
were found between the two settings, F < 1. Thus, both settings were assumed to have offered similar opportunities for
learning.

Results
The results are presented in three subsections. First, we report effects of the collaborative setting on learning strategy
use in the protocols. Second, impacts of the collaborative
settings on the process of collaboration are reported. Finally,
findings concerning the relations of process variables and
measures of the effectiveness of collaborative learning protocols are presented. Due to the explorative character of the
study and the relatively small sample size for all statistical
tests reported, an alpha level of .10 was used (to prevent
from too many beta errors).

Face-to-Face Learning Environment (Ftf-Setting)
In the ftf-setting, dyads of students worked on a common
learning protocol using pencil and paper. The collaboration
took place in a classroom. The learning protocols were written on provided sheets of ruled paper. In contrast to the netsetting, here, the dyads communicated verbally.

Coding and Scoring
Dependent measures were the quality of the learning protocols and subjective judgments concerning different aspects
of the collaboration. In order to determine the quality of the
learning protocols, the learning protocols (N = 30) were
segmented and coded for cognitive and metacognitive learning activities (Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). Table 1 gives an
overview of the categories used and the numbers of assigned
segments.
Table 1: Categories of learning strategies and absolute
frequencies of referring segments in the learning protocols
Learning strategy
Organization
Repetition
Elaboration
Metacognition
Evaluation

n
215
183
107
65
54

As the writing of a learning protocol is to stimulate the
application of cognitive and metacognitive learning activities, traces of these activities should be discernable in the
protocols. In order to identify and organize these traces, the
frequencies of statements representing a certain cognitive or
metacognitive activity were calculated. The units of analysis
were statements that could be understood on their own,
whole sentences and clauses. A segment was assigned to a
certain category depending on the primary cognitive function of that segment. For example, the statement “In Kelley’s covariation principle there are three distinct classes of
information…” was coded as an instance of organization,
because it makes explicit a part-whole relationship and

Strategy Use in the Learning Protocols
The length of the learning protocols (number of words) written in the net-setting (M = 241.25, SD = 94.23) and the ftfsetting (M = 221.71, SD = 55.20) did not show any significant differences, F < 1, indicating that any differences that
were found between protocols for different settings could
not be attributed to "lengths effects."
In order to assess potential differences in the use of learning strategies, the frequency of each strategy category per
learning protocol was calculated (e.g., number of elaborative statements per learning protocol). We found that in both
collaborative settings organizational (M = 7.17, SD = 3.37),
repetitive (M = 6.10, SD = 6.20), and elaborative statements
(M = 5.03, SD = 4.62) were used most often, whereas metacognitive (M = 2.17, SD = 1.95), and evaluative statements
(M = 1.80, SD = 2.12) were rarely used.
Comparisons of the two collaborative settings (Table 2,
upper part) revealed differences in the frequency of cognitive strategies (MANOVA with repetition, elaboration, and
organization as dependent measures), F(3,25) = 2.53, p =
.08, η2 = 0.23, as well as in the frequencies of metacognitive
and evaluative strategies (MANOVA with metacognition
and evaluation as dependent measures), F(2,26) = 7.29, p =
.003, η2 = 0.36. More specifically, repetitive statements
were used more often in the net-setting than in the ftfsetting, F(1,27) = 3.03, p = .09, η2 = 0.10. Elaborative
F(1,27) = 3.38, p = .08, η2 = 0.11, metacognitive, F(1,27) =
3.80, p = .06, η2 = 0.12, and especially evaluative statements, F(1,27) = 14.73, p = .001, η2 = 0.35, on the other
hand, were used more often in the ftf-setting. No differences
were found for organizational statements, F < 1.

1987

Moreover, it has often been found that metacognitive activities are of little value for learning if not followed by any
kind of cognitive regulation (e.g., elaboration) (e.g., Berthold, Nückles, & Renkl, 2004). The same assumption
seems reasonable for evaluative statements (i.e., criticising
the learning content or the learning episode) that are not
accompanied by any kind of cognitive regulation. Hence,
we were interested in whether the different collaborative
settings may induce different patterns of comprehension
monitoring (and evaluation) and resulting regulative activities. As a dependent measure, the frequencies of organizational, elaborative, and repetitive statements following a
metacognitive or an evaluative statement were counted for
each collaborative setting. With respect to evaluative statements, a MANOVA revealed clear differences between the
two collaborative settings in the use of cognitive strategies
as regulation, F(3,26) = 6.55, p = .002, η2 = 0.43. Regulation by organization was found much more often in the ftfsetting than in the net-setting, F(1,28) = 8.22, p = .008, η2 =
0.23 (see Table 2, lower part). The same was found for
regulation by elaboration, F(1,28) = 3.98, p = .056, η2 =
0.12. No differences were found for regulation by repetition, F < 1.

Net
Strategy
M
SD
Evaluation***
0.75
1.06
Metacognition*
1.63
1.75
1
Repetition*
8.00
7.31
Organization
6.75
3.70
Elaboration*
3.75
3.57
Repetition
0.34
0.79
2
Organization**
0.16
0.51
Elaboration*
0.21
0.54
Note. *p < .10, **p < .01, ***p < .001.

Ftf
M
3.00
2.79
3.93
7.64
6.50
0.23
0.67
0.81

Univariate ANOVAs with reported amount of planning, text
production, and revision respectively serving as dependent
measures revealed significant differences between the two
collaborative settings with respect to planning and text production. While collaborating in the net-setting, the participants reported having spent more time (in percent) on planning (M = 33.04, SD = 24.85) than in the ftf-setting (M =
20.00, SD = 10.11), F(1,22) = 5.42, p < .03, η2 = .20. Consequently, while collaborating in the net-setting participants
reported having spent less time on text production (M =
61.09, SD = 24.21) than in the ftf setting (M = 73.48, SD =
13.27), F(1,22) = 5.27, p < .03, η2 = .19. The amount of reported revision was relatively low in both the ftf-setting (M =
7. 39, SD = 9.64) and the net-setting (M = 6.30, SD = 7.11),
and did not differ significantly, F < 1.
In both settings, the focus of the collaborative work as
judged by the participants on six-point rating scales was definitely on the learning contents (M = 4.45, SD = 0.75) and to a
significantly less degree on structure (M = 3.35, SD = 0.85)
and form (M = 3.27, SD = 0.77), F(2,27) = 21.94, p < .001, η2
= .62.

Effectiveness of Collaborative Learning Protocols

Table 2: Cognitive and metacognitive statements per
learning protocol (1), and cognitive statements per learning
protocol following an evaluative statement (2).
Use

Collaboration Process

SD
2.42
2.04
3.81
3.03
5.35
0.63
0.47
1.05

With respect to metacognition, a similar pattern was obtained, but differences were less pronounced. Regulation by
organization was used more often in the ftf-setting (M = 0.43,
SD = 0.27) than in the net-setting (M = 0.13, SD = 0.29),
F(1,28) = 3.55, p = .07, η2 = 0.11. Differences in the use of
repetitive, F(1,28) = 1.60, p = .22, η2 = 0.05, and elaborative
strategies, F < 1, did not reach the level of significance.
To sum up, in the net-setting the prevalent strategy was
repetition whereas strategies more valuable for deeper learning and comprehension (e.g., elaboration and metacognition)
were clearly more represented in the ftf-setting. Moreover,
although there were no significant differences in the use of
organizational activities, these activities were used more often
as regulation (i.e., more strategically) in the ftf-setting.

In order to assess the acceptance of the collaborative settings,
the participants rated the overall benefits as well as the costs
of the collaborative task. ANOVAs showed that participants
rated the ftf-setting (M = 3.89, SD = 0.71) to be more beneficial than the net-setting (M = 3.28, SD = 1.02), F(1,28) =
3.54, p = .07, η2 = .11. In addition, the participants rated the
ftf-setting (M = 3.43, SD = 0.68) to be less demanding than
the net-setting (M = 3.94, SD = 0.73), F(1,28) = 3.91, p = .06,
η2 = .12. From these measures, the overall efficiency of collaborative learning protocols was calculated by subtracting
the (z-transformed) costs scores from benefit scores. An
ANOVA showed that the participants found face-to-face collaboration to be significantly more efficient (M = 0.72, SD =
1.38) than net-mediated collaboration (M = -0.63, SD = 1.69),
F(1,28) = 5.64, p = .03, η2 = .17.
Comparisons of the perceived attainment of individual
learning goals showed that participants felt they reached their
goals to a higher degree in the ftf-setting (M = 3.96, SD =
0.63) compared to the net-mediated setting (M = 3.44, SD =
0.89), F(1,28) = 3.38, p = .08, η2 = .11. The attainment of
individual learning goals was correlated with the reported
overall effectiveness of the settings (ftf-setting: r = .59, p =
.03, n = 14; net-setting: r = .44, p = .09, n = 16). Interestingly,
differences in the reported costs of coordination between the
net-setting and the ftf-setting did not reach statistical significance, F < 1, indicating that perceived coordination demands,
although descriptively higher in the net-setting (M = 3.94, SD
= 1.11) than in the ftf-setting (M = 3.61, SD = 0.84), could not
account for the differences found in the effectiveness and/or
efficiency of the two settings.
A final comparison of the settings referred to the perceived
value of collaboration. Participants rated the extent of organ-

1988

izational, elaborative, and metacognitive support that they felt
they received from their collaborator. In addition, they rated
the extent of support that they felt they gave in these respects
(note that support was assessed with a total of six different
items). A descriptive comparison of these ratings showed that
the ftf-setting reached higher ratings for every aspect of this
cost-benefit balance. Yet, while most of these differences
failed to reach statistical significance (as analyzed by separate
MANOVAs for given and received support), when collaborating in the ftf-setting, participants felt they gave significantly more organizational support to their collaborators (M =
3.62, SD = 0.50) than in the net-setting (M = 3.00, SD = 0.95),
F(1,27) = 4.62, p = .05, η2 = .15. Consistent with that finding,
the participants also reported having received more organizational support in the ftf-setting (M = 3.42, SD = 0.73) than in
the net-setting (M = 2.87, SD = 0.81), F(1,26) = 3.58, p = .07,
η2 = .12.
Correlation analyses revealed that in both settings the perceived overall effectiveness was strongly associated with
support received from the collaborator (ftf-setting: r = .54, p =
.007, n = 24; net-setting: r = .59, p = .002, n = 24). In the ftfsetting, the perceived effectiveness was highly positively correlated with support given to a collaborator (r = .51, p = .01, n
= 24); this was not the case in the net-setting (r = .27, p = .20,
n = 24). With respect to perceived overall costs of collaboration, it was found that in both settings these costs were negatively associated with support received from the collaborator.
Again, this relationship was more pronounced in the ftfsetting (r = -.53, p = .007, n = 24) than in the net-setting (r = .35, p = .10, n = 24).

Discussion
In this study, the potentials of enriching a well-working individual writing-to-learn approach by implementing it in a collaborative face-to-face setting and a net-based setting were
explored. Due to the naturalistic context (a university course),
some restrictions in terms of internal validity have to be acknowledged. As the factor collaborative setting was confounded with time and topic, it cannot be ruled out that participants at t2 (ftf-setting) used more effective strategies because of being more practiced with learning protocols or being more familiar with the topic. According to the participants’ ratings, neither the learning episodes, nor the topics
differed in important characteristics. However, it still remains
the possibility that the judgments itself are distorted by factors
that changed between t1 and t2.
External validity seems to be high, as the participants
worked in an authentic context (the course) with a clearly
stated goal (working on a common learning protocol as a
group task in a course session). Moreover, the participants
stated that their interest in the contents of the seminar. Also
their interest in the contents of each of the two learning episodes was very high, indicating a sufficient commitment and
seriousness.
Results indicate that the effectiveness of the collaborative
scenarios to support (individual) learning goals was related to
their perceived efficiency. The lower efficiency of the net-

setting might be explained by a higher extraneous work load
(Sweller & Chandler, 1994) that this setting posed on the participants. In both settings, participants were confronted with a
new mode of creating learning protocols (i.e., collaboratively). Yet, in the net-setting, they additionally had to cope
with a new mode of collaborating (shared editing), and were
exposed to an unknown computer environment. The cognitive
load assumption is supported by the fact that although virtually all participants reported being familiar with text processors and chat tools, virtually no participant had any previous
experience with shared editing. Therefore, it can be assumed
that the participants had no working strategies to use this new
scenario as an effective instrument to pursue their learning
goals. The lack of effective strategies could explain why participants in the net-setting spent significantly more time on
planning and this lack could have lead to the use of simpler
strategies (repetition) found in the learning protocols. However, the cognitive load hypothesis is weakened by the fact
that reported costs of coordination should have been significantly higher in the net-setting than in the ftf-setting. This was
not the case. In order to test the cognitive load assumption, it
would be worth examining whether these detrimental effects
would disappear with experience (i.e., practice), so that the
postulated positive collaboration effects (e.g., learning by
observing, scaffolding, or coaching) could emerge.
Differences in efficiency could also (and perhaps better) be
explained by differences in the cost-benefit balance. As expected, in both conditions, the higher the support received
from the collaborator, the higher the reported overall effectiveness was and the lower the reported overall costs were.
Yet, against all odds, a strong positive relationship between
the overall effectiveness of the ftf-setting and the support
given to a collaborator was found. In collaborative settings an
opportunity to help others might be of particular importance,
because (a) it is conform to what people believe about how
others (e.g., teachers) expect them to behave in a collaborative task, and/or (b) it might give them a feeling of selfefficacy and competence (Ryan & Deci, 2002).
With caution, it can be hypothesized that the differences in
the use of strategies in the learning protocols (e.g., regulation
by organization) might be attributed to these differences in
the cost-benefit relationship. In the ftf-setting, it was apparently much easier to support the collaborator, as indicated by
the higher ratings for given organisational support. This ease
of giving support may be attributed to better opportunities for
communicating and interacting. Therefore, it can be assumed
that an improvement of the interaction facilities in a netmediated collaborative writing environment would yield a
positive influence on the readiness to giving support. This, on
the other hand, should foster the use of more valuable strategies, especially a more strategic use of cognitive activities as
a means of regulation. Besides the provision of more or richer
communication channels, learners should also be encouraged
to use existing communication facilities more productively
and systematically (e.g., to revisit previous exchanges in a
chat-protocol). In the first place this would require the acquisition of readily usable conditional knowledge (i.e., knowl-

1989

edge about when to use a certain tool or technique). Measures
such as informed training (e.g., O’Sullivan & Pressley, 1984),
scripted collaboration (e.g., Kollar, Fischer, & Hesse, 2003),
and adaptive instructional support (e.g., Schwonke, Hauser,
Nückles, & Renkl, in press) are promising ways to provide
this knowledge and thereby help learners gain the most from
the opportunities that net-based learning scenarios have to
offer.

Acknowledgments
The support by Kristen Drake for proof-reading this manuscript is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Barile, A. L., & Durso, F. T. (2002). Computer mediated
communication in collaborative writing. Computers in
Human Behavior, 18, 173-190.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of
written composition. Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Berthold, K., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (2004). Writing
learning protocols: Prompts foster cognitive as well as
metacognitive activities and learning outcomes. In J. Elen,
P. Gerjets, R. Joiner & P. Kirschner (Eds.), Instructional
design for effective and enjoyable computer-supported
learning (pp. 193-200). Tübingen: Knowledge Media Research Center.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition
(pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the Modern Mind: Three
Stages in the Evolution of Culture and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hayes, J. R. (1996). A new framework for understanding
cognition and affect in writing. In C. M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), The science of writing: Theories, methods,
individual differences, and applications (pp. 1-27). Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Hodges, G. C. (2002). Learning through collaborative writing. Reading literacy & language, 36, 4-10.
Kollar, I., Fischer, F., & Hesse, F. W. (2003). Cooperation
scripts for computer-supported collaborative learning. In
B. Wasson, R. Baggetun, U. Hoppe & S. Ludvigsen
(Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computer Support for Collaborative Learning - CSCL,
2003, COMMUNITY EVENTS - Communication and Interaction (pp. 59-61). Bergen, NO: InterMedia.

Neuwirth, C. M., Kaufer, D. S., Chandhok, R., & Morris, J.
H. (2001). Computer support for distributed collaborative
writing: A coordination science perspective. In G. M. Olson & T. W. Malone (Eds.), Coordination theory and collaboration technology (pp. 535-557). Mahwah, NJ, US:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Noel, S., & Robert, J.-M. (2003). How the Web is used to
support collaborative writing, Behaviour & Information
Technology (Vol. 22, pp. 245). United Kingdom: Taylor
& Francis Ltd.
Nückles, M., Schwonke, R., Berthold, K., & Renkl, A.
(2004). The use of public learning diaries in blended
learning. Journal of Educational Media, 29, 49-66.
O’Sullivan, T. J., & Pressley, M. (1984). Completeness of
instruction and strategy transfer. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 38, 275-288.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, Computers and
Powerful Ideas. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pargman, T. C. (2003). Collaborating with writing tools. An
instrumental perspective on the problem of computersupported collaborative activities. Interacting with Computers, 15, 737-757.
Piaget, J. (1985). The equilibrium of cognitive structures.
Cambridge MA: HarvardUniversity Press.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2002). An overview of selfdetermination theory. In E. L. Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.),
Handbook of self-determination research (pp. 3-33).
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Schwonke, R., Hauser, S., Nückles, M., & Renkl, A. (in
press). Enhancing computer-supported writing of learning
protocols by adaptive prompts. Computers in Human Behavior.
Slavin, R. E. (1992). When and why does cooperative learning increase achievement? In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz & N.
Miller (Eds.), Interacting in cooperative groups. The
theoretical anatomy of group learning (pp. 145-173).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Speck, B. W., Johnson, T. R., Dice, C. P., & Heaton, L. B.
(1999). Collaborative Writing: An annotated bibliography. New York: Greenwood.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is
difficult to learn. Cognition & Instruction, 12, 185.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small
groups. International Journal of Educational Research,
13, 21-39.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). The teaching of
learning strategies. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 315-327). New York: Macmillan.

1990

