UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Color Language and Color Cognition: Brown and Lenneberg Revisited

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9v0080b4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Agrillo, Chrisitan
Roberson, Debi

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Color Language and Color Cognition: Brown and Lenneberg Revisited
Debi Roberson (robedd@essex.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Essex
Wivenhoe Park, Colcheser, UK, CO4 3SQ

Christian Agrillo (agrillo@upd.it)
Department of General Psychology, Via Venezia 8,
Padova, Italy, 35131

Introduction
The relation between language and non-linguistic behavior
has a long history of empirical investigation and continues
to engender lively debate (see Steels & Belpaeme, in press).
In a seminal investigation of this relationship in the color
domain, Brown and Lenneberg (1954) reported a positive
correlation between a range of measures of codability for
colors (speed of naming, consensus, communication
accuracy) and the accuracy with which those colors were
recognized A number of subsequent cross-cultural studies
also found evidence of a relationship between codability and
non-linguistic behavior, (e.g. recognition memory. Lantz &
Stefflre, 1964).
These findings implied a tight link between language and
thought, but Brown and Lenneberg (1954) also found
positive correlations, independent of codability, between
recognition accuracy and the discriminability of targets
within a test array. Lucy (1992, p. 165) suggested that these
factors interact, because codability is a property of a
stimulus in isolation, while discriminability (how easy it is
to distinguish a particular stimulus) is a property of a color
stimulus “in the context of a particular array” (italics in
original).
Rosch (Heider, 1972) suggested that, rather than either
discriminability or codability determining categorization,
the best (focal) examples of the putative Universal basic
color categories were simply more salient in nature and thus
likely to become the foci of evolving categories in any
language. Recent investigations suggest that the relationship
is more subtle and complex than previously proposed
(Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003). Guest and Van Laar
(2002) suggested that identification of colors is enhanced
when the exemplars are highly codable, but that this is
attenuated by context. Where all items are red the term ‘red’
is less useful than an idiosyncratic description.

participants “to tailor their descriptions to the particular
array” Lucy (1992, p. 172). Thus, while naming in isolation
may favor focal items, communication accuracy allows for
idiosyncratic descriptions that may be equally effective for
identifying non-focal items in any given context.
The present experiments return to these issues and compare
the relationship between communication accuracy and
recognition for both ordered and randomized arrays of
highly colorful stimuli. If, “coding by basic names was in
some sense optimal” (Guest & Van Laar, 2002, p.447), then
the focal items should always be better communicated than
traditionally ‘hard to name’ non-focal stimuli. If this
advantage arises from some inherent salience of those focal
points (Heider, 1972) then these items should also be better
recognized, regardless of context. If, however, the
advantage is tied to codability then it may be lessened when
items must be located in a random array, where
discriminability is equated and all items from the same
category are not placed together for comparison.
We further investigated whether communicative behavior
would be context sensitive and affected by knowledge of the
array from which another individual would make their
selection. We thus examined both communication accuracy
and recognition memory, using an ordered and a
randomized test array, to investigate whether focal colors
are easier to communicate accurately and to remember than
other colors, regardless of context.

Communication Accuracy

An early measure of codability that took context into
account was communication accuracy: the efficacy with
which a description, generated by one individual, allows
another to identify a particular color (Brown &
Lenneberg,1954; Lantz & Stefflre, 1964) , a task that allows

Experiment 1 extended Lantz and Stefflre’s
(1964)
experiment, exploring ease of communication for the
identity of colors. In addition to a test array with stimuli laid
out in Munsell order (hue horizontally, lightness vertically),
a second, randomly ordered, display of the same stimuli was
used. 30 pairs of native English speakers between the ages
of 16 and 48 (mean age = 26.5) with normal color vision
(City Colour Vision Test, Fletcher, 1998) sat on opposite
sides of a table with a portable screen hiding the other
person from view. Illumination was by D65 light source.
After a briefing session the nominated ‘Encoder’ described
each of 8 focal and 8 non-focal color stimuli, one at a time,
for the ‘Decoder’, who then selected an appropriate match
from either an ordered or a random array of 160 Munsell
color chips. The screen prevented the Encoder from

1868

indicating a spatial location for the target within the array or
from seeing the Decoder’s choices (because they might
modify their descriptions based on the Decoder’s previous
selections). Descriptions, latency to begin a description and
latency to choose a target were measured using voice
recognition software. Targets were shown in random order.
30 pairs of participants used the Ordered Array and 30 pairs
used the Random Array.

target, there might have been a bias towards guessing the
focal stimuli as ‘best examples’ of the basic terms. An
examination of guessing rates revealed that these were rare
but focal targets were selected in error more often (.063)
than non-focal targets (.052).
Table 2: Mean correct selections of Focal and Non-focal
items, mean RT to select target by Decoders in
Experiment 1.

Results

Target type

Communication..Table 1 shows mean latencies to begin
descriptions and the mean number of words used for each
type of array and target. Both were analyzed in 2 (Array
type: ordered vs. random) x 2 (Target type: focal vs. nonfocal) ANOVAs, with repeated measures over the second
factor. In both analyses the only significant effects were for
target type [latency: F (1, 28) = 27.91, MSE = .14, p < .001;
words used: F (1, 28) = 18.97, MSE = 29.61, p < .01]
Encoders were faster to begin describing focal stimuli in
both types of array and used fewer words to describe focal
targets for both arrays.

Ordered focal
Ordered non-focal
Random focal
Random non-focal

Latency
2720
3075
2839
3534

Mean Latency
(ms)

3.08
1.47
2.87
1.47

1804
2592
2050
2803

Discussion
The link between communication accuracy and focality was
found in every measure used. Encoders began descriptions
earlier and used fewer words to describe focal than nonfocal targets, in both arrays, so the link is not context
dependent. Basic terms are also used more often to describe
all types of target, regardless of the array. This finding is of
particular importance where participants were not
constrained either to length or type of description, or time
allowed.

Table 1: Mean latency (ms) to begin descriptions and
number of words used
Target type

Ordered focal
Ordered non-focal
Random focal
Random non-focal

Mean
correct

Total words
17.32
22.24
19.54
24.78

Identification. Table 2 shows mean accuracy of target
identification by decoders, and mean latency to select
targets. These were also examined in a series of 2 (Array
type: ordered vs. random) by 2 (Target type: focal vs. nonfocal) ANOVAs, with repeated measures over the second
factor. Again, the only significant effect was of target type
[identification accuracy: F (1, 28) = 18.19, MSE = .07, p <
.01; mean RT to select a target: F (1, 28) = 30.86, MSE =
28.82, p < .01]. In both types of array, Decoders accurately
identified significantly more focal than non-focal targets.
Decoders were also faster to select focal targets in both type
of array
Following Roberson et al. (2000) two further measures were
considered, namely, the compound distance (along the three
CIE L*a*b* coordinates) between each target and all of the
chips that had been selected in response to its description
and the number of times that another target stimulus was
chosen instead of a target stimulus. For the error distance a
2 (Array type: ordered vs. random) x 2 (Target type: focal
vs. non-focal) ANOVA, with repeated measures over the
second factor, revealed that the error distance between
selected stimuli and focal targets was less than that from
non-focal targets [F (1, 28) = 21.69, MSE = .02, p <.01].
There was no significant effect of array type and no
interaction. As the Decoders were ‘guessing’ the designated

Effectiveness of communication also showed a strong link
with focality. Focal stimuli were selected more accurately
and faster than non-focal stimuli in both types of array. This
cannot be accounted for by the position of focal stimuli
within the ordered array, or the number of close perceptual
competitors for each target, because performance for focal
targets was still superior in the random array. Overall there
was little indication that Encoders gave different
descriptions when Decoders had to select from a random
array. Since Encoders generally found the task difficult,
they may have been unable to further elaborate their
descriptions There was a strong tendency to use basic terms,
in combination with modifiers and /or secondary terms, to
describe all the stimuli, although these terms were seldom
used alone. Given this preponderance of basic terms, the
superior efficacy of communications for the focal stimuli
(which are the best examples of basic categories) may be
unsurprising. Given the consensus and consistency with
which different individuals use these terms, they may
indeed be optimal for communication (Guest and Van Laar,
2002) but the results of Experiment 1 cannot distinguish
whether the focal items have inherent perceptual
distinctiveness (because they are more salient in the natural
environment) or merely more easily codable and
communicable within a culturally relative framework.
Experiment 2 returned to the question raised by Brown and

1869

Lenneberg (1954) of the extent to which efficient linguistic
description is linked to accurate recognition memory.

Recognition Memory
Brown and Lenneberg (1954) proposed that recognition
memory is tightly linked to codability, because encoding a
stimulus for memory equates to describing it to oneself
across time. Although they acknowledged that perceptual
distinctiveness also affected recognition memory, they
argued that the importance of codability, relative to the
perceptual distinctiveness of a stimulus, would increase with
increased task demands. In their original experiment, the
test array used was large (and the interval between
presentation of target and test long (30 seconds) so effects
of codability relative to perceptual distinctiveness should
have been maximized.

(matched on CIE L*a*b* coordinates). Co-ordinates were
measured using a Minolta CR-100 Chroma Meter. Two
versions of the same 16-color test array (one Ordered and
one Random) were used for each target color. Test array
patches were arranged in a 4 x 4 grid with a distance of 23
pixels horizontally and 26 pixels vertically between stimuli.
In the Ordered Array patches were arranged in their Munsell
order: hue horizontally, values (lightness) vertically. In the
Random Array the same colors were laid out in a random
pattern. All test arrays were matched for overall perceptual
variation (∆E*ab). Each stimulus appeared once as a target
for the ordered array and once as a target for the random
array. Order of presentation of the 32 trials was pseudorandomized so that the same target did not appear on two
consecutive trials.

Results
Figure 1 shows the mean number of correctly recognized
stimuli for each array type. Mean response times are shown
in table 3. Accuracy, RT and error distance for erroneous
choices were examined in three separate two (Array:
ordered vs. random) by two (Target: focal vs. non-focal)
within-subjects ANOVAs. For recognition accuracy, there
was no significant effect of Array [F (1,23) = 1.05, p > .1]
and no significant effect of Target [F (1,23) < 1], but a
significant interaction [F (1,23)= 4.82, MSE = 1.14, p <
.05]. Inspection of the simple main effects revealed that
more focal targets were correctly recognized in the ordered
than in the random Array (p < .05). There were no other
significant simple effects. In recognition memory, there was
an effect of context for focal, but not for non-focal targets.

In the Ordered array, the focal stimuli are easier to
discriminate than non-focal targets, when the target and test
array are both visible (Roberson, et al., 2000).
Discriminability may interact with codability to produce
better recognition memory for focal targets. While superior
recognition of focal targets has frequently been observed
using an Ordered array (Brown & Lenneberg, 1954; Heider,
1972; Roberson et al., 2000), when the array was
randomized to equate discriminability of targets, Garro,
(1986) found an advantage for focal stimuli, but Lucy &
Shweder (1979) and Roberson et al. (2000) did not. In the
present experiment the delay between target and test was
reduced to 5000ms and both test arrays contained only 16
stimuli, to reduce task demands that might encourage
reliance on naming. Silence was maintained during the short
retention interval. Discriminability was held constant across
the two test arrays, while the context was varied, by using
the same set of test stimuli, in either an ordered or a random
array.

Figure 1: Mean number of correctly recognized Focal and
Non-focal targets in the Ordered or the Random Array in
Experiment 2

If focal stimuli are inherently more salient, regardless of
context, there should be superior recognition for these
stimuli in both arrays. If, however, the superiority for these
items relies on their codability, then the advantage should be
context dependent (Lucy, 1992; Guest & Van Laar, 2002),
because a description such as ‘best red’ is maximally useful
when all red examples appear together for comparison. Thus
the advantage should be found in the ordered, but not in the
randomized array.
24 native English speakers between the ages 16 and 32,
(mean age 22.4) with normal color vision (City Colour
Vision Test, Fletcher, 1998) were paid for their
participation. Target and test stimuli were displayed on a
Sony Trinitron 18 inch monitor, using E-Prime software, in
a darkened room. Each of the 16 test stimuli appeared in the
centre of the screen on a gray background, subtending a
visual angle of 2.10° x 2.10°. Target stimuli were the same
eight focal and eight non-focal colors used in Experiment 1,

Ordered
6

Random

4

2

Focal

Non-focal

Target type

For reaction times there was no significant effect of Array
[F (1,23) = 2.27, MSE = 6311438, p >.1], and no significant
effect of Target [F (1,23) = 2.14, MSE = 4088614, p >.1].
and no significant interaction [F (1,23) = 1.54, p >.1]. There

1870

was no difference in latencies for either type of target in
either type of array..
For distance (∆E*ab) of erroneous choices, there was no
significant effect of Array [F (1,23) < 1], or Target [F (1,23)
< 1] and no significant interaction [F (1,23) < 1]. For both
types of array, when the wrong selection was made there
was no difference in the distance of errors for focal and nonfocal stimuli.
Table 3: Mean Latency to select target in Experiment 2.
Target type

Mean Latency
(ms)

Ordered focal
Ordered non-focal
Random focal
Random non-focal

4602.4
4608.2
4780.7
4792.3

A second error measure was also considered: the tendency
of participants to select a focal target in error. Although
such errors were few there were more to focal targets (.034)
than to non –focal targets (.01).

Discussion
Roberson et al. (2000) found a memory advantage for focal
stimuli, in an Ordered, but not in a Random array). In the
present experiment, using a computerized display, where
component stimuli were held constant between the two
types of display and varied only in arrangement, there was a
recognition memory advantage for focal stimuli only in the
Ordered array.
Cognitive load might be increased in the Random array,
because all sixteen stimuli need to be searched, whereas in
the Ordered array, only one part of the array need be
considered. However, if that were case, performance should
be worse overall in the Random array condition and it is not.
Performance for focal stimuli drops in the Random
compared to the Ordered array, but performance on the nonfocal stimuli is slightly better in the Random array.

General Discussion
The results of these experiments confirm the advantage in
codability of the items central to basic categories compared
to poor category exemplars. Focal items can be
communicated faster and with fewer words, regardless of
context. For English speakers, the best examples of basic
categories do seem to have privileged status in any
descriptive task and the basic terms may be optimal for
communicative efficacy (Guest & Van Laar, 2002), perhaps
because they are used with the greatest consistency and
consensus across individuals. In recognition memory,

however, participants only show superior recognition for
focal colors in the Ordered array.
If focal points gain privileged status in the cognitive
organization of color because they are inherently more
salient than peripheral stimuli, they should always be better
recognized, regardless of context. If, instead, this advantage
is linked to labeling, then changing the context in which a
color appears should affect the advantage gained (Lucy,
1992; Guest & Van Laar, 2002). In experiment 2, with a
small set of distracter items and a short retention interval, to
minimize reliance on verbal coding, superior recognition of
focal stimuli occurred only in the Ordered array, where all
items within a category are placed together for comparison.
In such a context activation of ‘category feature detector
nodes’ (through naming) might bias perceptual judgments
towards the best example of the activated category (Pilling
et al., 2003). Consistent with this explanation, we found
more incorrect selections of focal targets (13) than non-focal
targets (2).
Such effects may be particularly strong in the color domain,
where naming and categorization converge, because to be
called ‘red’ an item must have the property of ‘redness’. For
other domains there is a demonstrable distinction between
the features that are necessary for the naming of objects and
those that are central to the object’s conceptual
representation (Marques, 2002). Color is thus one area
where links between naming and cognition might be
strongest. In the Random array these effects may be
attenuated because stimuli are not arranged systematically,
with the best example at the centre of the category. In such
circumstances, which more closely resemble naturalistic
surroundings, participants may be less influenced by
categorical labeling.
The present results indicate a strong and coherent cognitive
and linguistic organization of basic color categories around
best examples that are optimally communicated between
speakers of English, using a limited set of basic color terms.
The results also support the findings of Brown and
Lenneberg (1954), Roberson et al., (2000) and Özgen and
Davies (2002) that color perception is flexible and interacts
with cognitive processes, when circumstances favor the
activation of categorical information. However, the
advantages found for coding and recognition of (focal) best
examples of English color categories result from the tight
links between linguistic and cognitive organization of
categories, not from any inherent natural ‘goodness’ of these
colors over others. When task demands are limited and well
controlled, so that recognition need not be dependent on
name retention, the Focal points of basic categories are no
easier to recognize than other colors.

1871

