UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Colour and Stability in Embodied Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1rf372kq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Connell, Louise

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Colour and Stability in Embodied Representations
Louise Connell (louise.connell@northumbria.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology, Northumbria University
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

shortcut offered by amodal symbols facilitates the modeling
and testing of large-scale, complex, cognitive tasks.
However, criticism of amodal representations has become
increasingly frequent of late (Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg &
Kachak, 2002; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Pecher & Zwaan,
2005). The main criticisms concern the interaction between
the external and internal world: how perception can map to
arbitrary conceptual symbols (the transduction problem:
Barsalou, 1999), and how conceptual symbols can map back
to the real world (the grounding problem: Harnad, 1990).
Even if the bowl of savoury liquid in front of us can be
related to the arbitrary symbol SOUP, and if the symbol
SOUP can be related to other similar bowls of liquid, the
means by which this perceptual↔conceptual translation
takes place remains unknown. Without any reference to the
outside world, amodal symbols can have no meaning
(Searle, 1980), and this has led some researchers to propose
more perceptually-grounded embodied theories of
conceptual thought.

Abstract
Traditional views of cognition have assumed that thought
involves the representation and manipulation of discrete,
amodal symbols, while embodied theories of cognition hold
that thought is grounded in the same neural systems that
govern sensation, perception and action. This paper examines
whether implicit perceptual information on object colour is
represented during sentence comprehension even though
doing so does not necessarily facilitate task performance.
After reading a sentence that implied a particular colour for a
given object, participants were presented with a picture of that
object that either matched or mismatched the implied colour.
When asked if the pictured object was mentioned in the
preceding sentence, results showed that people’s responses
were faster (but less accurate) when the colours mismatched
than when they matched. A distinction between stable and
unstable embodied representations is proposed to allow
embodied theories to account for these findings, and
discussed with reference to future directions in cognitive
modelling.

Embodied Representations

Introduction

A growing body of empirical work has recently emerged in
support of embodied representations of concepts.
Neuroimaging studies have shown how sensorimotor areas
in the brain are activated during language processing
(Carpenter et al., 1999; Pulvermüller, 1999). In addition, it
has been shown that “low-level” sensorimotor
representations play a role in “high-level” cognitive
processes such as language comprehension and memory
retrieval (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Richardson et al.,
2003; Solomon & Barsalou, 2001; Stanfield & Zwaan,
2001; Zwaan, Stanfield & Yaxley, 2002). Importantly,
these studies employed implicit tasks such as recognition
and naming, demonstrating that perceptual information is
activated even though doing so does not facilitate task
performance. For example, Stanfield and Zwaan (2001)
presented people with sentences that mention objects with
implied orientation (e.g., “Rick put the pencil in the cup” or
“Rick put the pencil in the drawer”), followed by a picture
of an object (e.g. a pencil). People were faster to verify that
a pencil had been mentioned in the sentence when it was
pictured in the orientation implied by the sentence (i.e.
pictured vertically for the cup sentence, pictured
horizontally for the drawer sentence). This finding is
incompatible with amodal theories of conceptual
knowledge, which cannot account for why the orientation of
the pencil is represented when it is not specified in the
sentence. However, Stanfield and Zwaan’s findings can be
explained if participants construct an embodied
representation of the sentence (e.g. a sensorimotor
simulation of placing a pencil in a cup/drawer), as this

Imagine a person sitting at a desk wondering whether to
have a sandwich or soup for lunch. This is an everyday
cognitive feat, and yet is fraught with many unresolved
issues. How do we represent a sandwich that is not actually
in front of us at the time? How do we represent the notion
of soup without a specific flavour or colour? The ability to
form and utilise conceptual knowledge is central to human
cognitive life, and how we manage to do this is a key
question in cognitive psychology and cognitive science.

Amodal Representations
Many traditional theories of conceptual thought have
assumed that concepts are discrete, amodal representations
(e.g., Katz & Fodor, 1963; Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978;
Fodor, 1975; Pylyshyn, 1984).
In such an amodal
representation, our hypothetical bowl of soup could be
represented simply as SOUP, and we would not have to
concern ourselves with properties such as flavour or colour
unless we have that information available to represent (e.g.
FLAVOUR:TOMATO or COLOUR:RED). Such amodal
theories of representation have been popular in cognitive
science for their computational convenience, and are a
cornerstone of symbolic cognitive modelling in domains
from language comprehension (Kintsch, 2001) and
plausibility judgement (Connell & Keane, in sub.), to
analogical reasoning (Falkenhainer, Forbus & Gentner,
1989; Keane, Ledgeway & Duff, 1994) and more general
cognitive architectures (Anderson, 1993; Newell, 1990).
There are significant advantages in using an amodal
approach in cognitive models, as the representational
482

would include implied information about the pencil’s
orientation.
Although such evidence is often presented as
underscoring the endemic problems of amodal theories of
representation, there is currently no single theory of
embodied cognition that can integrate their findings.
Rather, theories of embodied representation share certain
characteristics and assumptions (see Wilson, 2002) and
consider perception and action as central to higher
cognition. One of the most influential of these theories is
Barsalou’s (1999) Perceptual Symbol Systems. According
to this theory, concepts are essentially partial recordings of
the neural activation that arises during perceptual and motor
experiences. These recordings (or “perceptual symbols”)
can later be re-enacted as a perceptual simulation of that
concept.
For example, to represent the concept of soup, neural
systems for vision, action, touch, taste, smell etc. partially
reproduce our previous experiences of soup. The perceptual
symbols activated for soup may include visual information
of liquid in a bowl, sensorimotor information of eating hot
savoury liquid with a spoon, etc. Barsalou (1999) thus
argues that Perceptual Symbol Systems theory avoids
transduction and grounding problems by assuming that
conceptual representations are based on the same systems
that are used for perception and action.

The Current Study
In an amodal representation, the sentence “John looked at
the steak” could be represented by a proposition such as
LOOK(JOHN, STEAK). But what about the colour of the
steak: is it red (raw) or brown (cooked)? This information is
not contained in the sentence and so we do not have a colour
attribute available for STEAK. An embodied representation
of this sentence would also lack this colour information, as
simulating an individual steak does not require simulating
its colour. 1
On the other hand, what if the sentence read “John looked
at the steak on his plate.”? As before, an amodal
representation does not encode any colour information as it
only represents the explicit information in the sentence, such
as
LOOK(JOHN,STEAK[LOCATION:ON_PLATE]).
However, although the sentence contains no explicit colour
information, the placing of a steak on a plate implies that the
steak is cooked and therefore has a brown colour. An
embodied representation of a sentence would contain such
implied perceptual information by simulating an individual
plate and steak and then specialising the colour of the steak
to brown.
The study reported in this paper examines whether
implicit perceptual information on object colour is
represented during sentence comprehension. Such a finding
would be incompatible with traditional amodal theories of
representation and cognition, and would lend support to the
embodied view of mental representation. In this study,
participants are asked to perform an implicit recognition
task that tests whether perceptual information is activated
even though doing so does not facilitate task performance.
Results are then related back to amodal and embodied
theories of representation, and are discussed with a view to
the future of both theories within cognitive science.

Representing Colour Information
Colour representation is a key aspect of perceptual
information that has not received the same attention in the
embodiment debate as other visual object attributes such as
shape, size and orientation. However, some studies have
already indicated that colour may not be represented as a
context-free amodal attribute (such as COLOUR: X). For
example, when asked to compare the colour grey to black
and white, Medin and Shoben (1988) found that people
considered grey to be more similar to white in the context of
hair, but more similar to black in the context of clouds.
Similarly, Halff, Ortony, and Anderson (1976) found that
people represented the colour red differently for hair, wine,
flag, brick, and blood, considering the colour of a red flag to
be more similar to a red light than a red wine. Rather than
using a single amodal symbol such as COLOUR:RED
across concepts, people appeared to use different perceptual,
embodied representations.
However, a colour such as red is not a constant
parameter: differing wavelengths of light give rise to shades
of red that vary in hue, saturation, and luminosity. In that
respect, it is perhaps not surprising that people consider red
wine differently to red bricks. These findings are not
necessarily incompatible with amodal representations if one
argues that people are retrieving knowledge of contextspecific, subordinate shades of the colour category red (e.g.
COLOR:WINE-RED, COLOR:BRICK-RED) rather than a
generic superordinate COLOR:RED. Presenting people
with explicit colour terms is not a suitable paradigm for
distinguishing whether amodal or embodied symbols are
activated in representing colour information.

Experiment
This experiment presents participants with short sentences
followed by a picture, and asks them to indicate whether the
pictured object was mentioned in the sentence. For test
items, the pictured object was always mentioned in the
preceding sentence but the object was shown in one of two
picture conditions: matching the colour implied by the
sentence or mismatching the colour implied in the sentence .
For example, the sentence “John looked at the steak on his
plate.” was followed by a picture of a brown steak in the
match condition, but by a red steak in the mismatch
condition (note that each colour used in the match and
mismatch picture conditions was a valid colour
representation of that particular object: raw steaks are red,
cooked steaks are brown). In addition, sentences had two
different forms, each of which implied one of the object
colours. Figure 1 shows a sample of the sentences versions
and pictures used in each condition. Thus, the basic design
crossed two sentence versions (version 1, version 2) with
two picture conditions (match, mismatch).
1

A default colour could be represented for steak in either an
amodal or embodied representation, but this is not important for
our present purposes as it does not distinguish the two theories.

483

Sentence

Picture Condition
Match

Mismatch

John looked at the steak on his plate.

(brown steak)

(red steak)

(red steak)

(brown steak)

John looked at the steak in the butcher’s window.

Figure 1: Sample sentences used in experiment, showing pictures used in match and mismatch conditions
There are two important aspects of this design that differ
from earlier studies such as Halff et al. (1976) that were not
concerned with the amodal/embodied distinction. First, as
previously discussed, colour information is not explicitly
stated but rather is implied by the sentential context.
Second, rather than keeping colour constant and varying the
possible objects, the object has been kept constant and its
possible colours varied. This allows amodal and embodied
representations to be teased apart because of their differing
predictions regarding participant response latencies
In amodal representations, both sentence versions shown
in Figure 1 would be represented without any colour
information. Thus, the traditional amodal view would
predict that people would respond equally quickly and
accurately in the match and mismatch conditions because
they are simply confirming that the pictured object (e.g.
STEAK) was mentioned in the preceding sentence (e.g.
LOOK(JOHN,STEAK[LOCATION:ON_PLATE]).
The
embodied view, however, makes very different predictions.
In embodied representations, both sentence versions would
be represented with the implied colour encoded as part of
the simulation for steak – i.e. simulating a steak on a plate
would involve specializing the steak colour to the
appropriate brown, while simulating a steak in a butcher’s
window would involve specializing the steak colour to the
appropriate red. Thus, the embodied view would predict
that people will be faster and more accurate (confirming that
the pictured object was mentioned in the sentence) in the
match condition than in the mismatch condition.

red steak predominantly contains shades of red). Each pair
of test pictures was identical except for the colours used.
All pictures were resized to a maximum of 250 pixel height
(approx. 6.9cm onscreen) and 350 pixel width (approx.
9.7cm onscreen).
It was important that picture recognition would not be
affected by the canonicality or view specificity of the
pictures (see Stanfield and Zwaan, 2001), and so each
picture was pretested to meet these requirements. Twentytwo participants were presented onscreen with an object
name followed by a picture, and had to indicate whether the
picture matched the name. Each pair of test pictures (e.g.
red / brown steak) was separated to form two groups of
items and participants were randomly assigned to one of the
groups. Filler pictures were seen by both groups and were
presented after semantically unrelated words, thus requiring
a “no” response. All test pictures were presented after their
object name and required a “yes” response. After indicating
their yes/no response, participants were asked to rate the
general quality of the picture on a scale from 1 (poor
quality) to 7 (good quality). All pictures used as test items
in this experiment met the following criteria: the median
response time for each item was < 1250ms, there was no
significant difference in response times between the pictures
in each test pair (all ps > 0.2), and each item received a
median quality rating of at least 4 out of 7. The sole
criterion for filler items was that each received a median
quality rating of at least 4 out of 7.
Forty-four sentences were constructed to accompany the
pictures in this experiment. Of these, twenty-four were test
items (naming an object featured in a test picture) and
twenty were fillers (naming objects not featured in either the
test or filler pictures). The test sentences thus formed pairs,
with each member of a pair implying a different colour for
the same object. Filler sentences all contained at least one
concrete noun. In order to ensure that the test sentences
actually implied the intended colour for the object, another
pretest (using 24 new participants) was conducted. Each
pair of test sentences was separated to form two groups of
items and participants were randomly assigned to one of the

Method
Materials. Forty-four pictures were created for use in this
experiment. Of these, twenty-four were test items (forming
pairs of pictures) and twenty were fillers (unrelated
standalone pictures). Many of the pictures came from
popular clipart packages but some were created by the
author. All pictures were coloured naturalistically by
sampling shades from photographs of the relevant objects,
and contained only one predominant colour (e.g. Figure 1’s

484

groups. Each sentence was presented along with two
pictures of an object mentioned in the sentence (i.e. both
matching and mismatching pictures) and participants were
asked to choose, from four forced-choice alternatives,
whether a) the first picture best matched the sentence, b) the
second picture best matched the sentence, c) both pictures
equally match the sentence, or d) neither picture matches the
sentence. All test items used in this experiment met the
criterion of having the picture from the matching condition
chosen at least 50% of the time.

Results & Discussion
Two participants that answered <50% of the comprehension
questions correctly were eliminated from the analysis. One
further participant was also excluded for failing to respond
with valid keystrokes. All responses <300ms and >3000ms
were considered outliers and dropped from the analysis, as
were any responses more than two standard deviations away
from a participant’s mean in the relevant condition.
Altogether, 9% of the data was excluded in this way.
Results were not wholly consistent with either the amodal
or embodied views of representation, but were partially
consistent with the embodied view. Table 1 shows the
mean correct response times and accuracy for the match and
mismatch picture conditions. Analyses of variance were run
on the data by participants and by items, and interactions
involving the group variable are not reported due to their
lack of theoretical importance. Against both amodal and
embodied predictions, people responded more quickly when
the picture colour mismatched (M=1190ms, SD=542ms) the
object colour implied by the sentence than when it matched
(M=1328ms, SD=577ms), with analysis significant by
participants, F1(1, 41)=7.845, MSE=0.082, p<0.01; F2(1,
31)=2.156, MSE=0.070, p=0.15.
The interaction of
sentence version × picture condition was significant by
participants, F1(1, 41)=6.212, MSE=0.103, p<0.05; F2<1.
Accuracy (responding correctly that the pictured object was
mentioned in the preceding sentence) was significantly
higher when the picture colour matched the implied colour
(93.6%) than when it mismatched (70.2%), in line with
embodied predictions, F1(1, 53)=56.056, p<0.0001; F2(1,
32)=14.018, p<0.001]. The interaction of sentence version
× picture condition was not significant (Fs<1).
The profile of response times was much slower than other
experiments using a similar picture decision paradigm (e.g.
Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001; Zwaan et al., 2003), inviting the
possibility that these slower response latencies reflect very
different processing and task strategies. However, even
when the fastest quartile of response times per condition is
taken2, the same pattern of response times emerges with the
mismatch picture condition (687ms) being faster than the
match condition (734ms). It should be noted that the other
studies mentioned used black and white line drawings while
the present study uses coloured line drawings, and this extra
complexity may influence processing times.
So what do these results mean for the contrasting
positions of amodal and embodied representation? The
predictions of the amodal view (that implied sentence colour
would have no effect on people’s response speed and
accuracy) were not borne out by the data. The main
prediction of the embodied view (that matching sentence
and picture colours would facilitate faster responses) was
not supported either. Indeed, the exact inverse was found
with mismatching colours being faster than matching. Only
the accuracy prediction made by the embodied view (that
matching colours would make people more accurate in
confirming that the pictured object was mentioned in the
sentence) found support in the results. The match condition

Design. Test items were divided into four groups so that
each group featured one of four sentence-picture
combinations:
version1-match,
version1-mismatch,
version2-match, version2-mismatch. Each group contained
equal numbers of match and mismatch test items, and the
various colours featured in test pictures were distributed
approximately evenly across groups. Participants were
assigned randomly to one of the groups. Thus, the
experiment was a 2 (sentence version: version1, version2) ×
2 (picture condition: match, mismatch) × 4 (group) design,
with sentence version and picture condition as withinparticipants variables and group as a between-participants
variable.
Participants. Sixty native speakers of English from
Northumbria University (not used in pretests) were paid a
nominal sum for participation in this experiment.
Procedure. Testing took place on portable computers
running Presentation software.
Participants read
instructions describing the experiment and instructing them
to read each sentence and then to decide if the pictured
object had been mentioned in the preceding sentence.
Participants were asked to respond as quickly as possible as
their response time was being measured, and to read every
sentence carefully as their comprehension would be tested at
various points during the experiment. Each trial began with
a left-aligned vertically-centred fixation cross presented for
1000ms, followed by presentation of a sentence. When
participants pressed the space bar to indicate comprehension
another fixation cross was displayed centrally onscreen for
500ms, followed by a picture. Participants had to decide if
the pictured object had appeared in the preceding sentence
and indicate their decision by pressing the key labeled “yes”
(the comma key) or the key labeled “no” (the full stop key).
In half of all filler trials, a comprehension question (relating
to the filler sentence) appeared after the picture decision.
Participants were required to answer an equal number of
“yes” and “no” comprehension questions. A blank screen
was displayed for 500ms as an inter-stimulus break between
trials. The entire procedure took approximately 10 minutes.
Table 1: Mean response times with standard deviations
(in ms) and accuracy rates (%) for match and mismatch
picture conditions.
Picture Condition
Match
Mismatch

Mean RT (SD)
1328 (577)
1190 (542)

Accuracy
93.6%
70.2%

2
Above a minimum threshold of 300ms, response times at the 25th
percentile were 977ms (match) and 890ms (mismatch).

485

presence, position, or shape) and hence that colour is
encoded with less stability in scene representations
(Aginsky & Tarr, 2000; Vandenbeld & Rensink, 2003). If
an embodied sentence representation involves a perceptual
simulation of visual information, then it is possible that the
colour of an object (as a non-configurational property) is not
represented as a stable specialisation. The instability of
colour information in an embodied representation could be a
contributing factor to the overall slower response times and
increased error rates observed in this experiment compared
to experiments concerned with more stable, configurational
shape and orientation information. More importantly, the
instability of embodied colour information could also
account for faster response times in the mismatch versus
match condition. This notion will be explored further in the
general discussion.

was significantly more accurate than the mismatch
condition, as also found by Zwaan et al. (2002). However,
it is interesting to note that the pattern of errors in this study
does not conform to speed-acuracy tradeoff: accuracy
improves as responses become faster, reaching 97.6%
(match) and 91.8% (mismatch) in the fastest quartile 2.
Together, these findings suggest that many of the criticisms
levelled at amodal theories are accurate: simple
propositional representations of sentences cannot account
for the results found in this study. However, it is also
apparent that current theories of embodied representation,
such as Barsalou’s (1999) Perceptual Symbol Systems, are
at present ill-equipped to explain these findings.
While it seems counterintuitive that people’s response
times were facilitated by mismatching rather than matching
colours, Naor-Raz, Tarr and Kersten (2003) reported a
similar pattern of results in a modified Stroop task. They
showed participants names of concrete objects displayed in
different colours (e.g. “banana” in yellow or purple text) and
measured naming times for the text colour. They found that
people were faster when text colour mismatched the named
object’s colour (e.g. “banana” in purple text) than when text
and object colour matched (e.g. “banana” in yellow text).
Naor-Raz et al.’s results suggest that participants found it
easier to ignore incongruent information about object colour
than to ignore congruent colour information. The same
rationale can be applied to the results reported here. When
the colour of the pictured object is different to that implied
by the sentence, people can compare the pictured object to
their mental representation and confirm rapidly that yes, the
object was indeed mentioned in the preceding sentence
(ignoring differences in other properties). Conversely, when
the colour of the pictured object is the same as that implied
by the sentence, people compare the pictured object to their
mental representation and confirm that yes, the object was
indeed mentioned in the preceding sentence and yes, it even
matches in colour (ignoring differences in other properties).
In other words, responses in the mismatching condition may
be faster than those in the matching condition because the
implied colour information in the sentence representation is
easier to ignore. There is some benefit to the extra
processing time consumed in the matching condition:
attending to the implied colour information makes
participants more likely to confirm accurately that the
pictured object was mentioned in the preceding sentence.
But why should implied colour information produce such
different behaviour to implied orientation (Stanfield &
Zwaan, 2001) or shape (Zwaan et al., 2002) information?
While Kaschak et al. (2005) also found mismatch
facilitation when examining object motion, their explanation
– a visual stimulus “ties up” neural motion mechanisms and
hinders ability to process a simultaneously-presented
auditory sentence that describes motion in the same
direction – cannot explain results in this study’s sequential
presentation paradigm. One other possible explanation is
that colour, unlike other object attributes such as shape, size,
and orientation, does not have as stable a specialisation in an
embodied representation. Studies of visual memory have
suggested that colour is not as salient as other properties that
determine the configuration of a scene (e.g., object

General Discussion
In this work, amodal and embodied theories of
representation are contrasted with a study examining the
representation of implied colour information. Results
showed that perceptual colour information is activated
during sentence comprehension even though doing so does
not facilitate task performance. People responded more
accurately when the colour of a pictured object matched the
colour implied by the previous sentence. This finding is in
line with embodied theories and is incompatible with
amodal, propositional theories which hold that implied
perceptual information is not represented. In addition,
people were found to respond more slowly when the colour
of a pictured object matched the colour implied by the
previous sentence. This finding is also incompatible with
amodal theories and is contrary to that predicted by current
embodied theories which hold that matching implied
information should facilitate faster responses. So, this paper
proposes a distinction between stable and unstable
embodied representations as explanation for the results.
According to Perceptual Symbol Systems theory
(Barsalou, 1999), the neural systems that represent colour in
perception also represent object colours (as perceptual
simulations). For example, thinking about a red car
involves activating the partial recordings of neural
activation that arose during previous perceptual experiences
with cars (i.e. a perceptual simulation of car) and then
specialising the colour to red.
In short, perceptual
properties of objects – visual, aural, tactile, etc. – are
represented by specialising the perceptual simulation of the
relevant object. In this paper, the focus of the experiment
was the representation of visual information.
When
information that determines the configuration of a visual
scene (shape, size, orientation, etc.) is implied by a
sentence, it is represented in a perceptual simulation as a
stable specialisation of the relevant object. This stability
makes implied information difficult to ignore when a
mismatch occurs between a pictured object (e.g. a vertical
pencil) and the preceding sentence (e.g. “Rick put the pencil
in the drawer”) (Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001). So, for stable
embodied representations, people are slower to respond in a
mismatching condition than a matching condition.
Conversely, when information that is not salient to the
486

Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558–565.
Halff, H. M., Ortony, A. & Anderson, R. C. (1976) A
context-sensitive representation of word meanings.
Memory & Cognition 4, 378–83.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica
D, 42, 335-346.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley, R.
H., Aveyard, M., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan, R. A.
(2005). Perception of motion affects language processing.
Cognition, 94, B79–B89.
Katz, J. J. & Fodor, J. A, (1963). The structure of a
Semantic Theory, Language, 39, 170-210.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994). Constraints
on analogical mapping: A comparison of three models.
Cognitive Science, 18, 387-438.
Kintsch, W. (2001). Predication. Cognitive Science, 25, 173202.
Kintsch, W. & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological
Review, 85, 363-394.
Medin, D., & Shoben, E. (1988). Context and structure in
conceptual combinations. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 158190.
Naor-Raz, G., Tarr, M. J., & Kersten, D. (2003). Is color an
intrinsic property of object representation? Perception,
32, 667-680.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pecher, D., & Zwaan, R. A. (2005). Introduction to
grounding cognition. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.),
Grounding cognition: the role of perception and action in
memory, language, and thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain’s language.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22, 253–336.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., &
McRae, K. (2003). Spatial representations activated
during real-time comprehension of verbs. Cognitive
Science, 27, 767-780.
Searle, J. R. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, 417–24.
Solomon, K. O., & Barsalou, L. W. (2001). Representing
properties locally. Cognitive Psychology 43, 129–169.
Stanfield, R. A., & Zwaan, R. A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153–156.
Vandenbeld, L. A., & Rensink, R. A. The decay
characteristics of size, color, and shape information in
visual short-term memory. Journal of Vision, 3. 682.
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 625–636.
Zwaan, R.A., Stanfield, R.A., Yaxley, R.H. (2002).
Language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes
of objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

configuration of a visual scene (such as colour) is implied
by a sentence, it is represented in a perceptual simulation as
an unstable specialisation of the relevant object. This
instability makes the implied information relatively easy to
ignore when a mismatch occurs between a pictured object
(e.g. a brown steak) and the preceding sentence (e.g. “John
looked at the steak in the butcher’s window”). Thus, for
unstable embodied representations, people are faster to
respond in a mismatching condition than a matching
condition, as reported in the present study. Further research
on this topic (Connell, in prep.) examines whether this
stable / unstable distinction is specific to embodied
representations of familiar objects.
Nevertheless, amodal theories of representation are
widely used in cognitive science and cognitive modelling,
often to valuable effect. For this reason, it is important to
observe that embodied theories of representation are not
necessarily incompatible with the idea that cognitive tasks
can be described in terms of computational processing.
Many cognitive models are not functionally dependent on
discrete symbols, and their views of cognitive processing
would be valid irrespective of the form of the mental
representations actually being processed. As evidence
grows for embodied mental representations, we gain a better
understanding of exactly what information people represent
and how they use it across a variety of cognitive tasks.
Future cognitive models that address such tasks should
examine ways to integrate the embodied evidence and
obviate explicit commitment to ungrounded symbols. In
this way, cognitive modelling and embodied research could
mutually inform theories of cognitive processing.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Division of Psychology in
Northumbria University. Many thanks to Dermot Lynott for
helpful comments and discussion, and to Ben Singleton and
Darren Dunning for data collection.

References
Aginsky, V., & Tarr, M. J. (2000). How are different
properties of a scene encoded in visual memory? Visual
Cognition, 7, 147-162.
Anderson, J. (1993). Rules of the Mind. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences 22, 577–660.
Carpenter, P. A., Just, M. A., Keller, T. A., Eddy, W. F.,
Thulborn, K. R. (1999). Time course of fMRI-activation
in language and spatial networks during sentence
comprehension. NeuroImage, 10, 216-224.
Connell, L. (in prep.). Embodied representations of colour.
Manuscript in preparation.
Connell, L., & Keane, M. T. (in sub.). A model of
plausibility. Manuscript in submission.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
Structure-Mapping engine: algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

487

