UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison-Induced Anchoring Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78h4w8nd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Choplin, Jessica M.
Tawney, Mark W.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison-Induced Anchoring Effects
Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu) and Mark W. Tawney (mwtawney@sbcglobal.net)
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504
The goal of the research reported here was to investigate
whether verbal comparisons (Choplin & Hummel, 2002)
mediate the effects of anchors on estimation. The issue of
whether verbal comparisons mediate anchoring effects is
largely orthogonal to the issues raised by previous accounts
of anchoring effects as verbal comparisons could affect
estimation by altering search strategies (Jacowitz &
Kahneman, 1995; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974), priming
values (Wilson et al., 1996), bringing to mind diagnostic
attributes (Strack & Mussweiler, 1997), appealing to
conversational norms (Schwarz, 1990), or any combination
thereof. Orthogonal to the issues raised by these theories,
however, the possibility that verbal comparisons mediate
anchoring effects is nevertheless of interest, because it
suggests patterns of bias that have not yet been documented
by previous research. We start by describing the patterns of
bias created by verbal comparisons. We then describe two
experiments in which we found support for the view that
verbal comparisons mediate the effects of anchors on
estimation.

Abstract
We investigated the possibility that verbal comparisons
(Choplin & Hummel, 2002) mediate the effects of anchors on
estimation. Consistent with patterns of bias documented by
previous research on anchoring effects, verbal comparisons
would most often bias estimates toward anchor values.
Undocumented by previous research, however, verbal
comparisons would occasionally bias estimates away from
anchor values. In particular, verbal comparisons ought to bias
estimates away from anchor values when unknown values are
judged larger (or smaller) than anchor values and the
differences between unbiased estimates and anchor values are
less than the differences suggested by these comparisons. We
tested these predictions in two experiments. In Experiment 1,
we constrained the range of acceptable estimates and
participants compared the unknown value to the anchor and
then estimated the value. We found that comparisons
sometimes bias estimates away from anchor values. In
Experiment 2, we replicated some of the findings of
Experiment 1 without constraining the range of acceptable
estimates. The results of these experiments suggest that verbal
comparisons mediate the effects of anchors on estimation.

Comparison-Induced Anchoring Effects
Verbal magnitude comparisons suggest quantitative values.
To investigate the values suggested by English age
comparisons, for example, Rusiecki (1985) gave his
participants sentences, such as, “Mary is older than Jane”
and “Martin’s wife is older than Ken’s wife,” and asked
them to report the ages they imagined. He found that in
response to the comparison “Mary is older than Jane”
participants imagined Mary to be 20.2 years on average and
Jane to be 17.9 years on average. In response to the
comparison “Martin’s wife is older than Ken’s wife”
participants imagined Martin’s wife to be 37.2 years on
average and Ken’s wife to be 33.0 years on average. We
will call these values comparison-suggested values, because
they are the values that are suggested by comparisons.
To investigate the values that might be suggested by
comparing unknown values to anchor values, we performed
a pilot study similar to Rusiecki’s (1985) study wherein our
participants imagined skyscrapers whose heights were more
and less than an anchor of 1,367 feet (the midway point
between the height of the Empire State Building in New
York City and the height of the Petronias Towers in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia). One group of participants (n=40)
imagined a skyscraper whose height was “much more” than
1,367 feet and a second skyscraper whose height was “much
less” than 1,367 feet. Another group (n=40) imagined a
skyscraper whose height was “slightly more” than 1,367
feet and a second skyscraper whose height was “slightly
less’ than 1,367 feet. The results indicated that “slightly
more” than 1,367 feet suggests a median value of 1,390 feet
and “much more” suggests a median value of 1,458.5 feet,

Anchoring Effects
In a well-known study, Tversky and Kahneman (1974)
asked their participants to judge whether African nations
represented a higher or lower percentage of UN-member
nations than an arbitrary numeric value called the anchor.
Participants then estimated the actual percentage. A bias in
estimation towards the anchor was observed. When the
anchor was 10% of UN-member nations, the median
estimate was 25%; but when the anchor was 65% of UNmember nations, the median estimate was 45%.
Several explanations for biases toward anchor values have
been proposed. Tversky and Kahneman (1974) suggested
that anchor values might give participants a starting point in
their search for an acceptable estimate. Participants might
then adjust their estimate toward values they think are likely
to represent the true value, but settle on a value before
sufficiently adjusting their estimate away from the anchor
(see also Jacowitz & Kahneman, 1995). Wilson, Houston,
Brekke, and Etling (1996) suggested that anchor values
might prime values near anchors that participants are then
unable to ignore. Strack and Mussweiler (1997) suggested
that anchors might bring to mind attributes that are
diagnostic or suggestive of values. By this account, biases
towards anchors would be observed because large anchor
values would bring to mind attributes that suggest large
values while small anchor values would bring to mind
attributes that suggest small values. Schwarz (1990) noted
that in some cases conversational factors might suggest that
anchor values are reasonable responses.
447

while “slightly less” suggests a value of 1,350 feet and
“much less” suggests a value of 1,270 feet (see Table 1).

feet. This time, however, the bias toward 1,458.5 feet
would produce a bias away from the anchor.
If verbal comparisons mediate the effects of anchors on
estimation, then the words used to compare unknown, to-beestimated values to anchors should affect estimation. In
particular, comparisons that suggest values that are close to
the anchor (i.e., slightly more or less) should produce
stronger anchoring effects—greater biases toward the
anchor—than comparisons that suggest values that are far
from the anchor (i.e., much more or less). For example, the
values suggested by the comparisons “slightly more than
1,367 feet” and “slightly less than 1,367 feet” (i.e., 1,390
and 1,350 feet respectively) are closer to 1,367 feet than are
the values suggested by the comparisons “much more than
1,367 feet” and “much less than 1,367 feet” (i.e., 1,458.5
and 1,270 feet respectively). Since estimates would be
biased towards these values stronger anchoring effects
should be observed if the adjective “slightly” modifies
comparisons than if the adjective “much” modifies
comparisons.
The purpose of Experiments 1 and 2 was to investigate
these predictions. To investigate whether comparisons bias
some estimates away from anchor values, our participants
estimated the height of the Sears Tower (a Chicago
landmark and one of the world’s tallest buildings; actual
height=1,450 feet) twice using two different measures: once
before (unbiased graphic estimate; see Figure 1) and once
after (biased numerical estimate) the presentation of the
anchor. This procedure allowed us to match estimates in the
experimental condition to estimates in the control condition
and compare them. To maximize the percentage of estimates
that would be biased away from the anchor, we constrained
the range of acceptable estimates in Experiment 1. We did
not constrain the range of estimates in Experiment 2.

Table 1: Comparison-suggested differences.
Comparison
Words
Slightly more
Much more
Slightly less
Much less

Anchor
Value
1,367 ft.
1,367 ft.
1,367 ft.
1,367 ft.

Suggested
Values
1,390 ft.
1,458.5 ft.
1,350 ft.
1,270 ft.

We propose that comparisons between unknown, to-beestimated values and anchors, whether presented to
participants explicitly in conversation, on a research
instrument, or articulated by participants themselves subvocally, might bias estimates towards the values suggested
by comparisons. For example, the judgment that the height
of one of the world’s tallest skyscrapers is slightly more
than 1,367 feet might suggest that the skyscraper is
approximately 1,390 feet (i.e., the median imagined height
slightly more than 1,367 feet; see Table 1). Likewise, the
judgment that one of the world’s tallest skyscrapers is
slightly less than 1,367 feet might suggest that the
skyscraper is approximately 1,350 feet. Estimates might
then be biased toward these comparison-suggested values.
Sometimes people might hesitate to describe a value as
larger (or smaller) than the anchor and prefer to describe it
as “approximately the same as” or “similar to” the anchor.
In such cases, the comparison-suggested value would be the
anchor value and estimates would be biased toward the
anchor.
Verbal comparisons would most often produce patterns of
bias that are consistent with the patterns of bias documented
by previous research. That is, verbal comparisons would
most often produce biases toward anchor values. They
would produce biases toward anchor values whenever
unknown, to-be-estimated values are judged “approximately
the same as” or “similar to” anchor values. They would also
produce biases toward anchor values whenever unbiased
estimates are more than a comparison-suggested difference
away from anchor values. For example, if a person’s
unbiased estimate of a skyscraper’s height were 1,700 feet
(i.e., more than 1,458.5 feet), then the judgment that its
height is much more than 1,367 feet would produce a bias
toward 1,458.5 feet (the comparison-suggested value; see
Table 1). This bias toward 1,458.5 feet would coincidentally
also produce a bias toward the anchor.
Nevertheless, verbal comparisons should occasionally
produce patterns of bias that have not yet been documented
by previous research.
In particular, they should
occasionally bias estimates away from anchor values.
Judging an unknown value to be much more or much less
than the anchor, for example, might exaggerate differences
from the anchor. For example, if a person’s unbiased
estimate of a skyscraper’s height were 1,400 feet (i.e., less
than 1,458.5 feet), the judgment that its height is much more
than 1,367 feet would again produce a bias toward 1,458.5

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to test the prediction that
verbal comparisons will sometimes bias estimates away
from anchor values. To test this prediction, we measured
participants’ estimates of the height of the Sears Tower
twice: once as a graphic estimate as shown in Figure 1 and
once as an estimate in feet. To maximize the chance that
unbiased estimates would be closer to the anchor than the
comparison-suggested values, we limited the range of
acceptable estimates to be between the height of the Empire
State Building and the height of the Petronias Towers.

Method
Participants. Four hundred ninety five passengers on the
Chicago elevated train system participated voluntarily.
Materials and Procedure. To limit the range of acceptable
estimates, participants were first told that the Empire State
Building in New York City was the tallest building in the
world until the Sears Tower was built and that the Sears
Tower was the tallest building in the world until the
Petronias Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, were built.

448

Finally, all participants estimated the height of the Sears
Tower in feet.

We then measured participants’ unbiased estimates by
showing participants the in-scale silhouettes of the Empire
State Building and the Petronias Towers as shown in Figure
1. Participants placed a tick mark between the horizontal
line representing the height of the Empire State Building
and the horizontal line representing the height of the
Petronias Towers to represent how tall they believed the
Sears Tower to be (henceforth, called the unbiased graphic
estimate).
The distance between the horizontal line
representing the height of the Empire State Building and the
horizontal line representing the height of the Petronias
Towers was 23mm.

Empire
State
Building

Results
Scatter plots of the results are presented in Figure 2.
Graphic estimates measured in millimeters from the line
representing the height of the Empire State Building are
plotted along the x-axis. Numerical estimates are plotted
along the y-axis. As predicted, the estimates of participants
in the experimental conditions who judged the height of the
Sears Tower approximately the same as the anchor appear to
cluster around the anchor. The estimates of the participants
who judged the height to be more or less than the anchor
appear to cluster around comparison-suggested values and
appear to be biased away from the anchor particularly
among participants who judged the height more than the
anchor.
To test whether these apparent biases were significant, we
needed to compare responses in the experimental conditions
to responses in the control conditions. We could not
directly compare estimates for each type of judgment (more,
approximately the same, less) to estimates in the control
condition, however, because the subsets of participants who
made each type of judgment were precisely the participants
most likely to estimate the height greater than, closest to,
and less than the anchor respectively even if comparisons to
anchor values did not in themselves bias estimates. To
control for this selection effect, we compared the estimates
from participants in the experimental groups who had
judged the height more than the anchor to the largest
estimates in the control group; we compared the estimates
from participants in the experimental groups who had
judged the height approximately the same as the anchor to
the estimates in the control group that were closest to 1,367
feet; and we compared the estimates from participants in the
experimental groups who had judged the height less than the
anchor to the smallest estimates in the control group. While
these control groups are potentially biased (i.e., we cannot
know whether the unbiased estimates of the participants
who judged the Sears Tower more than the anchor would
necessarily resemble the largest estimates in the control
group), these control groups are—if anything—biased
against the hypothesis that comparisons will bias estimates
away from the anchor.
We constructed these conservative control groups by
classifying the participants in the control group based upon
their responses on the graphic estimate (Figure 1) and the
percentage of participants in the experimental groups who
had made each type of judgment. In particular for each
millimeter of the unbiased graphic estimate scale, we
calculated the percentage of participants in the experimental
groups who had judged the height of the Sears Tower to be
more than, less than, and approximately the same as the
anchor. Then we classified the same percentages of
participants in the control group (inclusive) as controls for
each type of judgment. In Experiment 2, for example, 30%
of the participants in the much condition with an unbiased
graphic estimate of 18mm above the line that represented
the height of the Empire State Building judged the height of

Petronias
Towers

Figure 1. Graphic estimate of the height of the Sears Tower.
Participants placed a tick mark between the horizontal line
representing the height of the Empire State Building and the
horizontal line representing the height of the Petronias
Towers to represent how tall they believed the Sears Tower
to be.
We then limited the range of acceptable estimates for the
height of the Sears Tower in feet by telling participants that
the height of the Empire State Building is 1,250 feet tall and
the height of each of the Petronas Towers is 1,483. There
were two experimental groups. Participants in one
experimental group (n=165) judged the height of the Sears
Tower to be “slightly more than,” “approximately the same
as,” or “slightly less than” 1,367 feet (slightly condition).
Participants in the second experimental group (n=165)
judged the height of the Sears Tower to be “much more
than,” “approximately the same as,” or “much less than”
1,367 feet (much condition). A control group (n=165) did
not compare the height of the Sears Tower to 1,367 feet.

449

were closest to 1,367 feet were placed in the approximatelythe-same control group. Participants in the control
conditions were categorized in this manner twice: once to
provide control groups for the slightly experimental
condition and once to provide control groups for the much
experimental condition.
We first examined the estimates of participants in the
experimental groups who had judged the height of the Sears
Tower to be approximately the same as the anchor and
compared them to the participants in the control group
whose estimates were closest to the anchor. A 2 (group:
experimental versus control) x 2 (modifying adjective:
“slightly” versus “much”) between-subjects analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on the results of Experiment 2 revealed
that participants in the experimental group estimated the
height of the Sears Tower closer to the anchor (i.e., the
unsigned difference between their estimates and the anchor
was smaller) than did participants in the control group,
F(1,341)=23.57, p<.01. Posthoc t-tests revealed that this
effect held both when the adjective “slightly” modified
comparisons [M=9.81 versus 23.81ft.; t(262)=9.88, p<.01],
and when the adjective “much” modified comparisons
[M=18.36 versus 26.71ft; t(424)=14.94, p<.01]. The
ANOVA also revealed a main effect of the modifying
adjective [F(1,341)=6.18, p<.05] most likely because more
participants judged the height of the Sears Tower to be
approximately the same as the anchor in the much condition
than in the slightly condition. There was no interaction
[F(1,341)=1.51, p>.05].
We next examined the estimates of participants who had
judged the height of the Sears Tower to be different from
(i.e., more or less than) the anchor and compared them to
the largest (for more-than judgments) or the smallest (for
less-than judgments) estimates in the control group.
Consistent with the view that verbal comparisons mediate
the effects of anchors on estimation, a 2 (group:
experimental versus control) x 2 (modifying adjective:
“slightly” versus “much”) between-subjects ANOVA on
more-than judgments revealed a main effect of the
modifying adjective [F(1,239)=35.80, p<.01] and a marginal
interaction between the modifying adjective and group
[F(1,239)=3.5, p=.06] such that biases away from the anchor
were significant in the much more-than condition, but not in
the slightly more-than condition (see Table 2). No previous
account of anchoring effects would have predicted these
biases away from the anchor, but they are consistent with
the view that verbal comparisons mediate the effects of
anchors on estimation. An analogous 2 (group: experimental
versus control) x 2 (modifying adjective: “slightly” versus
“much”) between-subjects ANOVA on less-than judgments
also revealed a main effect of the modifying adjective
[F(1,100)=11.2, p<.01] and a significant interaction between
the modifying adjective and group [F(1,100)=4.00, p<.05]
such that there was a significant bias toward the anchor in
the slightly less-than condition, but a nominal, nonsignificant bias away from the anchor in the much less-than
condition. Note that even the null effects observed in the
slightly more-than and much less-than conditions are of
theoretical interest as previous models of anchoring effects

Figure 2. Results of Experiment 1. Graphic estimates are
plotted along the x-axis. Numerical estimates are plotted
along the y-axis. Estimates in the experimental conditions
appear to cluster around comparison-suggested values.
the Sears Tower to be much more than 1,367 feet and 70%
judged it to be approximately the same as 1,367 feet. We
then classified participants in the control group based upon
these percentages. Of the participants in the control
condition whose unbiased graphic estimate was 18mm
above the line that represented the height of the Empire
State Building, 30% with the largest estimates were placed
in the more-than control group and 70% whose estimates
450

would have predicted biases toward the anchor in these
conditions.

anchor. All participants then estimated the height of the
Sears Tower.

Table 2: Biases in estimates of the Sears Tower.
Words

Control
estimates
(in feet)

Exp.
estimates
(in feet)

Results
To investigate the effects of modifying adjectives on
estimation, we ignored whether participants had judged the
unknown value to be more than, approximately the same as,
or less than the anchor and calculated the distance between
every participant’s estimate and the anchor value that she or
he had seen (i.e., the unsigned difference between the
estimate and the anchor value). The results are presented in
Table 3. We analyzed these results using a 2 (modifying
adjectives: much or slightly) x 4 (anchor values: 10th, 40th,
60th, or 90th percentiles of unbiased estimates) betweensubjects analysis of variance (ANOVA). Consistent with the
view that verbal comparisons mediate the effects of anchors
on estimation, the adjective used to modify comparisons
affected estimates. Estimates were closer to anchor values if
the adjective slightly modified comparisons than if the
adjective much modified comparisons, F(1,152) = 5.98,
p<.05.

Significance

More
1,405.54 1,407.81a t(149)=0.39,p>.05
Slightly
1,424.22 1,443.38a t(90)=2.84,p<.01
Much
Less
1303.00 1,320.63t t(62)=2.51,p=.01
Slightly
1,295.42 1,290.71a t(38)=0.54,p>.05
Much
Note: t denotes nominal bias toward anchor;
a denotes nominal bias away from anchor.
Lastly, consistent with the view that verbal comparisons
mediate the effects of anchors on estimation, numerical
estimates of the height of the Sears Tower—averaged across
more than, approximately the same as, and less than
comparisons—were closer to the anchor value of 1,367 feet
in the slightly condition (M=32.09 feet away, SD=28.98)
than in the much condition (M=42.26 feet away, SD=37.27),
t(328)=2.77, p < .01.

Table 3: Average distance of estimates from anchor values.
Anchor values
Modifying adjective
Distance
th
10 percentile
Much
929.95
(300 feet)
Slightly
364.19
40th percentile
Much
1071.7
(1162 feet)
Slightly
284.6
Much
522.45
60th percentile
(1500 feet)
Slightly
242.7
90th percentile
Much
1047.1
(3180 feet)
Slightly
1148.5†
Note: All results are averaged across more than,
approximately the same as, and less than comparisons.
†
Means contrary to predictions due to outliers.

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to replicate the finding in
Experiment 1 that the words used to express comparisons
affect the strength of anchoring effects and to do so without
introducing other values (i.e., the heights of the Empire
State Building and the Petronias Towers) that might have
also served as anchors as was done in Experiment 1. The
view that verbal comparisons mediate the effects of anchors
on estimation predicts that anchoring effects ought to be
stronger if the adjective slightly modifies comparisons (i.e.,
participants judge whether the unknown value is slightly
more than, approximately the same as, or slightly less than
the anchor) than if the adjective much modifies comparisons
(i.e., participants judge whether the unknown value is much
more than, approximately the same as, or much less than the
anchor).

These results are consistent with the view that verbal
comparisons mediate the effects of anchors on estimation.
These results also demonstrate that the pattern of biases
predicted by the view that verbal comparisons mediate
anchoring effects and observed in Experiment 1 is not
contingent upon the presentation of values that could have
served as additional anchors.

Method
Participants. One hundred sixty passengers on the Chicago
elevated train system participated voluntarily.

Discussion
We investigated the possibility that verbal comparisons
mediate the effects of anchors on estimation in two
experiments. In both experiments, participants estimated
the height of the Sears Tower. In Experiment 1, participants
estimated the height of the Sears Tower twice: once
estimating its height graphically on the scale presented in
Figure 1 and once estimating its height in feet. This
procedure allowed us to match estimates in the experimental
condition to estimates in the control condition and, thereby,
form conservative control groups. To maximize the
percentage of estimates that would be biased away from the
anchor, we constrained the range of acceptable estimates in

Materials and Procedure. To find appropriate anchor
values, we asked a control group of participants to estimate
the height of the Sears Tower. We then used the 10th
percentile (300 feet), the 40th percentile (1162 feet), the 60th
percentile (1500 feet), and the 90th percentile (3180 feet) of
estimates as anchor values. Participants compared the height
of the Sears Tower to one of these anchor values by either
identifying it as much more, approximately the same as, or
much less than the anchor or by identifying it as slightly
more, approximately the same as, or slightly less than the

451

Experiment 1. Of the participants who judged the height of
the Sears Tower different from (more or less than) the
anchor, only the estimates of those who had judged the
height slightly less than the anchor were biased toward the
anchor. The estimates of the participants who judged the
height much less and slightly more than the anchor were not
biased toward the anchor. The estimates of the participants
who judged the height much more than the anchor were
biased away from the anchor. The words used to express
comparisons also affected estimates. Experiment 2 placed
no constraints on the range of acceptable estimates.
Replicating the results of Experiment 1, the words used to
express comparisons affected estimates. The results of both
experiments are consistent with the view that verbal
comparisons mediate the effects of anchors on estimation.
The view that verbal comparisons mediate the effects of
anchors on estimation can account for the biases in
estimation observed in the experiments reported here. The
theoretical issues raised by this view are largely orthogonal
to the issues raised by previous accounts of anchoring
effects, however, as the mechanisms by which verbal
comparisons might affect estimation could very well be
analogous to the mechanisms by which anchors have been
thought to affect estimation. That is, verbal comparisons
could affect estimation by altering search strategies
(Jacowitz & Kahneman, 1995; Tversky & Kahneman,
1974), priming values (Hummel & Holyoak, 2001; Wilson
et al., 1996), bringing to mind diagnostic attributes (Strack
& Mussweiler, 1997), appealing to conversational norms
(Schwarz, 1990, note that any account that appeals to
conversational norms would require a theory of the meaning
of verbal comparisons such as the one proposed by Choplin
& Hummel, 2002), or any combination thereof.
Nevertheless, the results reported here suggest that a
complete accounting of the effects of anchors on estimation
will need to consider the mediating effects of verbal
comparisons.

References
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of magnitude.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131(2),
270-286.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). A process model
of human transitive inference. In M. Gattis (Ed.), Spatial
Schemas and Abstract Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Jacowitz, K. E., & Kahneman, D. (1995). Measures of
anchoring in estimation tasks. Personality & Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1161-1166.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and Comparison in English.
New York: Longman.
Schwarz, N. (1990). Assessing frequency reports of
mundane behaviors: Contributions of cognitive
psychology to questionnaire construction. In C. Hendrick
& M. Clark, S. (Eds.), Research Methods in Personality
and Social Psychology (Review of Personality and Social
Psychology, vol. 11) (pp. 98-119). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage.
Strack, F., & Mussweiler, T. (1997). Explaining the
enigmatic anchoring effect: mechanisms of selective
accessibility. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 73, 437-446.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241130.
Wilson, T. D., Houston, C. E., Brekke, N., & Etling, K. M.
(1996). A new look at anchoring effects: Basic anchoring
and its antecedents. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 125, 387-402.

452

