UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Investigations of the Simon and the SNARC Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tw1c508

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Stoianov, Ivilin
Umilta, Carlo
Zorzi, Marco

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Investigations of the Simon and the SNARC Effects
Ivilin Stoianov (Ivilin.Stoianov@unipd.it)
Università di Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8, Padova, Italy

Carlo Umiltà (Carlo.Umiltà@unipd.it)
Università di Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8, Padova, Italy

Marco Zorzi (Marco.Zorzi@unipd.it)
Università di Padova, Dipartimento di Psicologia Generale, via Venezia 8, Padova, Italy

correspondence, known as the Spatial-Numerical
Association of Response Codes (SNARC) effect (Dehaene,
Bossini & Giraux, 1993). The effect is culture-specific: in
western countries, in which writing and reading direction is
left-to-right, the effect appears as a faster response on small
(big) numbers with the left (right) hand, and it reverses in
Arabic cultures, in which reading direction is right-to-left.
The effect is explained by an automatic activation of spatialnumerical representations (i.e., a mental number line; see
Zorzi, Priftis, & Umiltà, 2002) that prime lateralized
responses and interfere with the task-relevant response code.
Prima facie, the SNARC effect and the Simon effect appear
to be very similar. First, both depend on processing of taskirrelevant information within a spatial route; second, both
depend on activation of spatial codes that in turn prime the
response codes. Clearly, this raises the possibility that the
two effects are produced by the same mechanisms (which
would in turn suggest a common neural basis). However, in
a study that aimed at producing both effects within the same
experiment – where Arabic numerals were presented to the
left or to the right of the centre of the screen and the subjects
had to respond with the left or the right button according to
the parity of the stimuli – Mapelli, Rusconi and Umiltà
(2003) found additive Simon and SNARC effects. That is,
parity judgments on lateralized numerals produced the two
main effects but no interaction. The lack of interaction,
according to the Additive Factors Method (AFM; Sternberg,
1969), suggests that the two effects rely upon distinct
mechanisms. This result, however, was questioned by a
recent study that found interaction between the two effects
(Gevers, Caessens & Fias, in press).
There are relatively few attempts at modelling stimulusresponse compatibility phenomena with connectionist
simulations. Zhang, Zhang and Kornblum (1999)
investigated
various
types
of
stimulus-response
compatibility problems, among which the Simon effect, but
the network models were completely hand-crafted. The
Simon effect was explained with an indirect interference of
the irrelevant stimulus dimension at the response level
(output units), but no response times analysis was provided.
Moreover, since the irrelevant positional code was not
decayed, the model cannot accommodate the fundamental
observation of a decreasing Simon effect with increasing
response times. In contrast, the distribution of RTs and the

Abstract
This article presents computational investigations of the
Simon (location-response) and the SNARC (numerical–
response) correspondence effects, with the aim of shedding
light on the issue of whether they arise from independent
or shared spatial coding and spatial processing
mechanisms. A neural network was trained to perform a
parity-judgement task on lateralized numerals, following
pre-training on location-response and numerical-response
associations. Results showed independent effects of Simon
and SNARC correspondences (i.e., without interaction
between them), which supports the hypothesis that the two
effects originate from different neural mechanisms.
Keywords: connectionist modelling;
SNARC effect; Boltzmann machine

Simon

effect;

Introduction
Manual responses to lateralized stimuli are faster when the
spatial location of the stimulus corresponds with that of the
response, both when the spatial dimension is task-relevant
(spatial-compatibility effect; see Umiltà & Nicoletti, 1990,
for review) or task-irrelevant (the Simon effect; Simon &
Rudell, 1967; Lu & Proctor, 1994, for review). In the latter
case, the response is determined by a task-relevant specific
stimulus dimension (e.g., color). In a typical Simon task, the
subjects see lateralized color stimuli (e.g., red or green
squares) and are instructed to respond with one hand to one
color and with the other hand to the other color. One
important finding about the Simon effect is that it decreases
with increasing reaction times (e.g., Hommel, 1994). Hence,
the Simon effect is assumed to originate from the processing
of an automatically activated, but task-irrelevant, shortlasting positional code that in turn activates a response code
competing at the response-selection level with the taskassociated response (Zorzi & Umiltà, 1995). The effect is
typically explained with dual-route processing models, in
which one route processes the relevant stimulus dimension,
whereas the second route processes the task-irrelevant
dimension (location) (De Jong, Liang & Lauber, 1994;
Tagliabue, Zorzi, Umiltà, & Bassagnani, 2000).
Response speed and accuracy in tasks where the relevant
stimulus dimension is numerical information (e.g., parity) is
also modulated by a specific spatial-numerical

2080

visual input

8

1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9

SNARC:
number-response
association
(task –irrelevant)

+

Task

Parity
odd/even

L position R

Intermediate representations

Task

Simon:
location–response
association
(task –irrelevant)

L response R

Figure 1. An associative model of spatial stimulus-response compatibility based upon the associative
Boltzmann-machine trained on a parity-judgement task with lateralized numerals. Input is stimulus location,
parity, magnitude, and task. Output is response code. The intermediate hidden layer allowed the
development of internal representations.

investigated the network connectivity to gather insights into
the computational mechanisms underlying the two effects.

time course of the Simon effect was of primary concern in
the simulations of Tagliabue et al. (2000), which were based
on variants of the network model of Zorzi and Umiltà
(1995). The simulations revealed that a dual-route model
comprising direct location-response connections and indirect
feature-response and location-response connections could
best explain their human RT-data. However, architecture
and connection weights were set by hand. Erlhagen and
Schoner (2002) modeled movement preparation with a
dynamic field-theory model, in which stimulus-response
compatibilities, and the Simon effect in particular, were also
explained with an automatic modulatory input from the taskirrelevant dimensions. Their model, however, is very
general and no learning and architecture were considered.
To the best of our knowledge, no published study has
computationally investigated the SNARC effect.
The current work aimed at investigating the computational
bases of the two effects, by means of connectionist
simulations of the parity-judgement task on lateralized
numerals used by Mapelli et al. (2003). We employed
cognitively plausible neural networks and minimal
architectural assumptions. Our basic prediction was that
both location-response (Simon) and numerical-response
(SNARC) correspondences should significantly decrease
response times with respect to non-corresponding trials. We
particularly looked for an interaction between the effects,
the occurrence of which would suggest common
computational basis according to the AFM. We also

An associative model of stimulus-response
compatibility
Stimulus-response compatibility effects were studied in the
context of the parity-judgement task, in which odd and even
numbers were associated with left- and right-hand
responses, respectively. Stimuli were numbers 1…4 and
6…9, presented to the left or to the right of fixation.
Location and number magnitude were task-irrelevant
features, but associations between left (right) stimulus
location and left (right) hand responses, as well as
associations between small (big) numbers and left (right)
hand responses were assumed to be present (i.e., prelearned) before learning the parity task. These previous
associations were the primary causes of the Simon and
SNARC effects.
The model is shown in Figure 1. It is based upon the
Boltzmann machine, an associative-memory neural network
trained with a cognitively plausible learning mechanism (see
below) that we have previously used for the simulation of
various number processing tasks (e.g., Stoianov et al., 2002;
Zorzi, Stoianov, & Umilta, 2005, for review). One group of
neurons in the visible layer provides the following input to
the model: (i) location (left, centre, right), (ii) magnitude,
(iii) parity, and (iv) task: response determined by location,
magnitude, or parity. Other neurons in the visible layer are

2081

at time zero (positive phase)
reconstruction (negative phase):

output neurons that encode the response (left-hand, righthand). The three locations were encoded with a distributed
code: left [1 0], centre [1 1], and right [0 1]. Central location
was encoded in order to examine location-neutral
conditions. Numbers were encoded semantically with a
linear Number-line code (see Zorzi et al., 2005), whereby a
specific number is represented by the position of the hill of
activity over a set of units labelled [1 … 9]. Parity was
localistically encoded with two features, standing for odd
and even. The tasks were encoded by three dedicated units:
location-based response, magnitude-based response, and
parity-based response. All visible neurons were
interconnected, which allowed the network to form any
direct association within the visible layer. The network had
10 hidden units, which allowed indirect associations through
intermediate representations.

∆wij = η ( mi0 mj0 - mi1 mj1)

one-pass

data

(2)

where η denotes the learning coefficient. In our simulations
we used this learning algorithm in an unsupervised mode,
i.e. during learning there was no distinction between input
and output neurons (for details, see Stoianov et al., 2002).

Training and testing procedure
The network was first pre-trained for 5.000 epochs on
location-response and numerical-response associations, in
proportion of 80% and 20%, respectively – a ratio that could
roughly reflect the natural distribution of both types of
associations. Each epoch included the combination of all
numbers (1…9) and locations (L,C,R), resulting in a total of
27 patterns. In the spatial correspondence task, the left
location was associated with left response, the right location
with right response, and the central location was randomly
associated with left or right responses. The numbercorrespondence task, in turn, associated small numbers with
left response and large numbers with right response in a
stochastic manner, linearly dependent on the distance from
the halfway number of 5. During either of the tasks, the
corresponding task-code was activated, simulating attention
to location or number.
The network was then trained on the parity task, in which
odd numbers were associated with left response and even
numbers with right response. Stimuli were the same as in the
previous learning tasks, with the exception of number 5,
which was excluded in order to allow balanced distribution
of left- and right-responses. During this phase all weights
were free to change, which allowed the network to
reallocate computational resources, in particular at the level
of the hidden units. Learning in this phase was stopped at
convergence of performance level.
Performance on the parity task was tested by presenting
lateralized numerals, as in the Mapelli et al. (2003) study.
Thus, the input patterns were defined by the combination of
location (left or right) and identity of the numeral (1-9,
excluding 5). To accommodate earlier psychological
findings about relatively slower feature identification and
fast decay of the positional code (see Tagliabue et al., 2000),
the onset of numerical features was delayed by 30 iterations
and the positional code was offset after a small delay of 7
iterations. Neuronal states were updated with a momentum
of 0.97. Each testing condition was repeated 100 times,
varying only the initial states of the hidden units and the
Gaussian noise (µ=0, σ=0.1) added to the response units.
Response retrieval was stopped at convergence of all
neurons, i.e., when the change in the neuron’s activation
between two processing time-steps has no significance
(being smaller that a constant ε=0.0001). The number of
iterations until response were recorded for statistical
analysis.

Learning algorithm
Boltzmann Machines (Ackley, Hinton & Sejnowski, 1985)
are associative networks of stochastic neurons that
iteratively generate patterns according to the distribution of
the data learned. They consist of a layer of visible neurons
encoding the presented pattern and a layer of hidden neurons
that learn complex statistical dependencies among the data
observed at the visible layer. The networks are fully
connected, without structural biases. To generate patterns,
after initialisation of all neurons, the networks iterate until
convergence by updating all neurons in parallel, or
asynchronously. The number of steps to convergence can be
readily interpreted as response time, to be matched against
human RT data. Originally, Boltzmann Machines were
trained with a contrastive Hebbian learning algorithm: in a
positive phase corresponding to classical Hebbian learning,
patterns were clamped to the visible layer; the hidden units
were settled and the weights were augmented with the mean
correlations between every coupled neurons. In a second,
negative phase (anti-learning), the visible neurons were
unclamped; all neurons settled again, and the weights were
decreased with the mean correlations for this step. In this
way, the visible neurons learned to reproduce the data.
However, this stochastic learning algorithm is extremely
slow.
Hence, we used the approximate deterministic learning
algorithm of Welling and Hinton (2002) that dramatically
speeds-up the simulations, maintaining biological
plausibility (Contrastive Divergence Mean-Field learning).
The algorithm operates upon the mean-field activities mi of
neurons i=1…n and are given by the solution of a set of n
coupled mean-field equations:
|| mi = σ ( Σj=1..n wij mj + θi)

and

(1)

where σ notates the sigmoid function; wij is the weight from
unit j to unit i, and θi is the bias of unit i. Note that these
equations correspond to “classical” neuronal activation with
recurrent connectivity. Then, the update ∆wij of a weight
connecting two units is proportional to the difference
between the correlations between their mean-field activities

2082

RT

500

500

400

400

RT

300

300

Simon

SNARC

200

200
n-c.

n-c.

c.

100
1

2

3

4

5

c.

100

6

1

BIN

2

3

4

5

6

BIN

Figure 2. Network RTs as a function of Bin, Simon, and SNARC correspondences
(‘c.’=corresponding, ‘n-c.’=non-corresponding).

Results

Vis-Vis [

Magnitude

-

Parity-TASK-Pos-Response]

2
4
6
8
Neuron

Pre-training: The network learned all location-response and
numerical-response associations. The location-response
associations were learned as both direct input-output and
indirect associations. The numerical-response associations
were encoded with direct links only, although some hidden
units showed preference for certain numbers. Thus, the
hidden units mainly encoded location-response associations.
The two response units at the visible layer, as well as any
other coupled neurons (e.g., location and task), developed
strong inhibitory interconnections (similarly to the weights
in Figure 3).
Parity-judgement: The parity-judgement task was learned
for about 1000 epochs, relying mostly on direct parityresponse connections, and preserving both the direct
location-response and numerical-response associations (see
Figure 3). Network performance on this task was then
examined by multiple response retrieval. Erroneous
responses were about 5% - a typical level of errors for
humans in this task.
RT analysis: Response times on correct trials were first
analysed for the SNARC and Simon effects with a 2x2
ANOVA. As predicted, both the location-response and
numerical-response
correspondences
significantly
influenced response times (p<0.001), indicating faster
responses for corresponding trials compared to noncorresponding trials. However, no interaction between the
two effects was found (p>0.38), which suggests their
reliance on different computational resources. To examine
the time-course of the two effects, the RTs for each
combination of SNARC and Simon correspondences were
divided into 6 bins, with equal number of items per bin. A
three-way ANOVA – Simon (2) x SNARC (2) x BIN (6) –
showed that the effects also depended on the BIN factor. In

particular, the Simon x BIN interaction (p<0.05) shows that
the Simon effect disappears at the slowest bin (p>0.40).
Magnitude is another factor that generally affects number
processing, so we examined its effect on the RTs. For this

10
12
14
16
18
20
0

5

10
Input

15

20

Figure 3. Direct connections among the neurons of the
visible layer, after learning the parity task. The visible
neurons encode: magnitude (neurons 1-11), parity (1213), task (14-16), position (17-18), and response (19-20).
Gray and black boxes represent positive, and negative
values, respectively; box size represents absolute
strength. We note the strong mutual inhibitory
connections and position-response, and parity-response
excitatoty associations.

2083

the number magnitude, appearing stronger towards the
extremes of the numerical interval. In effect, the change of
response preference in humans is also gradual (Dehaene et
al., 1993; Fias et al., 1996).
In agreement with the results of the Mapelli et al. (2003)
study, the SNARC effect and the Simon effect did not
interact (i.e., they were additive). According to the AFM,
this result strongly suggests their reliance upon different
neural mechanisms. From a computational point of view, the
functional analysis of the network showed that (i)
independent direct location-response and numericalresponse associations had been formed during pre-training,
and (ii) the hidden units tuned on parity had developed
during pre-training a preference mainly for location, which
allowed the existence of indirect parity-response
associations modulated by location but independent of
number. Thus, the functional analysis confirmed the RTbased finding that the two effects relied on different
computational mechanisms, even if spatial and numerical
signals necessarily meet at the response-selection (output)
level.
We note that the distribution of intermediate resources
reflects the distribution of location-response compatibility
and numerical-response compatibility tasks during the pretraining (80% vs. 20%): the network has apparently used
most of the indirect resources to encode location-response
dependencies. The situation could be changed with more
even distributions of the tasks (e.g., 50% - 50%), which
would be however less plausible: spatial associations
between stimuli and responses located on the same side
(such as reaching for a right-located object with the right
hand) are much more frequently experienced than spatialnumerical associations.
The model presented in this article is consistent with
previous models of spatial stimulus-response compability, in
particular with those developed by Zorzi and collegues
(Zorzi & Umiltà, 1995; Tagliabue et al., 2000). Dispensing
with a hand-wired architecture represents a major advantage
of the present model over its predecessors. However, our
results stepped upon numerous assumptions: i) a simple
uniform architecture; ii) limited intermediate computational
resources (just 10 hidden units); iii) a simple positional code
(only two neurons, encoding L, C, R); iv) a specific
distribution of location-response and numerical-response
associations during learning (80% vs. 20%). Therefore,
further systematic simulations with a richer positional signal
and a different hidden layer size are needed to strengthen
the conclusions. We also plan to investigate in detail the
modulation produced by the task signal upon the
intermediate resources.
In conclusion, the simulations demonstrate that both the
Simon and the SNARC effect arise at the response-selection
(output) level, where all input signals converge, but they are
based upon different mechanisms involving distinct
processing pathways.

purpose, we first grouped odd and even numbers to produce
four magnitude categories (1-2, 3-4, 6-7, 8-9). A three-way
ANOVA on the RTs with predictors SNARC, Simon, and
magnitude revealed significant main effect of each predictor
(p<0.001), but also an interaction between the SNARC
effect and magnitude (p<0.001). The latter shows that the
size of the SNARC effect was bigger towards the extremes
of the numerical interval 1-9.
Internal representations: Most of the hidden units were
specialized for responding to parity, but preserving their
prior response preference to location. Thus, a kind of
intermediate feature-response code modulated by location
was formed. Units responding to opposite features
developed mutual inhibitory connections, which caused
competition also at the intermediate levels. In contrast, units
responding to the same features supported each other by
means of positive interconnections (previous models did not
include interaction among the internal code; e.g., Tagliabue
et al., 2000).
In sum, partially maintained pre-learned spatial response
preferences of the hidden units was one of the main
determinants of the model’s behaviour.

Discussion
This study investigated the computational basis of two
stimulus-response compatibility phenomena: the Simon and
the SNARC effects.
One source of the Simon effect in the model was a
conflict between the task-relevant response code and the
short-lasting positional signal coming from the direct
location-response links that pre-activated or inhibited the
target response. Indeed, the effect disappeared when the
positional code offset was minimized: in a control
simulation that used the same network and parameters,
except for the positional code offset that was set to one, the
network RTs again exhibited the SNARC effect (p<0.001),
but not the Simon effect (p>0.40).
Therefore, a kind of intermediate location-response code
was maintained active even after decaying the positional
code at the input level, due to the positive feedback among
hidden units responding to the same features. This signal
interfered with the correct response in the noncorresponding trials, increasing RTs even in the case of
relatively short positional code offsets. Thus, the typical
pattern of the Simon effect (decreasing effect for bins
containing slower RTs) was simulated only by means of
Gaussian noise added to the input of the neurons (the noise
gradually cancelled the intermediate positional signal).
In sum, the size of the Simon effect and its interaction
with bin depended on the delay of the spatial code offset (no
effect for a very fast offset; no cancellation of the effect for
relatively long offset delays) and the size of the noise
induced (a minimal level of noise was needed in order to
cancel the effect for the slowest RTs).
The SNARC effect was relatively strong and it was
caused by the direct associations between the number-line
code and the response neurons that facilitated (or inhibited)
response selection. The size of the effect was modulated by

2084

Mapelli, D, Rusconi, & E, Umilta, C. (2003). The SNARC
effect: an instance of the Simon effect? Cognition, 88,
B1-B10.
Simon, J., & Rudell, A. (1967). Auditory S–R compatibility:
The effect of an irrelevant cue on information
processing. Journal of Applied Psychology, 51, 300–
304.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages:
Extensions of Donders's method. Acta Psychologica, 30,
276-315.
Stoianov, I., Zorzi, M., Becker, S., & Umilta, C. (2002).
Associative Arithmetic with Boltzmann Machines: The
Role of Number Representations. In J. Dorronsoro (Ed.),
ICANN2002, v. 2415 (pp. 277-283). Berlin: Springer.
Tagliabue, M., Zorzi, M., Umiltà, C., & Bassignani, F.
(2000). The role of long-term-memory and short-termmemory links in the Simon effect. JEP: Human
Perception & Performance, 26, 648-670.
Umiltà, C., & Nicoletti, R. (1990). Spatial stimulus-response
compatibility. In R. W. Proctor & T. G. Reeve (Eds.),
Stimulus-response
compatibility:
An
integrated
perspective. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Welling, M., & Hinton, G. (2002). A new learning
algorithm for mean field Boltzmann Machines. In J.
Dorronsoro (Ed.), ICANN2002, v.2415. Berlin: Springer.
Zhang, H., Zhang, J., & Kornblum, S. (1999). A parallel
distributed processing model of stimulus–stimulus and
stimulus–response compatibility. Cognitive Psychology,
38, 386–432.
Zorzi, M., & Umilta, C. (1995). A computational model of
the Simon effect. Psychological Research, 58, 193–205.
Zorzi, M., Stoianov, I., & Umilta, C. (2005). Computational
modeling of numerical cognition. In J. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of Mathematical Cognition. NY: Psych.
Press.
Zorzi, M., Priftis, K., & Umilta, C. (2002). Neglect disrupts
the mental number line. Nature, 417, 138-139.

Acknowledgments
I.S. was supported by a fellowship (Assegno di Ricerca)
from the University of Padova to C.U. The study was also
supported by grants from MIUR (PRIN 2003 to C.U. and
PRIN 2004 to M.Z.), European Commission (Marie Curie
RTN “NUMBRA” to M.Z.), and the University of Padova
(Progetto di Ateneo 2003 to M.Z.).

References
Ackley D, Hinton, G., & Sejnowski, T. (1985). A Learning
Algorithm for Boltzmann Machines. Cognitive Science,
9, 147-169.
De Jong, R., Liang, C., & Lauber, E. (1994). Conditional
and un conditional automaticity: A dual-process model
of effects of spatial stimulus–response correspondence.
JEP: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 731–750.
Dehaene S, Bossini S., & Giraux P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. JEP:
General, 122, 371-396.
Erlhagen, W., & Schoner, G. (2002). Dynamic field theory
of movement preparation. Psychological Review, 109/3,
545-572.
Fias,W., Brysbaert, M., Geypens, F., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). The importance of magnitude information in
numerical processing: evidence from the SNARC effect,
Mathematical Cognition, 2, 95–110.
Gevers, W., Caessens, B., & Fias, W. (in press). Towards a
common processing architecture underlying Simon and
SNARC effects. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology.
Hommel, B. (1994). Spontaneous decay of response code
activation. Psychological Research, 56, 261–268.
Lu, C., & Proctor, R. (1994). Processing of an irrelevant
location dimension as a function of the relevant stimulus
dimension. JEP: Human Perception and Performance,
20, 286–298.

2085

