UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparing the Recall Inhibition Effects of Affect and Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6r7083zm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Erevelles, Sunil
Fukawa, Nobuyuki

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparing the Recall Inhibition Effects of Affect and Cognition
Nobuyuki Fukawa (nobu@uga.edu)
Department of Marketing, University of Georgia
Brooks Hall, Athens, GA 30602 USA

Sunil Erevelles (serevell@email.uncc.edu)
Department of Marketing, University of North Carolina
9201 University City Boulevard, Charlotte, NC 28223 USA

Research Objectives

Abstract

The objectives of this research are (i) to test the relative
ability of the affective and cognitive components of overall
brand attitudes to inhibit other brands in the category, (ii) to
examine the recall inhibition effect as a method to study
brand affect without forcing participants to go through a
cognitive memory process, and (iii) to shed some light on the
accessibility of brand affect

This paper compares the inhibition effects of affect and
cognition on the recall of competing members of a category.
The results indicate that the affective component of overall
attitudes has a greater ability to inhibit the recall of competing
members than the cognitive component. From a methodological
viewpoint, the recall inhibition effect is proposed as a relatively
unbiased way to study affective and cognitive-driven recall
effects, without forcing participants into cognitive recall
processes.

Literature Review

Introduction
Memory cues are often used to enhance recall (Unnava,
Burnkrant & Erevelles, 1994; Goddard, Pring, & Felmingham,
2005). If a person is presented with a category name, for
example, it serves as a cue to recall members of the category
(Tulving & Pearlstone 1966). Additional cues may heighten
recall for otherwise previously inaccessible members of the
category (Lewis, 1971).
A curious phenomena, however, has been noted by some
researchers (e.g., Rundus, 1973; Alba & Chattopadhyay,
1985). When a category member or instance is presented as a
cue, research has shown that it inhibits the recall of other
members in the category. This phenomena is usually referred
to as the “recall inhibition effect.” For example, a person
asked to recall brands of shampoo may recall about ten
brands. If however, the person is cued with a brand or a
subset of brands from the shampoo category prior to the recall
task, he or she would recall significantly fewer brands. This
effect has been found to be quite robust, and has been well
substantiated in both psychology and marketing literature
(e.g., Slamecka, 1968; Rundus, 1973; Nickerson, 1984; Alba
& Chattopadhyay, 1985, 1986).
Most studies on the recall inhibition effect have used a
subset of cues (e.g., words or brands) to inhibit the recall of
other members in the category. No research has examined
how attitude towards a cue (e.g., a brand) may affect
inhibition of other members in the category. Even more
specifically, no research has examined how the components
of attitudes (affect and cognition) may influence the inhibition
of other members in the category.

726

Several theoretical explanations have been suggested to
account for the recall inhibition effect (See Nickerson, 1984).
Rundus (1973) proposed one explanation, sometimes called
the "competition-at-retrieval" hypothesis. The intuition
behind this explanation is that the presentation (cueing) of an
item of a category or set, strengthens the associations in
memory between the item and the category. It thus increases
the accessibility of that item relative to the other items in the
category. A formulation of this hypothesis is known as the
"ratio rule." According to the ratio rule (Rundus, 1973), the
probability of retrieving an item from a category is equal to
the associative strength between the item and the category,
divided by the sum of the associative strengths between all
items and the category. When a person is cued with an item
from a category; the associative strength between that item
and the category increases, thereby reducing the probability
of the retrieval of other items in the category (Miniard,
Unnava & Bhatla, 1989).
Later, Anderson, Bjork and Bjork (1994) proposed the
theory of “retrieval-induced forgetting”. They argue that this
theory “reflects retrieval based suppression rather than
strength dependent competition.” Since “strength dependent
competition may reflect retrieval-induced forgetting
(Anderson et al. 1994),” we need not to consider this theory
as contradictory to "competition-at-retrieval" hypothesis.
The generalizability and robustness of the recall inhibition
effect has been well documented in psychology and
marketing literature. Slamecka (1968) used 30-item word lists
and found that participants who were cued with these words
recalled a significantly lower proportion of the non-cued
items than participants in a control group. Tulving and
Pearlstone (1966), Parker and Warren (1974), Roediger
(1978), and Dopkins and Ngo (2002) extended these studies
using lists of cues from various different categories.

accessibility of other brands in the category. According to the
ratio rule, the probability of retrieving an item (brand) from a
category is equal to the associative strength between the item
and the category, divided by the sum of the associative
strengths between all items and the category. Therefore, any
factor that enhances the associative strength between an item
and a category reduces the probability of retrieval of other
items in the category.
The recall inhibition effect appears to be an effective way
to elicit participants' affective responses, without forcing
them to go through a cognitive retrieval process. In doing so,
it could also be tested if affect is more accessible than
cognition from memory. If, indeed, the affective component
of a brand is more accessible (i.e., salient) in memory than the
cognitive component, it should have a greater recall inhibition
effect than the cognitive component on other brands in the
product category. Since, in addition to the product proposition
node, the emotion nodes also contribute to the increase of the
salience of brands with strong affective components, these
brands would tend to create a larger recall inhibition effect
than brands with relatively weaker affective components. The
difference in this level of activation or salience will cause
different inhibitory effects.
Also, during initial periods of free recall of brands in a
category, little conscious effort is expended by the participant.
Brands with dominant affective components represented by
highly salient emotion nodes, and the direct associations
between the emotion nodes and related product and brand
proposition nodes will cause substantial recall inhibition of
brands represented by relatively less accessible nodes. During
later periods of recall however, considerable conscious effort
is expended by the participant, and some brands represented
even by the relatively less accessible nodes are retrieved. As
the focus is primarily on the comparison of affective and
cognitive memory processes, there is no reason to expect any
gender differences in the scenario presented.
Based on the above discussion, the following hypotheses
are proposed:
H1: Brands with a predominant affective component will
produce a larger recall inhibition effect for other brands in the
product category than brands with a predominant cognitive
component.
H2: The recall inhibition effects specified in H1 will be
stronger in initial periods of recall than for later periods.
H3: There will be no gender differences for the recall
inhibition effects specified in H1 and H2.

Generally, cued participants were found to recall words from
fewer non-cued categories than did control participants. It
was also found that the presentation of a subset of category
names enhanced recall of the items in that category, but
inhibited the recall of items from other categories. Dopkins
and Ngo (2002) found that when a noun was recalled as
having occurred in a sentence, another later noun was
inhibited.
In the marketing literature, Alba and Chattopadyay (1985)
studied the effects of cueing participants with a subset of
brands from a category, on the recall of other competing
brands in the category. They found that depending on the
knowledge level of consumers, a subset of brands can either
inhibit or enhance recall of brands in a product category.
They also showed that even the presentation of only two
brands as cues can significantly inhibit the recall of
competing brands.
Alba and Chattopadyay (1986) investigated an alternative
route to inhibiting recall of competing brands in a category.
They studied the effects of an increase in "salience" of a
single brand on the recall of other competing brands in the
category. Salience refers to the "prominence" or "level of
activation" of an item in memory (c.f. Alba & Chattopadyay,
1986). They found that by increasing the salience of a single
"cue" brand, the recall of other competing brands in the
category are significantly hindered. They demonstrated this
effect for several product categories and in different
marketing contexts. In all the situations, the recall inhibition
effect proved to be remarkably consistent and robust. Alba
and Chattopadyay explain these results on the inability of a
person to suppress the recall of salient information during
memory search. When a brand is made more salient, it
repeatedly "comes to mind" and is retrieved during memory
search, thus inhibiting the recall of other competing brands in
the category.
The recall inhibition effect appears to be an excellent tool
to access participants' affective responses without forcing
them to go through a cognitive process, thus reducing
cognitive bias during retrieval processes, usually inherent in
such tasks. It thus could serve as a useful method to compare
how affect and cognition affect memory processes.

Hypotheses
To summarize, research has shown that when a category
member or instance is presented as a cue, it inhibits the recall
of other members in the category. The salience of a member
(brand) has also been shown to affect recall inhibition of other
members in the category. If a brand is made more salient in
memory, it inhibits the recall of other brands in the category.
This occurs because it is difficult to suppress the recall of
salient information in memory.
The theoretical explanation behind the recall inhibition
effect relates to the strength of associations in memory
between a category and a cued member of the category. The
stronger this association, the more accessible the brand is,
relative to other brands in the category. During the retrieval
process, the high accessibility of the cued brand decreases the

Methodology
Pre-tests
During the first stage of pre-testing, focus groups were
conducted to elicit a list of ten product categories considered
“common repeat purchase products” by the group.
Consumers usually follow a “low-involvement” decision
process when purchasing such products.
Since a major purpose of this study is to compare the
relative accessibility of a predominantly affective brand with
727

that of a predominantly cognitive brand, a "balanced"
common repeat purchase product category (toothpaste) was
selected during the second stage of pretests. (A “balanced”
product category is one that was determined from pretests, to
be a category where consumers consider both affective and
cognitive cues in their purchase decisions.)
In the third stage of pre-testing, ten different hypothetical
or unknown brand names were tested on the same pool of
participants as used in the study. On the first page of the
questionnaire, participants were asked if they had previously
heard of any of the hypothetical ten brand names listed. On
the second page, participants were asked if, in their opinion,
each of the brand names was suitable for a new brand of
toothpaste. This was done in order to make the manipulation
both realistic and plausible. The pre-study showed that
familiarity for the name "Jade" was nonexistent. Participants
also felt that this brand name would be suitable for the
toothpaste category. The name "Jade" was thus chosen for the
treatment conditions.
The fourth stage of pre-testing was to determine strong
functional attributes to be used in preparing stimulus material
for the cognitive treatment condition. In this phase,
participants were asked to list the "three top criteria" in
purchasing a brand of toothpaste. The most often cited
functional attributes were selected as arguments for the
cognitive treatment conditions. These attributes were
incorporated into the stimulus material for the cognitive
treatment condition.
In the fifth stage of pre-testing, the experimental
manipulations were tested. Three different conditions were
planned for the study: (i) the affective condition (ii) the
cognitive condition and (iii) the control condition. The
affective and cognitive conditions were manipulated with
specially prepared color print advertisements. There were
three advertisements for each condition. Each advertisement
contained a headline, a color picture and a professionally
developed image of the brand. The experimenter, with the
help of five participants from the same pool as used in the
study, selected pictures for the treatment conditions.

Manipulation Check
Sixty-six participants participated in the pretest. A 3
(condition) x 2 (gender) between participants design was
used. After the six minutes it took to go through all the
advertisements, participants were given a questionnaire that
contained Batra and Ahtola's (1990) scale and asked to rate
the "Jade" brand on the scale. The scale consisted of eight 7point semantic differential sets of items used to identify the
affective (pleasant/unpleasant, nice/awful, agreeable/
disagreeable, happy/sad) and cognitive (useful/useless,
valuable/worthless, beneficial/not beneficial, wise/foolish)
dimensions of each brand. An analysis of variance of the data
revealed that manipulation was successful.

Main Study
The main study was conducted using a 3 (condition) x 2
(gender) between-subjects design consisting of two treatment
conditions (affective, cognitive) and one control condition.
Gender was also included as a factor. (Alba and
Chattopadyay (1986) had hypothesized that in some product
categories, women had a more highly differentiated
knowledge than men, and this facilitated their recall of
otherwise inaccessible brands)
Participants were undergraduate business students at a
major research university. Participants were run individually
in a room where all drapes had been drawn to minimize
distraction and to facilitate recall inhibition effects. The
treatment conditions were rotated from session to session.
After being seated, the participants were presented with a
folder from the appropriate treatment condition that contained
the twelve advertisements. The experimenter prompted the
participant to turn to the next ad every thirty seconds. After
the participant had gone through all the advertisements, he or
she was given “Questionnaire 1.” The purpose of
“Questionnaire 1” was to clear the advertisements and the
brands that the participants had just seen from their short-term
memory. This was done so that the relative differences in
salience (accessibility) for the affective and cognitive
conditions would be accentuated, and measurable. The
participant was asked to recall the brand names seen in the
advertisements. After this, he or she was asked to read a
passage about the Yellowstone National Park, and then
answer questions about the passage.
“Questionnaire l” was then collected, and the participant
was given “Questionnaire 2.” As instructed, the participant
listed names of brands from the category (toothpaste). The
experimenter rang a bell at the end of 30 seconds, 1 minute, 2
minutes, 3 minutes and 4 minutes. Participants were asked to
mark their listing task each time the bell was rung. At the end
of four minutes, participants were asked to stop listing brands.
Participants were then asked to answer three questions: the
first was about their gender, the second question verified if
they had heard about the "Jade" brand name in the past, and
the final question again asked them to recall the brand names
in the advertisements they had seen earlier.
The dependent variable was the number of brands recalled.
As stated in the hypotheses, it was expected that recall

Stimuli
In the affective condition, the headline read: "The Incredibly
Exhilarating Feeling of Jade." This was followed by a picture
in each ad, each of which was judged to be highly emotional
in nature from pretests in another study. It consisted of 3
variations of a "happy couple" situation, with the couples
embracing. In the cognitive condition, 3 non-emotional
pictures of shopping situations were used. The headline read:
"Jade: Now Available in Local Stores," followed by three
strong attributes identified in pretests. In the control
condition, instead of the target product category, participants
were exposed to advertisements for an unrelated product
category. Nine other different filler advertisements for three
different brands (i.e., three for each brand) were also included
in each manipulation condition. The brands in these
advertisements were also unfamiliar brands, so as not to draw
special attention to the target brands.
728

Similarly no interaction effects for the 30 second (F=1.59,
p<.2104), 1 minute (F=3.09, p<.052) or 4 minute (F=1.61,
p<.2073) intervals attained significance. Table 1
summarizes the main effects and interactions for the
toothpaste category.

inhibition of other brands in the category will be more in the
affective condition than in the cognitive condition. Moreover,
this effect is expected to be greater in the earlier phases of
recall than in the later phases.

Results

Table 1: Recall Inhibition Results
Main Effects and Interactions.

Manipulation Check
A manipulation check was conducted for the treatment
conditions. The three treatment conditions were: Treatment 1:
Affective
Manipulation,
Treatment
2:
Cognitive
Manipulation, Treatment 3: Control Condition. The data
were analyzed using a 3 (condition) x 2 (gender) ANOVA.
The manipulation appeared to be successful. As expected, a
strong main effect for condition was obtained for both the
affective component (F=7.52, p<.001) and the cognitive
component (F=9.70, p<.0002). However, no main effect for
gender for the affective component (F=.09, p<.7638) or the
cognitive component (F=.05, p<.8312) was observed.
Similarly the interaction for the affective component (F=.04,
p<.9635) or the cognitive component (F=.12, p<.8859) was
not significant.
The affective means for treatments 1, 2 and 3 are 2.3864,
1.3409 and 1.0341 respectively. Preplanned comparisons
indicate that the affective mean for treatment 1 is significantly
different than the affective mean for treatment 2 (p<.005), and
the affective mean for the control condition (p<.0005). The
affective mean for treatment 2 did not significantly differ
from the affective mean for the control condition (p<.43). The
cognitive means for treatments 1, 2 and 3 are 1.6136, 2.4205
and 1.0909 respectively. Preplanned comparisons indicate
that the cognitive mean for treatment 2 is significantly
different than the cognitive mean for treatment 1 (p<.01), and
the cognitive mean for the control condition (p<.0001). The
cognitive mean for treatment 1 did not significantly differ
from the cognitive mean for the control condition (p<.07). No
significant pre-planned comparisons were obtained for gender
or for the condition-gender interaction.

Analysis: 3 (condition) x 2 (gender ) ANOVA
Main Effects:
Significant main effects for condition:
30 second interval:
F=5.89, p<.004
1 minute interval:
F=5.25, p<.007
4 minute interval:
F=4.67, p<.01
No main effect for gender for
30 second interval:
F=0.14, p<.705
1 minute interval:
F=0.07, p<.792
4 minute interval:
F=0.04, p<.836
Interactions:
No significant interactions for
30 second interval:
F=1.59, p<.210
1 minute interval:
F=3.09, p<.052
4 minute interval:
F=1.61, p<.207
The mean number of brands recalled during the 30 second
interval for treatments 1, 2 and 3 were 3.9615, 4.6923 and
4.9615 respectively. Preplanned comparisons indicate that the
number of brands recalled in the affective manipulation
condition (3.9615) and the number of brands recalled in the
cognitive manipulation condition (4.6923) are significantly
different from each other (p<.01) in the expected direction.
The number of brands recalled in the affective manipulation
condition (3.9615) and the number of brands recalled in the
control condition (4.9615) were also significantly different
from each other (p<.001). No significant difference (p<.40)
was obtained for the number of brands recalled in the
cognitive manipulation condition (4.6923) and the number of
brands recalled in the control condition (4.9615).
The mean number of brands recalled during the 1 minute
interval for treatments 1, 2 and 3 were 4.9615, 5.6538 and
6.0769 respectively. Preplanned comparisons indicate that the
number of brands recalled in the affective manipulation
condition (4.9615) and the number of brands recalled in the
cognitive manipulation condition (5.6538) are significantly
different from each other (p<.03). The number of brands
recalled in the affective manipulation condition (4.9615) and
the number of brands recalled in the control condition
(6.0769) were also significantly different from each other
(p<.002). No significant difference (p<.31) was obtained for
the number of brands recalled in the cognitive manipulation
condition (5.6538) and the number of brands recalled in the
control condition (6.0769).

Main Study
The dependent variable used is the number of non-cued
brands recalled. The three treatment conditions were:
Treatment 1: Affective Manipulation, Treatment 2:
Cognitive Manipulation, and Treatment 3: Control
Condition. The data were analyzed using a 3 (condition) x 2
(gender) ANOVA. This was carried out for non-cued brands
recalled at the end of 30 seconds, 1 minute and 4 minutes. A
significant main effect for condition was obtained for the 30
second interval (F=5.89, p<.004), the 1 minute interval
(F=5.25, p<.007) and the 4 minute interval (F=4.67, p<.01).
No main effect for gender was observed for the 30 second
interval (F=.14, p<.7058), the one minute interval (F=.07,
p<.7922) or the 4 minute interval (F=.04, p<.8363).

729

Table 2: Recall Inhibition Results
Preplanned Comparisons.

Theoretical Contributions
This research contributes to the existing body of knowledge
on affective and cognitive memory processes. The direct
theoretical contribution is the fact that the affective
component of overall brand attitudes produces greater
inhibitory effects on other brands in the category, than the
cognitive component. In addition, the findings may indicate
that affect is retrieved prior to cognition from memory.
Salience is responsible for inhibiting the recall of other brands
in the category, because it is difficult to suppress the recall of
salient information during memory search. By a similar line
of argument, this research raises some serious reservations
about past beliefs that cognitive information is more readily
accessible from memory, because of the increased elaboration
that takes place during the encoding process. The
methodologies used in the past studies may have biased the
results of those studies in favor of the cognitive component.
This research presents a better methodology for assessing
affective memory retrieval processes. Finally, this research
appears to support the associative network model of Bower
(1981). The results provide indications on how affect is stored
in relation to brand names and product categories in memory.
The results shed some light on past conceptualizations
regarding emotion nodes, product proposition nodes and
brand proposition nodes.

Mean of Number of Brands Recalled
Treatment 30 Seconds 1 Minute 4 Minutes
1 (Affective) 3.961
4.961
6.076
2 (Cognitive) 4.692
5.653
7.230
3 (Control) 4.961
6.076
7.384
30 Second Interval:
Treatments 1 and 2: Significantly different (p<.01)
Treatments 1 and 3: Significantly different (p<.001)
Treatments 2 and 3: Not significantly different (p<.40)
1 Minute Interval:
Treatments 1 and 2: Significantly different (p<.03)
Treatments 1 and 3: Not significantly different (p<.002)
Treatments 2 and 3: Significantly different (p<.31)
4 Minute Interval:
Treatments 1 and 2: Significantly different (p<.01)
Treatments 1 and 3: Not significantly different (p<.006)
Treatments 2 and 3: Significantly different (p<.80)
The mean number of brands recalled during the 4 minute
interval for treatments 1, 2 and 3 were 6 .0769, 7.2308 and
7.3846 respectively. Preplanned comparisons indicate that the
number of brands recalled in the affective manipulation
condition (6.0769) and the number of brands recalled in the
cognitive condition (7.2308) are significantly different from
each other (p< .01) . The number of brands recalled in the
affective manipulation condition (6.0769) and the number of
brands recalled in the control condition (7.3846) were also
significantly different from each other (p<.006). No
significant difference (p<.80) was obtained for the number of
brands recalled in the cognitive manipulation condition
(7.2308) and the number of brands recalled in the control
condition (7.3846). No significant gender effects were
obtained. These results are presented in Tables 3 and 4.

Managerial Implications
From a managerial perspective, this provides several
insights for the management of brands. The results obtained
may indicate what advertising strategies may be used when
entering highly competitive markets with a number of similar
brands. It may also indicate which brands are most
susceptible to competitive attack. The findings of this study
also suggest that it may be useful to develop a brand’s
affective component, even for a primarily utilitarian category.
This research also demonstrates that enhancing the affective
component of a brand may also result in significant inhibition
of other brands in the category. If the affective component of
a brand is so readily accessible that the recall inhibition effect
can be obtained by simple exposure for brands with strong
affective components, the managerial implications are
substantial. Simple exposure (sight or sound), or even recall
of a particular brand could inhibit the recall of other brands in
the category. Brand managers should thus pay greater
attention to the affective component when developing equity
for a new brand, or when reviving a dying brand.

Discussion
The results obtained support the hypotheses proposed. The
number of uncued brands recalled was significantly lower in
the affective condition than in the cognitive condition. This
also implies that brands with dominant affect components are
more accessible than brands with dominant cognitive
components. Overall, the objectives set at the beginning of
the study were fulfilled. The recall inhibition effect appears to
be a valid and unobtrusive method to retrieve affective traces,
and compare the relative accessibility of the affective and
cognitive components of overall brand attitudes. One of the
weaknesses of past studies on affect has been that participants
were forced to use a cognitive retrieval process to access
affective traces. The recall inhibition effect provides an
indirect way to test the relative accessibility of inputs in
memory without having participants go through a cognitive
retrieval process thereby biasing results in favor of cognitive
processes. Its application may thus provide insight into issues
that were difficult to investigate in the past.

Limitations
One objective of the study was to test the recall inhibition
effect as an unobtrusive measure of retrieved affect or
cognition. To a large extent, using the recall inhibition affect
as a methodological tool to understand the storage of affect in
memory, overcomes many of the weaknesses found in past
research on affect. The pre-study, however, uses more
traditional methods as manipulation checks, and the
limitations of these manipulation checks are acknowledged.

730

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20 (5),
1063-1087
Batra, R. & Ahtola, O. T. (1990). Measuring the hedonic and
utilitarian sources of consumer attitudes. Marketing Letters,
2, 159-170.
Bower, G. H. (1981). Mood and memory. American
Psychologist, 36 ( 2 ), 129-148.
Dopkins, S & Ngo, C. T. (2002). Inhibition of verbal memory
retrieval as a consequence of prior retrieval. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 606-621.
Erevelles, S. (1998). The role of affect in marketing. Journal
of Business Research, 42 (July), 199-215.
Goddard, L., Pring, L. & Felmingham, N. (2005). The effects
of cue modality on the quality of personal memories
retrieved. Memory, 13 (1) 79-86.
Lewis, M. Q. (1971). Categorized lists and cued recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 87 (January), 129131.
Miniard, P. W., Unnava, H. R., & Bhatla, S. (1989).
Inhibiting brand name recall: a test of the salience
hypothesis. in Advances in Consumer Research, 16, 264270.
Nickerson, R. S. (1984). Retrieval inhibition from part-set
cuing: a persisting enigma in memory research. Memory &
Cognition, 12 (6), 531-552.
Parker, R. E., & Warren, L. (1974). Partial category cuing:
the accessibility of categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 102 (6) (Jun), 1123-1125.
Roediger, H. L. (1974). Inhibiting effects of recall. Memory
& Cognition, 2 (2) (Apr), 261-269.
Roediger, H. L. (1978). Recall as a self-limiting process.
Memory and Cognition, 6 (January) 54 - 63.
Rundus, D. (1973). Negative effects of using list items as
recall cues. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12, 43-50.
Slamecka, N. J. (1968). An examination of trace storage in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76 (4)
(pt.1), 504-513.
Tulving, E. & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus
accessibility of information in memory for words. Journal
of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 5 (4), 381-391.
Unnava, H. R., Burnkrant R. E. & Erevelles, S. (1994).
Effects of presentation order and communication modality
on recall and attitude. Journal of Consumer Research 21
(3), 481-490.

Basically, the manipulation checks suffer from the same
weaknesses that have been criticized in past studies. The
affective responses of participants are measured using a scale
(Batra & Ahtola, 1990), that by its very nature, tends to favor
cognitive processing in participants. This is a limitation of all
paper-and-pencil measures used in the study of affect. This
weakness, however, may not be a major source of concern
when evaluating the validity of the results. This is because the
potential bias caused by the use of this scale, would tend to
favor the cognitive component of overall attitudes for all
manipulated conditions. Moreover, to the extent that the
manipulation check can be considered a confirmatory
procedure, the effects of systematic error in the manipulation
check is not a major source of concern affecting the validity
of the conclusions researched in the main study.

Conclusion
Despite the results discussed above, the usefulness of the
recall inhibition effect in affect accessibility studies should
not be overstated. It is unclear, for example, how this effect
can be adapted to distinguish among various dimensions of
emotion (Erevelles, 1998), or for studies in which absolute
rather than relative measures of accessibility are needed.
Further research is undoubtedly needed to better study
inhibitory effects for brands in a category, due to various
external influences. It seems to be a fair conclusion, however,
to say that the findings of this research and the successful
testing of this methodology is a significant initial contribution
towards the better understanding of affective retrieval
processes, and its role in the inhibition of competing brands.

References
Alba, J. W. & Chattopadhyay, A. (1985). The effects of
context and part-category cues on the recall of competing
brands. Journal of Marketing Research, 22 (August), 340349.
Alba, J. W. & Chattopadhyay, A. (1986). Salience effects in
brand recall. Journal of Marketing Research, 23
(November), 363-369.
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R.A., & Bjork, E.L. (1994).
Remembering Can Cause Forgetting: Retrieval Dynamics
in Long-Term Memory. Journal of Experimental

731

