UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints on Immediate Memory for Prosody: Evidence of a Correspondence with the
Prosodic Organization of Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wq1j75n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Boucher, Victor J.
Gilbert, Annie C.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints on Immediate Memory for Prosody:
Evidence of a Correspondence with the Prosodic Organization of Speech
Victor J. Boucher (http://www.ling.umontreal.ca/phonetique/)
Laboratoire de sciences phonétiques, Département de linguistique
Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7 Canada

Annie C. Gilbert (annie.gilbert@umontreal.ca)
Laboratoire de sciences phonétiques, Département de linguistique
Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7 Cana
prosodic patterns in meaningful speech. The present report
addresses this hypothesized correspondence by focusing on
stress. Both experiments in this summary refer to French,
where stress is not determined by the lexical code (as in
English) and defines the endpoints of stress groups that vary
in size (equivalent to phonological words, in this case).

Abstract
This study investigates the correspondence between memory of
stress rhythms in the context of a serial recall task and the
organization of stress patterns in meaningful utterances. French
speakers’ (n = 40) reproduction of stress patterns in recalling
series of syllables with stress groups of differing size shows a
floor effect for groups that exceed four syllables. A second
experiment where the Ss (n = 39) produced utterances with
phrases of differing length indicates a strong tendency to insert
stress marks in phrases that exceed four syllables. Taken
together, the findings provide an initial demonstration that
memory for prosodic patterns can be an organizational factor of
prosody in speech.

Experiments 1: memory for stress groups
Subjects Forty native speakers of French served as subjects.
All reported no history of speech or hearing problems.
Stimuli and procedure The stimuli consisted of assembled
series of seven, monotone nonsense syllables (e.g.
/pido’gatube’ky/). There were two sets of stimuli. The first
set comprised series where one stressed syllable was placed at
varying points within the list so as to create groups of one to
six syllables (rhythms of 1:6, 2:5, 3:4, 4:3 etc.). The duration
ratio of stressed to non-stressed syllables was 1.7, which is
representative of French speech. A second set of stimuli
included series with no stress marks (i.e., “ungrouped”
series). To ensure the perception of stress rhythms, stressed
and non-stressed syllables were arranged in terms of P-Center
intervals (Marcus, 1981). Three ungrouped series were
presented before 12, randomized, grouped series. These series
were delivered over a loudspeaker (73 dBA at the subjects’
ears). Though the test requested that the subjects (n = 40)
recall the heard series, stress patterns were also recalled.

Keywords: speech prosody; memory

Introduction
Learning a language, as an adult or as a child, implies
memory for series of speech sounds that are prosodically
organized. Prosody can induce grouping effects on serial
recall (Frankish, 1995; Reeves, Schmauder, & Morris, 2000),
and thus appears to provide frameworks that facilitate the
learning of novel series of speech sounds constituting new
words and expressions. This is supported by a number of
studies showing that children’s ability to imitate prosody
correlates with vocabulary growth (see Baddeley, Gathercole,
& Papagno, 1998). That prosody can become engrained in the
process of recalling novel series may account for the common
behavior of producing prosody in remembering lists of digits
such as phone numbers. A significant aspect of this behavior
is that series of numbers bear no syntactic structure. In this
case, it is the memorization process as such that appears to be
the source of prosodic grouping. Yet the role of memory
processes on the organization of speech prosody has not been
explored, and may appear to lack relevance. How, in fact,
would imitation of prosody in the context of recalling novel
speech material relate to prosodic structure in meaningful
speech? There is a rationale for supposing such link in that
any restriction on the imitation or reproduction of prosody
could, potentially, contribute to reinforce a given set of
patterns in speech. By this principle, limited reproducibility of
stress rhythms and intonation contours in recalling
meaningless speech may well correspond to limits on

Results
Acoustic analyses of duration increases marking stress
showed that reproduction of list-initial groups reached a floor
level for units exceeding four syllables (see Figure 1).
Moreover, by comparison to serial recall of ungrouped series
(baseline), it was found that stress-groupings of more than
four syllables had no beneficial effect on serial recall.

Experiment 2: stress groups in speech
Studies have reported a cross-language tendency to limit
stress intervals in speech to four syllables (Dauer, 1983). The
aim of Experiment 2 was to verify whether this tendency
could predict stress marks in test utterances.

328

However, the paradigms used in such investigations (typically
involving written recall of series containing repetitive groups
of three) provide no basis for extrapolation to speech. In this
respect, critics have, justifiably, questioned the relevance of
list-recall tasks in understanding speech processes (Van der
Linden & Poncelet, 1998). The above results provide an
initial demonstration of the relevance of memory processes in
understanding the organization of speech prosody and its role.
It should also be noted that, while the above results refer to a
tendency to restrict stress patterns in French to units of four,
similar tendencies have been reported for other languages
including English (Dauer, 1983 among others). There are
theoretical implications for psychological and linguistic
models that do not consider that memory processes bearing
on the reproducibility of tonal and rhythmic frameworks can
contribute to the prosodic organization of utterances and
issues bearing on a language learning device. For instance,
linguistic models assume that syntax underlies the
organization of prosody. However, prosodic patterns appear
in child speech before syntax and constitute the most easily
learned and generalizing aspects of speech. It is also clear in
the literature that these patterns assist serial memory that is
required in learning new words and expressions.

Subjects All but one of the 40 participants in Experiment 1
served as subjects in Experiment 2.
Stimuli and procedure. A set of 10 French sentences was
used containing noun and verb-complement phrases of
varying length (2 to 5 syllables). All phrases had an internal
word boundary allowing for optional group stress. These
sentences were presented in large characters on a computer
monitor. Subjects were asked to first read a presented
sentence out loud and then say the sentences by humming the
syllables.

Results
Analyses of the durational changes in the hummed utterances
indicated a strong tendency to produce a phrase-internal stress
when the phrase exceeded four syllables. For instance, the
proper noun Marie was most often non-stressed in:
“Marie-Paul part mecredi matin”
but was generally stressed in:
“Marie-Antoinette part mecredi matin”
so as to create a stress-group that does not exceed four
syllables.
Figure 1 is an overlay of the results of subjects’ recall of
stress groups (Experiment 1) and production of stress groups
in meaningful phrases (Experiment 2) as a function of
number of syllables in the groups. The similar relationship, as
illustrated, suggests that both memory for stress groups and
the production of stress groups in speech tend to be limited by
the same syllable-count.

Prospective
Prosody presents a hierarchical organization: intonational
(pitch) contours can encompass a number of stress groups or
intervals, which in turn can subsume a number of syllables.
Research by the present authors shows that different
constraints apply on the reproducibility of stress rhythms and
pitch contours: whereas reproduction of stress rhythms
reaches an average upper-limit of four syllables, results
suggest that the reproduction of pitch contours has an mean
upper-limit of 7-8 syllables (Gilbert & Boucher, 2005).
These constraints on reproducibility are reflected in
meaningful speech and determine prosodic patterns regardless
of morpho-syntactic boundaries For instance, subject noun
phrases (NP) before a verb phrase (VP) are only marked by a
complete pitch contour when they are long. Length (or
syllable count) thus constitutes a dominant factor. Such
findings suggest that constraints on the reproducibility of
prosodic patterns can underlie prosodic structure of
meaningful speech.

Stress in speech, Experiment 2
Stress recall, Experiment 1

100

80

80

60
60
40
40
20

20

% production in speech

% correct recall

100

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by Research Counsel
of Canada (SSHRC).

0
2

3

4

5

References

6

Syllable count

Baddeley, A. D., Gathercole, S., & Papagno, C. (1998). The
phonological loop as a language learning device.
Psychological Review, 105, 158-173.
Dauer, R. M. (1983). Stress-timing and syllable timing
reanalyzed. Journal of Phonetics, 11, 51-62.
Frankish, C. (1995). Intonation and auditory grouping in
immediate serial recall. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9,
S5-S22.
Gilbert, A. C., & Boucher, V. J. (2005). Size-constraints on
intonation groups in speech : Evidence of an independent

Figure 1: Combined results, Experiments 1 and 2

Discussion and conclusion
Investigations of grouping effects induced by such aspects as
pauses inserted in lists of digits or letters has led to
speculations on the role of prosody in language learning.
329

syllable-count principle. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 117, 2458 (Abstract).
Marcus, S. M. (1981). Acoustic determinants of perceptual
center (P-center) location. Perception & Psychophysics, 30,
247-256.
Reeves, C., Schmauder, A. R., & Morris, R. K. (2000). Stress
grouping improves performance on an immediate serial list

recall task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1638-1654.
Van der Linden, M., & Poncelet, M. (1998). The role of
working memory in language communication disorders. In
B. Stemmer & H.A. Whitaker (Eds.), Handbook of
neurolinguistics (pp. 290-301). San Diego, CA : Academic
Press.

330

