UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context-Sensitive Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61s68586

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Baraff, Elizabeth
Coley, John D.
Kemp, Charles
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context-Sensitive Induction
Patrick Shafto1 , Charles Kemp1 , Elizabeth Baraff1 , John D. Coley2 , & Joshua B. Tenenbaum1
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University

Abstract
Different kinds of knowledge are relevant in different
inductive contexts. Previous models of category-based
induction have focused on judgments about taxonomic
properties, but other kinds of models are needed for
other kinds of properties. We present a new model of
reasoning about causally transmitted properties. Our
first experiment shows that the model predicts judgments about a disease-related property when only causal
information is available. Our second experiment uses a
disease-related property and a genetic property in a setting where both causal and taxonomic information are
available. Our new model accounts only for judgments
about the disease property, and a taxonomic model accounts only for judgments about the genetic property.
This double dissociation suggests that qualitatively different models are needed to account for property induction.

Any familiar thing can be thought about in a multitude of ways. A cat is a creature that climbs trees, eats
mice, has whiskers, belongs to the category of felines,
and was revered by the ancient Egyptians. Knowledge
of all of these kinds plays an important role in inductive
inference. If we learn that cats suffer from a recently discovered disease, we might think that mice also have the
disease — perhaps the cats picked up the disease from
something they ate. Yet if we learn that cats carry a
recently discovered gene, lions and leopards seem more
likely to carry the gene than mice. Flexible inferences
like these are a hallmark of human reasoning, which is
notable for the selective application of different kinds of
knowledge to different kinds of problems.
Psychologists have confirmed experimentally that inductive generalizations vary depending on the property
involved. When told about genes or other internal
anatomical properties, people generalize to taxonomically related categories (Osherson, Smith, Wilke, López,
and Safir, 1990). When told about novel diseases, however, people generalize to categories related by the causal
mechanism of disease transmission (Shafto and Coley,
2003). Psychologists have also suggested, at least in
principle, how complex inferences like these might work.
Flexible inductive inferences are supported by intuitive
theories, or “causal relations that collectively generate
or explain the phenomena in a domain” (Murphy, 1993).
Many theories may apply within a single domain, and
very different patterns of inference will be observed depending on which theory is triggered.

Although a theory-based approach is attractive in
principle, formalizing the approach is a difficult challenge. Previous work describes a theory-based taxonomic model (Kemp and Tenenbaum, 2003), and here we
use the same Bayesian framework to develop a theorybased model for induction about causally transmitted
properties like diseases. The models differ in the causal
knowledge used to generate probability distributions
over potential hypotheses, resulting in qualitatively different patterns of generalization for different theories.
These are but two of the many models that may be
needed to explain the full set of inductive contexts, and
extending our framework to deal with a broader range
of contexts is an ongoing project.
Our work goes beyond previous formal models, which
find it difficult to capture the insight that different kinds
of knowledge are needed in different inductive contexts.
In the similarity-coverage model, a representative and
often-cited example, the domain-specific knowledge that
drives generalization is represented by a similarity metric
(Osherson et al., 1990). Even if we allow a contextspecific notion of similarity, a similarity metric is too
limited a representation to carry the richly structured
knowledge that is needed in some contexts. In contrast,
the knowledge that drives generalization in our Bayesian
framework can be as complex and as structured as a
given context demands.
We begin by introducing our new model of reasoning
about causally transmitted properties. We then present
experiments showing that our new model predicts human
generalizations about diseases, but not about genetic
properties. The theory-based taxonomic model has complementary strengths, and predicts generalizations about
genetic properties, but not diseases. We finish by comparing our model to previous approaches, and describing
some of the challenges to be surmounted in developing
a truly comprehensive theory of context-sensitive induction.

Theory-based induction
Our theory-based framework includes two components:
an engine for Bayesian inference and a theory-based
prior. The inference engine implements rational statistical inference, and remains the same regardless of the
inductive context. We model these theories using probabilistic processes over structured represenations of causal
knowledge.

2003

a)

a)

b)

b)

Human
Mako

Kelp

Human

Dolphin

Kelp

Sandshark

Herring

Mako

Sandshark

Tuna

Tuna

Herring

Dolphin

Figure 2: One possible disease simulation. (a) Initial
step showing species hit by the background rate (black
ovals) and active routes of transmission (black arrows).
(b) Total set of species with disease via background and
transmission.

Figure 1: Two different theories of domain structure. (a)
Food web structure. (b) Taxonomic structure.

The Bayesian inference engine
Suppose that we observe a set of examples D that share
a novel property, and wish to compute the strength of
the conclusion that an unobserved instance, y, also has
the property. Let H be the hypothesis space — the set of
all possible extensions of the property. The probability
that y has the property can be computed by summing
over all hypotheses:
p(y|D) =

X

p(y|h)p(h|D) =

h∈H

X p(y|h)p(D|h)p(h)
p(D)

h

where the last step follows from Bayes’ rule.
Now p(y|h) equals one if y ∈ h and zero otherwise.
We assume that p(D|h), the likelihood of observing the
data given h, is 1 if the data are consistent with the
hypothesis and 0 otherwise. Then
X

p(y|D) =

h:y∈h,D⊂h

p(h)
p(D)

The denominator can be
over all
P
P expanded by summing
p(D|h)p(h)
=
hypotheses: p(D) =
h:D⊂h p(h).
h
Thus
P
h:y∈h,D⊂h p(h)
(1)
p(y|D) = P
h:D⊂h p(h)
The generalization probability p(y|D) is therefore the
proportion of hypotheses consistent with D that also include y, where each hypothesis is weighted by its prior
probability p(h). If the conclusion y and observed examples D are included in many hypotheses with high prior
probability, then the probability of generalization will be
high.

Theory-based priors
The prior probabilities p(h) in Equation 1 are determined by intuitive theories of the domain under consideration. We model these theories using a combination of
structured representations of causal knowledge and parameters for generating a probability distribution over
hypotheses.

A generative model of causally transmitted properties. Our model will apply to any property that depends on asymmetric causal relationships among objects
in a domain. For concreteness, however, assume that the
domain is a set of species, and the novel property is a disease spread by predator-prey relations between species.
We generate a prior distribution using a theory with two
components. First, the theory states the predator-prey
relations that hold over the domain. The set of relations
can be represented as a food web (see Figure 1). Second, the theory assumes that properties are generated
by a probabilistic process over the web. The process
has two parameters, a base rate and a transmission rate.
The base rate is the probability that an animal inherits the property from a cause external to the web. The
transmission rate is the probability that the property is
transmitted from a species along an arrow to a causally
related species. Assuming that the base rate affects each
species independently and the transmission rate affects
each arrow independently, we obtain a prior distribution
over all extensions of the property.
The prior can be generated by repeatedly simulating
the arrival and transmission of disease in the system. A
single simulation chooses a set of animals that are affected by the base rate, and a set of causal links that are
active (Figure 2a). These choices imply that a certain
set of animals will catch the disease, and that hypothesis
is the output of the simulation (Figure 2b). If we repeat
the simulation many times, the prior probability of any
hypothesis is the number of times it is chosen as output.
Reflecting on these simulations should establish that the
prior captures two basic intuitions. First, species that
are linked in the web are more likely to share the property than species that are not directly linked. Second,
property overlap is asymmetric: a prey animal is more
likely to share the property with its predator than vice
versa.
Several qualitative predictions emerge from the model,
and will be tested in the experiments that follow. Asymmetry is the prediction that generalizations from prey to
predator are stronger than generalizations from predator
to prey. Asymmetry is a consequence of the assumption
that causal transmission is directed. Dissipation is the
prediction that the strength of generalization decreases
with increasing distance in the web, and should be seen

2004

because the mechanism of causal transmission is fallible. Finally, fanning is the prediction that generalization
from predator to prey depends on the number of other
species that the predator eats. If the predator has the
property but eats only one species, it is fairly likely that
the predator caught the disease from that species. If the
predator eats many species, the chance that it inherited
the property from any given prey species is small, since
there are many alternative sources of the disease.
Although our experiments only consider the case of
disease transmission in a food web, many other inductive contexts fit the pattern of asymmetric causal transmission that the model is designed to capture. Within
the domain that we focus on, the causal model should
also apply to inferences about the transmission of toxins. Outside of this domain, the model could be used,
for example, to model inference about the transmission
of lice between children at a day care, the spread of secrets through a group of colleagues, or the progression
of fads through a society.

generalizations, or the representations they may use. Inference in both our models can be implemented using
belief propagation over Bayes nets, and we are encouraged to know that efficient implementations exist. We
are not committed to the claim, however, that inference
in these Bayes nets resembles cognitive processing.

A generative model of taxonomic properties. A
second method for generating a prior distribution is described by Kemp and Tenenbaum (2003). The model
is based on two key ideas: species fall at the leaves of
a known taxonomic tree (see Figure 1), and the novel
properties are generated by a mutation process over the
tree. Imagine a property that arises at the root of the
tree, and spreads out towards the leaves. The property
starts out with some value (on or off), and at each point
in the tree there is a small probability that the property
will mutate, or switch its value. The mutation process
has a single parameter — the average rate at which mutations occur. As for the previous generative model, this
stochastic process induces a prior distribution over all
possible extensions of a novel property. The closer two
species lie in the tree, the more likely they are to share
the property.
Observe that this taxonomic model is closely related
to the model for causally transmitted properties. Both
models are based on structured representations (food
webs or trees), and incorporate stochastic processes over
those representations. Both were also built by thinking
about how properties are distributed in the world. It is
therefore not surprising that both models match models
used by scientists in other fields — models like the causal
model are used by epidemiologists, and models like the
taxonomic model are used by evolutionary biologists. In
developing these models, then, we have given rational
analyses of inductive inference in two contexts (Anderson, 1990). Extending our approach to other contexts is
a matter of formally specifying how the properties covered by those contexts are distributed in the world.
Our primary goal so far has been to characterize the
knowledge that plays a role in generalization (theorybased priors), and the input-output mapping that allows this knowledge to be converted into judgments of
inductive strength (Bayesian inference). Our work is located at the most abstract of Marr’s levels — the level
of computational theory (Marr, 1982) — and we make
no suggestion about the process by which people make

Materials. Participants were given a set of 7 cards
describing feeding relations between the animals. The
cards presented a blank label for the animal (“Animal
X”) and the creature’s immediate predators and prey.
This information is presented schematically in Figure 1.
Note that the full graph was never presented and no
taxonomic information was available to participants in
this experiment.

Experiments
This section compares model predictions to human generalizations in two experiments. The first experiment
focuses on the performance of the new causal model,
comparing model predictions with human generalizations when only causal information is available. The
second experiment considers generalizations of diseases
and genetic properties, and compares the performance
of the causal and the taxonomic models.

Experiment 1: Testing the Causal Model
Participants.
periment.

Nineteen people participated in this ex-

Procedure. The experiment contained two phases:
training and a generalization task. In the training phase,
participants were given a set of 7 cards corresponding
to the animals in a set. Before proceeding, participants
were required to score 85% on a true/false test to demonstrate that they were familiar with the information on
the cards. In the generalization phase, participants were
presented with a series of 42 questions (all possible pairs)
of the form, “Animal X has a disease. How likely is it
that animal Y has the same disease as animal X?” Participants rated the likelihood for each question on a scale
of 1-7, where 1 indicated “very likely” and 7 indicated
“very unlikely.” Questions appeared in random order.
Results. During the experiment, some participants
noted that they had used the rating scale backwards.
These subjects’ ratings were inverted as they requested,
and we inspected the data for other participants who
may have used the scale backwards. First we identified
all questions for which the average rating was < 2 or
> 6. If a participant provided opposite ratings (> 6 on a
question for which the average was < 2 or vice versa) for
more than 2/3 of these questions, we eliminated them
from further analysis. No participants were eliminated
from experiment 1.
We fit the model to the data by searching for the best
values of the base and transmission rates. The model
shows robust performance across a range of parameter
values, and all the results in this paper used a base rate
of 0.1 and a transmission rate of 0.5. Figure 3 shows that
the model gives a good account of the human judgments.
Qualitative results were also obtained for the three

2005

Figure 3: Human judgments of
argument strength vs. model
predictions.

Dissipation

Fanning

1
Argument
strength

r=0.17

r=0.31

r=0.87

Web

Tree

Gene

Model

Asymmetry

r=0.85
Disease

People

r=0.72

3
5
7

up down

1 2 3 4
Distance

1
2
Animals premise eats

Figure 5: Human judgments of argument strength vs.
model predictions for two models and two conditions.

Figure 4: Qualitative effects: Experiment 1.

causal phenomena: causal asymmetry, dissipation, and
fanning. To test for causal asymmetry, the average ratings for generalizations up the chain (from prey to predator) were compared to generalizations down the chain
(from predator to prey) using a two-tailed t-test. The
results indicate a significant difference (see Figure 4),
t(12) = 18.00, p < 0.001, with generalizations up the
food chain stronger than generalizations down the food
chain, as predicted by the model. To test for the dissipation effect, generalizations up the chain were collapsed into four categories based on the distance from
the premise to the conclusion. Dissipation predicts that
generalization strength should decrease with increasing
distance. Because there was only one argument with a
distance of 4, statistical significance could not be evaluated for this case. The results indicate significant differences 1 < 2, t(11) = 10.47, p < 0.001, and 2 < 3,
t(6) = 7.10, p < 0.001. Finally, to test the fanning effect
we collapsed generalizations from predators to prey into
two categories based on the total number of prey (1 or
2). The fanning effect predicts that generalizations from
animals with multiple prey should be weaker. Results
indicate no evidence for the fanning effect, t(5) = 1.09,
p > 0.20, and we consider possible explanations in the
next section.

Materials. Participants were again given 7 cards representing the species. For this experiment, however, each
card contained the name of a species (e.g. “Herring”),
its immediate neighbors in the food web, and all other
species in the same taxonomic category. Note that neither the full food web nor the taxonomic tree was ever
presented to participants.
Procedures. In the training phase, participants were
tested on both the taxonomic and the food web relations among creatures. In the generalization task, participants were assigned to a novel disease or novel gene
condition. Participants in the novel disease condition
were presented with questions of the form, “Tuna have
a disease. How likely is it that dolphin have the same
disease as tuna?” For the novel gene condition, the predicate “have a disease” was changed to “have a gene called
XR-23.”
Results. The data were inspected using the criteria
described in the first experiment, and one participant
was eliminated.
The causal and taxonomic models were both fit to
the data from each condition (Figure 5). The food web
model used the same parameters as in the previous experiment. We fit the taxonomic model by searching for
the best value for the mutation rate. The results show
a double-dissociation between model predictions and human generalizations. The predictions of the causal model
fit human judgments about diseases, but not judgments
about genes. Conversely, the predictions of the taxonomic model fit human generalizations of genes, but
not generalizations of diseases. The weak correlations of
the web model with the gene data and tree model with
the disease data reflect the fact that taxonomic relations
were not orthogonal to food web relations (mammals appear high in the food web while plants and fish appear
relatively low).
Qualitative comparisons were also conducted. We ex-

Experiment 2: Different Domain Theories
This experiment tests whether people use different kinds
of prior knowledge in a single domain. Participants were
taught about food web and taxonomic relations between
a set of familiar creatures (see Figure 1). Participants
were then required to generalize novel genetic or disease
properties.
Participants. There were 20 participants in the disease condition and 9 in the gene condition.
2006

pected only the participants in the disease condition
to demonstrate causal asymmetry, dissipation, and fanning. As predicted we found participants in the disease condition demonstrated significantly stronger generalizations from prey to predator than from predator
to prey, t(12) = 8.69, p < 0.001. Results for the gene
condition indicate no differences, t(12) = 0.14, p > 0.20.
There was a significant dissipation effect in the disease
condition, 1 < 2, t(11) = 8.03, p < 0.001, and 2 < 3,
t(6) = 2.71, p < 0.05. The gene effect showed no corresponding effect, both p > 0.40. Finally, the fanning
effect was not observed in either the disease or the gene
conditions, both p > 0.40.
Across both experiments, no evidence was found for
the fanning effect, one of the qualitative effects derived
from the causal model. One possible explanation is
methodological: subjects were asked to judge a single
argument at a time, but asking them to sort the entire
set in order of inductive strength might have produced
more finely tuned judgments. A second, more interesting possibility is that people find reasoning backwards
through a causal chain more difficult than reasoning forward. These possibilities will be pursued in future work.
Despite our negative results for the fanning effect, the
causal model derives strong support from the correlations achieved with human judgments.
These results of these studies demonstrate a doubledissociation between model predictions and human generalizations. When reasoning about disease, people’s
generalizations correlate highly with the causal model
but weakly with the taxonomic model. In contrast, when
reasoning about genes, people’s generalizations correlate
highly with the taxonomic model but weakly with the
causal model. Qualitative comparisons also support the
conclusion that multiple kinds of knowledge are necessary to account for reasoning in different inductive contexts.

Discussion
The importance of the inductive context has been downplayed by many previous accounts of category-based induction. Researchers have often used the domain of biology and chosen so-called ‘blank predicates,’ which usually trigger the default taxonomic context. For example,
a subject told that ‘cats have property P’ is likely to assume that P is related to internal genetic and physiological factors. The emphasis on biology and on the default
taxonomic context in particular may mean that some
existing models for category-based induction are more
limited than is commonly realized. The coverage model,
for example, includes a hierarchical taxonomy of categories, a structure that is ideal for reasoning about the
default biological context but of limited value in other
contexts.
Despite the general emphasis on taxonomic reasoning,
several researchers have argued for the importance of the
inductive context. Our experiments are perhaps most
closely related to those of Heit and Rubinstein (1994),
who show that people draw different conclusions when
asked about physiological properties than when asked
2007

about behavioral properties. Researchers have suggested
that formal approaches like the coverage model and the
feature-based model can account for some context effects (Heit and Rubinstein, 1994; Sloman, 1993). We
argue that both approaches are insufficient to account
for the full range of contexts because their representations of prior knowledge are too impoverished to capture
the abstract theoretical knowledge that constrains and
guides induction.
Here we give non-standard descriptions of the coverage
and the feature-based models that show how they relate
to our theory-based models. All three models include
context-specific representations. To recap, our Bayesian
approach uses a prior generated by a context-specific theory. The coverage model includes a similarity measure
and a taxonomy of categories, both of which may depend on the inductive context. The feature-based model
includes a set of context-specific features.
The similarity-coverage model can account for context
effects such as generalizations of anatomical and behavioral properties by using different measures of similarity
for different contexts. However, this approach can not
account for our disease-induction data. While shared behaviors and shared anatomy can be reasonably thought
of as contributing to similarity under some natural taxonomies, predator-prey relationships do not confer similarity in any conventional sense, nor are they naturally
organized in a taxonomy. It may be possible to account
for our data by leaving similarity behind and moving
to a context-specific measure of association. Similarity
alone, however, will not be able to provide a full account
of context-specific reasoning.
Unlike the similarity-coverage model, the featurebased model may be able to account for our results given
a sufficiently large set of features. To see why, note that
the information contained in either of our theory-based
priors could be represented using a large set of features
sampled from that prior. Our objection to the model is
that it cannot account for inductive inference in cases
where people have seen few directly relevant features or
perhaps none at all. Cases like these draw directly on intuitive theories, and Experiment 1 is one of them. Any
features used by the subjects in this experiment must
have been constructed solely from the information provided about predator-prey relations in the domain. A
simple feature representation where every predator-prey
pair shares a unique feature seems unlikely to work —
in particular, it is hard to see how the asymmetry effect
would emerge naturally from this representation.
A comparison with the feature-based model is illuminating because it underlines the importance of theories.
It is not enough to present a mechanism for inference
over features, and argue that it can account for human
judgments given the right set of features. We also need
to explain how subjects might have acquired those features. Similarly, it not enough to present a framework
for Bayesian inference and argue that the framework can
account for human judgments given the right prior. We
also need to explain how the prior is generated. In our
framework, theories provide that explanation, and it is

difficult to see how to account for real-world inductive
inference without them.
Consider, for example, the case of a scientist who
lives on an island where the local food web is represented by Figure 1a. Suppose that the scientist has
recorded the distribution of one thousand different diseases, and (possibly unknown to him), the distribution
closely matches the distribution predicted by our generative model. When asked the questions in Experiment
2, the scientist’s responses match our model perfectly,
but we cannot conclude that he has our theory – perhaps he is using the feature-based model over the data
he has collected. Suppose, however, we ask the scientist
a counterfactual question: we ask him about an ecosystem that is identical except that now people eat kelp, and
makos do not eat tuna. A scientist with our theory of
causally-transmitted properties will have no trouble, but
a scientist without the theory will be lost. Neither of our
experiments addresses this question, but we believe that
people will respond flexibly when asked to reason about
counterfactuals, or otherwise given information that alters an underlying theory. Prior distributions (or feature
sets) alone are unable to explain these effects, and we
conclude that the representational power of theories is
indispensable.
In this work, we do not claim to be modeling all or
most of the content and structure of people’s intuitive
theories. Rather, we are modeling just those aspects of
a theory which appear necessary to support inductive
reasoning about properties in these contexts. We are
agnostic about whether people’s intuitive theories contain much richer causal structures than those we have
modeled here (Carey, 1985), or whether they are closer
to light or skeletal frameworks with just a few basic principles (Wellman and Gelman, 1992).
Although we believe our theory-based approach is
more likely than previous formal models to yield a satisfying account of context-sensitive induction, the work
reported here is only a first step towards that goal. Perhaps the biggest gap in our model is that we have not
specified how to decide which theory is appropriate for a
given argument. Making this decision automatically will
require a semantic module that knows, for example, that
words like ‘hormone’ and ‘gene’ are related to the taxonomic theory, and words like ‘disease’ and ‘toxin’ are
related to the theory of asymmetric causal transmission.
Integrating this semantic knowledge with our existing
models of inductive reasoning is an ongoing project.
We have discussed theories that account for inductive
reasoning in two contexts, but it is natural and necessary to add more. Once we allow multiple theories, it
is important to consider how many are needed and how
they might be learned. Our Bayesian approach makes
it possible to address these problems: Kemp, Perfors,
and Tenenbaum (2004) present an approach to learning
a single domain theory, which could be extended to learn
multiple theories in a single domain.

Conclusion
Every real-world inference is embedded in some context, and understanding how these different contexts
work is critical to understanding real-world induction.
We have suggested that different contexts trigger different intuitive theories, and that modeling the theories involved explains patterns of induction across different contexts. We described a novel theory of causallytransmitted properties, and showed that it accounts for
inductive judgments about diseases but not genetic properties. Our new theory complements a previously described taxonomic theory, which accounts for judgments
about genetic properties but not diseases. Two theories
will not be enough, and characterizing the space of theories that people use and the process by which they are
acquired is a challenging long-term project. We believe
that our Bayesian approach suggests a promising way to
attack these fundamental problems.
Acknowledgements. We thank NTT Communication Science Laboratories and DARPA for research support. JBT was supported by the Paul E. Newton Career
Development Chair.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of
thought. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Heit, E. and Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property effects in inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20:411–422.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2004).
Theory-based induction. In Proceedings of the 26th
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Kemp, C. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2003). Learning domain structures. In Proceedings of the 25th annual
conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. W. H. Freeman.
Murphy, G. L. (1993). Theories and concept formation.
In Mechelen, I. V., Hampton, J., Michalski, R., and
Theuns, P., editors, Categories and concepts: Theoretical views and inductive data analysis. Academic
Press.
Osherson, D., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., López, A., and
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97(2):185–200.
Shafto, P. and Coley, J. D. (2003). Development of categorization and reasoning in the natural world: Novices
to experts, naive similarity to ecological knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29:641–649.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25:213–280.
Wellman, H. and Gelman, S. (1992). Cognitive development: Foundational theories of core domains. Annual
Review of Psychology, 43:337–375.

2008

