UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dealing with Multiple Documents on the WWW: The Role of Metacognition in the Formation
of Documents Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82t0w8vb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bromme, Rainer
Stadtler, Marc

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dealing With Multiple Documents on the WWW:
The Role of Metacognition in the Formation of Documents Models
Marc Stadtler (stadtlm@uni-muenster.de)
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Muenster
Fliednerstr. 21, 48149 Muenster, Germany
2002). Hence, the layperson's search for medical information
on the WWW is an interesting and important example of
learning from multiple documents, an issue that has mostly
been analyzed up to now only in the academic context of
schools and universities and with reference to printed documents (e.g., Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Rouet, Britt, Mason, &
Perfetti, 1996).

Abstract
Drawing on the theory of documents representation (Perfetti,
Rouet, & Britt, 1999), we argue that successfully dealing with
multiple documents on the WWW requires readers to form
documents models, that is, to deal with contents and sources.
We present a study in which we tested the assumption that the
use of metacognitive strategies is crucial to the formation of
documents models. A total of 100 participants with little medical knowledge were asked to conduct an Internet research on a
medical topic. Participants were randomly assigned to four experimental groups that either received evaluation prompts,
monitoring prompts, both types of prompts, or no prompts. A
control group took paper-and-pencil notes. Results showed that
laypersons receiving evaluation prompts outperformed controls
in terms of knowledge about sources. In addition, laypersons
receiving monitoring prompts acquired significantly more
knowledge about facts, and performed slightly better on a comprehension test. It is concluded that the results underline the
importance of metacognition in dealing with multiple documents.

Theoretical Background
Dealing With Multiple Documents: The Theory of
Documents Representation

Introduction

Traditionally, research on how readers comprehend and represent written text has focused on single texts (e.g., Kintsch,
1998; Kintsch, & Van Dijk, 1978). However, readers often
need to deal with more than one text, for example, when
learning about a controversial historical issue or a complex
scientific field in which different views or different pieces of
information have to be gathered from different documents.
Recognizing the need to adapt traditional propositional
models of text representation to the situation of multiple
documents, Perfetti, Rouet, and Britt (1999) have developed
the "theory of documents representation." Basically, this theory describes a text representation called "documents model"
that the authors deem most appropriate for dealing with multiple documents.
In the documents model, information from different sources
is represented in a highly integrated manner, with only core
concepts being tagged for their sources. Britt, Perfetti, Sandak, and Rouet (1999) consider this model as "typical of a
good reader's model of multiple-text learning" (p. 220). The
documents model contains not only a representation of contents (situation model) but also a representation of sources
and interrelations between documents (intertext model). In
the intertext model, information about sources is represented
in the form of document nodes that contain meta-information
about sources, that is, information about the author, his or her
position, intentions, and so forth. The document nodes are
linked to selected propositions in the situation model.
However, empirical studies on the formation of documents
models are rare, and many of their findings are inconsistent.
Britt et al. (1999) showed that readers can in fact form documents models when dealing with multiple texts. Undergraduate students were quite accurate at identifying sources of information subsequent to reading a history text. Yet, they did
not tag all information for their source. Similarly, Rouet et al.
(1996) found that college students show some ability to integrate and relate information to sources. In their study, undergraduate history students integrated information from multiple documents and organized it into a coherent essay text.
Furthermore, these students were aware of the different status

Today, the Worldwide Web (WWW) plays an important
role in the dissemination of health-related information for
both experts and laypersons (Fox & Fallows, 2003). Laypersons often retrieve such information to find out about a specific disease or different treatment alternatives—particularly
in the run-up to important health-related decisions. The information they retrieve may help them to make a knowledgebased decision–something that is taken commonly as an important precondition for patient compliance (O'Connor,
1995). The resulting learning situation differs from traditional
learning settings in that laypersons certainly do not aim to
become experts, yet need to develop a basic understanding of
the relevant concepts (Bromme, Jucks, & Runde, 2005).
However, even when the information is available, laypersons may find it hard to deal with its complexity and heterogeneity. Relevant information is scattered across a multitude
of different web sites (Bhavnani et al., 2003), making it necessary to integrate information, that is, to forge semantic links
between information from different sources. This process
may be hampered by a lack of the textual cues usually provided by authors in single texts (Goldman et al., 2004).
As well as the contents, laypersons have to deal with the
sources of information (Hofer, 2004). Numerous studies have
documented severe quality deficits in medical information
provisions (see, for a review, Eysenbach, Powell, Kuss, &
Eun-Ryoung, 2002). Awareness about source information is
particularly important when searching for medical information on the WWW, because of the lack of "gatekeepers of
credibility," such as editors and publishers (Britt & Aglinskas,

2068

of different types of documents (e.g., historical essays vs.
textbooks) and based their rankings of a document's trustworthiness on appropriate features such as the author's credentials
or intentions. In contrast, Wineburg (1991) found that compared with high-school students, expert history readers integrated information from different sources and paid much
greater attention to these sources. In line with this rather pessimistic view, Britt and Aglinskas (2002) reported that the
spontaneous use of source information when dealing with
multiple documents in history was rather low in college and
high-school students.
Such inconsistencies reveal that one central question has yet
to be answered sufficiently: Which factors determine whether
readers actually form documents models? What leads them to
integrate information and tag contents for their sources when
dealing with multiple documents? Up to now, empirical studies addressing these questions have focused on the role of
task characteristics (Britt & Aglinskas, 2002; Britt et al.,
1999), features of the documents themselves (Britt et al.,
1999), and the role of reader expertise (Rouet, Favart, Britt &
Perfetti, 1997; Wineburg 1991). One of the main results supported by studies focusing on the role of task characteristics is
that simple instructions to attend to source information are not
sufficient to make readers deal with sources efficiently. Compared with readers receiving content instructions, readers receiving sourcing instructions neither performed better on a
source identification task (Britt & Aglinskas, 2002), nor did
they incorporate a larger amount of reliable information in a
subsequent written essay (Britt et al., 1999).
Furthermore, expert-novice comparisons suggest an effect
of expertise on dealing with sources in multiple documents
situations. Wineburg (1991) reported that when confronted
with a set of different history documents, history specialists
qualified their choice of documents more accurately than novices did. Furthermore, specialists made extensive use of the
sourcing heuristic, which involves attending to author information prior to reading a document. Novices, in contrast,
applied this strategy only in a small number of cases.
However, Rouet, Britt, Favart and Perfetti (1997) pointed
out that in Wineburg's (1991) study, history specialists did not
just differ from novices with regard to content expertise, but
also with regard to the degree of discipline expertise at their
disposal. In other words, through extensive training in dealing
with different kinds of history documents, history specialists
possess more sophisticated models of discourse structures
within their discipline (Dillon, 1991). This enables them to
deal with multiple history documents more appropriately. In a
comparison of graduate historians and graduate psychologists,
Rouet et al. (1997) controlled for content expertise by choosing a historical topic unfamiliar to both groups. Results still
showed significant differences between discipline experts and
discipline novices. For instance, discipline experts were able
to deal with the bias potentially included in participants' accounts. Furthermore, discipline experts tended to use multiple
criteria when evaluating sources. Discipline novices, in contrast, based their evaluations mainly on content information
and included less source information in their essays. This
finding suggests that to fully understand which factors promote a successful processing of multiple documents, re-

searchers need to address the concrete (meta-) cognitive
strategies used by both expert and novice readers. Up to now,
this has not been the focus of studies dealing with learning
from multiple documents.

The Role of Metacognition in Forming Documents
Models
In our research, we focus on the role of metacognition in
dealing with multiple documents on the WWW. The term
metacognition is commonly referred to as the knowledge and
regulation of cognition. It involves processes like planning,
monitoring, evaluating, and elaborating (Baker & Brown,
1984; Schraw & Moshman, 1995). With regard to learning
from texts, there is a large body of empirical evidence underlining the importance of using metacognitive strategies. When
reviewing the literature pertinent to this topic, Baker and
Brown (1984) concluded that proficient young readers monitor their ongoing comprehension and adapt their reading
speed accordingly. Furthermore, they regularly activate prior
knowledge and integrate new information into existing
knowledge schemes. With the rise of hypermedia-based
learning environments in educational contexts, the use of
metacognitive strategies has become even more important.
Due to their nonlinearity, hypermedia-based learning environments afford a high amount of learner control, because
learners have to make decisions on which information to access as well as the sequence in which to retrieve it (Dillon,
2002; Dillon & Gabbard, 1998). Furthermore, learners have
to evaluate information in terms of its relevance to their current learning goal (Bannert, 2003). Evidence for the importance of metacognition in dealing with multiple documents in
hypermedia-based learning environments comes from intervention studies that systematically promote the use of metacognition (Bannert, 2003; Lin & Lehman, 1999). For instance, Bannert (2003) found that learning outcomes as
measured by a transfer test were higher for students who received metacognitive prompts than for a control group.
We assume that metacognitive strategies are even more
important when dealing with multiple documents on the
WWW. The fact that the amount of immediately available
information is nearly unlimited on the WWW underlines the
need for a reasonable selection of information and a thorough
self-monitoring of the comprehension process. Furthermore,
laypersons need to activate prior knowledge in order to integrate information from multiple texts and thereby build semantic connections between information from different
sources. Finally, to gain knowledge about the sources, laypersons have to evaluate sources in terms of quality and credibility. This involves finding out about the author as well as his
or her credentials, intentions, possible affiliations, and sponsors.
However, in an earlier study (Stadtler & Bromme, 2004),
we found that university students with little knowledge about
medicine showed rather low levels of metacognitive activity
while searching the Internet for medical information, a finding which is consistent with studies on the use of strategies in
hypermedia-based learning (e.g., Jonassen & Wang, 1993).
Furthermore, use of the metacognitive strategies of monitoring, evaluating, and elaborating correlated significantly with

2069

knowledge acquisition. This was true for both the acquisition
of factual knowledge and the comprehension of the subject
matter. Moreover, the use of evaluation strategies related
positively to the quality of essays on the credibility of
sources. These results, although correlative in nature, point to
the importance of metacognitive strategy use when dealing
with multiple documents on the WWW.

would foster the acquisition of knowledge about sources
(source knowledge hypothesis), and that evaluation prompts
would improve their ability to indicate the source of information after their Internet research (sourcing hypothesis). Finally
we predicted that monitoring prompts would support the acquisition of content knowledge (content knowledge hypothesis).

Method

Development of the Metacognitive Tool met.a.ware
To further investigate the role of metacognition in dealing
with multiple documents on the WWW, we developed the
metacognitive tool met.a.ware (see Figure 1). The tool supports laypersons to deal with multiple documents on the
WWW by encouraging them to use metacognitive strategies.

Figure1: Screenshot of the metacognitive tool met.a.ware
More precisely, met.a.ware enables laypersons to store the
information they have found on the WWW systematically.
They do this by assigning information to different tabs labeled with aspects of, in this case, the topic cholesterol (ontological classification) (see upper part of Figure 1). They are
also prompted to engage in metacognitive activities (monitoring and evaluating). As an evaluation prompt, they are required to indicate the source of information each time they
paste it into the system. They also have to rate the author's
credentials, the bias of information, as well as their confidence in the information on 5-point scales (see lower part of
Figure 1). As a monitoring prompt, laypersons are requested
to assess how well they have comprehended information, how
much they currently know about the specific aspect of cholesterol, and how much information they still need to search for
regarding this aspect of cholesterol. Once again, they answer
these items by rating them on 5-point scales (see right part of
Figure 1).
All ratings are attached permanently to the specific contents
and can be retrieved at all times during future Internet research. This means that the laypersons add an additional layer
of meta-information to the contents stored in met.a.ware.

Predictions
We formulated the following hypotheses on the use of metacognitive prompts: We predicted that evaluation prompts

Participants Participants were 100 undergraduate students at
the University of Muenster (79 female, mean age 23 years).
Prior knowledge about cholesterol was tested before the
Internet search to ensure their layperson status in this domain.
Two students scored more than 50%, and were dropped from
all further analyses. The remaining 98 participants scored an
average of 4.71 (SD = 2.32) out of 24 possible test points.
Scenario and Material Participants were instructed to conduct an Internet search to gather information for a fictitious
friend. This friend had been diagnosed with a high level of
cholesterol and needed to decide whether to consent to medical treatment. For their Internet search, participants were
given a set of 15 preselected websites on the topic cholesterol.
These web sites were accessible via a list of links presenting
the URLs in alphabetical order. When selecting web sites, we
took care to ensure that the resulting pool of information reflected the given heterogeneity of information available
online in terms of information providers and their perspectives on this controversially discussed topic. Thus, we included web sites hosted by universities, companies from the
food and pharmaceutical industries, and nutritionists or journals in the field of medicine. Web pages were displayed on a
standard 17-in. computer screen and could be browsed using
Microsoft Internet Explorer 6.
Design Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
experimental groups that worked with different versions of
met.a.ware or a control group that took paper-and-pencil
notes (paper + pencil control group). The availability of
metacognitive prompts was varied systematically across the
four met.a.ware conditions. Participants received either
evaluation prompts (evaluation group), monitoring prompts
(monitoring group), both types of prompt (evaluation + monitoring group) or no prompts (no prompts group). All
met.a.ware conditions were provided with tabs for ontological
classification.
For the sake of completeness, we point out that to control
for the effect of ontological classification, a second control
group was introduced, that is not described in this article. This
group worked with a plain text window that allowed them to
copy and paste information from the WWW, but provided
neither ontological classification nor metacognitive prompts
(text window - control group). Results showed that the text
window - control group did not differ significantly from either
the no prompts group or the paper + pencil control group on
any of the dependent measures. Because the effect of ontological classification falls outside the scope of this article,
results from the text window - control group are not discussed
any further. Similarly, we collected data on further variables
(such as the epistemological beliefs of participants), which we

2070

do not report in this paper, since they also fall outside the
scope of this article.
Measures and Procedure Prior to the Internet research, participants completed questionnaires measuring their computer
and Internet experience, as well as their interest in the topic
cholesterol. Because no significant differences were found
between groups, these variables were dropped from further
analyses. Furthermore, prior knowledge was assessed with a
24-item multiple-choice test on factual knowledge. Need for
cognition was measured with a questionnaire devised by
Bless et al. (1994). Since both measures were found to correlate with laypersons' scores on the factual knowledge posttest,
these variables were included as covariates in the analyses on
the acquisition of factual knowledge.
Searching time was limited to 40 min in order to avoid time
on task effects. Additionally, participants were asked to rate
the perceived time pressure after they had finished their Internet research. Results did not reveal any differences between
groups. After their Internet research, laypersons repeated the
multiple-choice test on factual knowledge and answered four
open questions measuring comprehension of the subject matter (content knowledge). These answers were scored qualitatively. Additionally, knowledge about sources was assessed
with a multiple-choice test asking participants to recall facts
about the sources of each web site visited (source knowledge). These included information such as the author's position, his or her affiliations, or the presence of commercial
sponsors. To find out to what degree laypersons tag information for their sources, participants were also asked to write an
argument based essay on whether they thought it was worth
trying to reduce cholesterol levels, and name the source of
each argument they used. These essays were scored in terms
of the degree of sourcing, that is, the percentage of information correctly tagged for its source (sourcing). Notes taken
during the Internet research were not available in the posttests. The whole session lasted about 100 min on average.

Results
Content Knowledge Table 1 depicts mean posttest scores
and standard deviations for the five groups. An analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) on factual knowledge posttest scores
controlling for prior knowledge and need for cognition revealed a significant difference between groups, F(4, 91) =
2.90, p < .05, η2 = .11. The effect of the covariates prior
knowledge and need for cognition was also significant, F(4,
91) = 7.69, p < .01, η2 = .08 and F(4, 91) = 8.47, p < .01,
η2 = .09, respectively.
Table 1: Mean posttest scores and standard deviations for
factual knowledge.
M
SD
Evaluation
14.50
3.49
Monitoring
15.32
2.36
Evaluation + Monitoring
14.75
2.65
No prompts
13.75
3.71
Paper & pencil
13.00
3.62

we performed planned contrasts between each experimental
group and the paper + pencil control group.1 Results showed
a significant difference between the monitoring group and
controls, F(1, 91) = 10.35, p < .01, η2 = .10, and a trend between the evaluation + monitoring group and controls, F(1,
91) = 3.66, p = .059, η2 = .04. As expected, no significant
difference could be found between controls and the no
prompts group, F(1,93) = .53, ns. However, we also obtained
a significant difference between controls and the evaluation
group, which was not predicted by our hypothesis, F(1, 91) =
5.29, p < .05, η2 = .06.
To test whether the manipulation of metacognitive prompts
impacted on the comprehension of the subject matter, we
calculated an ANOVA on the comprehension scores. Means
and standard deviations are shown in Table 2. Results showed
that comprehension scores did not differ significantly between conditions, F(4, 92) = 1.40, ns.
Table 2: Mean scores and standard deviations for
comprehension.
M
SD
Evaluation
5.79
2.30
Monitoring
6.33
1.99
Evaluation + Monitoring
5.80
2.15
No prompts
5.43
2.19
Paper & pencil
5.09
1.69
Planned contrasts were carried out to test our hypothesis that
the availability of monitoring prompts would affect comprehension of the subject matter. Results revealed a marginally
significant trend between the monitoring group and controls,
F(1, 93) = 3.36, p < .10, η2 = .04. As predicted, no significant
differences were found between controls and the no prompts
group, F(1, 93) = .25, ns, or between controls and the evaluation group, F(1, 93) = 1.09, ns. However, we did not obtain a
significant difference between controls and the monitoring +
evaluation group either, which was not predicted by our hypothesis, F(1, 93) = 1.13, ns.
Source Knowledge Table 3 depicts the mean percentage of
correct answers on the source test for the five groups. Percentages of correct answers were used instead of the total
number of correct items, because participants were free to
choose which web sites they visited. As a result, not all participants accessed all 15 web sites. We calculated an analysis
of variance (ANOVA) with the percentage of correct answers
on the source test as dependent variable. Results showed an
overall effect for the variable group, F(4, 93) = 4.27, p < .01,
η2 = .16. To test our hypothesis that evaluation prompts
would promote the acquisition of source knowledge, we performed planned contrasts between the control group and each
of the four met.a.ware groups. In line with our hypothesis, the
evaluation group, F(1, 93) = 9.48, p < .01, η2 = .09, and the
evaluation + monitoring group, F(1, 93) = 8.87, p < .01, η2
= .09, significantly outperformed controls.
1

To test our hypothesis that monitoring prompts would support the acquisition of factual knowledge more specifically,

An alpha-level of .05 was chosen for all significance testing involved in the calculation of planned comparisons unless otherwise
indicated. Since the number of contrasts does not exceed the number of degrees of freedom of the hypothesis, the alpha-level was
not adjusted (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1985)

2071

Table 3: Mean percentage correct on source test.
M
SD
Evaluation
45.33
10.80
Monitoring
33.83
12.60
Evaluation + Monitoring
44.92
13.82
No prompts
37.97
13.43
Paper & pencil
32.79
12.72
Furthermore, no significant differences were found between controls and either the no prompts group, F(1, 93) =
1.6, ns, or the monitoring group, F(1, 93) = .06, ns.
Sourcing Participants produced an average of 3.54 (SD =
1.57) arguments in their essays in favor of lowering high cholesterol levels. The number of correctly sourced arguments
was determined for each participant and related to the total
number of arguments given. This produced an index of sourcing. Means and standard deviations for this index (mean percentage of arguments that were tagged correctly for their
source) are shown in Table 4. We calculated an ANOVA with
the percentage of correctly tagged arguments for the source as
dependent variable. Results revealed no significant overall
effect for group, F(4, 93) = 1.76, ns.
Table 4: Mean percentage of correctly sourced arguments.
M
SD
Evaluation
62.17
39.15
Monitoring
42.72
44.28
Evaluation + Monitoring
65.42
42.86
No prompts
37.46
40.55
Paper & pencil
56.68
34.92
Although participants in the groups with evaluation prompts
showed the highest mean percentage of correctly sourced
arguments, planned contrasts comparing each group with
controls failed to attain statistical significance for either the
evaluation group, F(1, 93) = .43, ns, or the evaluation +
monitoring group, F(1, 93) = .82, ns. Moreover, there were
also no significant differences when either the monitoring
group or the no prompts group were compared with controls.
Therefore, the current data failed to support the sourcing hypothesis.
Because of this unpredicted result, we analyzed the handwritten notes of participants in the control group. In contradiction to what the findings of Britt and Aglinskas (2002) and
our own previous study (Stadtler & Bromme, 2004) would
suggest, the laypersons in our control condition exhibited a
noteworthy amount of spontaneous sourcing of information
gathered during their Internet searches. More precisely, 32%
named at least one source in their notes, as compared to 20%
(met.a.ware no prompts) and 21% (met.a.ware-Monitoring).
Laypersons' spontaneous use of this particular metacognitive
strategy may have compensated for the lack of prompting in
the control group.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to investigate the role of
metacognition in dealing with multiple documents on the
WWW. Drawing on the theory of documents representation

(Perfetti et al., 1999) as well as findings on the role of metacognition in text comprehension, we hypothesized that applying the metacognitive strategies of monitoring and evaluation
would help laypersons to form documents models. To a large
extent, the results support our hypothesis. Compared with
controls, participants receiving monitoring prompts acquired
significantly more factual knowledge on the topic cholesterol.
Furthermore, laypersons receiving only monitoring prompts
performed slightly better on a comprehension test. Nonetheless, the evaluation + monitoring group did not differ significantly from controls in their comprehension of the subject
matter. This may be because developing a high-level understanding within the given time limit of 40 min had been a
rather demanding task for laypersons. Results of previous
research (Stadtler & Bromme, 2004) has shown that when
laypersons were confronted with our scenario, their first goal
was to gather rather basic information such as what is an acceptable level of cholesterol in the blood or which diseases
may result from high cholesterol levels. After they had gathered some basic knowledge on the topic, they then moved on
to explore more complex issues such as the relationship between cholesterol and other factors causing a coronary heart
disease. These practical constraints may well explain why the
mean scores on the comprehension task in the present study
did not differ between groups. Further research will need to
address this issue by giving participants more study time not
only to acquire basic facts but also develop a deeper understanding of the subject matter.
However, forming a full documents model does not just require knowledge about contents, but also a representation of
knowledge about sources (Perfetti et al., 1999). This is particularly crucial when dealing with medical information on
the WWW, because single documents may contain faulty or
biased information and not always provide a reliable account.
This is why we gave laypersons evaluation prompts requiring
them to rate information in terms of its credibility. Results on
testing source knowledge revealed that evaluation prompts
improved performance: Members of both the evaluation
group and the evaluation + monitoring group recalled more
information about sources than controls. This underlines the
importance of metacognitive strategies in the formation of
source knowledge as well.
Finally, we do not find an effect of evaluation prompts on
the sourcing of information in an essay task. Although the
groups receiving evaluation prompts tagged the highest proportion of information for their source, they did not differ
significantly from controls. Analyses of the notes taken during Internet research showed that laypersons in the control
group showed a considerable amount of spontaneous source
tagging, which may have compensated for the lack of prompting. Therefore, our results suggest that future research on
metacognitive training tools like met.a.ware needs to take
into account spontaneous usage of metacognitive strategies
more explicitly.
In sum, the present study provides evidence that the use of
metacognition is crucial for the formation of documents models when dealing with multiple documents on the WWW.
Using metacognitive prompts for monitoring and evaluation
increased knowledge on both contents and sources. The results open up the possibility of designing intervention pro-

2072

grams to support laypersons in dealing with multiple documents on the WWW by fostering the use of metacognitive
strategies.

Acknowledgements
The research reported in this paper has been supported by a
scholarship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG). The scholarship has been granted to the first author in
the context of the Virtual Ph.D. Program "Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media".

References:
Baker, L., & Brown, A. L. (l984). Metacognitive skills and
reading. In P. D. Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of reading research. New York: Longman.
Bannert, M. (2003). Effekte metakognitiver Lernhilfen auf
den Wissenserwerb in vernetzten Lernumgebungen [Effects of metacognitive learning aids in networked learning
environments]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische Psychologie,
17, 13-25.
Bhavnani, S. K., Jacob, R. T., Nardine, J., & Peck, F. A.
(2003, April). Exploring the distribution of online healthcare information. Paper presented at the CHI, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA.
Bless, H., Wänke, M., Bohner, G., Fellhauer, R. F., &
Schwarz, N. (1994). Need for Cognition: Eine Skala zur
Erfassung von Engagement und Freude bei Denkaufgaben.
[Need for cognition: A scale measuring engagement and
happiness in cognitive tasks]. Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie, 25, 147-154.
Britt, M. A., Perfetti, C. A., Sandak, R., & Rouet, J.-F.
(1999). Content integration and source separation in learning from multiple texts. In S. R. Goldman, A. C. Graesser
& P. v. d. Broek (Eds.), Narrative comprehension, causality, and coherence: Essays in honor of Tom Trabasso.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Britt, M. A., & Aglinskas, C. (2002). Improving student's
ability to identify and use source information. Cognition
and instruction, 20, 485-522.
Bromme, R., Jucks, R., & Runde, A. (2005). Barriers and
biases
in
computer-mediated
expert-laypersoncommunication. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada
(Eds.), Barriers, biases and opportunities of communication and cooperation with computers- and how they may be
overcome. New York: Springer.
Dillon, A. (1991). Readers' models of text structures: The
case of academic articles. International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 35, 913-925.
Dillon, A., & Gabbard, R. (1998). Hypermedia as an educational technology: A review of the quantitative research literature on learner comprehension, control, and style. Review of Educational Research, 68, 322-349.
Dillon, A. (2002). Writing as design: Hypermedia and the
shape of information space. In R. Bromme & E. Stahl
(Eds.), Writing hypertext and learning: Conceptual and
empirical approaches. New York: Pergamon.

2073

Eysenbach, G., Powell, J., Kuss, O., & Eun-Ryoung, S.
(2002). Emprical studies assessing the quality of health information for consumers on the world wide web. A systematic review. JAMA, 287, 2691-2700.
Fox, S., & Fallows, D. (2003). Internet health resources. Retrieved February 7th, 2003, from http://www. pewinternet.org/.
Goldman, S. R., Braasch, J. L., Gepstein, R., Brodowinski,
K., Wiley, J., & Graesser, A. C. (2004, August). Doing research on the web: Comprehending complex science information. Paper presented at the 14th International Conference of the Society for Text & Discourse, Chicago, IL,
USA.
Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological understanding as a
metacognitive process: Thinking aloud during online
searching. Educational Psychologist, 39, 43-55.
Jonassen, D. H., & Wang, S. (1993). Acquiring structural
knowledge from semantically structured hypertext. Journal
of computer based instruction, 20, 1-8.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological Review,
85, 363-394.
Lin, X., & Lehman, J. D. (1999). Supporting learning of variable control in a computer-based biology environment: Effects of prompting college students to reflect on their own
thinking. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 36,
837-858.
O'Connor, A. M. (1995). Validation of a decisional conflict
scale. Medical decision making, 15, 15-30.
Perfetti, C. A., Rouet, J.-F., & Britt, M. A. (1999). Toward a
theory of documents representation. In H. v. Oostendorp &
S. R. Goldman (Eds.), The construction of mental representations during reading. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1985). Contrast analysis:
Focused comparisons in the analysis of variance. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rouet, J.-F., Britt, M. A., Mason, R. A., & Perfetti, C. A.
(1996). Using multiple sources of evidence to reason about
history. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 478-493.
Rouet, J.-F., Favart, M., Britt, M. A., & Perfetti, C. A. (1997).
Studying and using multiple documents in history: Effects
of discipline expertise. Cognition and Instruction, 15, 85106.
Schraw, G., & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories.
Educational Psychology Review, 7, 351-371.
Stadtler, M., & Bromme, R. (2004, August). Laypersons
searching for medical information on the web: The role of
metacognition. Poster presented at the 14th Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, Chicago, IL, USA.
Wineburg, S. S. (1991). Historical problem solving: A study
of the cognitive processes used in the evaluation of documentary and pictorial evidence. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 83, 79.

