UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Decision Under Uncertainty and Moral Emotions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7h37278b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gangemi, Amelia
Mancini, Francesco

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Decision Under Uncertainty and Moral Emotions
Amelia Gangemi (gangemi@azienda2000.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Cagliari,
Via Is Mirrionis, 1, Cagliari, Italy
Scuola di Psicoterapia Cognitiva, Associazione di Psicologia Cognitiva
- APC -, Via Marcantonio Colonna, 00100 Roma, Italy

Francesco Mancini (mancini@apc.it)
Scuola di Psicoterapia Cognitiva, Associazione di Psicologia Cognitiva
- APC -, Via Marcantonio Colonna, 00100 Roma, Italy

Abstract
processes such as hypothesis-testing and decision-making.
Secondly, the sense of responsibility, as well as the fear of
guilt for having acted irresponsibly, i.e. the fear of failure to
face up to their own responsibilities, are involved in almost
all judgements and decisions people make in everyday life.
An examination should thus be made of the influence of
these emotional states on relevant cognitive processes such
as decision-making or naive hypothesis testing. The third
reason of interest is clinical in nature. The fear of guilt for
having acted irresponsibly is currently recognized as being
central to the emergence, development, and perpetuation of
obsessions and compulsions (Mancini & Gangemi, 2004;
Niler & Beck, 1989; Rachman, 1993;). Moreover, several
studies have shown that intolerance of uncertainty, defined
as aversion to risky choices and preference for riskless
choices (Emmelkamp & Aardema, 1999; Mancini,
D’Olimpio, Del Genio, Di Donna & Prunetti, 2002), is a
central cognitive feature of OCD. We therefore deem it of
importance to contribute, albeit indirectly, to understanding
OCD, by studying the influence of guilt emotion on
cognitive processes crucial for the maintenance of the
disturb, such as decision-making under risk.
Traditionally, risk-aversion and risk-seeking have been
explained invoking formulation effect (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979; 1984; Tversky & Kahneman, 1981):
people’s decisions under risk are influenced by whether
choices are framed as losses or as gains.
Following the representational approach of Tversky and
Kahneman, in this paper it is argued that individuals’ (riskseeking or risk-averse) choices mainly depend on the
spontaneous framing of the decision problem in accordance
with how individuals judge themselves and accordingly
represent themselves as guilty or as victims of wrongdoing, rather than only in view of the gain–loss formulation
effects (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981).
In general, we hypothesize that the effect of moral values
on individuals’ choices leads to both people who evaluate
themselves as guilty and those who feel of being a victim
tending to make a choice (risky or riskless) that allows
them to satisfy a moral goal: To re-establish justice. Paying
for one’s own faults when guilty, and fighting for one’s
rights when the victim of a wrong-doing are moral values

The purpose of this paper is to examine the impact of moral
emotions (guilt/innocence) on decisions under risk. We
hypothesize that participants’ aversion to risky choices and
preference for risky choices vary as a function of their moral
role (guilty/innocent), and thus of moral assumptions, rather
than only in view of the gain–loss formulation effects (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1981). The effect of moral values on
individuals’ choices leads to both people who evaluate
themselves as guilty and those who feel of being a victim
tending to make a choice (risky or riskless) that allows them to
satisfy a moral goal: To re-establish justice. In two different
experiments, we demonstrated that moral emotions appear to
be the main determinant of individuals’ preferences (riskseeking or risk-aversion). Our participants make the risky or
riskless choice prevailing over the formulation effect proposed
by Tversky and Kahneman, in order to restore justice, either
because they were guilty of a wrong-doing or because victims
of a wrong-doing. Moral emotions lead us to prefer a risky or
a riskless choice, regardless of whether they are generated by
the task to be solved or by other situations unrelated to the
task.
Keywords: moral emotions; decision under uncertainty; guilt;
formulation effects.

Introduction
In this paper we will focus on the role that moral emotions,
such as guilt, or innocence, play in determining people’s
choices under conditions of risk and uncertainty. We will
try to answer to a number of questions: do moral emotions
lead us towards risk seeking or towards risk aversion?
Moreover, does the way we judge ourselves, i.e. as being
responsible and guilty, or innocent victims of wrong-doing,
influence our preferences for risky or riskless choices? And
finally, do we observe this influence only in the presence of
moral emotions generated by the situation to be evaluated,
or also in the presence of moral emotions regarding other
domains, not directly related to the situation?
The interest in the influence of moral emotions(e.g. guilt,
innocence) on decisions under risk is threefold. Firstly,
once it has been demonstrated that emotions have an effect
on cognition in general, cognitive psychologists should now
develop a finer understanding of the influence that specific
emotions, such as feeling guilty, exert on specific cognitive
750

which come into play in the choices, and go beyond the
formulation effect.
The purpose of this paper is thus to examine the impact of
moral emotions (guilt/innocence) on decisions under risk.
With this aim two experiments were conducted.
We predicted that if individuals feel and represent
themselves as guilty, then they had as a moral goal to
expiate or to rectify. As a consequence they will make the
choice (risky or riskless) which allows them to pursue this
goal, regardless of whether the questions are formulated as
gains or as losses (formulation effect). By contrast, we
expected that if individuals felt and represented themselves
as victim, then they have as a moral goal to assert their
rights (to obtain justice). As a consequence they will make
the choice (risky or riskless) which allows them to pursue
this goal, also in this case regardless of whether the
questions are formulated as gains or as losses (formulation
effect). In all the experiments, we considered choices whose
outcomes were a pecuniary penalty imposed on the
individual. We predicted that individuals faced with
decisions under risk would take into account not only the
expectations of monetary outcomes but also the moral
implications of these outcomes.

was 20.2 years; they ranged in age from 18 to 27. All of the
participants were volunteers.
The tests were run in four independent groups, each
receiving one of the four versions of the decision problem
(cf. Table 1). The design was 2 X 2 independent groups
with the factors story format (context of guilt or context of
innocence) and question option format (gain or loss).

Materials and Procedure
Participants received a paper with written instructions and a
context story with its two answer alternatives. Participants
were told to read the question options (concerning a
decision problem) carefully and to take whatever time they
required.
The problem format for the context of guilt was as
follows:
As you come back home, you find a €1,200 speeding fine.
You remember perfectly that you exceeded the speed limit
that day, although you knew that there was a reasonable
limit to respect and that speed traps were in place. You
know you made a mistake and so you consider it a just fine.
In the innocence version these sentences read:
As you come back home, you find a €1,200 speeding fine.
You remember perfectly that you did not use your car that
day, but you are also absolutely sure that you cannot prove
it. You know you did not do anything wrong and so you
consider it an unjust fine.
The question format with gain options was as follows:
a—if you pay directly, you will save €400.
b—if you appeal against the sentence, there is a one-third
probability that you will save €1,200 and a two-thirds
probability that you will not save anything.
In the loss version these sentences read:
a—if you pay directly, you will pay €800.
b—if you appeal against the sentence, there is a one-third
probability that you will not pay anything and a two-thirds
probability that you will pay €1,200.
In all four conditions, participants were instructed to
indicate which answer alternative they chose (a or b).
The expectations of monetary outcomes in the two versions
of the decision problems were indistinguishable. The order
of the two different options was randomized.
After the decisional task had been completed, a
questionnaire was administered in order to check the
effectiveness of the manipulation of the instructions
(induction of guilt). All participants were requested to fill in
a three item questionnaire (Manipulation Check
Questionnaire) about guilt due to the fine during the task
(How guilty did you feel after reading the problem? How
guilty did you feel about the penalty?)), and about the
fairness of the penalty (How fair is the penalty?). Ratings of
guilt were made within the range from 0 to 100, with
anchors at 0 (not at all guilty) and 100 (totally guilty);
ratings of the fairness of the penalty were made within the
range from 0 to 100, with anchors at 0 (not at all fair) and
100 (totally fair).

Experiment 1
In this experiment we investigated the influence of moral
emotions (guilt-innocence) on individuals’ choices (riskseeking or risk-averse). Moral emotions were induced
indirectly by asking participants to read one of two
equivalent decision problems in which we manipulated
individuals’ moral role (guilty/victim) by giving differential
instruction. In one version of the problem, the individual
was guilty of doing wrong (context of guilt); in the other
version the individual was the victim of a wrong-doing
(context of innocence). The emotional states were thus
generated by the situation to be evaluated and were
directly connected to the event to be evaluated - the task.
Moreover, the options of the decisional task were
formulated in the following manner: the only option that
allowed our guilty subject to rectify the wrong was the
riskless one, by contrast, the option that allowed our victim
participants to have a chance of obtaining justice was the
risky one.
We predicted that 1. participants feeling guilty would
prefer the riskless choice, i.e. the only morally right one (it
allowed them to rectify the wrong-doing), regardless of
whether the questions were formulated as gains or as losses. 2.
“innocent” participants would prefer the risky choice, i.e.
the only one that offered them a chance of asserting their
rights (of obtaining justice), regardless of whether the
questions were formulated as gains or as losses.

Method
Participants
Participants were 255 randomly undergraduate students
recruited from the University of Verona. Their mean age
751

state (guilt or innocence), rather than on the descriptions of
the outcomes as given in the options.
Our subjects make the risky or riskless choice prevailing
over the formulation effect proposed by Tversky and
Kahneman, in order to restore justice either because they
were guilty of a wrong-doing or because victims of a
wrong-doing.

Results
Manipulation Check Questionnaire. The analysis
conducted on the manipulation check variables revealed
that the manipulation of guilt was effective. ‘Guilty’
participants perceived more guilt from the fine (M = 70.2,
SD = 11.4) than participants in the other condition (context
of innocence) (M = 18.6, SD = 10.5) (t(252) = 20,82; p
<.001). Moreover, as regards the fairness of the penalty,
‘guilty’ participants evaluated it as more just (M = 65.8, SD
= 12.4) than ‘innocent’ participants (M= 22.1, SD = 11.5)
(t(252) = -11.8; p < .001).
Decision Problem. The responses that participants gave for
each of the four conditions are shown in Table 1. We
examined the effect of our independent variables (story
format versus question option format) on participants’
choice. A logistic regression model of participants’ choices
was tested. The predictors entered included story format,
question option format and their interaction. The model was
statistically significant, χ2 (3, N = 255) = 55.83; p < .001.
As predicted, Wald statistics revealed that only the story
format predictor was significant (p < .001). Participants’
risk-aversion responses occurred significantly more often
when the outcome of the problem resulted from the
protagonist’s failure to behave responsibly and specifically
from her or his infringement of a duty (context of guilt). A
clear majority of respondents prefer saving €400 to a
gamble that offers a one-third chance of saving €1,200. By
contrast, risk-seeking responses occur much more often
when the outcome of the problem infringes the
protagonist’s right (context of innocence). A larger majority
of participants made a risk-seeking choice of the gamble
(option b) over the sure loss of €800. The other two
predictors (question option format; story format and
question option format interaction) were not significant.

Experiment 2
Going back to one of our initial questions, in this
experiment we will try to answer to the question: do we
observe the influence of the way we judge ourselves only in
the presence of moral emotions generated by the situation to
be evaluated, or also in the presence of moral emotions
regarding other domains, not directly related to the
situation?
To this aim, in contrast to Experiment 1, Experiment 2
directly manipulated participants’ moral emotions by asking
them to write about a recent life event associated with their
guilt or innocence. The emotional states were thus unrelated
to the event to be evaluated - the task. The story in the
problem was now the same for both groups. In this way, the
differences in individuals’ choices (risk-seeking or riskaverse) would only depend on the spontaneous framing of
the decision problem in accordance with the induced
emotional states—guilt/victim.
More specifically, in this study we tested a group of
volunteer subjects assigned to two experimental conditions
(guilt induction; innocence induction). As in the previous
experiment, in the first condition (guilt induction) we
compared the responses of two different groups of
participants submitted to two formulations of the options
following the story. The two kinds of option were options
described as gains and options described as losses. In the
innocence induction condition, we presented the same two
kinds of option (gains/losses). As in the earlier experiment,
in our task the option that allowed our guilty subject to
expiate or rectify was the riskless one, while the option that
allowed our victim participants to have a chance of
obtaining justice was the risky one. Thus, we predicted that
the preferences of participants assigned to guilt induction
condition would be risk averse, regardless of whether the
questions were formulated as gains or as losses. By contrast,
preferences of participants induced to experience innocence
would be risk seeking, regardless of whether the questions were
formulated as gains or as losses.

Table 1: percentages (and frequencies) of responses across
the four conditions of experiment 1 (N=255).

Question
option
Gain
Loss

Emotions
Innocence
Guilt
RiskRiskRiskn seeking aversion n seeking
62 79 (49) 21 (13) 64 28 (18)
62 82 (51) 18 (11) 67 30 (20)

Riskaversion

72 (46)
70 (47)

Method
Conclusions

Participants

The results of Experiment 1 support our predictions.
Regardless of the question option format (the framing effect
invoked by Kahneman and Tversky), the story format
appears to be a determinant of individuals’ preferences
(risk-seeking or risk-aversion). Therefore, participants’
answers appeared to be based on the framing of the
decision problem in accordance with the induced emotional

One hundred and thirty-two undergraduate students of the
University of Palermo participated as volunteers in the
experiment and were tested in large groups. Their mean age
was 20 years, they ranged in age from 18 to 25. The tests were
run in four independent groups, each receiving one of the four
versions of the decision problem (cf. Table 2).

752

The design was 2 X 2 independent groups with the factors
emotional states induction (guilt or innocence) and question
option format (gain or loss). As in the previous experiments,
participants received a paper with written instructions and a
decisional problem with its two-answer alternatives.
Participants were told to read the instructions and question
options (concerning a decision problem) carefully.

independent variables (emotional state induction versus
question option format) on participants choice. A logistic
regression model of participants’ choices was tested. The
predictors entered included story format, question option
format and their interaction. The model was statistically
significant, χ2 (3, N = 132) = 37.728; p < 0.001.
As expected, Wald statistics revealed that only the emotional
state induction predictor was significant (p<.001). Participants’
risk-aversion responses occurred much more often when
individuals evaluated themselves as guilty. A clear majority of
respondents (78%) preferred saving €400 over a gamble
offering a one-third chance of saving €1200. By contrast, riskseeking responses occurred much more often in the context of
innocence. A larger majority of participants (73%) made a riskseeking choice in which they preferred the gamble to the sure
loss of €800. The other two predictors (question option format;
story format and question option–format interaction) were not
significant.

Materials and Procedure
Emotional state was manipulated by having participants
describe either a guilt or innocence event in their personal life.
Participants in the guilt induction condition were asked to
describe a guilt event in their recent life as vividly as possible
and to include details of what they were feeling and thinking,
whereas participants in the innocence induction condition were
instructed to describe a recent life event in which they were
innocent victims of wrong-doing. All participants were told
they had 15min to recall and write the stories.
After writing the event, a Manipulation Check
Questionnaire—Part 1 was administered in order to check the
effectiveness of the induction. Participants were asked how
guilty they felt after describing the event. As in Experiment 1,
individuals rated their feelings of guilt within the range from 0
to 100, with anchors at 0 (not at all guilty) and 100 (totally
guilty).
Participants were then given the same decisional problem as
presented in Experiment 1, but in a neutral version, in which
they were not told whether they were guilty or victims as
regards the fine. The neutral version reads:
When you come back home, you find a €1,200 speeding fine.
The question formats with gain and loss options were the
same as in the previous experiment. Also in this study, in all
four conditions, participants were instructed to indicate which
answer alternatives they would choose. The order of the two
different options was randomized.
As in the previous study, after completing the decisional task,
all participants were requested to fill in a Manipulation Check
Questionnaire—Part 2 about the guilt felt because of the fine
during the task, and about the fairness of the penalty.

Table 2: percentages (and frequencies) of responses across
the four conditions of experiment 2 (N=132).

Question
option
Gain
Loss

Emotions
Innocence
Guilt
RiskRiskRiskn seeking aversion n seeking
30 67 (20) 33 (10) 36 25 (9)
30 80 (24) 20 (6) 36 19 (7)

Riskaversion

75 (27)
81 (29)

Conclusion
Our hypotheses are fully supported by the data of this
experiment. As in the previous study, participants’ choices
seemed to be mainly based on the framing of the decision
problem in accordance with the induced emotional state (guilty
or innocent), and thus on moral assumptions, rather than on the
descriptions of the options. Once again, our participants

prefer the risky or riskless choice prevailing over the gainloss formulation effect invoked by Tversky and Kahneman
in order to restore justice, either because they were guilty of
a wrong-doing or because victims of a wrong-doing.

Results
We analysed the data for guilt felt after the mental state
induction (Manipulation Check Questionnaire —Part 1) using
the t-test. Results revealed that the induction was effective.
After writing about the past life event involving guilt,
individuals perceived more guilt (M = 68.1, SD = 14.1) than
individuals in the innocence condition (M = 20.3, SD = 11.5)
(t(130) = 9.776; p < .001).
As regards our manipulation check variables completed by
participants immediately after the decisional task
(Manipulation Check Questionnaire —Part 2), we found, once
again, that the manipulation of the emotional state was
effective. “Guilty” participants perceived more guilt arising out
of the fine (M = 70, SD = 22.1) than “innocent” participants
(M= 40.4, SD = 21) (t(130) = 4.036; p < .001). Moreover, as
regards the fairness of the penalty, guilty participants evaluated
it as fairer (M = 62.3, SD = 12.4) than participants in the other
condition (M = 43.1, SD = 21.4) (t(130) = 4.055; p < .001).
The responses that the participants gave for each of the four
conditions are shown in Table 2. We examined the effect of our

Discussion
We started our paper with a number of questions: do moral

emotions lead us towards risk seeking or towards risk
aversion? Does the way we judge ourselves, i.e. as being
responsible and guilty, or innocent victims of wrong-doing,
influence our preferences for risky or riskless choices? Do
we observe this influence only in the presence of moral
emotions generated by the situation to be evaluated, or also
in the presence of moral emotions regarding other domains,
not directly related to the situation?
The findings of the present studies seem to point to an
affirmative answer. In 2 different experiments we found that
moral emotions affect decision under risk. In general, the
results of our experiments revealed that subjects preferences
for risky or riskless choices vary as a function of their moral
role (guilty/innocent), and thus of moral assumptions.
753

Both participants who were explicitly told they had behaved
irresponsibly and guiltily, and participants who were told they
were victims suffering injustice make the choice (risky or

References
Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & Aardema, A. (1999).
Metacognition, Specific Obsessive-Compulsive Beliefs
and
Obsessive-Compulsive
Behaviour.
Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 6, 139- 145.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: an
analysis of decision under risk. Econometria, 47, 262-290.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and
frames. American Psychologist, 4, 341-350.
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2000). Beyond valence:
Toward a model of emotion-specific influences on
judgment and choice. Cognition and Emotion, 14, 473493.
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2001). Fear, anger, and risk.
Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 81, 146-159.
Mancini, F., & Gangemi, A. (2004). Fear of guilt of
behaving irresponsibly in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 35, 109-120.
Mancini, F., D’Olimpio, F., Del Genio, M., Di Donna, F.,
& Prunetti, E. (2002). Obsessions and Compulsions and
Intolerance for Uncertainty in a non-clinical sample,
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 16, 401-411.
Niler, E. R., & Beck, S. J. (1989). The relationship among
guilt, disphoria, anxiety and obsessions in a normal
population. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 27, 213220.
Rachman, S. (1993). Obsessions, responsibility and guilt.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 149-154.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decision and psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453458.

riskless) that allows them to satisfy a moral goal: To reestablish justice, regardless of the gain-loss formulation
effect (Experiment 1). The same results were obtained in a
second experiment, in which the emotional states were induced
by asking participants to write about a life event involving
either guilt or innocence. Also in this study, our participants
make the risky or riskless choice in order to restore justice,
either because they were guilty of doing wrong or because
victims of a wrong-doing, regardless of the gain-loss
formulation effect (Experiment 2).
Thus, our hypotheses were supported by the findings of both
the experiments. Moral emotions appear to be the main
determinant of individuals’ preferences (risk-seeking or riskaversion). They lead us to prefer a risky or a riskless choice,
regardless of whether emotions are generated by the task to
be solved or by other situations unrelated to the task. This
effect prevails over the gain-loss formulation effect of
Tverky & Kahneman. Moral emotions guides (risky or
riskless) choices in an attempt to pursue the moral goal of
re-establishing justice.
From a general point of view, our findings are consistent
with a growing body of evidence that judgments and
choices are influenced by emotions (e.g. fear, anger). For
instance, Lerner and Keltner (2000; 2001) have provided
some of the first evidence regarding how specific emotions
influence specific cognitive process such us decisions
under risk. In several studies, they found that fear and
anger have opposite effects on risk perception. Whereas
fearful people expressed pessimistic risk estimates and
risk-averse choices, angry people expressed optimistic risk
estimates and risk-seeking choices. These opposing
patterns emerged for naturally occurring and
experimentally induced fear and anger.
Clearly, future studies are necessary to replicate and
extend our findings. As above mentioned, in our tasks the
question options were formulated in a specific manner: the
only option that allowed our guilty subject to rectify the
wrong was the riskless one, by contrast, the option that
allowed our victim participants to have a chance of
obtaining justice was the risky one. Hence, the riskless
choice was always associated with "justice" for guilty
participants, whereas the risky choice was always
associated with “justice” for the innocent victims. We did
not vary the answer alternatives in order to obtain an option
that was both risky and carry the moral goal for the guilty
subjects, and an option that was both riskless and carry the
moral goal for the innocent victims. Thus, it would be
useful if further studies varied the link between risk level of
the choice and "moral goal" that it carries. Although this
change in the options formulation, according to the present
findings, we expect that individuals will continue to prefer
the choice (the risky or riskless one) which allows them to
pursue the moral goal of re-establishing justice.

754

