UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Designing Emotion-Capable Robots, One Emotion at a Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2391w64x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Ganjoo, Afshin

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Designing Emotion-Capable Robots, One Emotion at a Time
Afshin Ganjoo (afshin.ganjoo@intel.com)
Intel Corporation, 1900 Prairie City Road
Folsom, CA 95630, USA

responses fall somewhere between these two in response
time and the required brain power. But what makes them
stand out is their ability to manipulate the physiological and
mental state of the life form to increase its chances of survival. And that is what differentiates emotional processing
from reflexive and cognitive processing – that it is purely
designed to increase the entity’s chances of survival.
An emotion system will be activated when a stimulus negatively or positively affects the survival of the entity. Currently, robots do not enjoy the independence that other life
forms enjoy. But the time will come when robots will need
to be free from human control. At such a time, it will be
crucial that they make decisions to increase their chances of
survival. Those decisions can not be made for them in advance, as their environment can not be easily predicted nor
can all robots respond the same way. We must do for robots
what nature has done for us, and that is to equip them with
an adaptable system for survival. An emotion system is just
such a system.

Abstract
Recent advances in emotion modeling and continuous progress in robot design pose an intriguing question: can emotion-capable robots be constructed? This paper aims to compose an emotion model as a first step in this endeavor. Concrete concepts from existing advanced emotion models have
been built upon to develop a new comprehensive computational model of emotions. This model bridges the gap between physical sensations and emotions to allow robots to develop a dynamic emotion system. It organizes emotions not
just as opposites, but also as reverses of each other, critical
for managing resources. The model further categorizes complex emotions based on evolutionary pressures into energybased, object-based, social-based, and confrontation-based
emotions. Categorization of emotions gives an additional
flexibility in designing robots.
Keywords: Emotion Model; Emotion-Capable Robots

Introduction
Long gone are the days when emotions were considered
illogical. Today, engineers design and develop emotioncapable systems with new found fervor (Arbib & Fellous,
2004; Breazeal, 2003). Computer games, software agents,
pet toys, and simple robots now exhibit emotions. But there
is a big difference between exhibiting emotions and feeling
them. This gap is no where more apparent than in robots.
A robot which exhibits human emotions, yet understands
nothing else about the human experience, does not convince
even the most wishful of observers. Much like a bad actor,
the observer is left to wonder if there is anything real about
the emotion exhibited by the robot. The problem is not that
robots can’t be designed to feel emotions; the problem is
that we don’t have a model that allows for emotions to be
felt. This paper hopes to bridge that gap.

The Model
Tremendous amount of analysis has gone into developing
sophisticated models of emotions. Every aspect of emotions
have been used to uncover clues to the structure of emotions, including functional, behavioral, cognitive, physiological, neural, facial expressive, linguistic, and evolutionary aspects of emotions. The model presented here takes
some of the most concrete concepts from these models and
adds new concepts to lay the foundations for creating emotion-capable robots.

Pain and Pleasure, and the Basic Emotions
A well discussed concept in advanced emotion models is the
concept of basic emotions. Plutchik (1980), based on evolutionary concepts, identified eight basic emotions and neatly
paired them as four opposites. Ekman (1992) identified five
basic emotions based on universal signals. Johnson-Laird
and Oatley (1992) developed their basic emotions on the
analysis of the ontology of simple social mammals. Other
methods used to identify basic emotions include density of
neural firing (Tomkins, 1984), forms of action readiness
(Frijda, 1987), and hardwired response (Panksepp, 1982;
Gray, 1982). But perhaps the most basic of basic emotions
were offered by Mowrer (1960) and Weiner and Graham
(1984). Mowrer identified pleasure and pain as basic emotions due to their unlearned nature. Weiner and Graham
identify joy and sorrow as the basic emotions since they are
attribution independent. And here lies the connection be-

Why Emotion-Capable Robots
The fact that millions of years of evolution have produced
life forms with complex emotion systems should be enough
to convince anyone that such systems provide irreplaceable
benefits to the survival of these life forms. In fact, increase
in the cognitive powers of the higher order life forms has
not diluted their emotional complexity. We are the perfect
example of this phenomenon.
Behavioral responses to environmental stimuli can be categorized as reflexive, emotional or cognitive. Reflexive responses do not require much analysis or brain power, but are
made quickly. Cognitive responses require the most amount
of brain power, but are made relatively slowly. Emotional
755

on their value to the survival of the entity. Relevance to
preferences, goals, motives, coping potential, and immorality, are among the many factors that can contribute to this
calculation (Scherer, 1997; Lazarus, 1991). The appraising
of events will determine whether one likes something to
happen or not. It also explains why the same event can generate different emotions in different people, or even different emotions in the same person at different times. The
value of appraisal describes the intensity of the emotion
(Sonnemans & Frijda, 1995), allowing different names to be
given to different intensities of the same emotion. Appraisal
can be unconscious, due to repeated exposure to the same
event, or conscious, deliberately done to assess a situation
(Lazarus, 1991). It can take place before or after the eliciting emotion (Frijda, 1993). The appraisal before the emotion, causes the emotion, and the appraisal after the emotion,
helps in measuring the effectiveness of the emotion and
modifying it, if need be.
Here too, appraisal plays a central role. Its value, whether
negative or positive, is used in conjunction with other factors to define emotions. The value of appraisal assists in
defining the intensity of the emotion felt. It is also used to
give different names to the same emotion, distinguishing for
example, annoyance, anger, and rage. Reevaluation of an
event, leading to a new appraisal value, is identified as one
of the processes that would trigger a reverse emotion. But
perhaps the most important claim made in this model in
regard to appraisal is that it assigns a survival value to
events based on the amount of pain or pleasure they are expected to cause. As explained previously, that measure exactly describes the amount of sorrow or joy the event will
generate.
The robot must be able to feel different intensities of pain
and pleasure, based on how its survival is influenced. Using
this measurement, the robot will be able to appraise events
accurately. Complex appraisal factors, such as immorality
and motives, are built over many years of analysis of what
causes pain and pleasure. That is why it takes years for children to develop a sense of what is right and what is wrong.
A robot can and must go through the same process to develop these values. And it need not come to the same conclusions we have come to.

tween feelings and emotions. In the model presented here,
pain and pleasure are identified as feelings, for the same
reason Mowrer identified them as basic emotions. These
two feelings are directly tied to what this model considers
basic emotions, sorrow and joy.
Pain and pleasure are considered to be our most basic guides
to avoiding and seeking things for our survival. For that
purpose, there is no learning involved. Pleasure guides us to
seek things that improve our survival chances, from consuming food to reproduction. Pain, on the other hand, focuses our attention to events that are decreasing our chances
of survival.
Pain and pleasure are directly responsible for instigating
emotions. The most immediate emotions instigated by pain
and pleasure are sorrow and joy respectively. Sorrow is the
recognition that an event has occurred that has or will cause
pain. Joy is the recognition that an event has occurred that
has or will lead to pleasure. Winning and losing money is
always a good example here since the value of money has to
be learned. Winning the lottery may not be physically
pleasurable, but it is joyful. That recognition is important
since the brain has learned that possessing money will bring
pleasure later on. Equally, losing money at the gambling
table may not be physically painful, but it is saddening as
the brain has learned that it will require much resources and
hard work to replace the lost money. A simpler way of looking at it: joy is the felt when an event occurs that will bring
us pleasure and sorrow is felt when an event occurs that will
give us pain. The difference is that pleasure and pain are
hardwired sensations with no room for cognitively manipulation, while joy and sorrow require learning and can be
cognitively manipulated.
Sorrow and joy provide a layer of sophistication to the feelings of pain and pleasure. They allow the entity to associate
events that may not immediately cause pain or pleasure,
with those feelings. Considering the systematic evolution of
the brain (MacLean, 1967) and the different pathways information can take through the brain to generate emotions
(LeDoux, 1989), it is easy to see how and why sorrow and
joy would evolve from pain and pleasure.
To define pain and pleasure for a robot, it must be equipped
with the ability to recognize its state of survival. Recognition of depredation of equipment can be defined as pain,
requiring the robot to focus attention on eliminating the
source of pain. Replenishment of resources can be defined
as pleasure, guiding the robot to seek replenishment of its
resources.
The robot must be given the ability to recognize and associate events that indirectly or eventually lead to pain or pleasure. This learning is critical in creating a dynamic emotioncapable system. The occurrence of these events will trigger
the emotions of sorrow and joy.

Anticipation and Surprise: The Learning Emotions
The ability to anticipate events plays a critical role in this
model. Anticipation and surprise have been identified as
emotions in some models (Plutchik, 1980) while rejected in
others (Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988). Although anticipation and surprise have all the characteristics of emotions,
namely physiological modifications, behavioral reactions,
and cognitive focus, here they are not considered emotions
but are considered to be responsible in giving intensity to
emotions. The higher the anticipation of an emotion inducing event, the more intense the emotion experienced.
Equally, the higher the surprise from the occurrence of an
emotion inducing event, the more intense the emotion experienced. The emotion experienced depends on other fac-

Appraisal
Among the fundamental concepts shaping most advanced
models of emotions is the notion of appraisal (Arnold,
1960). Events are appraised, negatively or positively, based
756

Henry (1986) describes five basic emotions due to hormonal
activities. He claims these to be anger, fear, depression, elation, and serenity. Fear and anger require the body to prepare for confrontation while serenity prepares the body for
recuperation. Elation prepares the body for activity and expenditure of energy, while depression prepares the body for
inactivity and conservation of energy. The functional description of serenity suggests that it is the reverse of anger
and fear. That is because the removal of stimuli that caused
anger or fear will lead to serenity. The functional description of elation and depression on the other hand, seems to
suggest that they are opposites of each other. They are not
necessarily reverses of each other, since the removal of the
stimuli that caused one of the two emotions will not necessarily activate the other. The hormonal description of these
emotions confirms these finding, but further finds that elation and depression also act as reverses of each other.
Catecholamine hormones (epinephrine and norephinephrine) are released when in fear or anger. These hormones
help in maintaining the ability of neurons to fire, in effect,
prolonging the autonomic nervous system’s (ANS) arousal.
Epinephrine also causes the release of glycogen in the liver
which produces energy. Serenity on the other hand, reduces
the release of catecholamine and hence reversing the hormonal effects of fear and anger. Serenity is acting as a reverse emotion.
Depression causes hypothalamus to release corticotrophinreleasing hormones, which influence the pituitary gland to
release adrenocorticotropin. In turn, adrenocorticotropin
activates the outer adrenal gland which releases glucocorticoid hormones including cortisone, corticosterone, and hydrocorticosone. Elation, on the other hand, inhibits the release of adrenocorticotropin, glucocorticoids, and endorphin, acting as the reverse of depression. Elation, for its
part, releases testosterone perhaps because the entity can
afford to expend energy. Depression represses the release of
testosterone, and therefore acts as a reverse of elation.
Behavioral responses can also point to the existence of reverse emotions. Rolls (1998) alludes to this notion of reverse emotions through the analysis of reinforcing stimuli.
He postulates, for example, that the presentation and termination of negative reinforcer produce the emotions of fear
and relief respectively.
The robot, once in an emotional state, needs to constantly
reevaluate the emotion eliciting event to determine if it is
still justified to be in that emotional state. An emotional
response utilizes resources and therefore can tax the robot.
If the emotion is no longer justified, a reverse emotion needs
to be triggered to release the resources.

tors present. While some consider anticipation as one of the
many factors in the appraisal of events (Ortony et al., 1988),
here it is considered an evolutionary leap, far removed from
other learned factors in the appraisal process and necessary
for generating more complex emotions.
Emotions are separated into two groups: those due to the
appraisal of an occurred event and those due to the appraisal
of an anticipated event. Joy and sorrow occur due to the
appraisal of an occurred event. Other more complex emotions are due to the anticipation of events that, if and when
they occur, they would bring joy or sorrow.
The robot needs to continuously monitor the environment
and predict occurrences of events as they relate to its survival. If it predicts an event that would affect its survival, it
will trigger complex emotions. If the outcome is not what it
expected based on previous learning, surprise is triggered
which would adjust its knowledge base and the emotion
triggered by the incorrect prediction.

Opposite and Reverse Emotions
Emotions have been characterized as opposites of each other
for some time now - anger opposite of fear, pride opposite
of shame, and love opposite of hate. But there has never
been an organized way of describing emotions as reverses of
each other – relief reverse of fear, disgust reverse of love,
and remorse reverse of pride.
Opposite emotions are activated by opposite stimuli. Fear,
for example, occurs when a more powerful opponent attacks. Anger occurs when a less powerful opponent attacks.
These two are opposite stimuli as the opponent can not be
judged both more powerful and less powerful at the time of
the attack.
Reverse emotions are activated by reverse stimuli. To follow the example given above, relief occurs when the more
powerful opponent stops the attack. The attack by the more
powerful opponent and the stopping of the attack are reverse
stimuli. The latter is simply the removal of the former. This
makes relief the reverse of fear, and visa versa.
Considering the massive effects emotions have on the
physiology and the cognition, it only makes sense that any
emotion be coupled with a reverse emotion to counteract its
effects in case the environmental conditions changed and
the emotion eliciting stimuli are removed. An opposite emotion could reverse the physiological and cognitive effects of
an emotion, but it would require opposite stimuli to be triggered. A reverse emotion, on the other hand, simply requires
the elimination of the original stimulus.
Clearly there is a functional purpose and a cognitive basis
for the existence of reverse emotions. But if emotions were
ever to evolve as reverses of each other, hormonal effects of
emotions would be the best indicators of such an evolution.
This is because, of all the characteristics of emotions, hormonal changes are by far the slowest responses of emotions.
If the environmental conditions reversed, a reverse emotion
would need to counteract the hormones already released as
soon as possible to maximize the utilization of available
resources.

Categorization of Emotions
A newer concept utilized in emotion models is the categorization of emotions based on the varying mechanism which
instigate them. This categorization uncovers the relationship
between emotions. Roseman, Antoniou, and Jose (1996)
categorize emotions based on whether they were caused by
circumstance, by self, or by other. Ortony, et al. (1988)
757

is not going to be as joyful as previously thought. Either
way, the entity needs to reverse the physiological, behavioral, and cognitive movements which occurred as a result
of the emotion of excitement. Basically, the event was not
worth the level of excitement, and hence the level of energy
expenditure, it originally initiated. Disappointment adjusts
that to its proper level.
Depression is defined as anticipating a negatively appraised
energy-based event, in other words, anticipating sorrow in
the context of energy. Depression is the opposite of excitement because an event can not be appraised both positively
and negatively in the context of energy. Depression prepares
the body for inactivity and conservation of energy. Events
that cause depression include the coming of winter which
alludes to the reduction in energy sources and sustaining an
injury which requires conserving energy, by shutting down
non-essential activities, to heal.
Rejuvenation is defined as the reduction in anticipation
and/or negative appraisal of an anticipated, negatively appraised, energy-based event. In other words, rejuvenation is
the reverse of depression. It occurs when the entity realizes
that either the anticipated energy-based sad event is not as
likely to occur as previously calculated, or the event is not
going to be as saddening as previously thought. Either way,
the entity needs to reverse the physiological, behavioral, and
cognitive movements which occurred as the result of experiencing depression. The event, simply put, did not justify
the level of depression, and hence energy conservation, it
caused. Rejuvenation adjusts that to its proper level.

categorizes emotions based on whether they involve objects,
caused by actions of agent, or are simply consequences of
the situation. In the model presented here, four major survival mechanisms that control human behavior are used to
categorize emotions. The desires to replenish energy, possess objects, live successfully in social groups, and protect
the survival of self, are the four environmental pressures
that seem to have influenced the development of emotions.
This categorization works well for designing robots. Robots
that are not going to be used in social settings need not be
equipped with the social-based emotions. Robots that should
not take confrontational stances need not be equipped with
confrontation-based emotions. It is also easy to see that robots may be put in situations were none of these categories
assist the robot in surviving. Adding another category that
does not exist in nature is made easy with this model.
It must be noted here that the names assigned to complex
emotions below, represent a group of emotions. The members of each group differ only in intensity. For example,
anger, rage, and annoyance, are all represented by anger.
Rage is a more intense version of anger and annoyance is a
less intense version of anger. It should also be noted that the
names given to these emotions is not as important as how
they are triggered and what function they serve.
Energy-Based Emotions The function of energy-based
emotions is simple; expend energy when necessary to gain
needed resources, and reserve energy when needed resources were out of reach. Consumption of food, absorption
of heat to help in digestion of food, and other specie specific
events related to replenishing needed resources trigger energy-based emotions. Energy-based emotions include the
opposite emotions of excitement and depression, and their
respective reverses, disappointment and rejuvenation (Table
1).

Object-Based Emotions Possessing objects have proven to
be an evolutionary successful exercise. Land for grazing,
fruit trees for picking, supplies of water for drinking, and
caves for hiding, are among few objects creatures have
sought to possess. Strong houses, better farmland, fancy
cars, nice clothes, and expensive jewelry, are among objects
we seek to possess, as they are believed to increase our
chances of survival. Object-based emotions include the opposite emotions of love and hate, and their respective reverses, disgust and acceptance (Table 2).

Table 1: Energy-Based Emotions.

Increase
Decrease

Anticipating a Positively Appraised
Event
Excitement
Disappointment

Anticipating a Negatively Appraised
Event
Depression
Rejuvenation

Table 2: Object-Based Emotions.

Excitement is defined as the anticipation of a positively appraised energy-based event. In other words, excitement is
the anticipation of joy in the context of energy. Excitement
prepares the body for action and expenditure of energy in
the hope of replenishing needed resources. These resources
in turn allow the body to produce more energy and other
byproducts it needs to continue functioning.
Disappointment is defined as the reduction in anticipation
and/or positive appraisal of an anticipated, positively appraised, energy-based event. In other words, disappointment
is the reverse of excitement. It occurs when the entity realizes that either the anticipated energy-based joyful event is
not as likely to occur as previously calculated, or the event

Increase
Decrease

Anticipating a Positively Appraised
Event
Love
Disgust

Anticipating a Negatively Appraised
Event
Hate
Acceptance

Love is defined as the anticipation of a positively appraised
object-based event. Love encourages the entity to possess
the loved object in anticipation that such a possession will
bring it joy at some point in the future. Like is the less intense version of love.
Disgust is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
positive appraisal of an anticipated, positively appraised,
object-based event, and hence, it is the reverse of love. The
758

anticipation of sorrow in the context of social standing.
Shame encourages the entity to hide its achievements and
social associations in the anticipation that such an exhibition
will bring it sorrow at some point in the future.
Vindication is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
negative appraisal of an anticipated, negatively appraised,
social-based event, and based on that, it is the reverse of
shame. The event, simply put, did not justify the level of
shame, and hence hiding the achievements and associations,
it caused. Vindication reduces the effort afforded in that
regard.

entity, either miscalculated the appraised value of possessing the object, or the conditions have changed since the last
calculation was made. It needs to reduce the amount of effort it expends on maintaining the possession of the object.
Boredom is the less intense version of disgust.
Hate is defined as the anticipation of a negatively appraised
object-based event. In other words, hate is the anticipation
of sorrow in the context of possessing objects. Hate encourages the entity to expend energy in trying to dispossess the
object in anticipation that continued possession will bring it
sorrow at some point in the future. Dislike is the less intense
version of hate.
Acceptance is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
negative appraisal of an anticipated, negatively appraised,
object-based event, and therefore, it is the reverse of hate.
The entity reduces the effort expended in trying to dispossess the object as it realizes that either it miscalculated the
appraised value, or the conditions have changed since its
last calculation.

Confrontation-Based Emotions Confrontation over food,
objects and social standing are inevitable. Confrontationbased emotions evolved to help species survive such encounters. Confrontation-based emotions include the opposite emotions of anger and fear, and their respective reverses, relaxation and relief (Table 4).
Table 4: Confrontation-Based Emotions.

Social-Based Emotions Environmental pressures have
forces many species to join in groups to increase their survival chances. It is only natural to expect that social-based
emotions would evolve in these species. The wolf pack has
a strict hierarchy of dominance where the higher members
eat and mate first. If resources are scarce, the lower ranking
members are deprived of food and eventually ejected from
the group. Higher ranks will get the best of everything, from
mating rights to grooming rights, all of which will increase
their chances of passing on their genes to the next generation. Social-based emotions include the opposite emotions
of pride and shame, and their respective reverses, remorse
and vindication (Table 3).

Increase
Decrease

Increase
Decrease

Anticipating a Negatively Appraised
Event
Fear
Relief

Anger is defined as the anticipation of a positively appraised
confrontation-based event. In other words, anger is the anticipation of joy due to a confrontation. Anger encourages
the entity to fight in the anticipation that such a battle will
bring it joy at some point in the future. The benefit can be
keeping or gaining control over a needed resource, such as
food or territory. It could also be in regard to possessing or
maintaining possession of a valued object or in relation to
maintaining or increasing social standings. Commonly however, anger results from simply defending against an unprovoked attack by a weaker attacker.
Relaxation is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
positive appraisal of an anticipated, positively appraised,
confrontation-based event, and hence, it is the reverse of
anger. When the entity realizes that it has miscalculated the
level of anger, relaxation will set in and reverses the effects
of anger. Relaxation reduces the energy expenditure in response to confrontation.
Fear is defined as the anticipation of a negatively appraised
confrontation-based event. In other words, fear is the anticipation of sorrow due to a confrontation. Fear encourages the
entity to avoid confrontation in anticipation that such a confrontation will bring it sorrow at some point in the future.
Relief is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
negative appraisal of an anticipated, negatively appraised,
confrontation-based event, and therefore, it is the reverse of
fear. The reduction in appraisal of the fear inducing event
will trigger the emotion of relief. As a result, resources allocated to respond to the fear inducing event are released.

Table 3: Social-Based Emotions.
Anticipating a Positively Appraised
Event
Pride
Remorse

Anticipating a Positively Appraised
Event
Anger
Relaxation

Anticipating a Negatively Appraised
Event
Shame
Vindication

Pride is defined as the anticipation of a positively appraised
social-based event. In other words, pride is the anticipation
of joy in the context of social standing. Pride encourages the
entity to exhibit its achievements and associations in the
anticipation that such an exhibition will bring it joy at some
point in the future.
Remorse is defined as the reduction in anticipation and/or
positive appraisal of an anticipated, positively appraised,
social-based event. In other words, it is the reverse of pride.
The entity realizes that the event was not worth the level of
pride, and hence the level of energy expenditure it was devoting to exhibit its achievements and associations. Remorse adjusts that to its proper level.
Shame is defined as the anticipation of a negatively appraised social-based event. In other words, shame is the
759

Breazeal, C. (2003). Emotion and sociable humanoid robots.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 59,
119-155.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 6, 169-200.
Frijda, N. (1987). The Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Frijda, N. H. (1993). The place of appraisal in emotion.
Cognition and Emotion, 7, 357-387.
Gray J. A. (1982). The Neurophsychology of Anxiety. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Henry J. P. (1986). Neuroendocrine patterns of emotional
response. In R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman (eds.), Emotion: Theory, Research, and Experience (Vol. 3, pp. 3760). New York: Academic Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Oatley, K. (1992), Basic emotions,
rationality, and folk theory, Cognition and Emotion, 6, pp.
201-223.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and Adaptation. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
LeDoux, J. E. (1989). Cognitive-Emotional Interactions in
the Brain. Cognition and Emotion, 3(4), 267-289.
MacLean, P. D. (1967). The limbic and visual cortex in phylogeny: further insights from anatomic and microelectrode studies. In: R. Hassler and H. Stephan (eds.), Evolution of the Forebrain (pp. 443-453). Stuttgart: Thieme
Verlag.
Mowrer, O. H. (1960). Learning Theory and the Symbolic
Processes. New York: Wiley.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1988). The Cognitive Structure of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Panksepp J. (1982). Toward a general psychobiological theory of emotions. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 5, 407468.
Plutchick R (1980). Emotion: A Psychoevolutionary synthesis. New York: Harper & Row.
Rolls, E. T. (1998). The Brain and Emotion. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Roseman, I. J., Antoniou, A. A., & Jose, P. E. (1996). Appraisal determinants of emotions: Constructing a more accurate and comprehensive theory. Cognition and Emotion, 10, 241-277.
Scherer, K. R. (1997). The role of culture in emotionantecedent appraisal. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 73, 902-922.
Sonnemans, J., & Frijda, N. (1995). The determinants of
subjective emotional intensity. Cognition and Emotion, 9,
483-506.
Tomkins, S. S. (1984). A ect theory. In K. R. Scherer and P.
Ekman, (eds.) Approaches to Emotion. London: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Weiner, B., & Graham, S. (1984). An attributional approach
to emotional development. In C. E. Izard, J. Kagan, & R.
B. Zajonc (eds.), Emotions, Cognition, and Behavior.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Conclusion
Designing emotion-capable robots presents challenges that
designing emotion-capable software agents does not. The
most considerable challenge is their physical connection
with the real world. The emotion model presented here connects the physical sensations with emotional feelings specifically to address this need. The adaptability resulting
from implementing this model allows robots to adjust their
responses to survive their unpredictable environments.
Several significant elements distinguish this model from
other existing models. The first distinguishing element is the
pairing of emotions as reverses of each other. Other models,
in the absence of reverse emotions, assume once the emotion instigating stimulus has been removed, the entity simply stops feeling the instigated emotion. It has been argued
here that reverse emotions are triggered in such scenarios
and that they are responsible for diluting or completely reversing the initial emotion triggered.
The second distinguishing element is the categorization of
emotions based on evolutionary adaptations. Each of the
four categories mentioned here include two opposite emotions and their respective reverse emotions. Each emotion
within a category has equivalent emotions in other categories, all of which are defined similarly, differing only in the
evolutionary adaptation that made them necessary.
The third distinguishing element of this model is the evolutionary path it suggests. All complex emotions are connected to the two basic emotions of joy and sorrow, which
are in turn connected to the physical sensations of pleasure
and pain. Such a path not only makes evolutionary sense; it
also makes designing emotion-capable robots much easier.
To design emotion-capable robots using this model, the engineer needs to define pain and pleasure for the robot. Pain,
as with any other entity, is defined as events that do physical
damage to the robot. Engine overheat, electrical shock, and
radiation exposure are examples of events that could be defined as pain causing events. Pleasure is defined as events
that satisfy physical needs. Any type of resource replenishment, such as battery recharge and engine oil change, can be
defined as pleasure causing events. From this basis, the robot can build a network of events that eventually lead to
pain and pleasure. Those events trigger sorrow and joy.
From anticipating sorrow and joy, the more complex emotions result, as described above.
This model, once utilized, will allow robots to build their
emotion system based on their physical design, needs, and
function. They will be able to adapt to their environment, in
much the same way as we do. And most significantly, when
they experience emotions, it will be as real as our own emotional experiences are.

References
Arbib A. & Fellous J. M. (2004). Emotions: from brain to
robot. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8(12), 554-561.
Arnold, M. B. (1960). Emotion and Personality. New York:
Columbia University Press.

760

