UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differences of Split and Non-Split Architectures Emerged from Modelling Chinese Character
Pronunciation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3td482rg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen
Shillcock, Richard

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differences of Split and Non-split Architectures Emerged from Modelling
Chinese Character Pronunciation
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (h.hsiao@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Richard Shillcock (rcs@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
aspect in Chinese orthography, and has been a focus for
understanding Chinese character recognition processes. The
majority of the left-right structured phonetic compounds
have the semantic radical on the left and the phonetic radical
on the right – SP characters. The opposite arrangement also
exists, in which the phonetic radical appears on the left and
the semantic radical on the right – PS characters (Figure 1).
The ratio of SP and PS character types in Chinese lexicon is
about nine to one. They have correspondingly different
internal information profiles. From an entropy analysis,
there is greater entropy on the right side of the SP
characters, reflecting greater variability of the phonetic
radicals on the right as opposed to the semantic radicals on
the left. In contrast, there is greater entropy on the left side
of the PS characters, where the phonetic radicals appear.
The distinction between the SP and PS characters provides
important opportunities to examine hemispheric processing
in language, given the very different information contained
in the two halves of the character, interacting with the split
fovea, which we discuss below.

Abstract
The split fovea model, which reflects some aspects of the
anatomy of the visual pathways, has successfully addressed
several phenomena in visual word recognition (e.g.,
Shillcock, Ellison & Monaghan, 2000). However, it is still
unclear what qualitative processing differences exist between
a split architecture and a non-split counterpart. In the current
study, we compare the performance of split and non-split
architectures in modelling Chinese character pronunciation
and show that Chinese left-right structured phonetic
compounds create a unique opportunity for understanding the
qualitative processing differences between the two possible
versions of cognitive architectures.
Keywords: Connectionist modelling; Chinese character
pronunciation; foveal splitting.

Introduction
In Chinese orthography, characters are the smallest units of
the orthography. There exists a dominant type of Chinese
characters, phonetic compounds, in which a semantic radical
signifies the meaning of the character and a phonetic radical
potentially informs the pronunciation of the character.
Phonetic compounds comprise about 81% of the 7,000
frequent characters in the Chinese dictionary (Li & Kang,
1993).
The phonetic compounds have different relationships with
their phonetic radical. For current purposes, regular
characters are referred to as the characters that have the
same pronunciation and tone as their phonetic radical;
semiregular characters have the same pronunciation as their
phonetic radical, but with a different tone; irregular
characters have different pronunciations from their phonetic
radical. In the Chinese lexicon, about half of the phonetic
compounds are irregular, the other half are either regular or
semiregular (Hsiao & Shillcock, submitted(a); unless
otherwise stated, all Chinese language statistics cited here
are from this paper). A regularity effect has been reported in
Chinese phonetic compound recognition: regular characters
are named faster than irregular characters. There is also an
interaction between character frequency and regularity in
Chinese, as in English (see, e.g., Hue, 1992; Liu, Wu &
Chou, 1996; Seidenberg, 1985). The regularity effect and its
interaction with frequency have been commonly used to
examine cognitive plausibility of computational models
(see, e.g., Plaut, McClelland, Seidenberg, & Patterson,
1996).
About two-thirds of phonetic compounds have a left-right
structure. This left-right structure is the most tractable

SP character

PS Character

Figure 1. An SP and a PS character
The fovea is the part of the retina across which a fixated
word is projected. It is responsible for fine-grain, focal
visual processing. From anatomical and behavioural studies,
it has become increasingly clear that the human fovea is
precisely vertically split (see, e.g., Frendrich & Gazzaniga,
1989; Gray, Galetta, Siegal, & Schatz, 1997). This fact has
fundamentally important implications for visual word
recognition (Shillcock et al., 2000): when a word is fixated,
the left part of the word is initially projected to the right
hemisphere (RH) and the right part to the left hemisphere
(LH). Thus, visual word recognition can be reconceptualised
in terms of coordinating the information in the two
hemispheres. The splitting is sufficiently precise that a
single Chinese character, under normal reading conditions,
is split precisely at the fixation point, with the semantic and
phonetic radicals projected contralaterally to the two
hemispheres (Hsiao, Shillcock, & Lavidor, submitted).
The split fovea model of English word reading has
successfully captured several reading phenomena (see. e.g.,
989

the non-split model. Here we explore this issue by training
both the split and non-split models with a realistic largescale lexicon, which has an imbalanced distribution of SP
and PS characters, and an artificial lexicon that has a
balanced distribution of SP and PS characters. We show that
the difference between the two architectures is revealed in
processing the lexicon with an imbalanced SP and PS
character distribution. This difference hence has important
implications for the hemispheric processing of language.

Monaghan & Shillcock, submitted; Shillcock et al., 2000;
Shillcock & Monaghan, 2001a). The split architecture
fortuitously corresponds to the functional division of the
phonetic compound structure; it “carves the problem at its
joints”. Alphabetic languages like English contain uneven
distributions of information within words, but do not contain
the dramatic difference observed in Chinese orthography. In
modelling word recognition phenomena in English, the split
architecture significantly accentuates phenomena such as
the exterior letters effect (Shillcock & Monaghan, 2001b),
but it does not trade on the qualitative differences in
representations found in Chinese orthography. In view of
this opportunity – not available in alphabetic languages – for
examining the plausibility of the split fovea claim, Hsiao
and Shillcock (2004) applied the split fovea architecture in
modelling Chinese phonetic compound pronunciation. Their
model successfully addressed some of the known effects in
Chinese character recognition, such as the regularity effect
and the regularity by frequency interaction, and provided
cross-language
support
for
the
hemispheric
desynchronization account of surface dyslexia (see
Monaghan & Shillcock, submitted).

Phonological representation: 27 nodes

Hidden layer
100 nodes
Left
radical
179
nodes

Hidden layer
100 nodes

Left /
right
radical
179
nodes

Left /
right
radical
179
nodes

*

Phonological representation

Right
radical
179
nodes

Fixation point
Total number of links: 97,000
Figure 3. The corresponding split-fovea model.

Hidden layer: 113 nodes

Left
radical

Left /
right
radical

*

Total number of links: 96,728

Left /
right
radical

Simulations

Right
radical

Phonological Representation
In the current modelling, we adopted a distributed, featurebased phonological representation. The pronunciation of
each Chinese character has only one syllable, which can be
divided into three segments: the initial consonant, the
nucleus vowel, and the final consonant. Each character also
has a tone associated. We allocated 14 features for the initial
consonant, 8 features for the nucleus vowel, 3 features for
the final consonant, and 2 features for the tone. In total, the
phonological representation consisted of 27 feature nodes
(for details, see Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004).

Fixation point

Figure 2. The non-split model for mapping Chinese
orthography to phonology.
Previous efforts in connectionist modelling of Chinese
character recognition usually adopted a feed-forward
network architecture with a single hidden layer (Chen &
Peng, 1994. See Figure 2). This architecture can be
considered as a non-split architecture as opposed to the split
fovea architecture, which has two interconnected hidden
layers, left hidden layer (LHL) and right hidden layer
(RHL), receiving input from left and right halves of the
input layer respectively (Figure 3). These interconnections,
or “callosal” connections, between the two hidden layers
enable the “interhemispheric” communication between the
two halves of the input. Nevertheless, non-split models also
have been reported to be able to capture the regularity effect
and the regularity by frequency interaction (Chen & Peng,
1994). It is hence unclear whether the split fovea model has
a qualitatively different processing style and behaviour from

Orthographic Representations
Chinese orthography consists of several individual strokes.
Some strokes may comprise a “stroke pattern”, which is a
recursive constituent of Chinese characters. In the
orthographic representation, we used basic stroke patterns
defined in Cangjie, a Chinese transcription system (Chu,
1978), to reflect the observation that the recognition by
skilled readers is based upon well-defined, integral
orthographic units (Chen, Allport, & Marshall, 1996; Zhou
& Marslen-Wilson, 1999). There are 179 such basic stroke
patterns comprising the radicals of all left-right structured
Chinese phonetic compounds. These 179 stroke patterns
990

were used to encode each Chinese character in the current
models (see Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004).

Network Architecture
In our split fovea model for Chinese character
pronunciation, real fixation behaviour was idealized and a
character was presented in each of three fixation positions
equally frequently (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004. see Figure 4).
We adopted the same idealization in the current modelling.
Figures 2 and 3 show the non-split and split network
architectures respectively for modelling the real lexicon.
Adjacent layers were fully connected. The four blocks in the
input layer were used to accommodate the input schema
shown in Figure 4. Each node in a block represented one of
the 179 possible stroke patterns. This orthographic input
was mapped onto a feature-based phonological output,
where the most frequent pronunciation of the input character
was presented. We equalized the computational power of
the two networks as much as possible by adding recurrent
links to the hidden layer of the non-split model and making
the number of weighted connections in the two models as
closed as possible. Hence, the principal difference between
the two models was the network architecture 1 . The
corresponding split and non-split models for modelling the
artificial lexicon is shown in Figure 5. The learning
algorithm was discrete back propagation through time
(Rumelhart, Hinton & Williams, 1986).

Training and Test Corpora
Two sets of training and test corpora were used. In the first
set, the training corpus contained all left-right structured
Chinese phonetic compounds and their phonetic radicals
which exist as characters on their own. During training, each
character was presented according to its log token
frequency. The database contains 2,159 of the most frequent
left-right structured phonetic compound characters and 880
radicals that are also existing characters. The test corpus
contained the same phonetic compounds as those in the
training corpus, but not the phonetic radicals.
In the second set of corpora, an artificial lexicon was
created in which the SP and PS characters had a balanced
distribution. This artificial lexicon had 200 SP and 200 PS
characters. The character type distribution in both the SP
and PS character groups was proportional to the distribution
of the SP characters in the real lexicon. Hence, among the
200 characters in either the SP or PS group, there were 74
regular characters (37%), 26 semiregular characters (13%),
and 100 irregular characters (50%). Within the 100 irregular
characters, 53 characters had the same rime as their phonetic
radical, 12 characters had the same onset as their phonetic
radical, and 35 characters had a radically different
pronunciation from their phonetic radical.
The radicals that comprised the 200 SP characters
consisted of 10 semantic radicals that only appeared on the
left of the characters, and 40 phonetic radicals. The 200 PS
characters consisted of the same 40 phonetic radicals as
those in the SP characters, and another set of 10 semantic
radicals which only appeared on the right of the characters.
The 40 phonetic radicals could appear on either the left or
right of a character. The characters in the SP group were
randomly generated from different combinations of the left
semantic radicals and the phonetic radicals; the semantic
radicals of the characters in the PS group had the same
combinations with the phonetic radicals as those in the SP
group. The training corpus contained all the 400 phonetic
compounds and the 40 phonetic radicals. Each character was
presented with equal frequency. The test corpus contained
the same phonetic compounds but not the phonetic radicals.
Position 1
Position 2
Position 3

木

27 nodes
40 nodes
60 nodes

40 nodes

60 nodes

60 nodes

60 nodes

Connections: 13360
27 nodes
43 nodes

60 nodes

60 nodes

60 nodes

60 nodes

Connections: 13330
Figure 5. Corresponding split and non-split architectures
for modelling the artificial lexicon.

由
木

由
1

*

木

Note that because of the inherent difference in architecture
between the two models, it is not possible to equalize the
computational power of the two models in terms of both the
number of nodes and the number of weighted connections while
keeping connections between layers all fully connected. We chose
to match the number of weighted connections since the weights on
the connections are the only trainable parameters during training
according to the learning algorithm, and hence the number of
weighted connections is a good indication in the models’ learning
capacity.

由

Fixation point
Figure 4: Three fixation positions in the input layer.

991

Results and Discussion

.4

95% CI Summed square error

We ran each model ten times and analyzed their average
performance. The performance of the two models was very
similar but in each of the two cases, the artificial lexicon
and the real one, the split model had a slight but significant
advantage over the non-split model (paired t-test, t(1, 399) =
-3.778, p < 0.001 and paired t-test, t(1, 2158) = -6.363, p <
0.001, respectively). This slight advantage suggests that the
split architecture encouraged the model to discover the
functional division between the radicals in the two halves of
the characters. The divided visual system fortuitously
mirrored the distinction between the phonetic and semantic
information in the orthography2 (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004).
As for their performance on different types of characters,
both models captured the regularity effect and the regularity
by frequency interaction in the real lexicon. For the top 10%
high frequency and bottom 10% low frequency characters,
the regularity by frequency interaction was significant (F(1,
428) = 8.052, p < 0.01); the interaction between the two
models was not significant (F(1, 428) = 1.456, n. s.).
The two models also had similar performance on SP and
PS characters. In the split model, there was a significant
interaction between position of the phonetic radical and
character regularity (F(1, 2155) = 4.161, p < 0.05); this
interaction was marginal in the non-split model (F(1, 2155)
= 2.938, p = 0.087). The difference between the two models
in this interaction was not significant (F(1, 2155) = 0.646, n.
s.). This interaction reflected the fact that only 34% of
characters are regular or semiregular among the PS
characters, compared with 50% among the SP characters.
When examining the performance difference between the
two models, we observed a significant three-way interaction
between network architecture, fixation position (see Figure
4), and position of the phonetic radical (F(2, 4310) = 6.594,
p = 0.001). When we examined the models’ performance in
different fixation positions separately, we found that when
characters were centrally presented in fixation position two,
there was a significant interaction between network
architecture and position of the phonetic radical: compared
with the SP characters, the PS characters were relatively
more difficult to process in the non-split model, but
relatively easier in the split model (F(1, 2155) = 6.161, p =
0.013. See Figure 6). In contrast, when characters were
presented in fixation position one or three, this interaction
was not significant. In other words, the split model’s
behaviour in the fixation position one or three was very
similar to the non-split model.

.3

Network architecture
.2

Split model
Non-split model

.1

SP characters PS characters

Figure 6. Interaction between position of phonetic
radicals and network architecture. Error bars show 95%
confident interval for mean.
This interaction can be explained in terms of the
information profile in SP and PS characters and the
qualitatively different processing style of the two models.
As mentioned earlier, there is greater variability on the right
of the SP characters, and this distribution is reversed in the
PS characters. The overwhelming majority of SP characters
leads to a greater variability on the right of the left-right
phonetic compounds. When characters were centrally
presented in the split model, the left and right radicals were
projected to the LHL/RH and RHL/LH respectively, and
communicated through the interconnected callosal
connections (for the importance of these callosal
connections, see Hsiao & Shillcock, 2004). Compared with
the LHL, the RHL had a heavier processing load due to the
greater variability, or entropy in information theory, on the
right of the characters (Figure 7). For a centrally presented
SP character, the RHL was where its phonetic radical
initially projected. It hence had more processing difficulty
than a centrally presented PS character, whose phonetic
radical was initially projected to the LHL. Thus, in the split
architecture, centrally presented SP characters were
relatively more difficult to process than PS characters; this
was especially true for irregular SP characters, for which
more computational resource was required.
In contrast, in the non-split architecture, both left and
right radicals were projected to and processed in the same
single hidden layer. Also, as shown in Figure 7, the
staggered input scheme (Figure 4) made the input entropy of
the two sides of a centrally presented stimulus balanced
(block 2 and 3 in Figure 7). Hence, for centrally presented
characters, the minority PS characters became more difficult
to process than the majority SP characters and this was
especially true for regular PS characters, due to their
unrepresentative nature: phonological information came
from the left of the characters, as opposed to the normal

2

Another possibility concerning the observed advantage for the
split model was the slightly larger number of weighted connections
in the split model than in the non-split model. Nevertheless, the
number of connections was already matched as closely as possible
between the two models, and hence the performance difference
observed was less likely to be due to the small difference in the
total number of connections.
992

cases in which phonological information came from the
right of the characters. These two qualitatively different
processing styles gave rise to the significant interaction
observed between network architecture and position of the
phonetic radical.
95% CI Summed square error

.4

10
7.6

Entropy

8
6

7.6

7.75

5.46

4
2

.3

Network architecture
.2

Split model
Non-split model

.1

SP characters PS characters

0
Block 1

Fixation
Position 1
Fixation
Position 2
Fixation
Position 3

S
p

Block 2

Block 3

Block 4

Figure 8. Performance of the two architectures on the
artificial lexicon. Error bars show 95% confident interval for
mean.

P
s
S
p

P
s
S
p

Conclusion
We have compared the performance of two computational
architectures, the split fovea model and its non-split
counterpart, in modelling Chinese character pronunciation.
Both models have successfully addressed the regularity
effect and the regularity by frequency interaction found in
behavioural studies. When the computational power of the
two models is closely matched as much as possible, the split
fovea model slightly outperforms the non-split model. The
split architecture fortuitously mirrors the functional
distinction between the semantic and phonetic radicals, and
hence facilitates discerning where the phonological
information comes from.
The difference in processing style between the two
models emerged when comparing their performance on
centrally presented SP and PS characters. Due to the
imbalanced distribution of SP and PS characters in the real
lexicon, in the split architecture, the LHL/RH typically
receives less processing load than the RHL/LH, and
consequently facilitates the processing of centrally
presented PS characters. In contrast, in the non-split
architecture, both SP and PS characters are projected to and
processed in the same single hidden layer; the
unrepresentative nature of PS characters consequently
induces more processing difficulties. Hence, there is a
significant interaction between the network architecture and
the phonetic radical position. Nevertheless, such interaction
is not present when training the networks on an artificial
lexicon with a balanced distribution of SP and PS
characters. The distinct structures and skewed distribution
of Chinese SP and PS characters hence has provided a
unique opportunity for examining the difference between
the split and non-split architectures.

P
s

Figure 7. Entropy Analysis of the four blocks in the input
layer.
Nevertheless, such interaction was only observed when
the distribution of SP and PS characters in the lexicon was
imbalanced. Figure 8 compares the performance of the two
architectures on the artificial lexicon with a balanced
distribution of SP and PS characters. In the split model, the
LHL and RHL received the same processing load without
any bias toward either PS or SP characters. Neither did any
bias exist in the non-split model given an exactly balanced
distribution of SP and PS characters. Hence, the interaction
between network architecture and position of the phonetic
radical was absent (F(1, 396) = 0.466, n. s.).
What can be inferred from these findings is that, the
qualitatively different processing styles between the split
and non-split architectures is best observed when there is an
imbalanced distribution of two groups of stimuli with
opposite internal information distributions. The distinction
between Chinese SP and PS characters represents a unique
opportunity for this examination. The processing difference
between the two architectures hence has important
implications for understanding hemispheric processing in
language and examining the cognitive plausibility of the two
architectures.

993

Hsiao, J. H., Shillcock, R. & Lavidor, M. (submitted). A
TMS Examination of Semantic Radical Combinability
Effects in Chinese Character Recognition.
Hue, C. W. (1992). Recognition processes in character
naming. In H. C. Chen & O. J. L. Tzeng (Eds.), Language
Processing in Chinese (pp. 93-107). Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Li, Y. & Kang, J. S. (1993). Analysis of phonetics of the
ideophonetic characters in Modern Chinese. In Y. Chen
(ed.), Information analysis of usage of characters in
Modern Chinese. Shanghai: Shanghai Education
Publisher. (In Chinese)
Liu, I. M., Wu, J. T., & Chou, T. L. (1996). Encoding
operation and transcoding as the major loci of the
frequency effect. Cognition, 59, 149-168.
Monaghan, P. & Shillcock, R. (submitted). Hemispheric
desynchronisation and developmental dyslexia in a
computational model of reading.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., &
Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired
word reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular
domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56-115.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning internal representations by error propagation. In
D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds), Parallel
Distributed
Processing:
Explorations
in
the
microstructure of cognition; Vol. 1: Foundations (pp.
318-362). Cambridge, Massachusetts: the MIT Press.
Seidenberg, M.S. (1985). The time course of phonological
code activation in two writing systems. Cognition, 19, 130.
Shillcock, R., Ellison, T. M., and Monaghan, P. (2000).
Eye-Fixation Behavior, Lexical Storage, and Visual Word
Recognition in a Split Processing Model. Psychological
Review, 107, 824-851.
Shillcock, R. C. & Monaghan, P. (2001a). Connectionist
modelling of surface dyslexia based on foveal splitting:
Impaired pronunciation after only two half pints.
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Edinburgh: LEA.
Shillcock, R. C. & Monaghan, P. (2001b). The
computational exploration of visual word recognition in a
split model. Neural Computation, 13, 1171-1198.
Zhou, X. & Marslen-Wilson (1999). Sublexical Processing
in Reading Chinese. In J. Wang, A. Inhoff & H. Chen
(Eds.), Reading Chinese Script (pp. 37-63). Erlbaum:
London.

Do the visual pathway anatomies, reflected in the split
fovea architecture, really matter in attempts to model
reading behaviour? The different processing styles of the
two architectures have made different predictions about
Chinese readers’ behaviour when naming centrally
presented SP and PS characters. The future work hence is to
examine the cognitive plausibility of the two computational
architectures by verifying these testable predictions through
behavioural studies (Elsewhere we compare the modelling
results with behavioural data; see Hsiao & Shillcock,
submitted(b)).

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Economic and Social Research
Council.

References
Chen, Y., and Peng, D. (1994). A connection model of
Chinese character recognition and pronunciation.
Advances in the study of Chinese language processing,
211-240.
Chen, Y. P., Allport, D. A., & Marshall, J. C. (1996). What
are the functional orthographic units in Chinese word
recognition: The stroke or the stroke pattern? Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Experimental Psychology, 49, 1024-1043.
Chu, B. (1979). Laboratory of Chu Bong-Foo. Retrieved
Aug. 25, 2004, from http://www.cbflabs.com/.
Fendrich, R. & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1989). Evidence of foveal
splitting in a commissurotomy patient. Neuropsychologia,
27, 273-281.
Gray, L. G., Galetta, S. L., Siegal, T., & Schatz, N. J.
(1997). The central visual field in homonymous
hemianopia – evidence for unilateral foveal
representation. Archives of Neurology, 54, 312-317.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2004). Connectionist
Modelling of Chinese Character Pronunciation Based on
Foveal Splitting. Proceedings of the Twenty Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (submitted(a)). Analysis of a
Chinese Phonetic Compound Database: Implications for
Orthographic Processing.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (submitted(b)). Chinese
orthography is processed differently in the male and
female brain.

994

