UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distinctiveness Effects in Face Memory Vanish with Well-Controlled Distractors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0df031kt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Davidenko, Nicolas
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distinctiveness Effects in Face Memory Vanish with Well-Controlled Distractors
Nicolas Davidenko (ndaviden@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Street, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Michael Ramscar (michael@psych.stanford.edu)

Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Street, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

remembered” in these tasks can help resolve this apparent
controversy.
It seems clear that choice of distractor faces can critically
affect the difficulty of a recognition task. In particular, if a
distractor is very similar to a target face, the two are likely
to be confused, which can lead to an incorrect recognition
judgment. It is surprising, then, that the choice of
distractors in face recognition studies is rarely manipulated
or even controlled.
This means that the similarity
relationships between targets and distractors cannot be
guaranteed to be equivalent for typical and distinctive faces.
In fact, because typical faces lie in a denser, more central
region of face space (Valentine, 1991), they will tend to be
more similar to the distractor set than distinctive faces. This
raises the possibility that recognition performance on typical
faces is artificially low simply because it is harder to
discriminate the typical faces from the set of distractors.
We propose that this asymmetry is at the root of the
distinctiveness advantage in memory, and that the relative
location of distractors in face space with respect to typical
and distinctive targets is sufficient to explain the effect. In
other words, we suggest that there is nothing about
distinctive faces per se that makes them more memorable,
but rather that systematic differences in similarity
relationships between targets and distractors for the two
types of faces are responsible for performance differences.
Indeed, theories of perceptual learning (e.g., Tanaka &
Gauthier, 1997) should predict a memory disadvantage for
distinctive faces, since we have less perceptual experience
with peripheral regions of face space where these faces lie.
This prediction would be consistent with general notions of
perceptual expertise, whereby we are better able to
discriminate and remember items with which we are more
familiar. Confirming that the distinctiveness effect is
actually an artifact of the selected distractor set would
therefore help advance our understanding of face
representation.

Abstract
The “distinctiveness effect” in face memory holds that
distinctive faces are recognized better than typical faces, as
reflected by higher hit rates and lower false alarm rates during
recognition tasks. We propose that this effect is due to a
systematic bias in the similarity relationships between target
and distractor faces. Specifically, we claim that distinctive
faces are recognized more successfully because they are on
the whole more distinguishable from a set of distractor faces,
but not because of any inherent advantage in the way we
represent them in memory. To test this claim, we conduct
two memory experiments using a low-dimensional
parameterization of face space based on silhouetted face
profiles (Davidenko, 2004). In Study 1, we conduct an
old/new recognition task with face silhouettes to replicate the
classic distinctiveness effect. In Study 2, we construct a set of
face stimuli that eliminates the asymmetry of target-distractor
distances between typical and distinctive faces. Under these
conditions, distinctive faces lose their recognition advantage
and actually produce poorer performance than typical faces.
We discuss possible causes of this “typicality effect” in terms
of perceptual learning.

Introduction
Recognition memory paradigms have long been used as a
tool for studying the way we represent faces. In a typical
experiment, a subject observes a set of target faces and later
decides which faces from among a set of distractors were
part of the target set. Responses are elicited as either
“old/new” judgments, or as particular choices from a set of
alternatives. One of the most consistent findings from this
type of experiment is that distinctive faces (those that are
rated as “easy to spot in a crowd”) are correctly recognized
more frequently than typical faces. This “distinctiveness
effect” is robust and has been widely reported in the
literature (e.g., Bartlett, Hurry, & Thorley, 1984; Shepherd,
Gibling, & Ellis, 1991). In such studies, distinctive faces
produce more hits (correct detections) and fewer false
alarms (incorrect detections) than typical faces. This
difference is often interpreted to mean that distinctive faces
are better remembered than typical faces, a conclusion that
is at odds with other findings in the literature (e.g., that we
are slower to identify distinctive faces as faces, as compared
to typical faces; Valentine & Bruce, 1986). We suggest
that a closer examination of exactly what is meant by “better

Silhouetted Face Profiles
To investigate the influence of distractor choice on the
memorability of faces, we devised a low-dimensional
parameterization of face space based on the shape of
silhouetted face profiles (see Figure 1). A previous set of
validation studies indicates that silhouettes are perceived
and processed like genuine face stimuli (see Davidenko,
548

multi-normal distribution of face silhouettes derived from
the parameterization of silhouette face space (Davidenko,
2004). Typical and distinctive silhouettes were defined by a
median split on the distance in silhouette face space between
a silhouette and the overall norm (with the larger distances
corresponding to the distinctive silhouettes). In previous
studies, we have found a high correlation between this
geometric measure and human ratings of distinctiveness
(Davidenko, in prep.). Of the 105 typical silhouettes, 70
were randomly designated as targets and 35 as distractors,
and likewise for the 105 distinctive silhouettes. Examples
of typical and distinctive silhouettes are shown in Figure 2.

2004). In particular, silhouettes provide enough information
for gender identification and age estimation, they elicit
reliable and coherent ratings of attractiveness and
distinctiveness, and they are better remembered when they
are presented upright than upside down, replicating the faceinversion effect (Yin, 1969). In addition, silhouettes can be
matched to their front-view gray-scale counterparts with
considerable accuracy, comparable to performance with
“synthetic faces” (Wilson, Loffler, & Wilkinson, 2001).

Figure 1. A silhouetted face profile obtained by
thresholding and cropping a gray-scale profile face image.
Silhouettes can be accurately reproduced by interpolating
smooth splines across a set of 16 informative points along
the contour of a face profile. A principal components
analysis on the location of these points from a large
collection of silhouettes (taken from the FERET Face
Database; Phillips, Moon, Rizvi, & Rauss, 1998) results in a
32-dimensional parameterization of silhouette face space,
which effectively requires only 16 dimensions for veridical
reconstruction (Davidenko, in preparation). Using this
parameterization, we can easily create artificial but realistic
silhouettes in specified regions of face space. In particular,
we can manipulate target and distractor silhouettes for use
in a series of recognition experiments, precisely controlling
their relative distances.
In the first of two studies, we test whether the classic
distinctiveness effect replicates with face silhouettes. In the
second study, we manipulate the placement of distractors in
silhouette face space so that their distance from typical and
distinctive face silhouettes is matched.
Under these
conditions, we examine whether any recognition advantage
for distinctive face silhouettes persists once the asymmetry
in target-distractor similarities is eliminated, or whether
perceptual learning of typical regions of face space results in
a typicality advantage.

Figure 2. Typical (A) and distinctive (B) silhouettes.
Procedure. Participants completed a total of 35 trials. In
each trial, they observed a sequence of 4 “training”
silhouettes on a computer screen, followed by an 8-second
retention interval. They then observed a sequence of 4
“test” silhouettes (2 novel, and 2 from the training set) in
random order. For each test silhouette, they entered “y” or
“n,” indicating whether or not they believed the silhouette
had been shown in the preceding training set.

Results
Each response was coded as a hit, miss, false alarm, or
correct rejection. A 2x2 repeated measures ANOVA
revealed a significant interaction between Typicality and
Response Type (F1,11 = 27.24, p<.001).
Replicating
previous studies using front-view face images (e.g.,
Shepherd et al., 1991), distinctive face silhouettes received
significantly higher hits (.63 vs. .54; 2-tailed paired t-test =
2.78, p<.05) and significantly lower false alarms (.21 vs.
.33; 2-tailed paired t-test = 2.57, p<.05) than typical faces
(see Figure 3). Separate d’ scores for performance on
typical and distinctive silhouettes were computed for each
participant.
A paired t-test revealed a significant
recognition advantage for distinctive silhouettes over typical
silhouettes across participants, with the average d’ for
distinctive silhouettes = 1.17 and d’ for typical silhouettes =
.59 (paired t-test = 4.89, p < .001). This replication of the
distinctiveness effect provides further validation of
silhouettes as genuine face stimuli.

Study 1. Replicating the Distinctiveness Effect
Method
The design of this study was a standard old/new task using
parameterized face silhouettes.
Participants were 12
Stanford undergraduates with normal or corrected vision,
who participated in the experiment for course credit.
Stimuli. Using Matlab, 210 silhouettes were constructed
online for each participant, by sampling randomly from the
549

Stimuli. Using Matlab, 100 typical and distinctive target
silhouettes were constructed in the same way as in Study 1,
by sampling from the multi-normal distribution of
silhouettes from our parameterized silhouette face space.
Two distractors were constructed specifically for each target
silhouette by varying the values on 3 of its 16 dimensions.
The distractors were, in essence, small translations of the
target silhouettes in silhouette face space. The magnitude of
these translations was kept constant for all targets, while the
direction of the translations varied randomly across targets.
This ensured that, statistically, distractors were neither more
nor less distinctive than their respective targets (which
could, over time, have become a cue for participants as to
the oldness or newness of the presented item)

Figure 3. Hits and False alarms for typical and distinctive
silhouettes. All differences are significant to p < .05.

Face-space explanation
As mentioned earlier, the distribution of typical and
distinctive faces in face space should have consequences on
the set-wise distances between distractors and the two types
of targets (see Valentine, 1991). In particular, we should
expect randomly chosen distractors to be on the whole
closer to a set of typical faces than to a set of distinctive
faces. To show this, we simulated random sets of faces
researchers might use in a standard face memory experiment
and compared the relevant distances in face space. In each
simulation, we sampled 30 typical and 30 distinctive faces,
and 30 random distractor faces from one of two versions of
face space: a silhouette-like face space with 16 dimensions,
and front-view-like face space with 400 dimensions (as
estimated by Penev and Sirovich, 2000). We measured
pairwise distances between each distractor and each target
face.
Figure 4 shows the mean distances between
distractors and the two types of targets. Standard errors
were calculated by running 1000 simulations. In both face
spaces, we obtain the same reliable difference: distractors
are statistically closer to typical faces than to distinctive
faces (all differences significant to p < .01). The results of
these simulations support the notion that distinctive faces
may elicit more hits and fewer false alarms because they are
more distinguishable from the distractors. The conclusion
leaves open the question of whether distinctive faces would
still be more memorable than typical faces if these
differences were somehow eliminated. In the next study, we
address this question by constructing equally-spaced
distractors for each target silhouette.

Figure 4. Mean distance from distractors to target faces.
Distances are statistically larger for distinctive targets, in
both 16-dimensional and 400-dimensional face spaces.
Procedure. Participants completed 100 trials in which they
observed a target silhouette for 2.5 seconds, a random line
mask for 2 seconds, and a set of 3 test silhouettes. They
were asked to decide which of the 3 test silhouettes was the
one they had just seen. A sample trial is shown in Figure 5.

Study 2a. Deconfounding Distinctiveness and
Isolation from Distractors: A Typicality Effect
Method
We conducted a short-delay recognition task in a 3alternative-forced-choice (3AFC) paradigm. Participants
were 16 Stanford undergraduates who participated for
course credit.

Figure 5. A sample trial from Study 2a.

Results
Performance was coded as percent identification of the
target silhouette. Mean performance across participants was
550

61% for typical silhouettes and 56% for distinctive
silhouettes, revealing a significant disadvantage for
distinctive silhouettes (2-tailed paired t-test = 2.20, p < .05).
In other words, we find a typicality effect, whereby typical
face silhouettes are recognized with more accuracy than
distinctive face silhouettes.
One way to interpret this result is that due to a lifetime of
experience with faces, we become more sensitive to and
better at discriminating between faces in dense, over-learned
regions of face space. This interpretation would be
consistent with reports of an own-race advantage in face
recognition (e.g., Tanaka, Kiefer, & Bukach, 2004).
However, there is an alternative explanation for our finding.
It is possible that participants developed specific strategies
for recognizing silhouettes during the course of the
experiment, and that this learning was biased toward typical
silhouettes. As shown schematically in Figure 6, the region
of silhouette face space occupied by the set of typical target
silhouettes observed during the experiment is smaller and
more dense than the region occupied by the set of distinctive
silhouettes. Because the silhouettes are embedded in a 16dimensional space, these differences are actually more
pronounced than is apparent in the diagram.

typical silhouettes, except that it was centered in a different
location of the space, still within the realm of normallooking silhouettes. To avoid specific item effects, we ran
two between-subject conditions where we reversed the
direction of translation (see Figure 7 for an illustration).
Participants were Stanford undergraduates who participated
for course credit, of which 16 were randomly assigned to
Condition 1, and 14 to Condition 2.

Figure 7. Regions of face space occupied by typical and
distinctive silhouettes used in Study 2a, conditions 1 and 2.

Results
Just as in Study 2a, performance was measured as percent
correct in a 3AFC task. In both conditions, participants
were more successful at recognizing typical silhouettes than
distinctive silhouettes. In condition 1, recognition of typical
vs. distinctive faces was 64% vs. 59% (2-tailed paired t-test
= 2.32, p<.05), and in condition 2 it was 62% vs. 57% (2tailed paired t-test = 2.42, p<.05). Figure 8 summarizes the
results of Studies 2a and 2b.

Figure 6. Typical silhouettes observed in Study 2a occupy
a smaller, denser area of silhouette face space than
distinctive silhouettes.
To test whether the typicality effect shown in Study 2a is
due to a lifetime of perceptual learning or, more trivially, to
online learning during the experiment, we conducted a
variation of the study where the size and density of the
regions corresponding to typical and distinctive silhouettes
were matched.

Study 2b. Short-Term or Long-Term
Perceptual Learning?
Method

Figure 8. Recognition performance in 3AFC task in
Studies 2a and 2b (conditions 1 and 2).

This study was conducted similarly to Study 2a, except for
the way in which distinctive silhouettes were constructed.
To avoid differences in the size and density of the two
regions of silhouette face space, we defined the set of
distinctive silhouettes as a translation of the set of typical
silhouettes. in a particular direction in face space. That is,
the set of distinctive silhouettes was identical to the set of

By matching the sizes of the regions in silhouette face
space corresponding to the typical and distinctive target
sets, we can reject the alternative hypothesis suggested
earlier. While we cannot rule out the possibility that
participants are learning over the course of the experiment,
this alone cannot account for the superior performance on
551

and also modify the images in precisely controlled ways.
Without this precise control over the construction of face
stimuli, we would not be able to isolate the effect of
distractors in recognition memory. The studies presented
here hopefully demonstrate the value of constructing
parameterized stimulus spaces for the study of human
memory and representation. We predict, in particular, that
the “typicality effect” reported with face silhouettes will
generalize, not only to front-view face representations, but
also to other object categories whose items are centrally
distributed.

typical silhouettes in Study 2b. The regions of silhouette
face space occupied by typical and distinctive silhouettes
are the same size and density, and thus perceptual learning
should not favor one type of silhouette over the other. The
result provides strong evidence that prior experience with
central regions of face space (corresponding to typical
faces) improve our ability to discriminate and represent
these faces in memory.

Discussion
The results reported in this paper may appear at first glance
contradictory. In Study 1, we successfully replicated the
distinctiveness effect with face silhouettes and confirmed
that distinctive faces elicit higher discriminability, as
measured by hits and false alarms in a recognition task. In
Studies 2a and 2b, we provided evidence that typical faces
are actually recognized with better accuracy, as reflected by
a higher percent correct on a 3AFC task. How can we
reconcile these two results?
The simplest answer is that the choice of distractors in
recognition tasks, which is often overlooked and rarely
manipulated, can dramatically influence performance in
recognition tasks. In forced choice as well as old/new
paradigms, the choice of distractors can determine which of
two sets of items will be discriminated better than the other.
For example, if the set of distractors is statistically more
similar to set A than to set B, we should expect items in set
B to be more distinguishable from distractors, and thus
successfully recognized more often. Conversely, if the set
of distractors is more similar to set B, we should expect
better performance for items in set A. It is misleading to
report that one set of items is more memorable than another
without describing the structure of the distractor set, in
particular, the relative proximity of the distractor set to the
two sets being compared.
Perhaps a more informative way of reporting the
memorability of items is to measure the accuracy of our
representations. In Studies 2a and 2b, we attempted to do
just that. By constructing distractors that were equally
spaced from typical and distinctive targets, we were able to
obtain a fair comparison of performance between the two
sets. We found in three separate conditions that typical face
silhouettes are remembered more accurately than distinctive
faces silhouettes; that is, typical faces are successfully
recognized more often than distinctive faces, when
subjected to equivalent modifications.
The “typ icality effect” we report with faces should not be
too surprising. A variety of results from human perception
and memory report similar advantages for well-learned
regions of representational space. For example, prototypical
colors are discriminated better than less prototypical ones
(Lucy & Shweder, 1979); realistic chess patterns are better
remembered by experts than random assortments of chess
pieces (Chase & Simon, 1973). One reason this effect has
not been reported in faces is the lack of a well-accepted
parameterization of face space.
To construct the stimuli for Studies 2a and 2b, we relied
on a full parameterization of silhouette face space that
allowed us to both sample faces from a realistic population

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by an NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship. The authors would like to thank Dan
Yarlett for his helpful suggestions.

References
Bartlett, J. C., Hurry, S., Thorley, W. (1984). Typicality and
familiarity of faces. Memory & Cognition, 12, 219-228.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in Chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Davidenko, N. (Manuscript in preparation). Silhouetted face
profiles: a low-dimensional parameterization of face
space.
Davidenko, N. (2004). Modeling face-shape representation
using silhouetted face profiles [Abstract]. Journal of
Vision, 4(8), 436a.
Lucy, J., and Shweder, R. (1979). Whorf and his critics:
Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on color memory.
American Anthropologist, 81, 581-615.
Penev, P. S. and Sirovich, L. (2000). The Global
Dimensionality of Face Space. Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition, pp. 264-270.
Phillips, P., Moon, H., Rizvi, S., & Rauss, P. (1998). The
FERET evaluation. In H.W. et al., editor, Face
Recognition: From Theory to Applications, 244-261.
Shepherd, J. W., Gibling, F., & Ellis, H. D. (1991). The
effects of distinctiveness, presentation time and delay on
face recognition. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 3(1), 137-145.
Tanaka, J. W., & Gauthier, I., (1997). Expertise in object
and face recognition. Mechanisms of Perceptual Learning,
Vol.36 (eds. Medin, Goldstone & Schyns), 83-125.
Tanaka, J.W., Kiefer, M., & Bukach, C. M. (2004). A
holistic account of the own-race effect in face recognition:
evidence from a cross-cultural study, Cognition, 93, B1B9.
Valentine, T. (1991). A unified account of the effects of
distinctiveness, inversion and race in face recognition.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43A, 161204.
Wilson, H.R., Loffler, G., & Wilkinson, F. (2002). Synthetic
faces, face cubes, and the geometry of face space. Vision
Research, 42(27), 2909-2923.
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

552

