UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Divergence and Overlap in Bilingual Concept Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7tn4788v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Chu, Amy H.
Heredia, Roberto R.
Vaid, Jyostna
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Divergence and Overlap in Bilingual Concept Representations
Thomas B. Ward (tward@bama.ua.edu)
Center for Creative Media, Box 870172, University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487 USA

Amy H. Chu (chu004@bama.ua.edu)
College of Communication and Information Sciences, Box 870172, University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487 USA

Jyotsna Vaid (jxv@psyc.tamu.edu)

Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843 USA

Roberto R. Heredia (rheredia@tamiu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Texas A&M International University
Laredo, TX 78041 USA

Abstract
Chinese-English bilingual participants listed exemplars of 10
common categories on two occasions, one week apart. Half
responded in the same language in both sessions (Chinese or
English) and half responded in one language in one session
and the other language in the other session. There was
substantial overlap in the exemplars listed across the sessions,
but those responding in different languages showed less
overlap than those responding in the same language. The
results indicate differences in graded structure of the
categories across the participants’ languages; the exemplars
associated with translation equivalent category labels in
bilinguals’ two languages differ in how representative they
are of the category.
Keywords: bilingualism; concept representation.

Introduction
To what extent do the conceptual representations
associated with translation equivalents in a bilingual
person’s two languages overlap or diverge? This question
relates to, but goes beyond the issue of whether a bilingual
person has two separate lexical systems each associated
with separate underlying conceptual representations or an
integrated, shared system. Francis (1999; in press) has
reviewed the extensive literature on this topic and concluded
that the evidence supports a single, integrated concept
representation view. At the same time, however, crosslanguage effects on a variety of tasks ranging from priming
to Stroop interference typically tend to be weaker than
comparable same-language effects, suggesting that although
a bilingual person’s languages may access a common
conceptual system, the mapping of lexical to conceptual
referents and perhaps even the nature of the conceptual
referents themselves may differ across the two languages
(see Paradis, 1979; de Groot, 1992; de Groot, Dannenburg,
& Van Hell, 1994).

2342

As a way of gaining insight into the question of
potentially differing bilingual concept representations, the
present study made use of the well-known fact that
exemplars of a given category exhibit a graded structure.
That is, within a given category, certain of its exemplars
appear to be more representative of the category than others.
Variations in exemplar representativeness are evident in
several measures, including output dominance, in which
some instances are consistently listed as category members
earlier and more frequently than others (e.g., Battig &
Montague, 1969), and typicality or goodness of example, in
which some instances are reliably rated as better examples
of the category than others (e.g., Rosch, 1975). Output
dominance and typicality are positively correlated; items
that are listed early and by many respondents also tend to be
rated high in typicality (Mervis, Catlin & Rosch, 1976.)
In the present study, we focused specifically on output
dominance as a measure for assessing the similarities and
differences in the way the underlying concepts associated
with translation-equivalent pairs are represented in an
individual’s two languages (e.g., the match between the
conceptual representations associated with the words
FURNITURE in English and MUEBLES in Spanish). To
what extent do those corresponding terms access the same
or different sets of exemplars, attributes and understandings
about the concepts in question? For example, when a
Spanish/English bilingual is asked to list exemplars of
FURNITURE (in English), do the same instances come to
mind for that individual as when asked to list exemplars of
MUEBLES (in Spanish)? Although several studies have
documented differences in category exemplar listing and
typicality across different groups that use different
languages, examinations of differences within the same
bilinguals across their two languages are rare (e.g., Roberts
& LeDorze, 1997), and no published studies have examined
such differences for a broad sampling of concept types.

Suggestive evidence that different exemplars come to
mind when bilingual individuals access concepts via their
two languages comes from a study by Pena, Bedore, and
Zlatic-Giunta (2002). Those investigators had SpanishEnglish bilingual children between the ages of 4;5 and 7;1
name animals, clothing and food in Spanish on one occasion
and in English on another occasion. The children generated
about the same number of items in each language, but their
overall tendency was to list different items in each language
(e.g., elephant, lion and dog as the top items in English
versus caballo (horse), elefante (elephant) and tigre (tiger) in
Spanish). In fact on average, only about one third of the
children’s responses were doublets (i.e., listed in Spanish
and English), whereas two thirds were singlets (i.e. listed in
one language or the other, but not both). Because none of
the bilingual children was tested twice in the same language,
it is not certain that the proportion of doublets was higher
than it would have been for children responding in the same
language on two separate occasions, but the results provide
at least suggestive evidence for a different pattern of
association of exemplars with categories in the children’s
two languages. Roberts and LeDorze (1997) also had
French-English bilinguals list exemplars of foods and
animals in each of those languages and found that there was
substantial, but less than perfect overlap in the sets of
exemplars listed.
Data reported by Jeng, Lai, & Liu (1973) allow a look at
a much wider set of categories and provide indirect support
for the idea that the exemplars that come to mind in
response to category labels will differ across translation
equivalents. Jeng et al. obtained listings for categories in
the Battig and Montague (1969) norms from ChineseEnglish bilingual students at two universities in Taiwan.
Some of the participants were given labels for the categories
in Chinese and listed exemplars in Chinese. Others were
given English labels and responded in English. Jeng et al.
reported frequencies for listings of exemplars for each of the
categories separately for the respondents who listed in
Chinese and English, but did not report analyses comparing
the patterns of responses by the two groups.
A preliminary examination and comparison we made of
the Jeng et al. lists suggests that there is substantial overlap,
but there are also striking differences in the exemplars that
come to mind depending on the language in which the
participants responded. For the category SPORT, for
example, we found that the correlation between the output
dominance of particular exemplars between the Chinese and
English responses was .52. This significant positive
correlation indicates, as would be expected, that there is at
least some overlap in the exemplars that are strongly
associated with the concept SPORT for Chinese bilinguals
when accessing the concept in either language. More
striking however, when we compared the Jeng et al. data to
listings obtained on largely monolingual US college
students from our own datasets, the correlation between
output dominace for Jeng et al.’s English responses and
responses by our US college students was .79. In other

2343

words, the sports that came to mind most readily when
Chinese participants listed exemplars of the category of
SPORTS in English were more similar to those that came to
mind for US college students tested about 30 years later
than they were to exemplars accessed by other Chinese
students who responded in the same year in Chinese.
Because each participant in the Jeng et al. study only
responded in one language, there is no way to know for sure
whether or not the same individuals would list different
items in each of their languages. The fact that the
participants were sampled from the same population and yet
responded differently in Chinese than in English suggests
that translation equivalents of category labels are associated
with differing sets of exemplars in each of their two
languages, but without having the same individuals respond
in both languages, it is not possible to firmly establish that a
difference exists. Indeed a complete design requires that
some participants respond twice in the same language and
some respond once in each of their two languages on
separate occasions. This is because output dominance is
dynamic and changeable, at least within limits, even when
monolinguals respond on two separate occasions in their
one language.
For example, Bellezza (1984) had
monolingual English speakers list exemplars of several
categories in two sessions held one week apart and found
that correlations between the output dominance of items was
strong and positive, though not perfect, and averaged in the
.70 range (e.g., Bellezza, 1984). Thus, in general, items that
are highly accessible remain so, but there is also
considerable variation from one time to the next in the
relative dominance of items.
In the present study we examined the category exemplar
listing responses of Chinese-English bilinguals in two
separate testing sessions, and had some of them respond
twice in the same language and other respond once in each
language.

Method
Participants
Participants were 36 Chinese-English bilinguals (17 female
and 19 male) recruited from social and community groups in
the Tuscaloosa area. The majority were students from
Mainland China attending the University of Alabama, and
the remainder were family members of those students.
Participants ranged in age from 20 to 57, with a mean age of
31 years, 1 month.

Materials
All participants listed exemplars for the 10 categories of
ANIMALS, SPORTS, VEGETABLES, OCCUPATIONS,
TYPES OF MUSIC, FRUIT, SUBJECTS STUDIED IN
SCHOOL, RELATIVES, BREAKFAST FOODS, and
ENTERTAINMENT in each of two sessions approximately
one week apart. Participants were equally divided across
four conditions formed by crossing the variables of
language used in Session 1 (Chinese or English) and

whether the language used in Session 2 was the same or
different from that used in Session 1. For ease of reference,
these groups are designated, with respect to the language
used in the first and second sessions as Chinese-Chinese
(CC), English-English (EE), Chinese-English (CE), and
English-Chinese (EC). As nearly as possible, the groups
were equivalent in terms of the numbers of males and
females and age distribution.
Task instructions and category labels were always in the
language being used for listing exemplars, and testing was
done by a Mass Communication graduate student who is
fluent in Chinese and English. Instructions and category
labels were translated from English to Chinese by two fluent
Chinese-English bilinguals. For each session, participants
were given sheets of paper with category labels and twelve
lines beneath each label. Different random orderings of the
categories were used so that no particular category would
always occur either late or early in the sequence. One
constraint on the random order was that the food items
(FRUIT, VEGETABLES, and BREAKFAST FOODS) did
not immediately precede or follow one another. Participants
were allowed to respond at their own pace. Although
participants were not told explicitly that they should list
twelve items for each category, in practice they typically did
so.

Results
Of most interest was the extent of overlap in the specific
exemplars listed in the two sessions. The simplest measure
of overlap is the number of items listed in common across
the two sessions. As shown in Table 1, for all 10 categories,
the mean number of overlapping items was greater for
individuals who listed in the same language on both
occasions than for those who listed in a different language
on each of the two occasions. A multivariate analysis of
variance (MANOVA) confirmed that the overall effect of
language (same versus different) was significant, F = 2.54, p
< .05, and that the differences in overlap were individually
significant for the categories of SPORTS, SUBJECTS
STUDIED IN SCHOOL, VEGETABLES, TYPES OF
MUSIC, BREAKFAST FOODS, and RELATIVES, and
marginally significant for OCCUPATIONS.
Table 1: Mean exemplar overlap by condition.
Category
Sports
Fruit
Occupation
Animals
Subjects
Entertainment
Vegetables
Music
Breakfast
Relatives

Same
6.9
7.1
4.8
6.9
7.5
5.0
6.3
5.6
5.9
7.8

Different
5.2
5.9
3.5
5.7
4.9
4.5
4.0
3.9
4.2
5.7

One concern in using raw overlap as a measure is that it is
influenced by the total number of items listed. The more
total items listed across the sessions, the more possible
overlapping items there are. To adjust for the number of
items listed in the sessions, we followed an analysis
procedure used by Bellezza (1984) in a study on the
reliability of retrieval from semantic memory. Specifically,
we computed common element correlations, which are
defined as the number of exemplars listed in common across
the sessions divided by the square root of the total number
of exemplars from Session1 times the total from Session 2
(the geometric mean). The measure can range from 1.00
when the exact same exemplars are listed in both sessions to
0 in the case of completely different exemplars across the
sessions. The same-language conditions (CC and EE)
provide an essential baseline measure of reliability of
retrieval from each of the categories when individuals
access information in a single language (see e.g., Bellezza,
1984). In other words, because the way in which a category
is constructed or instantiated on two different occasions will
not be identical, even when an individual accesses
information from that category in the same language,
common element correlations will not reveal perfect overlap
even in the CC and EE conditions. The extent to which CE
and EC overlap scores are even lower can then be taken as
an indicator of differences in the way category information
is represented and accessed in a bilingual individual’s two
languages beyond that baseline limit on reliability.
As shown in Table 2, for all 10 categories, the mean
common element correlations for items listed in Session 1
and Session 2 were smaller for groups that responded in
different languages (CE and EC) than for groups that
responded in the same language (CC and EE). Using
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), it was found
that the mean differences between the common element
correlations were statistically significant overall and
significant individually for 7 of the 10 categories (SPORTS,
FRUIT, OCCUPATIONS, SUBJECTS STUDIED IN
SCHOOL, VEGETABLES, BREAKFAST FOODS, and
RELATIVES), and marginally so for another (TYPES OF
MUSIC). Thus the response patterns point to a divergence
in the exemplars most associated with corresponding
categories in Chinese and English across a range of concept
types.
Table 2: Common Element Correlations by condition.

p
.011
.111
.055
.154
.002
.512
.008
.050
.019
.012

Category
Sports
Fruit
Occupation
Animals
Subjects
Entertainment
Vegetables
Music
Breakfast
Relatives
2344

Same
.63
.68
.43
.61
.65
.49
.58
.60
.58
.70

Different
.49
.58
.31
.50
.44
.41
.42
.46
.42
.51

p
.004
.010
.020
.128
.002
.192
.002
.067
.012
.003

Neither the analysis on raw overlap scores nor that on
common element correlations revealed an effect of starting
language or an interaction of starting language and same
versus different language. In effect these participants
showed as much overlap in the category exemplars they
listed when they responded twice in English as they did
when they responded twice in Chinese, and they showed as
much divergence in shifting from Chinese to English as they
did in shifting from English to Chinese.

Discussion
The present findings are consistent with the idea that
exemplars of common categories are differentially
representative of those categories when accessed via
bilingual individuals’ two languages. Overlapping, but
nevertheless divergent sets of exemplars come to mind
when bilingual individuals are prompted with translationequivalent category labels in their two languages.
It is important to note that the divergence found across
languages was reliably more than that found when
individuals responded in the same language on two
occasions. Same-language common element correlations
provide a kind of test-retest reliability and an indicator of
the stability of category structure within a language,
whereas cross-language correlations are influenced by both
the reliability of the measure and differences in dominance
structure in the languages. That is, the cross language
divergence reflects more than just the limited test-retest
reliability of responding in a category exemplar listing task.
Hierarchical models of bilingual language representation
(e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994; Kroll & Tokowicz, in press;
Potter, So, Eckardt, & Feldman, 1984) typically distinguish
between two levels of representation, a lexical level at
which the words of the two languages are represented in
distinct lexicons and a conceptual level concerned with the
representations associated with the bilingual’s two lexicons
(see e.g., Francis, in press; Heredia & Brown, 2004, Kroll &
Stewart, 1994). Attention has focused on the links between
corresponding items in the separate lexicons and on whether
access to meaning from L2 is direct or mediated through L1.
Although the distinction between the lexical and conceptual
level has been an extraordinarily useful one, these models
do not directly address the form or structure of underlying
conceptual representations and address bilingualism largely
at the single word level (but see Heredia & Altarriba, 2001).
Other bilingual memory models, however, such as the
distributed model (e.g., de Groot, 1992; 1993; 2002), and
the tripartite model (e.g., Paradis, 1979) may be more easily
amenable to a more nuanced account of bilingual conceptual
representations, and may help in interpreting the present
findings.
Paradis’ (1979) model builds on a proposal by Kolers
(1968) that bilinguals either store all information centrally
in one information store and have access to it equally or
store it in two separate conceptual stores, one associated
with each language. Paradis suggested that there may be a
2345

single conceptual store but that languages differ in how they
organize experience and thus differentially access the
common conceptual-experiential store.
In de Groot’s distributed model, translation equivalents
from each of the bilingual’s two languages are associated
with semantic elements, and different types of concepts may
have relatively more or less overlap in the associated
elements (de Groot, 1992; de Groot et al., 1994). de Groot
has argued that some concepts (e.g., concrete words) have
more overlapping characteristics across languages, and
others (e.g., abstract words) have less overlap across
languages. According to this framework, abstract words
that are translation equivalents from two languages would
be especially likely to be associated with diverging, though
partially overlapping semantic elements. For example,
because LOVE in English can be applied to animate as well
as inanimate entities, whereas AMOR in Spanish is reserved
for people those words in a bilingual’s English and Spanish
lexicons will be linked to partially overlapping, but not
identical sets of semantic elements. Those differences then
might be expected to manifest themselves in a variety of
conceptual tasks, such as the category exemplar listing task
used in the present study. For example, rubbing a pet dog’s
ears, caressing a favored security blanket or rereading a
special poem for the nth time could conceivably be listed as
instances of things that exemplify LOVE, but they would
not be listed as exemplars of AMOR. Thus, the conceptual
representations associated with the otherwise equivalent
LOVE and AMOR would be different, and that difference
would be revealed in traditional tasks that assess the nature
of conceptual structures.
Although divergence in the associated meanings of
abstract words is to be expected in de Groot’s model, the
present findings reveal divergence even for categories that
have concrete, tangible exemplars, such as fruit and
vegetables. Our results are also consistent with evidence
from other types of conceptual tasks for divergence in the
meanings of words that refer to concrete objects. Malt and
Sloman (2003), for example, showed that adult, nonnative
English speakers, who were in various stages of learning
English, diverged from native English speakers in the way
they applied labels, such as “bottle” and “dish” to a set of
presented stimuli, and in their judgments of the typicality of
those stimuli within categories. With more experience,
particularly years of immersion in an English speaking
environment, their English naming patterns and typicality
judgments shifted in the direction of those of native English
speakers, but did not come to match native patterns exactly,
even for individuals who had become quite proficient in
English. More importantly for present purposes, the
participants’ naming patterns in English also differed from
the naming patterns they used in their native languages, and
the mismatches increased slightly, though not significantly,
with increased immersion in an English-speaking
environment. Participants’ self reports of the strategies they
used in determining the appropriate English term also
suggested that, when responding in English, these

individuals did not simply try to retrieve the most
reasonable label in their native language and then translate it
into the English equivalent. The results are consistent with
the idea that there are different mappings between words
and meanings across the bilingual’s languages. This type of
finding can be explained by a distributed model such as the
one proposed by de Groot (1992) if one extends the idea of
non-overlapping elements to concrete concepts as well as
abstract concepts, and by the Paradis model (1979).
Based on our study and other findings (e.g., Malt and
Sloman; 2003; Pena et al. 2003; Roberts & LeDorze, 1997),
it is clear that bilinguals show less overlap in their listings
when they respond in their different languages than when
they respond in the same language, even for relatively
concrete types of concepts. However, it is not clear yet
whether systematic studies using paradigms that assess
conceptual structure will find relatively more crosslanguage divergence for abstract and social/cultural
categories that may share fewer meaning elements across
the words from two languages (see e.g., de Groot, 1992).
Another interesting case would be goal derived or ad hoc
categories (see e.g., Barsalou, 1985), because, in contrast to
the other types of concepts that have pre-established
structures they are constructed online in response to
particular goals or needs. Because those constructions are
driven by broader understandings and beliefs about the
workings of the world, discrepancies in exemplar listings
for those concepts may be expected to be strongly related to
differences in the context of acquisition for the person’s
languages.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629654.
Battig, W. F., & Montague, W. E. (1969). Category norms for
verbal items in 56 categories: A replication and extension
of the Connecticut category norms. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Monographs, 80, 3, Pt 2.
Bellezza, F. S. (1984). Reliability of retrieval from semantic
memory: Common categories. Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, 22, 3324-326.
De Groot. A. M. B. (1992). Determinant of word
translation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 1001-1018.
DeGroot, A. 1993. Word type effects in bilingual processing
tasks: Support for a mixed-representational system. In
Schreuder, R. and Weltens, B. (Eds.), 1993. The bilingual
lexicon. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
De Groot, A.M.B. (2002). Lexical representation and lexical
processing in the L2 user. In V. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of
the L2 user, (pp. 32-63). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
De Groot, A. M. B., Dannenburg, L., & Van Hell, J. G.
(1994). Forward and backward word translation by
bilinguals. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 600629.
2346

Francis, W. S. (1999) Cognitive integration of language and
memory in bilinguals: Semantic representation.
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 193-222.
Francis, W. S. (in press). Bilingual semantic and conceptual
representation. In J. F. Kroll & A. M. B. de Groot (Eds.).
Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches.
Oxford University Press.
Heredia, R. R., & Altarriba, J. (2001). Bilingual language
mixing: Why do bilinguals code-switch? Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 10, 164-168.).
Heridia, R. R., & Brown, J. M. (2004). Bilingual memory.
In T.K. Bhatia and W. Ritchie (Eds.), The Handbook of
Bilingualism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Jeng, Chung-In, Lai, Mei-Wei, & Liu, In-Mao (1973).
Category norms in Chinese and English from bilingual
subjects. Acta Psychologica Taiwanica, 15, 81-153.
Kolers, P. 1968. Bilingualism and information-processing.
Scientific American, 218, 78-86.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory & Language, 33, 149-174.
Kroll, J. F., & Tokowicz, N. (in press). Models of bilingual
representation and processing. In J. F. Kroll & A. M. B.
de Groot (Eds.). Handbook of bilingualism:
Psycholinguistic approaches. Oxford University Press.
Malt, B. & Sloman, S. (2003). Linguistic diversity and
object naming by non-native speakers of English.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6(1), 47-67.
Mervis, C. B., Catlin, J., & Rosch, E. (1976). Relationships
among goodness-of-example, category norms, and word
frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 7, 283284.
Paradis, M. (1979). Language and thought in bilinguals. In
W.McCormack & H. Izzo (Eds.), The Sixth LACUS
Forum (pp. 420-431). Columbia, SC: Hornbeam Press.
Pena, E., Bedore, L., & Zlatic-Giunta, R. (2002). Categorygeneration performance of bilingual children: The
influence of condition, category, and language. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45, 938-947.
Potter, M. C., So, K., Eckardt, V., & Feldman, L. (1984).
Lexical and conceptual representation in beginning and
proficient bilinguals. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 23, 23-38.
Roberts, P. & LeDorze, G. (1997). Semantic originality,
strategy use and productivity in bilingual semantic verbal
fluency. Brain and Language, 59, 412-449.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
104, 192-232.

