UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Classifier Categories Structure our Concepts?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8r45826p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Imai, Mutsumi
Saalbach, Henrik

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Classifier Categories Structure our Concepts?
Henrik Saalbach (saalbach@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, 5322 Endo, Kanagawa, Japan
Abstract
Whether and to what extent our conceptual structure is
universal is of great importance for our understanding
of the nature of human concepts. Two major factors that
might affect our concepts are language and culture. In
this research, we tested whether these two factors affect
our concepts of everyday objects in any significant
ways. For this purpose we compare adults of three
cultural/language groups—Chinese, Japanese, and
German—on similarity judgment and property
induction. In particular, we tested whether classifier
categories influence the conceptual structure of
speakers of classifier languages. Some classifier effect
was found, but only for Chinese speakers in similarity
judgment. Our overall results indicate that the global
structure of our concepts is similar across different
culture/language groups.
Keywords: Concepts, Cross-cultural differences,
Linguistic relativity, Classifiers, Thematic relations

Introduction
One of the key questions in the literature of human concepts
is to what extent they are universal across different cultures
and language groups (e.g., Bailenson, Shum, Atran, Medin &
Coley, 2002; Berlin, 1992; Imai & Gentner, 1997; Imai &
Mazuka, 2003; Rosch, 1978; Malt, 1995). In this research, we
tested whether language and culture affect our concepts of
everyday objects in any significant ways. For this purpose, we
compared adults of three cultural/language groups - Chinese,
Japanese, and Germans - on similarity judgment and property
induction.
Comparison of Chinese, Japanese and German speakers
is particularly interesting for examining the influence of
language on our concepts because Chinese and Japanese are
classifier languages. Numeral classifiers are somewhat similar
to English quantifiers such as a piece of, a portion of. The
important difference between English quantifiers and numeral
classifiers is that while the former are only used for
quantifying mass nouns (with numerals being used directly
with count nouns, e.g. two cars), in Chinese and Japanese,
numeral classifiers must be applied to all nouns when
quantifying them, including clearly individuated objects such
as cars, computers, and even humans.
Like nouns, classifiers linguistically categorize entities
in the world. However, the lexical organization of classifiers
is very different from that of nouns. While the noun lexicon is
organized by taxonomic relations, the classifier lexicon is
organized around semantic features such as animacy, shape,
1901

dimensionality, size, functionality, and flexibility. Categories
made by classifiers often crosscut taxonomic categories,
although functional classifiers in part overlap with them. For
example, nouns classified with hon, a Japanese classifier for
long, thin things (and things that are metonymically or
metaphorically related to long, thin things), include pens,
baseball bats, home-runs, bananas, carrots, ropes, necklaces,
wires, and telephone calls (Lakoff, 1987). Tiao, a Chinese
classifier for long and flexible things, even crosses the animal
and non-animal ontological boundary, including fish, dogs,
rivers, roads, pants, and more, in the set of the things it
classifies. An extremely interesting question is whether
classifier categories are an integral part of conceptual
structures in speakers of a classifier language.
Zhang and Schmitt (1998) addressed this issue. They
tested English speakers and Mandarin-Chinese speakers on a
similarity judgment task and found that Chinese speakers in
fact rated pairs of objects as more similar than English
speakers did when the objects were drawn from the same
classifier class. Although Zhang and Schmitt’s results may be
interpreted as evidence for a version of the Sapir-Whorf
hypothesis, it is important to note that these results do not tell
us whether Chinese speakers have significantly different
conceptual structures than English speakers do, as we could
not judge whether Chinese speakers in fact organize their
concepts around classifier categories. Do Chinese speakers
rely on classifier membership more heavily than taxonomic or
thematic relations in grouping objects, judging similarity, or
making inductive inference of novel properties? If this is
indeed the case, we can comfortably conclude that the
conceptual structure of Chinese speakers is qualitatively
different from that of English speakers, and an endorsement
for the strong version of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
However, if we find that, rather than giving precedence to
classifier class membership, Chinese speakers organize their
concepts around taxonomic or thematic relations in the way
that native speakers of European languages do, we must
qualify the impact of the classifier system on the speakers’
conceptual structure.
To explore this issue, in Experiment 1, we tested
speakers of Mandarin-Chinese and German on similarity
judgment as well as on property inference. The participants
were presented with pairs of everyday objects bearing
different kinds of relations. The first type of pairs were related
taxonomically, and the second type were related thematically.
The pairs of the third type were drawn from the same
classifier class in Chinese, but were not related taxonomically
or thematically (e.g., fish and ropes) and the fourth type had
no relation and served as a control (see table 1). In this

design, not only were we able to test whether the classifier
system affects Chinese speakers’ judgment of similarity
and/or inductive inference of properties, but also whether
Chinese speakers rely on classifier membership more strongly
than two of the other major relations underlying our concepts.
How Chinese and Germans utilize thematic relations in
similarity judgment and property induction is also of great
interest in evaluating a proposal that has attracted much
attention in the recent literature of cross-cultural cognition.
Nisbett and his colleagues have proposed that philosophy,
values and customs that have been nursed in a culture
throughout its history leads to a “culturally specific” style of
cognition (Nisbett, 2003). In his empirical work, Nisbett
focused on the comparison between East Asians and
Westerners. Characterizing the former as “holistic”, and the
latter as “analytic,” Nisbett argued that while East Asians tend
to view the environment as a unified whole and pay much
attention to relations that tie elements in the environment,
Westerners tend to focus individual elements of the
environment separately. Based on this scheme, Nisbett and
colleagues have made a specific prediction regarding the
conceptual structure of East Asians and Westerners: East
Asians, with their predisposition to see a scene or event as a
whole, are expected to categorize the world around thematic
relations; Westerners, with their focus on properties of
individual objects, are expected to categorize the world by
taxonomic relations. Ji, Zhang, and Nisbett (2004) in fact
reported that monolingual Chinese people showed a
preference for “relational” groupings while European
Americans tended to group things “categorically”. However,
Lin and Murphy (1999) demonstrated that even educated
European American young adults sometimes show a
preference for categorizing objects based on thematic
relations over taxonomic relations. It is thus extremely
interesting to see how Chinese and German participants in our
study utilize taxonomic and thematic relations in similarity
judgment and property induction tasks.

Method
Participants. Thirty-seven Chinese undergraduates from
Beijing and 38 German undergraduates from Berlin
participated in this study. The Chinese students were all
native speakers of Mandarin Chinese, and the German
students were all native speakers of German.
Materials. The structures of the stimuli used in this study and
in Experiment 2 are shown in Table 1. The stimuli for this
experiment were drawn from Set Type 1. In Set Type 1, the
stimuli were 12 quintuplets of objects, each consisting of one
standard and four targets. The first target type was from the
same classifier class as the standard item, but was not related
to it either taxonomically or thematically (e.g., flower-cloud:
CH_CLS). The second type was taxonomically related to the
standard (e.g., flower-tree: TAX), and the third type was
thematically related to the standard (e.g., flower-vase:
THEME). Neither the TAX nor THEME items belonged to
the same classifier class as the standard item. The fourth type
served as a control condition, unrelated taxonomically or
thematically, and with objects from different classifier classes
(CO). Twelve sets of quintuplets were constructed. The
stimulus sets were prepared on the basis of the results of a
pretest with native Chinese speakers.
The item pairs were presented in a questionnaire. The
twelve sets were split into two groups (Item Group A and B).
The questionnaire booklet included both a similarity
judgment task and a property induction task and was prepared
in such a way that Group A sets were used for the similarity
judgment and Group B sets were used for property induction
in one version of the booklet, and vice versa in the other
version. In both versions, however, similarity judgment was
presented before property inference because similarity
judgement is more susceptible to influence from a previous
task.
Participants were randomly assigned to either version of
the booklet. Item pairs within each version of the booklet
were arranged in random order for both similarity judgment
and property inference. The participants judged the similarity
of each object pair on a rating scale of 1 (not similar at all) to
7 (very similar). In the property inference task, following Lin
and Murphy (1999), we used the property “carry the same
bacteria,” as most of our items were artifacts. The participants
were asked to judge the likelihood that the two objects would
carry the same bacteria on a rating scale of 1 (not likely at all)
to 7 (very likely).

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we compared native Mandarin-Chinese
speakers and native German speakers on similarity judgment
and inductive inference of a novel property.

Table 1. Structure of the stimuli used for Experiments 1 & 2 with a sample set for each set type.
Standard

CH/JP
CLS+Tax
table
-

TAX

THEME

CH/JP
CLS
tube
-

CH
CLS
cloud
-

JP
CLS
TV

CO

(tree)
(vase)
cup
SetType1 flower
bed
chair
SetType2
bone
platter
SetType3
hat
SetType4 bus
Experiment 1: Set Type1 only (including the items in parenthesis); Experiment 2: Set Type 1-4. However, the items in
parenthesis were not used

1902

Procedure. The participants received the booklet in groups.
They were instructed to go through the questionnaire
carefully at their own pace, and to rely on their intuition.

Table 2: Difference scores for each target type in each
culture in Experiment 1
TAX_diff THEME_diff CH CLS_diff

Results

Culture

N

Sim Prop

Sim

Prop

Sim

Prop

Results are reported separately for similarity judgement and
property induction.
Similarity Judgment. Figure 1 shows the mean similarity
ratings for the four target types. The effect of the target type
was tested on a repeated measure ANOVA for each culture
separately. For both cultures, the effect for Target Type was
highly significant, F(3,108) = 126.70 for Chinese, and
F(3,111) = 113.17 for Germans, both ps < .01. In both
cultures, similarity of the four targets was rated in the order of
the TAX, THEME, CH_ CLS, and Control pairs (CO). Posthoc pairwise comparisons were carried out with Bonferroni
corrections. For both cultures, the similarity ratings for the
four target types were all significantly different from one
another, all ps < .01.
We then tested whether the magnitude of the effect for
each target relation differed across the two cultures. For this
test, we obtained difference scores (TAX_diff, THEME_diff,
CH-CLS_diff) by subtracting the Control scores (CO) from
each of the TAX, THEME, and CH-CLS scores in order to
adjust the difference in the baseline across the two cultures,
and we used these difference scores as the dependent
variables for the analysis (see Table 2).
A 3 (target type) X 2 (culture) repeated measure

China

37 3.40 1.98

2.45

1.31

1.22

0.01

Germany

38 3.42 1.69

1.72

1.70

0.63

-0.12

6

China

5

Germany

4
3

Sim: similarity judgment: Prop: property induction
analysis of variance revealed main effects for target type,
F(2,146) = 154.94, p < .01, and culture, F(1,73) = 4.49, p <
.05, as well as a significant interaction effect, F(2,146) =
3.99, p < .05. Separate ANOVAs for each of the three rating
scores revealed a significant cross-cultural difference on CHCLS_diff, F(1,73) = 9.59, p < .01, as well as on
THEME_diff, F(1,73) = 5.17, p < .05.
Property Induction. Figure 2 shows the mean rating scores
for the likelihood of the pairs sharing the same property for
each target type. As for similarity judgment, the effect of the
target type was tested within each culture. For both cultures,
the effect for Target Type was highly significant, F(3,102) =
58.71 for Chinese, and F(3,102) = 51.47 for Germans, both
ps<.01. A post hoc test revealed that for the Chinese group,
all the pairwise comparisons (Bonferroni corrected) were
significant (all ps < .01) except for the difference between CH
CLS and Control. For the German group, there was no
significant difference between Taxonomic and Thematic or
between CH CLS and Control. Other comparisons turned to
be significant, ps < .01.
As we did for similarity judgment, we conducted a 3
(target type) X 2 (culture) on the difference scores (see Table
2). No effect of culture or the interaction involving this factor
was found.

Discussion

2

Several important findings should be noted. First, we found
that both taxonomic and thematic relations are important
organizers of adults’ conceptual structure in two very
different language/culture groups. This finding provides
strong support for the view that thematic relations, along with
taxonomic relations, are an important part of our conceptual
structures, even for educated young adults (e.g., Lin &
Murphy, 1999).
At the same time, some support for linguistic relativity
and for Nisbett’s cultural theory was found, as (1) Chinese
people’s similarity judgment for pairs drawn from the same
classifier classes was higher than those of the Germans, and
(2) the Chinese gave higher similarity ratings for thematically
related object pairs than the Germans did. However, these
effects need to be qualified both in terms of the range and
magnitude: For both cultures, neither the cultural nor the
linguistic effect was large enough to change the relative order
of the preference among the four target types. Also, the
thematic effect and classifier effect in Chinese people were
not found in property inference. In fact, in both cultures, the

1
TAX

THEME

CH CLS

CONTROL

Figure 1: Mean similarity ratings for each target type in
each culture in Experiment 1
6

China

5

Germany

4
3
2
1
TAX

THEME

CH CLS

CONTROL

Figure 2: Mean likelihood ratings for property
induction for each target type in each culture in
Experiment 1
1903

rated likelihood of two objects from the same classifier class
sharing the same property was no different from that for two
unrelated objects. Interestingly, in similarity judgment, not
only the Chinese but also the Germans rated the sameclassifier pairs higher than the control pairs. This suggests
that even speakers of a non-classifier language can detect an
inherent similarity between objects belonging to the same
classifier class. However, this inherent similarity may be
magnified for speakers of the classifier language. Taken
together, we can say that whether or not their language has
the classifier system, people can detect semantic features
underlying the classifier system, but they know that these
features are not very useful for inductive inference of a novel
property.
In summary, we did find “some” evidence for linguistic
relativity and for the cultural difference view advanced by
Nisbett (2003). However, these effects are rather local and
subtle, as, at a global level, people from two very different
linguistic and cultural backgrounds showed strikingly similar
performance both in similarity judgment and property
induction.
Given that there was some classifier effect for Chinese
speakers on similarity judgment, we wished to examine
whether the classifier effect would be replicated for a larger
set of stimuli and if it would also be found for speakers of
another classifier language, Japanese. As in the case of
Chinese classifiers, Japanese classifiers are structured around
semantic features such as animacy, shape, and functionality,
although, unlike Chinese, Japanese classifiers are not
sensitive to flexibility. However, there are also clear
differences in the grammatical function of classifiers between
the two languages. Chinese classifiers must be used not only
in numeral phrases (e.g. one [classifier] table) but also in
phrases with demonstratives (e.g. this [classifier] table). By
contrast, Japanese classifiers are only used with numerals, and
are not used as determiners or demonstratives. Given this
structural difference between Chinese and Japanese, it is
interesting to see whether the classifier effect on similarity
judgment is found not only for Chinese speakers but also for
Japanese speakers.

taxonomic category membership and classifier membership in
both Chinese and Japanese (e.g., bed and table) to pairs in
which the two objects only shared taxonomic category
membership (e.g., bed and chair).

Method

Experiment 2

Participants. Thirty-nine Chinese undergraduates from
Beijing, 35 German undergraduates from Berlin, and 40
Japanese undergraduates from the Tokyo area participated in
this study.
Material and Procedure. Stimulus set types 1- 4 in Table 1
were used but the items in parenthesis were not included for
this experiment. Type 2 sets contrasted pairs in which the two
objects shared both taxonomic category membership and
classifier class membership (e.g., bed and table:
CH/JP_CLS+TAX) with pairs in which the two objects
belonged to the same taxonomic category but to different
classifier classes. (e.g., bed and chair: TAX). Type 3 sets
were used to contrast the object pairs from the same classifier
class in both Chinese and Japanese (e.g., bone and tube:
CH/JP_CLS) with the pairs sharing no relation (e.g., bone and
platter: Control). Type 1 sets, which were also used for
Experiment 1, contrasted object pairs sharing classifier
membership in Chinese only (CH_CLS) with pairs sharing no
relation. Type 4 sets were used to contrast object pairs from
the same classifier class in Japanese but not in Chinese
(JP_CL) with pairs sharing no relation. As in Experiment 1,
the standards and the same classifier targets were verified by
a pretest.
As in Experiment 1, each participant received a
questionnaire containing both similarity judgment and
property inference. As in Experiment 1, “carrying the same
bacteria” was used for the property inference. The structure as
well as the format of the questionnaire was the same as that
used in Experiment 1: Item pairs of all set types were divided
into two groups (A and B) within each set type and two
versions of the questionnaire were prepared, one using Group
A pairs for similarity judgment and Group B pairs for
property inference, the other using Group B pairs for
similarity judgment and Group A pairs for property inference.
The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to that of
Experiment 1.

In Experiment 2, speakers of two classifier languages,
Chinese and Japanese, and speakers of a non-classifier
language, German, were tested on similarity judgment and
property inference. In this study, we focused on the influence
of classifiers. Thus, we designed the stimuli in such a way
that the classifier effect could be examined more finely than
in Experiment 1. Specifically, we tested the classifier effect in
three situations: (1) object pairs belonging to the same
classifier class both in Chinese and Japanese; (2) object pairs
belonging to the same classifier class in Chinese but not in
Japanese; (3) objects pairs belonging to the same classifier
class in Japanese but not in Chinese. We also tested whether
we could see the classifier effect even when two objects are
drawn from the same taxonomic category. For this purpose,
we contrasted pairs in which two objects share both

Results

1904

Similarity Judgment. Figure 3 shows the average rating
score for each of the six target types in each culture. We first
examined the classifier effects within each culture. The
contrast between the pairs sharing both taxonomic category
membership and classifier membership (in both Chinese and
Japanese) and the pairs sharing the taxonomic category
membership only revealed an advantage of sharing classifier
membership for all three cultures, all ps < .01. The pairs
sharing classifier membership in Chinese and Japanese were
rated higher than the controls in all cultures as well, all ps
< .01. The pairs sharing classifier membership only in
Chinese were significantly different from the corresponding
control pairs in Chinese, p < .01, and German, p < .05, but not

in Japanese, p > .1. The pairs sharing classifier membership
only in Japanese were rated more similar than the
corresponding control pairs in all three cultures, all ps < .01.
We then tested whether the magnitude of the classifier
effect for each type of contrast differed across the three
cultures. For this test, as in Experiment 1, we used the
difference scores to adjust the difference in the scores for the
control pairs across three cultures. Again, we obtained the
difference scores by subtracting the rating scores for the
corresponding control pairs from each target. For example,
CH/JP_CLS+TAX difference score was obtained by
calculating CH/JP_CLS+TAX – TAX in Item Set Type 2,
and JP_CLS difference score was obtained by subtracting the
mean score of the control pairs (in Item Set Type 4) from the
mean score of JP_CLS pairs. Difference scores across each
type of contrast in each culture are shown in Table 3.
A cross-cultural difference was found for the pairs
sharing classifier membership in both Chinese and Japanese
(CH/JP CLS difference score) and for the pairs sharing
classifier membership only in Chinese (CH-CLS difference
score), F(2,111)=6.86, and F(2,111)=5.09, respectively, both
ps < .01. For the former, post-hoc pairwise comparisons
(Tukey) revealed a significant difference between Chinese
and German, and Chinese and Japanese, both p < .01. For the
CH_CLS difference score, the difference between Chinese
and German was marginally significant p<.08, and the
difference between Chinese and Japanese was significant, p
< .01. No cross-cultural difference was found on the
6
China

5

Germany

4

Japan

Table 3: Difference scores for each classifier contrast in
Experiment 2
CH/JP CLS+

CH/JP

CH

JP

TAX_diff

CLS_diff

CLS_diff

CLS_diff

Sim

Prop

Sim Prop

Sim

Prop

Sim

Prop

CH

0.38

0.16

1.57 0.34

0.92

0.27

0.45

0.26

GR

0.38

0.03

0.83 0.18

0.59

0.18

0.37

0.03

JP

0.60

0.19

0.91 0.36

0.48

0.21

0.40

0.19

Sim: similarity judgment; Prop: property induction
CH/JP_CLS+TAX difference score or on the JP_CLS
difference score.
Property Induction. Figure 4 shows the average rating score
for the property induction task for each target type in each
culture. Again, the classifier effects were tested within each
culture by paired t-tests testing the difference between each of
the classifier targets against the corresponding controls.
Unlike the case with similarity judgment, the classifier effect
was only found for the pairs in which the target object was
from the same classifier class as the standard in both Chinese
and Japanese (CH/JP CLS). In all three cultures, the
likelihood score for this target type was higher than the
control, all ps<.01. In the other three types of contrasts (i.e.,
CH/JP_CLS+TAX-TAX, CH_CLS – Control, and JP_CLS –
Control), there was no advantage for shared classifier class
membership in any of the three cultures.
We again tested the effect of culture for each of the four
difference scores given in Table 3. Unlike the case with
similarity judgement, in none of the difference scores was
there an effect for culture, all ps > .05.

3

Discussion

2

The classifier effect found in the similarity judgment task in
Experiment 1 for Chinese speakers was replicated with a
larger stimuli set. In this study, the Chinese participants gave
higher similarity rating scores for the objects from the same
classifier class in Chinese than German and Japanese
speakers did, although this classifier effect was not found
when the two objects were taxonomically related to start with.
These results again suggest that taxonomic relations are a
primary factor organizing our concepts, and within this
constraint, the classifier system influences our construal of
similarity among objects. We also replicated the finding from
Experiment 1 that classifier categories are not utilized in
inference of novel properties.
Another important finding from Experiment 2 is the lack
of the classifier effect in Japanese speakers. As stated earlier,
the link between objects and corresponding classifiers may be
weaker for Japanese than for Chinese speakers because
classifiers are associated with objects only when objects are
enumerated in Japanese, while in Chinese, classifiers also
have the function analogous to English determiners. This
suggests that, in considering the influence of language, how
often (or how habitually) a given linguistic category is used in

1
CH/JP
CLS+TAX

TAX

CH/JP CLS

CH CLS

JP CLS

CONTROL

Figure 3: Mean similarity ratings for each target type in
each culture in Experiment 2
China
Germany
Japan

6
5
4
3
2
1
CH/JP
CLS+TAX

TAX

CH/JP CLS

CH CLS

JP CLS

CONTROL

Figure 4: Mean likelihood ratings for each target type in
each culture in Experiment 2

1905

the language is important in addition to whether the linguistic
categories are present in a given language.

General discussion
This research examined whether classifier categories affect our
conceptual structures in significant ways. In a way, we tested
linguistic relativity in two forms, to see (1) whether classifier
categories function as organizers of our concepts and categories
(cf. Lakoff, 1987); (2) whether speakers of classifier languages
attend to features underlying classifier categorization more
strongly than speakers of non-classifier languages in certain
cognitive contexts (cf. Hunt & Agnoli, 1991). We found some
support for linguistic relativity in (2) but not in (1). In both
Experiments 1 and 2, Chinese people showed higher similarity
ratings for objects from the same classifier class in their
language than German people did, which supports linguistic
relativity. At the same time, this effect must be qualified
because the magnitude of the effect as well as the cognitive
domain it applies to was limited. First, the classifier effect was
found in similarity judgment but not in property inference.
Second, more importantly, speakers of classifier and nonclassifier languages showed strikingly similar performance in
both similarity judgment and property induction at a global
level: In Experiment 1, both Chinese and Germans gave the
highest ratings for objects holding the taxonomic relation, then
to objects that were thematically related, then to objects from
the same classifier class in Chinese. It is also important to note
that even Germans could see some similarity in object pairs
from the same classifier class, presumably because these
objects shared a semantic feature such as shape, size, or
function. In Experiment 2, the classifier effect on similarity
judgment was replicated for Chinese people, but it was not
found in Japanese speakers. This suggests that, in addition to
the presence of certain linguistic categories, how frequently the
linguistic categories are used in the language is important when
we explore issues in linguistic relativity. It is possible, however,
if we employ a paradigm that assesses more automatic, lower
levels of cognition (e.g., a priming task), we may find the
classifier effect even for Japanese speakers. Further
examination is also required whether the classifier effect is
found in property induction if we employed a different task,
e.g., asking the likelihood of sharing a blank property.
The results of Experiment 1 in this research also speak to
two important proposals in the literature of concepts and crosscultural cognition. The fact that Chinese people gave higher
ratings for thematically related objects than Germans is
consistent with Nisbett´s proposal (2003; Ji et al., 2004) that
East Asians weigh thematic relations more heavily than
Westerners. At the same time, however, this finding also needs
to be qualified in that Chinese people relied on taxonomic
relations more heavily than thematic relations in both similarity
judgment and property induction just like Germans. Thus, we
found little evidence that Chinese people’s concepts and
categories were organized differently from Germans. Our
results provide support for recent views that thematic relations
are an important and integral part of concepts not only in
children but also in adults (Lin & Murphy, 1999).

To conclude, the results of the two experiments suggest
that the overall structure of our concepts is similar across
different cultures and language groups, because the structure of
the world and objects place strong constraints on how we
perceive them and relations among them (Malt, 1995). At the
same time, language and/or cultural traditions and customs
affect our concepts and cognition, but the role of these factors
seems to be secondary rather than primary in our conceptual
structure (see also Imai & Mazuka, 2003).

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by Japan Society of the
Promotion of Science (JSPS). We are deeply indebted to
Zhou Xiaolin, Elsbeth Stern, Sachiko Saitoh, Zhu Liqi, and
Huangfu Gang for help for data collection and discussion.

References
Bailenson, J., Shum, M., Atran, C., Medin, D. & Coley, J.
(2002). A bird’s eye view: biological categorization and
reasoning within and across cultures. Cognition, 84, 1-53.
Berlin, B. (1992). Ethnobiological classification: Principles of
categorization of plants and animals in traditional societies.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hunt, E & Agnoli, F. (1991). The Whorfian hypothesis: a
cognitive psychology perspective. Psychological Review
98(3): 377-389
Imai, M. & Gentner, D. (1997). A crosslinguistic study of early
word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic influence.
Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Imai, M. & Mazuka, R. (2003). Re-evaluation of linguistic
relativity: Language-specific categories and the role of
universal ontological knowledge in the construal of
individuation. In D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.),
Language in Mind: Advances in the issues of language and
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ji, L.J., Zhang, Z., & Nisbett, R.E. (2004) Is it Culture, or is it
language? Examination of language effects in cross-cultural
research on categorization. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87(1), 57-65.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What
categories reveal about the mind. Chicago: Uni-versity of
Chicago Press.
Lin, E. L. & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Thematic relations in
adults’ concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
Malt, B. C. (1995). Category coherence in cross-cultural
perspective. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 85-148.
Nisbett, R. E. (2003). The geography of thought: how Asians
and Westerners think differently and why. NewYork: Free
Press.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch and
B.B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization. Hillsdale,
NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Zhang, S. and Schmitt, B. (1998). Language-dependent
classification: The mental representation of classifiers in
cognition, memory, and ad evaluations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4, 375-385.

1906

