UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Preschoolers Understand Causality? A Critical Look

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bh2f76z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Kloos, Heidi
Sloutsky, Valdimir M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do Preschoolers Understand Causality? A Critical Look
Heidi Kloos (kloos.6@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
211G Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
While developmental research commonly claims that children
have causal understanding, the extent to which such
understanding is present is unclear. The current research is a
step towards a more conservative look at children’s
understanding of causality. We test whether preschoolers
appreciate the difference between causes and effects, a
finding that is commonly taken to show causal understanding
in adults. A two-phase blocking paradigm was used in which
the causal status of the cues was manipulated to be either
potential causes (predictive reasoning) or potential effects
(diagnostic reasoning). Results of two experiments show a
significant difference between preschool children and adults
in that only adults but not children exhibit evidence for
differentiation between causes and effects. These results cast
doubt on the idea that understanding of causality appears
early in development.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology; Causal
reasoning; Cognitive development; Learning; Developmental
experimentation.

Introduction
There is a growing body of evidence that even young
children have understanding of causality, and that they use
this understanding in their thinking about the world (see
Sobel, Tenenbaum, & Gopnik, 2004, for a review). Initially,
this claim has been limited to single-cue events, such as
physical events in which a rolling ball propels a stationary
object (Oakes & Cohen, 1990). More recently this claim has
been extended to multiple-cue events, events in which
children have to pick the causally relevant cue among
several cues, all of which are associated to the caused
outcome (e.g., Sobel, et al., 2004).
The goal of the current research is to take a more critical
look at young children’s understanding of causality. Our
perspective is motivated by the current debate about the
structure of adult causal knowledge (for a review see
DeHouwer, & Beckers, 2002). While some researchers
claim that adults rely on abstract causal knowledge when
solving causal problems (e.g., Cheng, 1997; Waldmann &
Holyoak, 1992), others claim that that relatively simple
attentional mechanisms can explain adults’ performance in
such tasks (e.g., Cobos, Lopez, Cano, Almaraz, & Shanks,
2002; Van Hamme & Wasserman, 1994).

Given that adults’ causal knowledge is a contested issue,
it seems that the presence of causal knowledge in children
needs a closer examination. The current study is aimed at
placing the findings with children in perspective of the
findings with adults. To start, we will briefly describe the
developmental evidence of multiple-cue events that was
taken to show abstract causal knowledge in children.
A variety of studies have been conducted with a so-called
Blicket detector, a machine that lights up when a ‘Blicket’ is
placed on it (e.g., Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Sobel et al.,
2004). Blickets are objects that turn on the lights of the
Blicket detector. Children’s task is to find the Blicket
among other similar looking objects, to make the machine
go (or to remove the Blicket to turn the machine off).
An example of events shown to children is presented
schematically in Figure 1 (Sobel et al., 2004; Experiment 1).
This task is also referred to as a backward blocking task (or
screening-off task). A and B refer to the objects presented to
children (i.e., the cues), and the outcome O is the response
of the Blicket detector (O+: light on; O-: light off). First,
cues A and B were placed simultaneously onto the machine
and the Blicket detector was activated (O+). Next, cue A
was placed onto the machine alone, and the Blicket detector
was activated again. The critical question in the test phase
pertained to the causal power of cue B. Do children link it
with the outcome O+ (because the machine’s lights were on
when cue B was on the machine during training), or do they
understand that cue B, while associated to the outcome O+,
is not causally related to it?

1154

Training 1
A

B
O+

Training 2

Testing

A

B

O+

O+ or O-?

Figure 1: Schematic Procedure of a
Backward Blocking Task.
Consistent with the authors’ predictions, most 4-year-olds
and even some 3-year-olds did not link cue B to the
outcome O+. They showed some evidence of blocking cue
B. However, the difficulty with this (or similar) finding is

that blocking per se is not sufficient to show abstract causal
knowledge. We explain this next.

Blocking in Animals
Kamin (1969) was the first to demonstrate the phenomenon
of blocking in animals. In a crucial experiment, animals
were trained in a first phase that cue A (e.g., a light) is
paired with an outcome (e.g., food pellet). Upon learning
this contingency, cue A was presented simultaneously with
cue B (e.g., a tone) and paired again with the outcome. After
training, the associative strength was measured of cue B
with the outcome. The results show that animals were less
likely to expect the outcome when cue B was presented
alone.
Similar results were found in a backward blocking
paradigm, a task that is similar in structure with the one
used with children (see Figure 1) (e.g., Dickinson & Burke,
1996). Apparently, cue B looses its associative strength with
the outcome if cue A alone is perfectly associated with the
outcome. What seem to be in place are adaptive domaingeneral learning mechanisms such as learned inattention
that allow animals to capture regularities and behave
adaptively in a causal environment (cf. Kruschke & Blair,
2000).
These findings undermine a claim that blocking per se is
sufficient evidence for abstract knowledge of causality.
Blocking could be based on a low-level learning mechanism
that allows the learner to disregard cue-outcome relations
when the same outcome is caused by another cue. It may be
dependent on temporal and other non-causal information,
rather than on abstract theories about causal order. Even
though children’s Blicket task differs from the animal
conditioning task in many aspects (e.g., length of training,
ecological relevance), it is possible that both tasks require
the same theory-free mechanisms. What would be needed as
evidence from theory-based causal understanding is a
finding in which the learner goes beyond blocking.

Beyond Blocking
Understanding causality includes the ability to appreciate
the asymmetry between a cause and an effect. Causes are
inherently different from effects, independently of the
temporal sequence of events in which a causal relation is
acquired. In particular, causes can compete for explaining
an effect, whereas effects do not compete for being
explained by a cause. As a result, multiple independent
effects of a single cause do not attenuate the certainty of
inference of a given effect from a given cause. On the other
hand, multiple independent causes do attenuate the certainty
of inference of a given cause from a given effect because
each cause may provide an alternative causal scenario. In
other words, an inference from a cause to effect is more
certain than an inference from an effect to a cause. This is
because one cannot be certain that there are no competing
alternative causes, whereas effects do not compete (cf.
Pearl, 1988).

To illustrate the certainty of a common cause, take the
two cues to be body reactions (e.g., running nose and fever)
with each being potentially caused by a virus. Here,
presence of the second cue (i.e., fever) does not attenuate
the participant’s belief that presence of the virus is
associated with the first cue (i.e., running nose).
Conversely, to illustrate the lack of certainty of a common
effect, take the two cues to be two foods (e.g., milk and
cereal), with each potentially causing an allergy. Here,
given that that the allergy is present, the second (potentially
alternative) cause attenuates the certainty that the allergy
was caused by the first cause.
Waldmann & Holyoak (1992) tested whether adults
appreciate the asymmetry between causes and effects. They
used a blocking paradigm similar to the one shown in Figure
1. During training, adults were shown (1) that cue A is
linked to outcome O+, and (2) that cues A and B together
are also linked to that outcome. After this training, adults
had to assess their certainty that cue B alone is linked to
outcome O+.
Two conditions were formed that differed only in the
cover story of the experiment. In both conditions, the cues
were body features of a person (e.g., a person’s skin color
and weight). In the Prediction condition, these cues were
said to be potential causes of the outcome (e.g., they might
cause an emotional reaction in others), and after training,
participants had to rate their certainty that cue B alone
would cause the outcome (common-effect scenario).
Conversely, in the Diagnostic condition, cues were said to
be potential effects of the outcome (e.g., they might have
been caused by a new disease), and after training,
participants had to rate their certainty that cue B alone
would be an effect of the outcome (common-cause
scenario).
The results support the hypothesis that adults appreciate
the asymmetry in certainty between cause and effect. They
were more likely to block an alternative cause (Prediction
condition) than they were to block an alternative effect
(Diagnosis condition). It was argued that adults applied
different causal models to the same set of associations, and
performed differently as a function of them (but see Cobos
et al., 2002).

Overview of Experiments

1155

The current set of experiments examined whether children
have an appreciation of the asymmetry between causes and
effects. The two reported experiments had the same
blocking paradigm described above. The schematic
illustration of their procedure is shown in Table 1. It
consists of two phases: a training phase (Block 1 and Block
2), and a testing phase.
In Block 1 of the training, cue A was consistently linked
to outcome O+, while the control cue C was linked to
outcome O-, which was explained to participants as “it’s
impossible to tell whether or not it is linked to the
outcome.” In Block 2 of the training, cue A was paired with
the redundant cue R, both of which were consistently linked

to the outcome O, while it was again impossible to tell
whether cue C was linked to the outcome (i.e., O-). During
the testing phase, participants were asked to determine
whether a shown cue is linked to the O+ or O-. Four types
of test trials were used, three of which functioned as check
trials (they tested whether participants learned the cueoutcome links presented during training) and one of which
functioned as critical test trials (it tested participants’
inferences about whether cue B is linked to the outcome).

Training Block 2
Check trials
Check trials
Check trials
Critical test trials

Cue
A
C
A+R
C
A
C
A+R
R

The goal of this experiment was (1) to replicate Waldmann
and Holyoak’s (1992) findings with a task that can be used
with children, and (2) to examine whether young children
appreciate the difference between causes and effects.
Preschool children and adults were tested in one of two
conditions: the Prediction condition and the Diagnostic
condition.

Method

Table 1: Schematic Illustration of the Procedure
used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Training Block 1

Experiment 1

Participants Participants were 33 4- and 5-year-olds (16
girls and 17 boys), recruited from suburban middleclass
preschools, and 27 introductory psychology students at the
Ohio State University, who participated for class credit.
Half of the participants in each age group were randomly
assigned to the Prediction condition, and the other half were
assigned to the Diagnostic condition. The mean age for
children was 61.3 months (SD = 3.1) in the Prediction
condition and 59.6 months (SD = 4.9) in the Diagnostic
condition. Additional 13 children (8 of which were in the
Diagnostic condition) and 3 adults were tested and omitted
from the sample because they did not meet the learning
criterion (see Procedure).

Outcome
O+
OO+
O?
?
?
?

Note. Three cues were used: A, R (redundant cue) and C
(control cue).
As was done in Waldmann and Holyoak (1992), subjects
participated in one of two conditions that differed only in
the cover story of the experiment. In the Prediction
condition, cues were said to be possible causes of the
outcome and children’s task was to predict the effect of a
cue. In the Diagnostic condition, cues were said to be
possible effects and children’s task was to diagnose the
cause of a cue.
If children appreciate the asymmetry between cause and
effect, they should exhibit different patterns of blocking in
the Prediction and the Diagnostic conditions. In particular,
they should be more likely to exhibit blocking in the
Prediction condition, when multiple causes are present, than
in the Diagnostic condition, when multiple effects are
present.
Two different scenarios were used in the two reported
experiments. In Experiment 1, the scenario involved a
magical place in which creatures eat special food to turn
into something else. The cues are fruits on a plate. In the
Prediction conditions, these cues are said to be potential
causes (creatures that eat from the plate might turn into a
flower), and in the Diagnostic condition, they are said to be
potential effects (creatures that ate from an enchanted
flower might turn into the plate).
A different was used in Experiment 2. Here, the cues were
animal marks found on a forest floor (e.g., a foot print, a
hair ball, a bite mark). Again, the status of the cues was
manipulated in the cover story. Marks were either potential
causes (creatures that see the marks might get scared;
Prediction condition) or potential effects (a creature might
have left them behind; Diagnostic condition).

Materials Cues were realistic pictures of fruits (e.g., apple,
orange, strawberry) depicted on a plate. A plate could have
one fruit (e.g., cue A) or two fruits (i.e., cues A + R). In the
case of one fruit, the plate was partially covered. This was
done to aid children in the Diagnostic condition, the
condition in which correct performance was to link cue R
with the outcome. We reasoned that children in the
Diagnostic condition might get confused if the outcome has
only one effect (cue A) during the first part of the training,
but then has two effects during the second part of training
(cue A + R). As a result of this confusion – rather than
because of missing causal knowledge – children may block
the redundant cue R. For example, they may think cue R
could only be an effect of the outcome if it occurs every
time the outcome is present. Having a plate partially
covered when only one cue is shown avoids this potential
confusion. It allows children to reason that cue R was an
effect of the cause all along, but was not visible during the
first part of the training.
To partially cover the plate, a realistic drawing of a tissue,
the size of fruit, was placed on one side of the plate. The cue
(fruit) was placed on the other side of the plate.
For children, two laminated cards (2.5 x 2.5 cm) were
also used, one being a realistic picture of a plant, and the
other one being a stick figure scratching its head underneath
a question mark. This second picture was used to explain to
children the phrase “impossible to tell.”
Procedure Adults were tested in a quiet room on campus,
and children were tested in their preschool. The experiment
was administered on a computer and controlled by SuperLab Pro 2.0 software.

1156

The cover story involved Toto, the traveler, who wants to
find out about a far-away place. A wizard tells him about
some of the things that go on at this far-away place. For
participants in the Prediction condition (cue = potential
cause), the wizard tells Toto that creatures eat from
enchanted plates of fruit and then turn into something else.
If creatures eat from some plates of fruit, they will turn into
a flower, and if they eat from other plates of fruit, there is no
way of knowing what they will turn into1. Participants’ task
was to predict for each plate of fruit whether the creature
that eats from it would turn into a flower or whether it is
impossible to tell what it would turn into.
For participants in the Diagnostic condition (cue =
potential effect), the wizard tells Toto that creatures turn
into plates of fruits after they eat from an enchanted food.
Before a creature turns into a plate of fruits, it either ate an
enchanted flower or it is impossible to tell what it ate.
Participants’ task is to determine for each plate of fruit
whether the creature ate the flower or whether it is
impossible to tell what the creature ate.
During a warm-up phase, participants were told that a
tissue is sometimes covering part of a plate, and that it is
impossible to tell what is underneath the tissue. Several
training trials were presented to children until they guessed
correctly that it is impossible to tell what’s underneath the
tissue.
Training and testing stimuli was identical for both
conditions. Participants were presented with plates of food,
one by one, and asked to determine for each plate whether it
is linked to flower or to impossible to tell. During training,
participants were given feedback about whether or not their
decision was correct. No feedback was given during testing.
In the first training phase (Block 1), plates with cue A (15
trials) and cue C (10 trials) were presented in random order,
followed by the second training phase (Block 2) in which
plates with cue A + R (5 trials) and cue C (5 trials) were
presented in random order2.
The testing trials followed immediately after the training.
They consisted of check trials, those that tested whether
participants learned the cue-outcome relations presented
during training, and of critical trials, those that tested
participants’ inferences about the unseen cue-outcome
relation. Check trials were plates with cue A (5 trials), cue C
(5 trials), and cue A + R (5 trials), and critical trials were
plates with cue R (10 trials). All of these trials (check trials
and critical trials) were presented in random order. To be
included in the sample, participants had to perform correctly

on 75% of the check trials. Five children in the Prediction
condition and five children in the Diagnostic condition did
not meet the criterion.
At the end of the experiment, children were asked to
reproduce the story line of the experiment. Particularly, they
were asked whether some creatures (1) ate a plate of fruit
and then turned into a flower or (2) ate the flower and then
turned into a plate of fruit. Each sequence was shown on the
computer and children had to choose the correct one. To be
included in the sample, children had to perform correctly on
this question. While all children in the Prediction condition
met this criterion, three children in the Diagnostic condition
did not and were excluded from the sample.

Results and Discussion

1

A preliminary analysis of participants’ accuracy during
check trials indicated that across conditions, participants
were highly accurate, with accuracy ranging from 0.94 to
0.98 for all cells. This shows (1) that both adults and
children could learn the cue-outcome relations presented to
them during training, and (2) that any difference found
between conditions or age group cannot be attributed to
differences in learning.
More important was participants’ performance during
critical test trials, those in which participants had to guess
whether the redundant cue (cue R) alone is related to the
outcome flower. Recall that a rudimentary understanding of
causality shows itself in blocking this cue (i.e., linking it to
O- “impossible to tell”). Figure 2 shows the proportion of
blocking (i.e., proportion of trials in which a child linked
cue R with O-) found for children and adults as a function of
condition. A 2 (condition: prediction, diagnostic) by 2 (age
group: children, adults) between-subjects ANOVA revealed
a significant interaction (F(1,56) = 6.37, p < .02), with the
mean blocking scores differing by condition for adults (t(25)
= 2.53, p < .02) but not for children (t(31) = 1.06, p > .29).

The instructions were given in terms of plates of fruits rather than
in terms of fruits by themselves to avoid any possible cues about
whether the enchanted food pertains to one fruit or many. If
participants believe by mistake that a creature’s transformation is
caused by the plate rather than by a fruit, they should fail to block
the redundant cue R.
2
Pilot testing established the optimal number of trials, so that
children could learn each cue-outcome relation (especially the
relation between cue A and the outcome), without loosing interest
in the game.
1157

Mean Proportion of Blocking

0.75

0.5

Condition
Prediction
Diagnostic

0.25

0
Children

Adults

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard errors.
These findings point to several important regularities.
First, adults show the same dissociation between predictive
and diagnostic conditions as documented before. Their

claw, a hairball, a bite mark on a log, and a scratch made by
a sharp tooth. As was done in Experiment 1, two laminated
cards were used to aid children’s responses. One card
represented the outcome (a grey amorphous shape with two
eyes said to be a creature), and the other represented
“impossible to tell” (the same stick figure used for
Experiment 1).
Procedure The procedure was similar to the procedure used
in Experiment 1 (see Table 1), with differences pertaining
(1) to the cover story and materials used, and (2) to the order
and number of trials during training and testing.
The cover story involved Toto who wanted to find out
about a never-before seen creature, and, for this reason,
traveled to the place where this creature lives. He found lots
of mark and took pictures of them. In the Diagnostic
condition, children were told that the marks were left behind
by animals. To explain this phrase, children were shown a
picture of a cat’s paw print and asked whether it was a bird
or a cat that left this mark behind. To ensure that children do
not assume that one creature leaves only one mark behind,
they were shown four marks simultaneously (a feather, a
bird’s foot print, a cat’s paw print, and a horseshoe). Each
mark was explained to them, and they were specifically
instructed: “Some animals leave lots of marks behind.”

Results and Discussion

Experiment 2

During check trials, children did not perform differently as a
function of condition. The mean proportion of correct trials
was 0.82 (SE = .04) in the Prediction condition and 0.89 (SE
= .04) in the Diagnosis condition.

Cues were animal marks such as a foot print, a hairball, or a
bite mark. In the Diagnostic condition, where the cue is said
to be a potential effect, children had to learn whether a
particular mark (or marks) was left behind by a creature. We
reasoned that children are exposed to animal prints in their
everyday environment (e.g., paw prints in the snow) and
they may understand that they are made by animals. For
comparison, children in the Prediction condition had to
learn whether a particular mark (or marks) would scare a
creature.

Method
Participants Participants were 25 4- and 5-year-olds (12
girls and 13 boys) randomly assigned to one of the two
conditions (Prediction, Diagnostic). The mean age was 60.1
months for children in the Prediction condition and 57.6
months for the Diagnostic condition. Additional 11 children
were tested and omitted from the sample because they did
not meet the learning criterion (see Procedure).
Materials Cues were colorful drawings of marks that could
be made by an animal. They included a print made by a
1158

0.75
Mean Proportion of Blocking

performance in the critical test trials was highly dependent
on the cover story. They blocked the redundant cue R in the
Prediction condition, when the cue was said to be a cause,
but not in the Diagnostic condition, when it was said to be
an effect. Finding this dissociation in adult performance
indicates that the task is suitable to test abstract causal
knowledge in children.
Second, a large majority of children (82%) performed
significantly different than would have been expected by
chance (binomial probability p < 0.02, assuming a chance
probability of 0.5). This indicates that they were not simply
confused about the task at hand. Also, the standard error
obtained for children was virtually identical that the one
found for adults, and their degree of blocking the redundant
cue R in the Prediction condition was not different from
adults’ performance in that condition. Taken together, this
suggest that children construed the task the same way as
adults did, and given that they showed some blocking, they
must have construed the task in terms of causal relations
rather than as a mere associative learning task.
Finally, and most importantly, children and adults
differed in the degree to which they were affected by the
predictive vs. diagnostic task context. Even though children
could remember the story line at the end of the experiment,
their inferences about whether the redundant cue is linked to
the outcome was independent of condition. Children
blocked the redundant cue, whether it was said to be a
possible causes (Prediction condition) or a possible effect
(Diagnosis condition).
To ascertain that results of Experiment 1 are not limited to
a particular cover story, we conducted Experiment 2, which
had the same design and procedure as Experiment 1, but a
different cover story.

Condition

0.5

Prediction
Diagnostic

0.25

0
Experiment 2

Experiment 1

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 2 in comparison with
Experiment 1. Error bars represent standard errors.
How did children perform during critical test trials, when
asked whether cue R alone is linked to the outcome? Figure
3 shows the mean proportion of blocking by condition. For
comparison, results of Experiment 1 are also included in the
Figure. As was found in Experiment 1, children’s
performance did not differ as a function of condition.
Despite the simpler task context, children did not reason
differently when cues are said to be a potential cause
compared to when cues are said to be a potential effect.

It is important to stress that the results are not a mere nulleffect. Given that children show considerable amount of
blocking of cue R, it is likely that children understood the
learned cue-outcome relations in terms of mere associative
rather than causal relations. Although they construed the
task appropriately, they failed to distinguish between a
cause-effect relation and an effect-cause relation.
Therefore, the two different contexts used in Experiments 1
and 2 generated essentially the same pattern of results.

General Discussion
Our starting point was to examine whether young children
differentiate between causes and effects. One way to
examine this differentiation is to present participants with
blocking paradigm. If they differentiate between causes and
effects, they should exhibit differential blocking in the
Predictive and Diagnostic conditions. At the same time, if
they do not differentiate between causes and effects, they
should exhibit equally strong blocking across the conditions.
Our results clearly indicate that while adults exhibit
evidence for differential blocking (and thus understanding
of differences between causes and effects), young children
exhibited equivalently strong blocking in both the
Prediction and diagnostic conditions. Therefore, there is
little evidence that young children differentiate between
causes and effects.
One could counter argue that children’s pattern of results
could stem from their difficulty with the Diagnostic
condition. Even though the cover story of this condition was
largely simplified in Experiment 2, it is still conceivable,
that a diagnostic task context puts too high processing
demands on children3. This is because it requires children to
reason “backwards”, from effects to causes, rather than from
causes to effects. It requires children to ignore the temporal
sequence in which events are presented to them (first cue,
than outcome), and they need to keep in mind that the
outcome happened prior to the cue (e.g., the creature ate the
enchanted flower before it turned into the plate of fruit). If
true, the argument would suggest that the temporal
information is a stronger cue than information about the
cause and the effect.
Although this argument would require future research,
current findings indicate that in the absence of clear
temporal order, young children do not exhibit evidence of
differentiating between causes and effects. These results
cast doubt on the idea that understanding of causality
appears early in development. They suggest instead that it
could be a result of learning.

References
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367-405.
Cobos, P. L., Lopez, F. J., Cano, A., Almaraz, J., & Shanks,
D. R. (2002). Mechanisms of predictive and diagnostic
causal induction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 28, 331-346
De Houwer, J., & Beckers, T. (2002). A review of recent
developments in research and theories on human
contingency learning. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 289-310.
Dickinson, A.., & Burke, J. (1996) Within-compound
associations mediate the retrospective revaluation of
causality judgments. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 49, 60-80.
Gopnick, A., & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting Blickets:
How young children use information about novel causal
powers in categorization and induction. Child Development, 71, 1205-1222.
Gopnick, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal
learning in children: Causal maps and bayes nets.
Psychological Review, 111, 3-32.
Kamin, L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and
conditioning. In R. M. Church (Ed.), Punishment and
aversive behavior (pp. 279-296). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 636-645.
Oakes, L. M., & Cohen, L. B. (1990). Infant perception of a
causal event. Cognitive Development, 5, 193-207
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent
systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Sobel, D. M., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gopnick, A. (2004).
Children’s causal inferences from indirect evidence:
Backwards blocking and Bayesian reasoning in
preschoolers. Cognitive Science, 28, 303-333.
Van Hamme, L. L., & Wasserman, E. A. (1994). Cue
competition in causality judgments: The role of nonpresentation of compound stimulus elements. Learning
and Motivation, 25, 127-151.
Waldmann, M. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). Predictive and
diagnostic learning within causal models: Asymmetries in
cue competition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 121, 222-236.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

3

We thank Michael Waldmann for pointing this out.
1159

