UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effect of Text Cohesion on Comprehension of Biology Texts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tw744hb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dempsey, Kyle
McNamara, Danielle S.
Ozuru, Yasuhiro
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effect of Text Cohesion on Comprehension of Biology Texts
Yasuhiro Ozuru (y.ozuru@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Kyle Dempsey (kdempsey@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Jasmine Sayroo (jsayroo@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@ mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Psychology Department, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
This study explored the effect of text cohesion on reading
comprehension of challenging science texts among students
with little topic-relevant knowledge. Introductory level
psychology students, considered to have a low level of
knowledge on the topic, read high and low cohesion versions
of biology texts. After reading the texts, their comprehension
of the texts was assessed with text-based or inference-based
open-ended comprehension questions. The results showed that
participants benefited from high cohesion texts. The benefit
was observed only for text-based questions, and the positive
effect was marginally larger for skilled compared to unskilled
readers. This study provides a better understanding of how
text cohesion affects one’s comprehension of science texts.

Introduction
Numerous studies have demonstrated a positive effect of
text revision on comprehension (e.g., Beck, McKeown,
Sinatra, & Loxterman, 1991; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996)
of both narrative and expository texts (see Britton, Gulgoz,
& Glynn, 1993 for review). However, the research indicates
that the effect of text revisions on reading comprehension
differs depending on the reader’s characteristics, the
characteristics of the text, the nature of the text revisions,
and the ways in which the effect of text revision is assessed.
For example, McNamara and her colleagues (McNamara,
Kintsch, Songer, Kintsch, 1996; McNamara & Kintsch,
1996) have shown that the effect of text revision, in
particular increased text cohesion, depends on the reader’s
prior level of knowledge in the text domain. Following the
Construction Integration Model (Kintsch, 1988) of reading
comprehension, McNamara and her colleagues revised texts
by increasing argument overlap, adding connectives, and
adding background information. These text revisions
alleviate readers’ heavy reliance on their prior knowledge
when constructing a coherent mental model of the overall
text meaning based on text-based information. The results
of a series of studies conducted by these authors have
consistently indicated that: 1) low domain knowledge
readers benefit from reading higher cohesion texts; 2)
reading higher cohesion texts produces a detrimental effect
for high domain knowledge readers’ comprehension, in
particular when the measure taps into deep level
understanding of the text (e.g., inference questions, card
sorting task). One interpretation of this reversed effect of

cohesion is that the redundancy between the high level of
prior knowledge and added cohesion in the text led these
readers to process the text passively (McKoon & Ratcliff,
1992). As a result, high knowledge readers who read high
cohesion texts fail to attain the deep level of understanding
of the text which high knowledge readers reading a low
cohesion text attain.
The effect of text revision on comprehension appears to
be influenced by other individual differences. For example,
Voss and Silfies (1996) showed that more-skilled readers
learned more than less-skilled readers when reading history
texts that were expanded to make causal relations more
explicit. The level of prior knowledge did not affect learning
from expanded texts in this study. Thus, skilled readers were
better at taking advantage of added information that
increased text cohesion. Yet, another study has shown that
both less and more-skilled readers equally benefited from
reading texts that have been improved in terms of causal
cohesion (Linderholm, Everson, van den Broek, Mischinski,
Crittenden, & Samuels, 2000). Interestingly, this study also
indicated that the positive effect of text revision was specific
to more difficult texts regardless of readers’ skills. This text
was judged to be more difficult based on the presence of
causal organization, goal structure, and referential
connections. This finding suggests that when the original
text has good referential and causal organization, a further
revision does not improve readers’ comprehension,
indicating the importance of matching the text and reader
characteristics in reading comprehension.
Overall, these studies indicate that providing extra
scaffolding to readers by adding referential and/or causal
cohesion to texts helps readers better understand the
textbook when the original text is challenging. The degrees
of this benefit differ depending on the readers’ skills to take
advantage of the extra scaffoldings of increased cohesion.
However, the added scaffolding has only a little or
sometimes even a negative influence on comprehension
when the original text is not challenging to the readers,
suggesting that how text cohesion affects comprehension
differs depending on the reader’s familiarity with the text
content.
The current study addresses a question concerning text
difficulty by focusing on the effect of text revision when the
text content is highly unfamiliar to the reader. Does added

1696

cohesion help when readers are faced with an extremely
unfamiliar topic? This is not a trivial issue. In classroom
situations, students are often faced with highly unfamiliar
concepts in their textbooks. Although a course may be
designed such that each complex topic builds upon an
earlier, less difficult topic, many students are forced to move
on to the difficult topics without gaining sufficient
understanding of the earlier content matter which serves as
background knowledge. Thus, it is important to understand
whether
increasing
text
cohesion
benefits
the
comprehension of readers who are faced with unfamiliar
materials.

Method
Participants and Design
The sample consisted of 108 undergraduate students
recruited from the psychology department at the University
of Memphis. The 2 x 3 experimental design included text
cohesion (low and high) and type of question (textbase, near
bridging, and far/global bridging) as within-subjects
variables. Participants’ prior knowledge and reading skill
were assessed to create quasi-experimental independent
variables.

Materials

Present study
We explored two specific questions in this study: 1)
whether and to what extent increasing text cohesion benefits
a reader’s comprehension of extremely unfamiliar domains;
and 2) whether having a higher level of reading skill helps
in taking advantage of the increased cohesion even when the
text content is extremely unfamiliar. In examining these
questions, we followed the McNamara (2001) study, in
which psychology students read a high or low cohesion
version of a challenging biology text. The results of this
study showed a benefit of increased cohesion in low
knowledge readers’ ability to answer text-based questions,
but not inference-based questions.
Furthermore, the
detrimental effect of increased cohesion among high
knowledge readers was observed only for their performance
of text-based questions. Thus, we expect to find the benefit
of increased cohesion only in questions about basic level
concepts when the text content is extremely unfamiliar to
readers. In order to examine whether the effect of text
revision is specific to basic level understanding of the texts,
we included three types of comprehension questions: textbased, local inference, and global inference questions.
Having these three types of questions makes it possible to
effectively examine the effect of text revision on different
levels of understanding.
Several specific details of the study deserve attention.
First, following McNamara (2001), we used biology texts
instead of social science or history texts (e.g., Voss &
Silfies, 1996, Linderholm et al., 2000) because social
science and history texts often describe relatively familiar
individual concepts and events (e.g., war situation, conflict
between groups, politics) in a novel context. Thus, using a
social science text may not afford examining reading
comprehension of unfamiliar concepts.
Second, we manipulated text cohesion as a withinsubjects variable. A within-subjects manipulation of text
cohesion allowed us to examine the interaction of reading
skill and text cohesion more precisely by eliminating
confounds between the effects of other individual
differences on comprehension. No past study has examined
the effects of text cohesion using a within-subjects
manipulation of cohesion.

Two texts were taken from high-school biology textbooks
and modified to produce low- and high-cohesion texts. One
text described a plant’s response to an external stimulus
(plant text), and the other described internal distribution of
heat in animals (heat text).
Manipulations to increase cohesion included: 1) replacing
ambiguous pronouns with nouns; 2) adding descriptive
elaborations which link unfamiliar concept with familiar
concepts; 3) adding connectives to specify the relationships
between sentences or ideas; 4) replacing or inserting words
to increase the conceptual overlap between adjacent
sentences; 5) adding topic headers; and 6) adding thematic
sentences that serve to link each paragraph to the rest of the
text and overall topic. These manipulations were aimed at
increasing what others have called referential (Britton &
Gulgoz, 1996) and causal (e.g., Voss & Silfies, 1996)
cohesion. We did not restrict the text revision to a specific
type of cohesion (e.g., causal) because the focus of this
study is not on the type of cohesion manipulation, but the
effect of overall text cohesion on comprehension of highly
unfamiliar materials. As indicated in Table 1, text revision
increased the text length by approximately 50%. However,
the increase in the text length is common in past text
revision studies (e.g., Beck et al, 1991; Voss & Silfies,
1996).
Care was taken to ensure that the difficulty level of the
plant and the heat texts were approximately the same, and
the degrees of cohesion manipulation between high and low
cohesion versions of the two texts were equivalent by
monitoring several text features that are known to be
indicative of text cohesion and associated with text
difficulty. These features include argument and stem overlap
between sentences, LSA cosine between sentences, and
word frequency (Graesser, McNamara, Lowerse, & Cai,
2004). Monitoring of these text features was achieved using
the Coh-Metrix tool (Graesser et al., 2004). The primary
features of high and low cohesion versions of the plant and
heat texts are reported in Table 1.

1697

knowledge questions on plants and the distribution of heat
was measured with a total of 16 open-ended questions on
the knowledge of plant biology (eight questions) and animal
circulatory system (eight questions). These questions were
concerned with information relevant to understanding the
texts but not provided in the texts.

Table 1: Text features of high and low cohesion plant and
heat texts.
Heat text
Plant text
Cohesion
Low
High
Low
High
Argument
.571
.823
.568
.816
overlap adjacent
Stem
overlap .714
.901
.795
.899
adjacent
LSA
all .290
.332
.310
.345
sentences
Flesh-Kincaid
10.03 12.00 9.12
10.30
grade level
Word
0.768 0.823 0.659
0.669
Frequency (0-6)
Number
of 604
968
633
991
words

Procedure

As described earlier, the primary aim of this study was to
examine the effect of cohesion on students reading
comprehension of unfamiliar materials. The word frequency
indexes for the texts confirm that the texts included highly
unfamiliar words. Word frequency was calculated based on
the average of the lowest frequency content word in each
sentence. We used this measure instead of an overall content
word frequency, because the difficulty of a sentence is often
determined by the most unfamiliar word in the sentence.
The word frequency measures confirm that the plant and
heat texts are lower in word frequency than the Voss and
Silfies (1996) texts (1.02/1.06 for original) and the
Linderholm et al. (2000) texts (1.12/1.04 for original).
There were 12 comprehension questions for each text, of
which 4 were text-based, 4 were near or local bridging, and
4 were far or global bridging questions. A question was
classified as text-based when the answer to the question did
not require any prior knowledge or text-based inferences but
could be answered based on information explicitly stated
within the text. A question was classified as a local bridging
question when the answer to the question required an
integration of information located within 5 or 6 clauses
across multiple sentences. Far or global bridging questions
are similar to local bridging questions, but involved the
integration of information located across larger distances,
more than 5 or 6 clauses apart.
Four types of individual difference measures were
collected: general reading comprehension ability, general
world knowledge, biology knowledge, and domain-specific
knowledge on the topic of the text. General reading
comprehension ability was measured using the NelsonDenny (Brown, Fishco, & Hanna, 1993) reading
comprehension ability test. The Nelson-Denny reading
comprehension test is a standardized reading comprehension
test for college level students. General world knowledge
was assessed with 19 multiple-choice questions on historical
facts, authors of well known books, paintings, etc. Biology
knowledge was assessed with 21 multiple-choice questions
on anatomy, reproduction, genetics, etc. Domain specific

Participants were first administered the prior knowledge
test, which included the general world knowledge and
biology questions, followed by the Nelson-Denny reading
skills assessment. Each test (i.e., prior knowledge and
Nelson Denny) was restricted to 15 minutes. The
participants then read the texts and answered the questions,
which were presented in a booklet. Participants read both
texts, one high cohesion and one low cohesion, and then
answered comprehension questions for both texts, in the
order of text presentation. The order of the texts and the
order of the cohesion level were counterbalanced. Reading
times for each text were obtained through a self-report
measure. Once the subjects finished reading, they were not
allowed to return to the text to answer the questions. The
subjects were not allowed to return to the previous section
of questions after they moved to the next set of questions.
Domain specific prior knowledge questions were then
presented in the order of the text presentation. Neither type
of question was limited by time, but working time was
recorded by a self-report measure. Participants’ responses to
the open-ended questions were scored independently and
then compared by two raters. Inter-rater reliability was
greater than 95%.

Results
Participants’ domain knowledge
Participants’ scores on the domain specific knowledge
measures establish that participants’ domain knowledge was
very low. Average proportion correct was .22 (SD =.14) on
heat-related questions and .27 (SD = .21) on plant-related
questions, with 99% of participants scoring below .5 for
heat-related questions, and 91% of participants scoring
below .5 for plant-related questions. A paired-samples t-test
indicated that participants performed significantly better on
plant than heat questions, t(107) = 3.09, p < .01. However,
the performance on these two tests were highly correlated r
= .594, p < .001. As these data indicate, participants’
knowledge related to plant and heat distribution in animals
was limited. We further divided the participants into higher
and lower domain knowledge groups based on the combined
score of heat- and plant-related question in order to isolate
extremely low domain knowledge participants.
Table 2 describes the two groups (lower and higher
domain specific knowledge) in terms of the other individual
difference scores (e.g., general world knowledge, general
biology knowledge, etc.).

1698

Table 2. Lower and higher domain knowledge participants’
profile
Lower domain
Higher domain
knowledge
knowledge
group (N = 53)
group (N =53)
Plant-related
.10 (.11)
.44 (.13)
knowledge
Heat-related
.13 (.11)
.31 (.11)
knowledge
General biology .41 (.13)
.46 (.14)
knowledge
General world
.41 (.14)
.51 (.15)
knowledge
Nelson-Denny
.52 (.18)
.64 (.18)
reading ability

Table 3: Performance on comprehension questions as the
function of domain knowledge, cohesion, and the type of
question.
Lower
Higher
Mean
Domain
Domain
Knowledge Knowledge
(N = 53)
(N = 55)
Low
Text
.18 (.21)
.38 (.27)
.28
Coh
Local
.13 (.21)
.37 (.26)
.25
Global .07 (.14)
.20 (.19)
.14
.25 (.26)
.40 (.29)
.33
High Text
Coh
Local
.12 (.18)
.34 (.33)
.23
Global .12 (.13)
.20 (.15)
.17

Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses
A series of one-way ANOVAs indicated that higher and
lower domain knowledge participants differ in terms of all
the above measures at p < .05. In the subsequent analyses,
we analyzed data from all the participants. We then
performed analyses only with lower domain knowledge
students’ performance to examine how text cohesion
particularly affects this group of participants.

Comprehension question performance
We first analyzed whether the pairing of text and
cohesion, and the order in which texts were read (for
counter-balancing) influenced comprehension performance.
A 2 (text) x 2 (cohesion) x 2 (text order) ANOVA on overall
comprehension scores indicated no effect of cohesion, text,
order, or interaction among them. Table 3 below indicates
the participants’ performance (proportion of correct answer
to comprehension questions) as the function of cohesion,
domain specific knowledge, and question type. A 2
(knowledge) x 2 (cohesion) x 3 (question type) ANOVA
indicated main effects of knowledge, F(1, 106) = 31.656,
MSE = 7.509, p < .001, question type, F(2, 105) = 46.820,
MSE = 0.506, p < .01, and an interaction between
knowledge and question type, F(2, 105) = 6.212, MSE =
.506, p < .01. No other effects, including the effect of
cohesion, reached statistical significance.
The analysis indicates that cohesion did not affect overall
performance. However, as discussed in the introduction, the
benefit of cohesion was expected to be observed for
performance on questions probing for basic level concepts.
Hence, we performed a separate analysis for the effect of
cohesion by including only the text-based and local
inference questions. A 2 (question type) x 2 (cohesion) x 2
(domain knowledge) ANOVA indicated main effects of
question type, F(1, 106) = 10.68, MSE = .038, p < .01,
domain knowledge, F(1, 106) = 30.01, MSE = .149, p <001,
and an interaction between cohesion and question type,
F(1,106)_= 4.004, MSE = .036, p < .05. The interaction

between question type and cohesion indicates that
participants scored significantly higher on the text-based
questions than local inference questions when reading a high
cohesion text, t(107) = 3.406, p < .01. In contrast, there was
no difference between text-based and local inference
questions for the low cohesion text t(107) = 1.024 ns.
Additionally, for text-based questions, there was a marginal
benefit of high cohesion, t(107) = 1.84, p=.06. It is also
evident from Table 3, that lower knowledge participants
showed significant gains on text-based questions, t(52) =
2.163, p = .035, whereas the higher domain knowledge
participants showed negligible gains.
We further examined whether the benefit of reading a
high cohesion text was more apparent for skilled readers.
The conflicting findings between Voss and Silfies (1996)
and Linderholm et al. (2001) studies indicate that
interactions of reading skill and cohesion may depend
further on text difficulty. Specifically, more-skilled
compared to less-skilled readers may show benefits of
increased cohesion only when the text is sufficiently
challenging. Thus, we examine here whether skilled readers
show larger benefits of cohesion when the text is highly
unfamiliar. We performed a 2 (reading skill) x 2 (cohesion)
ANOVA on text-based questions. We did not include local
and global inferential questions because the earlier analysis
confirmed no effect of cohesion in these measures. Table 4
shows participants’ performance on text-based questions as
a function of cohesion and reading skill.
This analysis indicated, in addition to a marginal effect of
cohesion which has been already reported, a main effect of
reading skill, F(1, 106) = 23.474, MSE = .0925, p < .01.
The interaction between reading skill and cohesion was not
significant, F(1, 106) = 1.04. Nonetheless, separate tests
were performed for skilled and less skilled readers to pursue
the question of whether the effect of cohesion differs
between skilled and less skilled readers. These analyses
showed that the difference in comprehension performance
for low and high cohesion texts was marginal for skilled
readers, t(49) = 1.882, p =.06 (but reliable according to a
one-tailed t-test), whereas the difference was not significant
for the less skilled readers, t(57) < 1.0.

1699

Table 4: Performance on text-based questions as the
function of reading skill and text cohesion.
Less Skilled
Skilled readers
readers
(N= 50)
(N = 58)
Low cohesion
.20 (.21)
.37 (.29)
High cohesion
.22 (.23)
.45 (.29)

Discussion
There are two main findings. The experiment indicated
that revising texts, by increasing referential and explanatory
cohesion, helps students understand biology texts even when
the text content is highly unfamiliar to them. However, the
benefit of cohesion was quite small and limited to questions
that requested information explicitly provided within
individual sentences in the text. Thus, in this case, the
cohesion did not help the low knowledge students
understand the relations between ideas – it only helped them
understand individual ideas in the text. This result, as found
by McNamara (2001), is likely a function of the text
difficulty. That is, the text was too challenging for the
readers to develop a coherent situation model of the text
content. Interestingly, however, the benefit of the increased
cohesion was observed only for students with an extremely
low level of domain knowledge; we did not observe an
effect of cohesion with higher domain knowledge
participants. This is in line with previous research (i.e., that
cohesion does not benefit high knowledge students), but
frankly, is not what we were expecting because the prior
domain knowledge of the participants was relatively low
overall.
Second, the results indicated that skilled readers benefit
more than less-skilled readers from increased cohesion. This
finding, in the light of others’ work (e.g., Linderholm et al.,
2000; Voss & Silfies, 1996), seems to indicate that text
difficulty moderates how reading skill interacts with
cohesion. As discussed, whereas Voss and Silfies (1996)
found larger benefit of cohesion for skilled readers,
Linderholm et al., (2000) reported no difference in benefit
of cohesion between skilled and less skilled readers. Given
the marginally larger benefit of cohesion for skilled as
opposed to less skilled readers with unfamiliar texts
observed in this study, it is likely that whether readers
benefit from increased cohesion, and whether the benefit is
larger for skilled readers depends on the overall difficulty of
the text. Although different studies are not directly
comparable, one important message that this study provides
in the light of others’ findings (e.g., Linderholm et al., 2000;
McNamara et al 1996) is that when the text is too easy or
too difficult, the effect of cohesion, and also the interaction
between reading skill and cohesion declines, or sometimes,
entirely disappears.
Why do skilled readers enjoy larger benefits of cohesion
when the text is challenging? This may have occurred
because the skilled readers have a larger vocabulary,

because they are better able to parse the sentences, or
perhaps because they are more strategic, active readers
(McNamara & O’Reilly, in press). Unfortunately, we were
not able to collect measures to discriminate between the
specific abilities contributed by reading skill. Nonetheless,
the effect of cohesion observed in this study appears to
reflect the notion that skilled readers are better able to take
advantage of added argument overlap, connectives, and
background information, in their attempt to understand and
learn new information from the unfamiliar texts.
Overall, this paper contributes to reading comprehension
literature, in particular text revision research, by
highlighting the importance of matching text difficulty and
reader’s ability, specifically the level of domain knowledge.
In this study, we focused on a particular kind of text
difficulty, namely topic unfamiliarity, operationalized as
low content word frequency of the text. The findings here,
along with previous studies, suggest that cohesion
manipulations affect readers’ comprehension of and learning
from the text at their level of zone of proximal development
(Vygotsky, 1978) determined by the reader’s familiarity
with the text content, and not necessarily at a specific level
of understanding as reported by McNamara et al. (1996). In
this case, the zone of proximal development was the basic
level understanding of the text content because readers’
familiarity with the content was low. Thus, under some
circumstances, the understanding and learning of unfamiliar
individual concepts rather than the global text meaning may
be the area of comprehension that readers can improve by
using reading related skills to take advantage of increased
text cohesion. A challenge for future research is to reliably
identify readers’ zone of proximal development, and how
that depends on their aptitudes, the text difficulty, and the
demands of the comprehension task.

References
Beck, I. L., McKeown, M. G., Sinatra, G. M., & Loxterman,
J. A. (1991). Revising social studies text from a textprocessing perspective: Evidence of improved
comprehensibility. Reading Research Quarterly, 26, 251276.
Best, R., Ozuru, Y., & McNamara, D. S. (2004). Self
explaining science texts: Strategies, knowledge, and
reading skill. In Y. B. Yasmin, W. A., Sandoval, N.
Enyedy, A. S. Nixon, F. Herrera (Eds.), Proceedings of
the sixth international conference of the learning
sciences: Embracing diversity in the learning sciences
(pp. 89-96). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Britton, B. K., & Gulgoz, S., & Glynn, S. (1993). Impact of
good and poor writing on learners: Research and theory.
In B. K. Britton, A. Woodard, & M. Brinkley (Eds.),
Learning from Textbook. Hillsdale; NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, J., Fishco, V., & Hanna, G. (1993). Manual for
Scoring and Interpretation, Forms G & H. Chicago,
Illinois: Riverside Press.

1700

Graesser, A., McNamara, D., Louwerse, M., & Cai, Z.
(2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments,
and Computers, 36, 193-202.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Linderholm, T., Everson, M. G., van den Broek, P.,
Mischinski, M., Crittenden, A., & Samuels, J. (2000).
Effects of causal text revisions on more- and less-skilled
readers’ comprehension of easy and difficult texts.
Cognition and Instruction, 18, 525-556.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Inference during
reading. Psychological Review, 99, 440-466.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high coherence and
low coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55, 51-62.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from
texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of text
coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding from text. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 143.
McNamara, D.S., & O’Reilly, T. (in press). Theories of
comprehension skill: Knowledge and strategies versus
capacity and suppression. In F. Columbus (Ed.), Progress
in Experimental Psychology Research. Hauppauge, NY:
Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Vidal-Abarca, E., Martinez, G., & Gilabert, R. (2000). Two
procedures to improve instructional text: Effects on
memory and learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 92, 1-10.
Voss, J. F., & Silfies, L. N. (1996). Learning from history
text: The interaction of knowledge and comprehension
skill with text structure. Cognition and Instruction, 14,
45-68.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

1701

