UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Negation, Truth Value, and Delay on Picture Recognition after Reading Affirmative
and Negative Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19s068vb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Kaup, Barabara
Ludtke, Jana
Zwaan, Rolf A.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Negation, Truth Value, and Delay on Picture Recognition
after Reading Affirmative and Negative Sentences
Barbara Kaup (barbara.kaup@tu-berlin.de)

Jana Lüdtke (janaluedtke@gp.tu-berlin.de)

Department of Psychology (FS-1), TU Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany

Department of Psychology (FS-1), TU Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany

Rolf A. Zwaan (zwaan@psy.fsu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Florida Sate University
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270, USA

Abstract
Participants read sentences of the type The X is (not)
above/below the Y and were subsequently presented with a
picture of the two objects mentioned in the sentence, either in
the correct or in the incorrect spatial relation. Participants
judged as quickly as possible whether both depicted objects
were mentioned in the sentence. A negation-by-truth-value
interaction was observed when the picture was presented
without delay; a main effect of truth value was observed when
the delay was 1500 ms. Both response-time patterns are well
known from studies employing a sentence-picture verification
task. Our results indicate that these findings are not dependent
on verification. They moreover indicate that temporal
characteristics of the task help explain why and when one or the
other response-time pattern emerges. An account in terms of the
experiential-simulations view of comprehension is discussed.
Keywords: Negation; Embodied Cognition

Introduction
A considerable amount of research into the processing of
negation was conducted in the 1960’s and 1970’s. Most of
these studies employed sentence-verification tasks in which
the sentences were to be verified either against background
knowledge or against a picture that was presented before or
after the corresponding sentence (for an overview see
Carpenter & Just, 1975; Kaup, Zwaan, & Lüdtke, in press).
Although very stable results were obtained with respect to the
response-slowing impact of the negation operator, the various
studies do not allow definite conclusions about the impact of
the sentence’s truth value. In some studies, false sentences
were generally harder to process than true sentences. The
majority of the studies, however, have produced a negationby-truth-value interaction. Whereas true affirmative sentences
[e.g., (1)] are easier to evaluate than false affirmative
sentences [e.g., (2)], the opposite holds for negative
sentences; here, true sentences [e.g., (4)] are more difficult
than false ones [e.g., (3)].
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

The star is above the plus.
The plus is above the star.
The star is not above the plus.
The plus is not above the star.

To account for the two patterns of verification latencies, it was
suggested that comprehenders encode the pictures, just as the
sentences, in a propositional format. Both representations are

then compared constituent by constituent, whereby an internal
response parameter is changed from true to false and vice
versa each time an incongruency is being detected. Each
incongruency prolongs the time needed to verify the picture
against the sentence (for a detailed description of the model,
see Carpenter & Just, 1975; Clark & Chase 1972). Two
strategies can be distinguished that produce the two observed
response-time patterns.
The negation-by-truth-value interaction arises when
participants are using the original sentence representation for
the comparison process. For true affirmative sentences [e.g.,
(1)], the order of the arguments in the sentence representation
matches that in the picture representation [both: above (star,
plus)], whereas for false affirmatives [e.g., (2)] there is a
mismatch [sentence: above (plus, star); picture: above (star,
plus)]. This explains why false affirmatives take longer to
verify than true affirmatives. In contrast, for negatives, it is
the false case in which there is a match with respect to the
order
of
the
arguments
[e.g.,
(3);
sentence:
not(above(star,plus)); picture: above(star,plus))], and the true
case where there is a mismatch [e.g., (4); sentence:
not(above(plus, star)); picture: above(star, plus))]. This
explains why true negatives take longer to verify than false
ones. These assumptions account for the negation-by-truthvalue interaction. The main effect of negation is explained
similarly. For negative sentences, the sentence representation
contains a negation marker that mismatches with the
affirmative picture representation. Accordingly, negative
sentences take longer to verify than affirmative sentences.
The strategy producing a main effect of truth value differs
from the strategy discussed earlier in that negative sentences
are converted into affirmative ones with the same truth
conditions before starting the comparison process [e.g., (4) is
converted into (1), and (3) into (2)]. After this conversion,
true sentences imply a match and false sentences a mismatch,
which explains the main effect of truth value. Despite the
many studies in which negation and truth value were being
manipulated, there are still no definite criteria for when
participants employ one or the other strategy. However, all in
all, the conditions that produced a main effect of truth value
are more or less consistent with the conversion assumption.
Some researchers have pointed out that a main effect of
truth value is consistent with a pictorial strategy in which
participants encode the sentence pictorially and then directly
compare this representation to the representation of the
picture. In a study by MacLeod, Hunt, and Mathews (1978),

1114

participants who produced a main effect of truth value were
found to have higher spatial abilities than participants who
produced a negation-by-truth- value interaction, whereas the
two groups did not differ in linguistic abilities. This finding is
sometimes taken as positive evidence for the claim that the
truth value main effect reflects a pictorial strategy. However,
some authors have noted that high scores on spatial or verbal
abilities tests do not allow the researcher to deduce that a
particular participant is using a pictorial or verbal strategy
(Roberts, Wood, & Gilmore, 1994). Other studies have
explicitly instructed participants to use one or the other
strategy, and the similarity of the results to the respective
response-time patterns in the “free choice” condition is again
taken as evidence for the claim that pictorial strategies are
being used (e.g., Reichle, Carpenter, & Just, 2000). However,
as before, it seems questionable that the mere similarity of the
response-time patterns affords the inference that the same
strategies were being employed.
To summarize, in the context of sentence-verification
studies, most authors believe that sentences are by default
encoded in a propositional format in which negation is
explicitly represented. Strategies involving other kinds of
representations (i.e., spatial representations) are considered
special cases that (if at all) are exhibited under conditions in
which participants are specifically instructed. The next
section discusses an alternative hypothesis for why (and
when) the different response-time patterns emerge.

An experiential-simulations account
There is growing evidence in the literature that language
comprehension is tantamount to mentally simulating the
described situations and events in a representational format
that is experiential in nature. In other words, the processes
and representations employed when comprehending a
linguistic description of a particular state of affairs resemble
those that are employed when directly experiencing or reexperiencing the respective state of affairs (e.g., Barsalou
1999; Glenberg, 1997; Zwaan, 2004). An obvious question
that arises for the experiential-simulations view is how
linguistic operators, such as negation, are represented in
language comprehension. We believe that negation is
implicitly encoded in the simulation processes that are
undertaken when comprehending a negative sentence: More
specifically, when processing negation, the comprehender is
assumed to create a simulation of the negated state of affairs
which he or she keeps separate from the simulation of the
actual state of affairs. The negation is then captured in the
deviations between the two simulations (Kaup & Zwaan,
2003; Kaup, et al., in press). For instance, when reading a
sentence such as Sam is not wearing a hat in the context of a
story about Sam, the comprehender would create a simulation
of Sam with a hat which he or she keeps separate from the
simulation of the actual state of affairs (Sam without a hat).
By comparing the two simulations, the comprehender can
recapitulate that he or she was told that Sam was not wearing
a hat, rather than, for instance, that Sam was not wearing
glasses, should this information become relevant later on. In
previous research, we obtained initial evidence for this

experiential-simulations account of negation with different
availability measuring tasks: Evidence for a simulation of the
negated state of affairs was obtained shortly after the
processing of negative sentences. Evidence for a simulation
of the actual state of affairs was obtained only at a later point
in the comprehension process, and only if the negative
sentences were presented in the context of a longer narratives,
or contained contradictory predicates (for an overview, see
Kaup et al. in press). We concluded that comprehenders of
negative sentences simulate the negated state of affairs, and
routinely focus their attention on this simulation during and
shortly after the processing of negative sentences. At a later
point in the comprehension process, comprehenders may shift
their attention (back) towards the simulation of the actual
state of affairs. Such attention shifts are particularly likely
when the simulation of the actual state of affairs serves an
independent function, as is the case when the sentences are
part of longer narratives or imply information with regard to
the actual situation that does not also pertain to the negated
situation (e.g., The door is not open Æ door closed).
How do these considerations relate to the results of the
sentence-verification studies mentioned before? The
experiential-simulations view of negation offers an alternative
account with regard to the question of why and when the two
different response time patterns should be observed. A
negation-by-truth-value interaction comes about when
response times are faster for false negatives than they are for
true negatives. Thus, in terms of our hypothesis, responses are
fast when the picture matches the negated situation. In
contrast, a main effect of truth value is observed when true
negatives lead to shorter response times than false ones. Thus,
in terms of our hypothesis, response times are short when the
picture matches the actual situation. Our hypothesis posits
that two simulations are involved in the processing of a
negated sentence, one of the negated situation and one of the
actual situation. This predicts match effects for both
simulations.
The interesting question is whether the conditions under
which one or the other match effect is observed correspond to
the predictions of the experiential hypothesis. Directly in line
with this hypothesis is the observation that a main effect of
truth value is observed when there is a delay between the end
of the sentence and the presentation of the second source of
information (cf. Carpenter & Just, 1975, p. 66; for evidence
with a sentence-sentence verification task, see Carpenter,
1973). With no delay, comprehenders are likely still focusing
on the negated state of affairs. From a certain delay on,
however, they may have shifted their attention towards the
simulation of the actual situation. As a consequence,
responses after a certain delay depend on the match or
mismatch with the actual situation. Similarly, that extensive
practice (e.g., Carpenter & Just, 1975) and high spatial ability
(e.g., MacLeod et al., 1978) lead to a main effect of truth
value suggests that practiced and high-spatial ability
comprehenders arrive at the second stage (focusing on the
actual state of affairs) at an earlier point in time than other
comprehenders, which should enhance the probability of a

1115

match effect with respect to the actual situation. Moreover,
our hypothesis explains why a main effect of truth value has
mainly been found in experiments using two complementary
predicates or the same contrary predicates throughout (e.g.,
Trabasso et al., 1971). As mentioned above, in these
conditions it is particularly likely that comprehenders indeed
shift their attention to the actual state of affairs once
comprehension is completed.
If the experiential-simulations account of the respective
empirical phenomena is correct, then the results obtained with
sentence-verification tasks should generalize to experimental
tasks that do not require verification. According to the
experiential-simulations view, the processing of sentences
routinely leads to mental simulations of the described states
of affairs. These simulations in turn potentially affect
responses to subsequently presented pictures. Picture
identification is assumed to be facilitated when the picture
matches the experiential simulation that comprehenders have
available from processing the sentence, independent of
whether or not the pictures are verified against the sentences.
To test this prediction, we presented participants with
sentences of the form The X is (not) above/below the Y
followed by pictures of two objects, one above the other. The
participants’ task was to quickly decide whether both of the
depicted objects had been mentioned in the sentence. In
experimental trials, the correct response was always ‘yes’, but
in half of the trials the picture matched the situation described
by the sentence (true) whereas in the other half of the trials
the picture mismatched this situation (false). For negated
sentences, the picture in the latter condition matched the
negated situation. For instance, for The lion is not above the
mouse, the picture in the true condition would depict a mouse
above a lion, whereas in the false condition, it would depict a
lion above a mouse. In addition to the polarity of the sentence
(affirmative vs. negative), the predicate mentioned in the
sentence (above vs. below) and the “truth value” of the
picture (true vs. false), we varied the delay with which the
picture was presented after the sentences. For half of the
participants, the delay was 0 ms whereas for the other half,
the delay was 1500 ms.
If our hypotheses are correct, then participants should be
faster to respond to the pictures in the true condition than in
the false condition after reading affirmative sentences in both
delay conditions. The reason is that in the true affirmative
condition, the picture matches the mental simulation that
participants presumably construct when processing the
sentence. For negative sentences, however, the response-time
pattern should be affected by the delay with which the picture
is presented after the sentences. In the short-delay conditions,
participants are likely still focusing on the negated situation.
Thus, in this condition, we would expect shorter response
times in the false than in the true conditions, because it is the
false condition, where the picture matches the negated
situation. For the long delay conditions, in contrast,
participants may have already shifted their attention towards
the actual situation. Attention shifts are expected, because two
contrary predicates (above and below) are used throughout

the experiment, and the negative sentences therefore allow
inferences with regard to the actual situation (see above).
Hence, in this condition, we would expect a reduced match
effect with respect to the negated situation, or ideally even a
match effect with respect to the actual situation. In short,
ideally we expect to find a negation-by-truth-value interaction
for the short delay, and a main effect of truth value in the long
delay.1

Method
Participants. One hundred and twenty four students at the
Berlin University of Technology participated in the
experiment. Sixty four of these were assigned to the 0 ms
delay condition and sixty to the 1500 ms condition.
Materials. Forty experimental sentences were constructed.
All of these were of the form The X is (not) above/below the
Y, with X and Y denoting concrete objects such as lion or
refrigerator. Thus, each sentence was available in four
versions, two affirmative (is above and is below), and two
negative (is not above and is not below). Forty additional
filler sentences were constructed. Half of these were
affirmative and half were negative, and of each of these, half
contained the preposition above and half the preposition
below. For 32 of sentences, a second sentence (probe
sentence) was constructed that mentioned the same objects,
but deviated from the respective sentence with respect to the
polarity of the sentence, the preposition mentioned, and/or the
order in which the objects were being mentioned.
There were 120 black-and-white pictures, each depicting
two objects, one above the other. Eighty of these pictures
were comprised of 40 pairs with the two members of a pair
depicting the same two objects but in opposite spatial
relation. The objects depicted in these forty picture-pairs
corresponded to the objects mentioned in the experimental
sentences. Of the remaining 40 pictures, 20 depicted two
objects that were not mentioned in any of the sentences, and
20 depicted one object mentioned in a filler sentence and one
object not mentioned in any sentence. All pictures were
scaled to 140 by 282 pixels, with each of the two objects
appearing in a framed rectangle of 131 by 131 pixels centred
horizontally on the computer screen (see Figure 1).
Design and Procedure. For each of the delay conditions we
created eight lists that counterbalanced items and conditions.
Each list included a different one of the eight possible
versions (4 sentences x 2 pictures) for each item. In half of
the versions, the picture matched the situation described in the
sentence (true) and in the other half, it mismatched this
situation (false). For each of the eight lists, a second list was
created that deviated from the original list only with respect to
the order in which the two objects were mentioned. Each
1
One may wonder why effects of delay are expected with self-paced
reading. The reason is that spill-over effects are often observed with selfpaced reading. Thus, comprehenders seem to lack some sort of metacognitive awareness that would allow them to judge when processing is
complete.

1116

participant saw one of these 16 lists. Thus, we employed a
2(delay) x 2(order of mention) x 2(negation) x 2(preposition)
x 2(truth value) x 16(list) design with delay and order of
mention being manipulated between participants and within
items, and negation, preposition and truth value being
manipulated within participants and items. For our
hypotheses only delay, negation and truth value are of
interest. For the statistical analyses we therefore collapsed
across order of mention and preposition. This also allowed us
to collapse across certain lists, reducing the number of levels
of this variable to four and eight for the by-participants and
the by-items analyses, respectively.

was congruent with the first sentence, again by pressing the
‘yes’ or ‘no’ key. Participants were given feedback on their
responses. The experimental session took approximately 20
minutes.

Results
Picture-response latencies in the experimental trials were
submitted to 2 (delay) x 2 (negation: affirmative vs. negative)
x 2 (truth value: true vs. false) x 4/8 (list) analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) with repeated measurement on truth value and
negation in both the by-participant and the by-items analysis,
and delay being manipulated between participants but within
items. The analyses were performed on correct responses
only. The data of six participants were discarded because they
had made more than 15/80 errors in the picture-recognition
task. Responses longer than 5000 ms or shorter than 200 ms
were omitted. Outliers were determined according to the
procedure suggested by Tukey (1977), whereby the fences
were determined on the basis of the distributions of response
times per item and condition. The mean latencies are
displayed in Table 1.

Figure 1: Sample picture
Each participant saw 40 affirmative and 40 negative
sentences. Twenty of each of these contained above, and 20
below. Ten of each of these were paired with a picture that
depicted the two objects mentioned in the sentence
(experimental items), five in the correct spatial relation (true),
and five in the incorrect spatial relation (false). Of the
remaining ten pictures (filler items), five depicted two objects
not mentioned in the sentence, and five depicted one object
that was and one that was not mentioned. Thirty-two of the
sentences were paired with a probe sentence. For each
participant, half of these probe sentences described the same
situation as the respective sentence, and the remaining half
described a different situation.
At the beginning of the experimental session, participants
were presented with a cover story. The cover story informed
participants that the experiment was about playing a
particular card game (similar to the game Memory), in which
they would read sentences and subsequently see cards that
either did or did not depict the objects mentioned in the
sentences. The purpose of this cover story was to make the
otherwise arbitrary sentences more plausible.
During each trial, participants first saw a sentence that
either did or did not mention the objects they would later see.
They pressed the space bar when they had understood the
sentence. Subsequently the picture was presented either with
a delay of 0 ms or with a delay of 1500 ms. Participants
decided as quickly as possible whether both depicted objects
were mentioned in the sentence, by pressing a ‘yes’ or ‘no’
key, respectively. For trials with a probe sentence, this was
presented next.2 Participants decided whether this sentence

Table 1: Mean latencies, standard deviations and percentages
of errors in the picture-recognition task.
Truth Value
True
False
Negation
M/SD (%err)
M/SD (%err)
Delay: 0 ms
Affirmative
1387 / 295 (1)
1482 / 320 (1,4)
Negative
1504 / 317 (1)
1454 / 284 (2)
Delay: 1500 ms
Affirmative
1315 / 263 (1)
1374 / 298 (1,4)
Negative
1370 / 268 (5)
1382 / 275 (1,7)
There was a main effect of delay (F1(1,110) = 3.9, p = .05;
F2(1,32) = 62.0, p < .01), a main effect of negation (F1(1,110)
= 11.4, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 7.2, p < .05), and a main effect of
truth value, which however was only significant in the
analysis by participants (F1(1,110) = 6.2, p < .05; F2(1,32) =
2.1, p = .16). In addition there was a negation-by-truth-value
interaction (F1(1,110) = 16.3, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 8.6, p < .01).
Most important, there was a significant three-way interaction
of delay, truth value and negation (F1(1,110) = 5.1, p < .05;
F2(1,32) = 6.4, p < .05).
Analyzing the data separately for the two delay conditions,
produced for the short delay a significant main effect of
negation (F1(1,55) = 8.4, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 4.2, p < .05), and
a significant negation-by-truth-value interaction (F1(1,55) =
20.6, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 16.7, p < .01), but no main effect of
truth value (F1(1,55) = 1.9, p = .17; F2 < 1). For the long
delay, in contrast, there was no interaction (F1(1,55) = 1.5, p =
.22; F2<1), and at best a trend towards a main effect of
negation F1(1,55) = 3.6, p = .06; F2(1,32) = 2.0, p = .17).
There was a main effect of truth value, which however was

2
The probe sentences were presented to ensure that participants were
reading for comprehension. One may argue that responding to these probes
requires verification and the computation of truth values. However, for our
purpose it is only important that truth values are not required for correctly

1117

responding to the pictures, as these response times constitute the dependent
variable.

only significant in the by-participants analysis (F1(1,55) = 4.4,
p < .05; F2(1,32) = 1.3, p = .28). Analyzing the three-way
interaction from the other perspective revealed that for
affirmative sentences there was a significant main effect of
truth value (F1(1,110) = 17.8, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 8.4, p < .01),
which did not interact with delay (F1(1,110) = 1.2, p = .27;
F2(1,32) = 2.4, p = .13), whereas for negative sentences there
was no main effect of truth value (F1(1,110) = 1.6, p = .22;
F2(1,32) = 2.6, p = .12), but a truth-value-by-delay
interaction, which in the by-items analysis was only
marginally significant (F1(1,110) = 4.9, p < .05; F2(1,32) =
2.8, p = .10).
Planned comparisons revealed that for affirmative
sentences response times were shorter in the true than in the
false condition for both delays, whereby the effect for the
long delay was only significant by participants (short:
F1(1,55) = 14.4, p < .01; F2(1,32) = 9.23, p < .01; long:
F1(1,55) = 4.7, p < .05; F2(1,32) = 2.1, p = .16). Response
times for the negative sentences were not shorter in the true
condition. Rather, for the short delay, response times were
significantly longer in the true condition (F1(1,55) = 6.5, p <
.05; F2(1,32) = 7.5, p = .01), and for the long delay, response
times did not differ (both Fs < 1).

Discussion
The results of the experiment correspond to the predictions.
For the short-delay condition we found a negation-by-truthvalue interaction, whereas for the long-delay condition, we
found a main effect of truth value. The difference between the
two delay conditions manifested itself in a significant threeway interaction of delay, negation, and truth value. Both
patterns of results are well documented response-time
patterns in research employing sentence-picture-verification
tasks. The main contribution of the present experiment is to
show that these patterns of results are obtained with an
experimental task that does not require participants to
compute truth values. A second contribution of the present
experiment is that it produced direct evidence that temporal
characteristics of the experimental task may indeed help
explain when one or the other of the two response-time
patterns emerges. As predicted, a negation-by-truth-value
interaction seems to be an early effect, whereas a main effect
of truth value seems to be a late effect. To our knowledge,
there is no other empirical study that has directly manipulated
the delay of picture presentation after the sentences within
one set of materials (see Carpenter, 1973, for evidence with
sentence-sentence verification).
What can be concluded from these findings with respect to
the different explanatory accounts discussed in the
introduction? The classical accounts hold that response-time
differences in the four negation-by-truth-value conditions
reflect differences in the number of times that an internal
response parameter has to be changed from true to false and
vice versa before the final decision is made. Given that the
experimental task employed in this experiment did not require
the computation of truth values, it seems that the classical
accounts are not applicable. In order to account for the

findings, one would need to assume that participants verified
the pictures against the sentences although the experiential
task did not require them to do so. Considering that
verification according to these accounts implies actively
comparing two representations constituent by constituent and
manipulating an internal response parameter in accordance
with this step-wise comparison process, we consider this
possibility highly unlikely. It seems more plausible that the
differences in the response times in the various conditions
reflect differences in the degree to which the picture is primed
by the representations that are available from processing the
sentences. This in turn is what the experiential simulations
view of comprehension would predict: Comprehenders
routinely create experiential simulations of the described state
of affairs when processing sentences. If the sentence is
followed by a task that requires the identification of a
depicted scene, then responses in this task should be fast
when the picture matches the mental simulation available
from processing the sentence, and slow when it mismatches
this mental simulation. The response-time pattern observed in
the affirmative conditions of the present experiment support
this prediction: Responses were faster in the true than in the
false condition, independent of the delay with which the
picture was being presented after the sentences. The responsetime patterns observed in the negative conditions can also be
explained in terms of the experiential-simulations view. It
was predicted that different response time patterns should
emerge in the different delay conditions. We did indeed
observe an interaction of delay and truth value in the negative
conditions: In the short-delay condition, a match effect
occurred with respect to the negated situation, which is in line
with the view that participants at this point focused on a
simulation of the negated situation. In the long-delay
condition, the match effect disappeared in the negated
conditions. This may suggest that some participants in some
conditions were still focusing on the negated situation
whereas other participants in other conditions had already
shifted attention towards the actual simulation.
The argument for ruling out an explanation in terms of the
classical accounts was based on the fact that truth-value
computation plays a key role in these accounts. However,
what are the implications for propositional accounts that do
not require verification? On the basis of our data, these cannot
be ruled out. The reason is simply that it is nearly impossible
to falsify propositional accounts on the basis of reaction-time
data in case there is enough degree of freedom with respect to
the processes that operate on the proposed representations. A
possible propositional account of the present findings would
be that comprehenders use the content of the sentence to
guide their eye-movements when processing the picture. If
the preposition is above they go from top to bottom, and if it
is below they go from bottom to top, both for affirmative and
for negative sentences. If we additionally assume that
response times in the picture-recognition task are fast when
the order in which comprehenders focus on the entities in the
picture, corresponds to the order in which they are mentioned
in the sentence, then the response-time pattern for the short

1118

delay condition is explained. For the long delay condition,
one would simply need to assume that comprehenders recode
negative sentences into affirmative ones before looking at the
picture. Thus, a propositional account of the present findings
is possible. It should be noted however that this propositional
account is clearly post-hoc: The findings in question can be
explained but they are in no way predicted. In contrast, our
experiential-simulations account predicts these findings, and
would in principle be falsified should the effects of delay,
truth value and negation be consistently absent from studies
employing experimental tasks that do not require the
computation of truth values.

Conclusion
We argued that the experiential-simulation view of
language comprehension offers an alternative explanation for
why and when a negation-by-truth-value interaction or a truth
value main effect is being observed in sentence-pictureverification tasks. This alternative explanation differs from
classical accounts mainly in two respects. First, instead of
assuming that differences in response time reflect differences
in the time needed to compare the representation of the
picture to the representation of the sentence, it is assumed that
they reflect differences in the degree to which the processing
of the picture is primed by the simulation processes carried
out when comprehending the sentence. Second, instead of
attributing the two different response-time patterns
(interaction vs. main effect) to different processing strategies,
these patterns are related to different stages of one and the
same processing mechanism. In line with the first aspect, the
two response-time patterns were observed even though the
response-time-eliciting task did not require the computation
of truth values. In line with the second aspect, the delay
between presenting the sentence and the picture indeed
determined whether one or the other response-time pattern
emerged.
To be sure, our results do not rule out the possibility that
the classical accounts correctly explain what participants do
in sentence-verification tasks. It seems well possible that a
verification task engenders strategic processes on the part of
the comprehender. We also concede that our results do not
offer a water proof argument against alternative propositional
accounts that do not rely on the computation of truth values.
What our results do show, however, is that there is an
alternative to propositional accounts. In the present
experiment we realized conditions that would have allowed
falsifying the main implication of this alternative, namely an
experimental task that does not require the computation of
truth values. Our alternative account survived this test. We
therefore conclude that the experiential-simulations view of
language comprehension can in principle account for the
effects of negation and truth value in sentence-pictureverification studies. This is relevant for research in language
comprehension as these effects have typically been attributed
to propositional representations. It also shows that in contrast
to popular prejudices, the experiential-simulations view can

deal with linguistic operators such as negation. In experiential
simulations, negation is not explicitly represented but rather
implicitly encoded in the simulation processes that are
undertaken when processing a negative sentence.

Acknowledgments
We thank L. Schalk, R. Schindele, and M. Zirngibl for
assistance with data collection. This research was supported
by grant KA 1389/2-1 to B. Kaup (DFG) and grant MH
63972 to R. A. Zwaan (NIMH).

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol System.
Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Carpenter, P.A. (1973). Extracting information from
counterfactual clauses. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 12, 512-521.
Carpenter, P.A., & Just, M.A. (1975). Sentence
comprehension: A psycholinguistic processing model of
verification. Psychological Review, 82, 45-73.
Clark, H.H., & Chase, W.G. (1972). On the process of
comparing sentences against pictures. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 472-517.
Glenberg, A. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioural and
Brain Sciences, 20, 1-41.
Johnson Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kaup, B., & Zwaan, R.A. (2003). Effects of negation and
situational presence on the accessibility of text information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 439-446.
Kaup, B., Zwaan, R.A., & Lüdtke, J. (in press). The
experiential view of language comprehension: How is
negation represented? In F. Schmalhofer & C. Perfetti
(Eds), Higher level language processes in the brain:
Inference and comp. processes. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacLeod, C.M., Hunt, E.B., & Mathews, N.N. (1978).
Individual differences in the verification of sentencepicture relationships. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17, 493-507.
Reichle, E.D., Carpenter, P.A., Just, M.A. (2000). The neural
bases of strategy and skill in sentences-picture verification.
Cognitive Psychology, 40, 261-295.
Roberts, M., Wood, D.J., & Gilmore, D.J. (1994). The
sentence-picture verification task: Methodological and
theoretical difficulties. British Journal of Psychology, 85,
413-432.
Trabasso, T., Rollins, H., & Shaughnessy, E. (1971). Storage
and verification stages in processing concepts. Cognitive
Psychology, 2, 239-289.
Tukey, J.W. (1977). Exploring data analysis. London:
Edison-Wesley.
Van Dijk, T.A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse
comprehension. New York: Academic Press.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H. Ross
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Vol.
44.) New York: Academic Press.

1119

