UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Category Labels on Induction and Visual Processing: Support or Interference?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0j2788nh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Fisher, Anna V.
Fleischman, Michael
Roy, Deb
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Category Labels on Induction and Visual Processing: Support or
Interference?
Anna V. Fisher (fisher.449@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208B Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA
based approach, when presented with entities that share the
same name (i.e., both are called Cats), people, including
young children, first infer (by the linguistic assumption) that
the entities belong to the same category. Then (by the
category assumption) they infer that things that belong to
the same category share important properties, thus
performing category-based induction.
Proponents of the alternative similarity-based approach
argue that early in development generalizations are
performed on the basis of multiple commonalities among
presented entities (French, et al. 2004; Mareschal, Quinn, &
French, 2002; McClelland & Rogers, 2003; Sloutsky, 2003;
Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b). Members of a category
often happen to be perceptually similar to each other, and
different from the non-members; therefore, young children
are more likely to generalize properties to members of a
category, than to the non-members. Under this view,
conceptual knowledge (i.e., knowledge that members of the
same category share many important properties) is a product
rather than a prerequisite of learning.
The similarity-based approach to early induction is
exemplified by a model SINC (abbreviated for SimilarityInduction-Categorization), proposed recently by Sloutsky
and colleagues (Sloutsky et al., 2001; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004a). Unlike the knowledge-based approach, assuming
that linguistic labels denote categories, SINC assumes that
for young children labels are features of objects contributing
to the overall similarity of compared entities. Support for
this assumption comes from the finding that when two
entities share the same name, young children but not adults,
perceive these entities as looking more similar (Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004a). Furthermore, attentional weights of
linguistic attributes are assumed to be greater than weights
of other attributes early in development. In particular, it has
been demonstrated that auditory input often overshadows
(or attenuates processing of) the visual input for infants and
young children, however this effect disappears by adulthood
(Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003; Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004).
In sum, according to the knowledge-based approach, even
early in development people realize that labels denote

Abstract
Linguistic labels have been demonstrated to promote inductive
generalizations even early in development, however, the
mechanism by which labels contribute to induction remains
unknown. According to one theoretical position, even young
children, realize that labels denote categories. Therefore, labels
enable categorization of presented entities, and thus contribute
to category-based induction. According to the alternative
proposal, early in development labels are features of objects
that promote induction through their contribution to the overall
similarity of compared entities. The goal of the experiments
presented below was to distinguish between these positions.
Keywords: Induction, Categorization, Cognitive Development,
Language.

Introduction
The ability to make inductive generalizations is crucial for
acquiring new knowledge. For instance, upon learning that a
particular cat uses serotonin for neural transmission, one can
generalize this knowledge to other felines and possibly other
mammals. The ability to perform inductive generalizations
appears very early in development (Gelman & Markman,
1986; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b; Welder & Graham,
2001), however the mechanisms underlying early induction
remain unknown.
Two theoretical positions emerged in the course of study
of early induction: a similarity-based and a knowledgebased approach. Proponents of the knowledge-based
position argue that even early in development induction is
driven by “theory-like” knowledge, implemented as a set of
conceptual assumptions. These assumptions include among
others the category and the linguistic assumptions. The
category assumption is the belief that individual entities
belong to more general categories and that members of the
same category share many important properties. The
linguistic assumption is the belief that linguistic labels
presented as count nouns denote categories (for review of
these assumptions see Gelman, 2003; Keil, et al, 1998;
Murphy, 2002). Therefore, according to the knowledge-

678

categories; therefore, it is the conceptual meaning behind
labels that influences induction. On the other hand,
according to SINC, effects of labels on induction early in
development stem from the privileged processing of the
auditory information, rather than from conceptual
assumptions.
Traditionally, inductive generalization in children has
been studied directly, by asking participants to perform
generalizations, and inducing the mechanism of
generalization from provided responses. However, this
approach has generated evidence that does not allow
distinguishing between the proposed theoretical positions
(Gelman, 1988; Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004a). An alternative approach allowing more
direct examination of the mechanisms of induction has been
recently developed (Fisher & Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky &
Fisher, 2004b). In this framework, memory traces formed
during induction are examined, and generalization
mechanisms are inferred from the patterns of memory
accuracy. Predictions are based on the following reasoning.
There is a well-known finding, known as the “level-ofprocessing effect”, indicating that deep semantic processing
facilitates correct recognition of presented items, increasing
the proportion of “hits” (Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Craik &
Tulving, 1975). At the same time, recent studies indicate
that semantic processing (i.e., categorization) results not
only in higher hit rates, but also in the elevated levels of
memory intrusions – false recognition of non-presented
semantically associated items, or “critical lures” (e.g.,
Koutstaal & Schacter, 1997; Rhodes & Anastasi, 2000;
Thapar & McDermott, 2001). Therefore, if recognition
accuracy is measured as the difference between hits and
false alarms, the net result of semantic processing is an
overall decrease in accuracy. At the same time, focusing
participants on perceptual details of pictorially presented
information leads to a relatively low rate of false alarms,
and thus to accurate recognition (Marks, 1991).
Thus, a memory test administered after an induction task
should reveal differential encoding of information during
induction: If participants perform category-based induction,
they should be engaged in semantic processing, and
therefore exhibit low discrimination of studied items from
critical lures during a memory test (compared to a noinduction baseline condition), due to an elevated level of
false alarms. On the other hand, if participants perform
similarity-based induction, they should be engaged in
perceptual processing, and as a result exhibit accurate
recognition, due to a high level of hits and a relatively low
level of false alarms.
Because SINC assumes that induction is similarity-based
early in development, it makes a nontrivial prediction that
under certain conditions (i.e., after performing induction)
young children should exhibit more accurate recognition
than adults. These predictions received empirical support
(Fisher & Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004b), and
aggregated findings of the previous research that used
Induction-then-Recognition paradigm are presented in
Figure 1. The figure represents memory sensitivity A-prime

Memory Sensitivity (A-prime)

scores. A-prime is a non-parametric analogue of the signaldetection d-prime statistic (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). An
A-prime score of .5 indicates that participants do not
discriminate studied items from critical lures, and as
discrimination accuracy increases, A-prime scores approach
1. As shown in the Figure, after performing induction about
members of familiar animal categories (i.e., cats, bears, and
birds), adults’ memory accuracy attenuated markedly
compared to the no-induction baseline, whereas 5 year-olds
remained accurate. However, after a short training to
perform induction by relying on category information,
memory accuracy of 5-year-olds decreased to the level of
adults in the induction but not in the baseline condition.
Therefore, decrease in memory accuracy observed in the
induction condition is attributable to specific effects of
training in category-based induction, rather than to general
factors, such as fatigue. This finding suggests that young
children perform similarity-based induction, and that
development of category-based induction requires learning.
Furthermore, it has also been demonstrated that categorybased induction develops gradually, such that adults are
more likely to perform category-based induction that 11
year-olds, and 11 year-olds are more likely to perform
category-based induction that 5- and 7-year-olds (Fisher &
Sloutsky, in press). Additionally, both 5- and 7-year-olds
can successfully learn to perform category-based induction,
however retention of this learning is a function of age, with
7 year-olds being able to retain learning for longer periods
of time than 5 year-olds (Fisher & Sloutsky, in press). These
results demonstrate that unlike adults, young children
spontaneously perform similarity-based induction, and that
category-based induction is a product of learning and
development.
0.9

Baseline

0.8

Induction

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Adults

Children
Before Training

Children
After Training

Figure 1: Recognition Accuracy in 5 year-olds and adults
(aggregated findings from Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004b). The
dashed line represents the point of no sensitivity.
In all of the experiments that used the Induction-thenRecognition paradigm, study items were drawn from
familiar animal categories, and Sloutsky & Fisher (2004b)
established that even the youngest participants could easily
label the pictures that were used in research. However,
category labels never accompanied these pictures, and it
could be argued that the presence of labels is critical for the
679

ability to perform category-based induction. According to
this argument, young children might have exhibited
evidence for category-based induction, had the category
labels been provided. At the same time, according to SINC,
for young children labels are features of entities, with labels
affecting induction by contributing to similarity.
Furthermore, there are reasons to believe that effects of
auditorily presented labels stem from auditory information
overshadowing,
(i.e.,
attenuated
processing
of)
corresponding visual information early in development (e.g.,
Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano,
2003). The goal of this research is to distinguish between
these theoretical alternatives.

recognition test. In the Study Phase of the Induction
condition participants were first presented with a picture of
a cat, and informed that it had “beta-cells inside its body”.
Participants were then presented with 30 pictures of animals
(identical to those presented in the Baseline condition), and
asked whether each of the animals also had beta-cells inside.
After responding, participants were provided with “yes/no”
feedback, indicating that only cats, but not bears or birds,
had beta-cells. The recognition test was not mentioned in
the study phase of this condition. Note, that different
instructions regarding the upcoming memory test and
differential task demands during the Study Phase in the
Induction and Baseline conditions were not a concern,
because we repeatedly demonstrated that these factors do
not affect the pattern of results in this paradigm (Fisher &
Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b). In
particular, all previous studies included an additional
condition controlling for different instructions and task
demands; results of this control condition were statistically
equivalent to the Baseline condition.
Additionally, there were two between-subject labeling
conditions: (1) No Labels and (2) Category Labels. In the
Study Phase of the Category Labels condition, each picture
was accompanied by a basic category label (i.e., cat, bird, or
bear), whereas no labels were presented in Study Phase of
the No Labels condition.
The Recognition Phase, which was identical for all study
task and labeling conditions, immediately followed the
Study Phase. Participants were presented with 28
recognition pictures, and were asked to determine whether
each picture was “old” (i.e., exactly the one presented
during the Study Phase) or “new.” None of the pictures
were labeled, and no feedback was provided during the
Recognition Phase.
Children were tested individually in their day care centers
by female hypothesis-blind experimenters. All stimuli were
presented on a computer screen, and stimuli presentation
was controlled by Super Lab Pro 2 software (Cedrus
Corporation, 1999).

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined the effect of category labels on
induction and recognition accuracy in young children.
According to the knowledge-based position, providing
category labels should promote category-based induction
and therefore, increase induction accuracy. At the same
time, category-based induction should lead to an increase in
the level of false alarms, and therefore to a decreased
recognition accuracy. However, SINC predicts that labels
often overshadow visual input early in development;
therefore labels may disrupt young children’s encoding of
visual information, thus having negative effects on their
recognition accuracy. These effects however, should differ
from negative effects exerted by semantic processing: While
the latter should result in an elevated level of false alarms,
the former (due to disrupted encoding of visual information)
should result in a decreased level of hits.

Method
Participant Participants were 83 5 year-olds (44 girls, 39
boys, M age= 5.17 years, SD = .35 years).
Materials, Design and Procedure Materials were 44 color
photographs of familiar animals used in our previous
research (Fisher & Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004a, 2004b). Materials also included a set of category
labels – cat, bear, and bird.
Experiment 1 consisted of two phases, a Study Phase and
a Recognition Phase. During the Study Phase, participants
were presented with 30 pictures representing three different
categories (10 cats, 10 bears, and 10 birds), one picture at a
time. During the Recognition Phase, participants were
presented with 28 pictures, half of which were previously
presented during the Study Phase, and the other half were
new pictures. The recognition pictures consisted of (1)
previously presented pictures (7 cats and 7 bears), (2) novel
pictures from the studied category (7 cats, which served as
critical lures), and (3) novel pictures from a non-studied
category (7 squirrels, which served as catch items).
There were two between-subject task conditions: Baseline
and Induction. In the Study Phase of the Baseline condition
participants were presented with 30 pictures of animals, and
their task was to remember these pictures for a subsequent

Results and Discussion
Catch Trials Accuracy. Data from participants who failed to
correctly reject at least 5 out of 7 catch items in the
Recognition Phase were excluded from further analysis.
Based on this criterion, 5 participants in the Baseline
condition (3 in the No Labels and 2 in the Category Labels
condition) and 4 participants in the Induction condition (1 in
the No Labels, and 3 in the Category Labels condition) were
excluded. The rest of the participants were highly accurate
in rejecting catch items, averaging over 96% of correct
responses across all experimental conditions.
Induction Accuracy. Similar to the previous reports (Fisher
& Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b),
when no labels were presented, participants performed
accurate inductive generalizations, averaging 75% of correct
responses. The rate of correct generalizations was somewhat

680

alarms (paired-samples t (20) > 3.6, p < .005); however in
the Category Labels condition the rates of hits and false
alarms were indistinguishable (paired-sample t (22) = 1, p >
.3) and equivalent to chance (both ps > .06).
Proportion of "Old" Responses

lower when category labels were introduced (67% of correct
inductions), however the difference did not reach
significance.
Although the difference did not reach
significance, it was clearly in the direction opposite from
that predicted by the knowledge-based approach: while the
knowledge-based approach predicts facilitative effects of
category labels on induction, current results do not support
this prediction.

0.8

0.8

False Alarms

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
No Labels

Category Labels

Data presented in Figure 4 demonstrate, that recognition
accuracy in the Baseline condition was generated by a
pattern of high hits (.74 and .79 in the No Labels and
Category Labels conditions respectively, both above chance,
ts > 5.7, ps < .0001) and relatively low false alarms (.58 and
.45 in the No Labels and Category Labels conditions
respectively, both at chance, ps > .3). Furthermore, the
difference in the level of hits and false alarms in both
labeling conditions was statistically significant, both pairedsamples ts > 3.6, ps < .005.

Baseline
Induction

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

No Labels

Hits

Figure 3: Proportions of Hits and False Alarms in the
Induction condition of Experiment 1. The dashed line
represents chance level.

Proportion of "Old" Responses

Memory Sensitivity (A-prime)

Recognition Accuracy. Memory sensitivity A-prime scores,
computed for each participant and averaged across
participants in each between-subject condition, are
presented in Figure 2. Data in the Figure indicate that when
no labels were presented during the Study Phase,
participants demonstrated accurate recognition memory in
both, Induction and Baseline conditions (average A-prime
scores were .63 and .66 respectively, both above chance, ts
> 2.5, ps < .05). However, when category labels were
introduced during the Study Phase, participants’ memory
accuracy in the Induction condition decreased to chance, p >
.3, whereas participants remained accurate in the Baseline
condition, t (15) > 4, p < .001.

0.9

Category Labels

Figure 2: Memory sensitivity A-prime scores across
conditions in Experiment 1. The dashed line represents the
point of no sensitivity.
Recall, that when labels are present, both similarity-based
induction and category-based induction should result in
lower recognition accuracy. However, patterns of hits and
false alarms generating attenuated recognition should be
different. If labels facilitate category-based induction (as
predicted by the knowledge-based approach), the drop in
accuracy should occur because of an increased level of false
alarms (due to semantic processing). At the same time, if
labels overshadow visual information, thus disrupting
encoding of visual details (as predicted by SINC),
attenuated recognition accuracy should stem from a
decreased level of hits.
To distinguish between these possibilities follow-up
analyses of hits and false alarms were conducted. The
results of these analyses are presented in Figures 3-4. Data
in Figure 3 indicate that in the No Labels condition, the
level of hits was significantly above chance (t (20) > 3.8, p
< .001) and statistically different from the level of false

0.9

Hits
False Alarms

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
No Labels

Category Labels

Figure 4: Proportions of Hits and False Alarms in the
Baseline condition of Experiment 1. The dashed line
represents chance level.
Thus, results of Experiment 1 indicate that providing
category labels did not promote category-based induction in
5 year-old children: The rate of correct inductions in the
Category Labels condition did not increase compared to the
No Labels condition, and analysis of the hits and false
alarms patterns pointed to disrupted perceptual processing
rather than to conceptual processing.

681

However, it could be argued that low hits and low false
alarms observed in the Induction-with-Labels condition (see
Figure 3) stem from extraneous factors rather than
interrupted perceptual encoding.
To eliminate this
possibility, we conducted Experiment 2, in which young
children were trained to perform category-based induction.
Our previous results (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b)
indicate that such training results in the pattern of
recognition accuracy indicative of category-based induction
(i.e., high hits and high false alarms). Therefore, if results
of Experiment 1 stemmed from interrupted similarity-based
induction, training to perform category-based induction
should result in low accuracy stemming from high hits and
high false alarms.

Results and Discussion
Catch Trials Accuracy. Data from participants who failed to
correctly reject at least 5 out of 7 catch items in the
Recognition Phase were excluded from further analysis.
Based on this criterion, data from 4 participants were
excluded. The rest of the participants were highly accurate
in rejecting catch items, averaging over 96% of correct
rejections.
Induction Accuracy. As predicted, after training
participants demonstrated high induction accuracy: accuracy
= 88%, above chance, one-sample t (16) > 10.6, p < .0001.
Furthermore, their induction accuracy in Experiment 2 (i.e.,
88%) exceeded that in Experiment 1 (i.e., 67%),
independent samples t (38) > 3.3, p < .001.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 participants were first trained to perform
category-based induction relying on common category
labels. After training participants were presented with the
experiment proper, which was identical to the Induction task
of the Category Labels condition of Experiment 1. It was
expected that after training participants should perform
category-based induction. Therefore, participants’ (1)
induction accuracy was predicted to increase (compared to
that in Experiment 1), and (2) participants’ recognition
accuracy was expected to be low, due to an increase in the
level of false alarms.

Recognition Accuracy. Similar to Experiment 1,
recognition accuracy in the Induction condition of
Experiment 2 was quite low, with an average A-prime score
of .52 (not different from chance, p > .7). However, the
pattern of hits and false alarms changed dramatically
compared to Experiment 1: As predicted, after training in
category-based induction, participants exhibited a pattern of
high hits (.77) and high false alarms (.71), both above
chance, ts > 2.4, p < .05. Furthermore, the rate of hits was
statistically equivalent to the level of false alarms, pairedsamples t (16) < 1, p > .4. Recall, that post-training decrease
in recognition accuracy can be attributed to specific effects
of training, rather than to general factors, such as fatigue,
because our previous findings (Fisher & Sloutsky, in press;
Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b) indicate that post-training
decrease in recognition memory does not occur in the
Baseline condition.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that after training in categorybased induction, children started relying on labels when
performing inductive generalizations, which resulted in a
marked increase in the level of false alarms. Notice, that the
pattern of results observed in the Induction condition of
Experiment 2 (high hits/high false alarms) is indicative of
semantic processing, and is different from the (1) pattern
observed the Baseline condition of Experiment 1 (high
hits/low false alarms), a pattern indicative of perceptual
processing, and (2) from the pattern observed in the
Induction condition of Experiment 1 (low hits/low false
alarms), a pattern that suggests interrupted perceptual
processing.

Method
Participants Participants were 22 5 year-olds (10 girls, 12
boys, M age= 4.9 years, SD = .39 years).
Materials, Design and Procedure Materials, design, and
procedure of Experiment 2 were identical to those of the
Induction task of the Category Labels condition of
Experiment 1, with one important difference. Prior to the
experiment proper, participants were given training in
category-based induction. The training procedure was
identical to the one used in our previous research (Fisher &
Sloutsky, in press; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004a, 2004b). In the
course of training children were taught that (1) animals that
have the same names belong to the same category, (2)
animals that belong to the same category share many
important properties, and (3) therefore, animals that have
the same name share many important properties.
Participants were presented with six categorization and six
induction trials, and their responses during training were
accompanied by explanatory feedback. Materials used in
training were cards representing pictures of rabbits, dogs,
and lions – the categories of animals that were not used in
the experiment proper.
Upon completing training, participants were randomly
assigned to an Induction or a Baseline task, in which
presentation of animals during the Study Phase was
accompanied by category labels. Hypothesis-blind female
experimenters tested children individually in their schools
and child care centers.

General Discussion
Several important findings stem from the experiments
reported above. First, as demonstrated in Experiment 1,
introduction of category labels does not automatically
promote category-based induction: Category labels seem to
interrupt perceptual processing, rather than promote
conceptual processing in the Induction tasks - as evidenced
by slightly decreased induction accuracy and dramatically
decreased level of correct recognition. At the same time, no

682

Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998).
Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
Koutstaal, W., & Schacter, D. L. (1997). Gist-based false
recognition of pictures in older and younger adults
Journal of Memory & Language, 37, 555-583.
Mareschal, D., Quinn, P. C., & French, R. M. (2002).
Asymmetric interference in 3- to 4-month olds' sequential
category learning. Cognitive Science, 26, 377-389.
Marks, W. (1991). Effects of encoding the perceptual
features of pictures on memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 566577.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Flexible attention in young
children. Child Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C.W., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2004). Auditory
Dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Rhodes, M. G., & & Anastasi, J. S. (2000). The effects of a
levels-of-processing manipulation on false recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 158-162.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
psychology, 25, 231 – 280.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004b). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against
category-based
induction
in
children.
Psychological Science, 15, 553-558.
Sloutsky, V. & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth a
thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to dementia
and amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 117, 34-50.
Thapar, A. & McDermott, K. B. (2001). False recall and
false recognition induced by presentation of associated
words: Effects of retention interval and level of
processing. Memory and Cognition, 29, 424-432.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

evidence for auditory overshadowing was found in the
Baseline tasks. One potential explanation for this finding is
a possibility that overshadowing effects are, at least in part,
moderated by the task complexity that interacts with
stimulus familiarity and age of participants (both of the
latter variables have been implicated in overshadowing
effects, see Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004 and Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2004 for a discussion). However, this possibility
requires further investigation.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that training young children
to rely on common category labels increases their induction
accuracy, and also leads to a pattern of recognition accuracy
(high hits – high false alarms) indicative of semantic
processing. At the same time, recognition accuracy in the
Baseline condition was unaffected by training.
Taken together, the reported findings suggest, even in
the presence of labels, young children perform similaritybased induction; however they can be trained to perform
category-based induction. These findings support
predictions of the SINC model, while challenging the idea
of the knowledge-based approach that early induction is
driven by the category and linguistic assumptions.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103 and BCS # 0078945)
to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Craik, F. I., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing:
A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
Learning & Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Craik, F. I., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and
the retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 268-294.
Fisher, A.V., & Sloutsky, V.M. (in press). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development.
French, R. M., Mareschal, D., Mermillod, M., & Quinn, P.
C. (2004).
The role of bottom-up processing in
perceptual categorization by 3- to 4-month-old infants:
Simulations and data.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133, 382-397.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. London: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural kind and artifact categories. Cognitive Psychology,
20, 65-95.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A. & Hirschfeld, L. A. (1999). How biological
is essentialism? In S. Atran & D. Medin (Eds.).
Folkbiology, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (2002). How children know the
relevant properties for generalizing object names.
Developmental Science, 5, 219-232.
683

