UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Embodied Representations: What are the Issues?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vm3x1jf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Svensson, Henrik
Ziemke, Tom

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Embodied Representation:
What are the Issues?
Henrik Svensson (henrik.svensson@his.se)
University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Tom Ziemke (tom.ziemke@his.se)
University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

representations in cognitive systems to constrain the notion
of representation, “the debate between representationalists
and anti-representationalists is bound to remain a debate
for the sake of appearance” (p. 21; emphasis added; cf. also
Beer, 2003; Wheeler, 2001). The purpose of this paper is to
continue in the same spirit as Haselager et al., i.e., instead of
elaborating our own position on whether or not cognition
uses representation, we would like to contribute to
structuring the debate. In order to resolve the confusion, we
believe it necessary to: (1) review what types of
mechanisms, processes, states, etc. can be identified as
candidates for representationhood2 in current theories and
models of embodied cognition, and (2) explicate the
relevant theoretical frameworks and criteria for what is or is
not an embodied representation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The next
section summarizes the representation debate, possible
problems and new directions. The following sections
respectively outline some candidates and criteria for
representationhood. The paper ends with some concluding
remarks.

Abstract
A common theme of many discussions among embodied
cognition researchers is whether or not cognition is making
use of representations. This debate has recently been called a
“debate for the sake of appearance” because there is no agreed
upon way of identifying what is a representation. Therefore,
instead of elaborating our own position on whether embodied
cognition uses representation, we structure the debate by (1)
reviewing three types of mechanisms in models of embodied
cognition that might be considered candidates for
representationhood and (2) outlining criteria for what is or is
not a representation in embodied cognition.
Keywords: embodied cognition; interaction; representation

Introduction
With the advent of theories of embodied cognition1, in the
1980s, the traditional notion of representation has been
attacked by many researchers questioning the usefulness of
representational explanations in cognitive science (e.g.,
Brooks, 1991; Beer, 1995). For example, Brooks (1991)
famously argued for “intelligence without representation”
and emphasized continuous real-time interaction between an
embodied agent and its environment. Others have argued
that representations are necessary even in theories and
models of embodied cognition (e.g. Clark & Grush, 1999;
Dorffner, 1997; Grush, 2004). This has led to further
confusion about the concept of representation calling for “an
ongoing critical assessment of representational notions”
(Beer, 2003, p. 237). Haselager, de Groot, and van Rappard
(2003) have suggested that the debate between
representationalists and anti-representationalists is in fact
futile because of the ubiquitous and often unconstrained use
of representations in explanations of cognition. Haselager et
al. did not commit themselves on the issue of whether
cognition is representational or not. Instead, they argued that
as long as there is no way of identifying actual

The Representation Debate: What is the
Problem?

1

As seen in the recent target articles by Beer (2003) and
Grush (2004) as well as the respective peer commentary
(e.g., Clark, 2003; Edelman, 2003; Stojanov & Bickhard
2004; Yang & Wang, 2004), the discussion is often framed
(or perceived) as a debate between anti-representationalists
emphasizing continuous interaction with an environment,
and representationalists arguing that representations are
needed for scaling up to higher-level cognition. Beer (2003)
noted in his response that “despite the enormous
explanatory weight that the notion of internal representation
is required to bear in cognitive science, there seems to be
very little agreement about what internal representations
actually are” (p. 304). This was illustrated by the fact that
different commentators described Beer’s example model as
both representational and non-representational. Similarly,
Grush’s (2004) recent emulation theory of representation

For ease of exposition, the term embodied cognition, as in much
of the literature, is used in a broad sense covering several
approaches, including situated action (e.g. Suchman, 1987),
situated cognition (e.g., Clancey, 1997), embodied cognition (e.g.,
Lakoff and Johnson, 1999), and distributed cognition (e.g.
Hutchins, 1995), that have come to question traditional cognitivist
cognitive science (for overviews of the positions cf. Wilson, 2002;
Ziemke, 2003).

2

2116

Except for an added hyphen (representation-hood), Wheeler
(2001) used the same term in his paper discussing two threats to a
representational explanation of on-line intelligent behavior.

(cf. Clark & Grush, 1999) has striking similarities to
Hesslow’s (2002) simulation hypothesis, but nevertheless
the former is explicitly framed as a theory of representation,
where the latter is decidedly anti-representational.
Therefore, in this section we outline some possible reasons
for this confusion and argue that these problems might be
viewed differently in embodied cognition.
A possible reason for this type of confusion is according
to Haselager et al. (2003) that the current definitions of
representation are not capable of identifying physical states
that are representational and separating them from other
non-representational physical states. In contrast to many
others, Haselager et al. explicitly argued for a realist
explanation of representation (as opposed to an instrumental
one; cf. Kim, 1998). That means, to have fruitful debates
about the representational nature of cognition one needs to
find “an identifiable physical state within a system that
stands in for another (internal or external) state and that as
such plays a causal role in (or is used by) the system
generating its behavior” (Haselager et al., 2003, p. 8). The
representations, according to this view, need to be not mere
theoretical entities used to predict empirical data, but actual
physical (neural) states (cf. Wheeler, 2001).
Haselager et al. (2003) argued that isomorphism, the
standard method to detect representation, is not sufficient
for separating physical representational states from nonrepresentational
ones.
Isomorphism
identifies
representations ”as those physical states that correspond
one-to-one with the content carrying states outlined on the
computational level and that have the causal connections to
match the computational transformations” (Haselager et al.,
2003, p. 8). This mapping between the two levels is a
fundamental prerequisite in traditional cognitivist cognitive
science. Gardner (1987), for example, argued that “it is
necessary to speak about mental representations and to posit
a level of analysis wholly separate from the biological or
neurological” (p. 6). That means, the explanatory work is
not done on the physical level but only on the higher
representational level (see e.g., Fodor, 1975; Fodor &
Pylyshyn, 1988).
Research in embodied cognition, on the other hand, often
does not start with psychological states but with
sensorimotor interaction, i.e., physical state transitions
typically in more or less direct (reactive) interaction with
the world making them more concerned with the physical
mechanisms behind cognition. The problem with starting
out at a non-cognitive level is that it makes isomorphism, as
described above, insufficient for separating representational
and non-representational states in physical systems
(Haselager et al., 2003)3. However, embodied cognition
could also entail new ways of conceptualizing and
3

Isomorphisms between internal and external states might be
equally problematic for theories of representation within
(embodied) cognition (cf. e.g. Bickhard & Terveen, 1995).
However, since internal-external isomorphism is not part of any of
the candidates and criteria described in later sections, we do not
discuss that possibility.

identifying representations. The next section provides the
first steps to identifying such new constraints and
conceptualizations of representations by presenting some
candidates for representationhood within embodied
cognition.

Embodied Representation: Which are the
Candidates?
In this section we review what we think are the main types
of mechanisms, processes, or states in current
models/theories of embodied cognition that can be
considered as candidates for representationhood: interactive
potentials, simulation or emulation, and externalization.
However, the descriptions are, due to the limited space,
fairly brief.

Interactive Potentials
Bickhard (1998; 2000; Bickhard & Terveen, 1995) has
argued that representation emerges from the interactive
nature of biological systems, i.e., the fact that for embodied
creatures, actions influence subsequent input processing in a
direct way. The interactive nature of embodied organisms
leads to the idea that an agent can represent because of
processes based on indications of interactive potentials and
the anticipation or indication of interaction outcomes
(Bickhard, 1998).
This type of mechanism is called for in situations where
an organism has several interactive options available and a
selection is necessary, such as the situation of the frog in the
following example.
A frog seeing a fly might set up indications of the possibility
of tongue-flicking-and-eating, while a frog seeing a shadow
of a hawk might set up indications of the possibility of
jumping in the water. A frog seeing both needs some way to
decide, and internal outcome indications provide a basis for
such a decision (Bickhard, 1998, p. 59).

Thus, indications of interaction outcomes have the ability
to differentiate different types of environments, but it is
important to notice that the indications do not necessarily
correspond to any particular environment. They are only
internal, functional specifications, which enable an implicit
content about the agent’s presuppositions of the
“appropriate” properties (Bickhard & Terveen, 1995).
Interactive potentials are constituted as anticipations, which
have the advantage of being true or false for the system
itself. According to Bickhard (1998), it is only through
interactive potentials based on anticipation or indicated
outcomes that the agent itself is able to detect an error. The
error is detectable because the anticipation of internal
outcomes can be made false by executing the interactive
potential that pointed to the outcome in an environment that
does not support the type of interaction that would lead to
that internal outcome.

2117

on a hot plate. Except for the simulation and emulation
accounts’ emphasis on motor processes, perceptual symbol
systems can be said to be roughly based on the same general
mechanism in which reactivated perceptual and/or motor
states are coupled into simulated chains of behavior.

Emulation & Simulation
Another recent effort to explain higher-level cognition and
representation comes from so called emulation or simulation
theories (e.g., Grush, 2004; Hesslow, 2002) which are kinds
of embodiment theories that have emerged in different
contexts (for a review see Svensson & Ziemke, 2004;
Svensson, Lindblom, & Ziemke, in press).
The basic idea is that neural structures that are responsible
for perception and action, i.e. direct interaction with the
world, are also reactivated and used in various cognitive
tasks, such as perception, imagery, reasoning, and language.
Interestingly, this basic idea is very similar in Hesslow’s
(2002) (anti-representational) simulation hypothesis and
Grush’s (2004) emulation theory of representation, and, to
some extent, in Barsalou’s (1999) perceptual symbol
systems.

Externalization

Simulation or Emulation Mechanisms The main
mechanisms involved in simulation is the reactivation of
sensorimotor states in the absence of overt activity and the
ability to anticipate consequences of that sensorimotor
activity if actually performed overtly (cf. e.g., Clark &
Grush, 1999; Grush, 2004; Hesslow, 2002). Hesslow (2002)
summarized his simulation theory in three basic
mechanisms:
(1) Simulation of actions: we can activate motor structures of
the brain in a way that resembles activity during a normal
action but does not cause any overt movement. (2) Simulation
of perception: imagining perceiving something is essentially
the same as actually perceiving it, only the perceptual activity
is generated by the brain itself rather than by external stimuli.
(3) Anticipation: there exist associative mechanisms that
enable both behavioral and perceptual activity to elicit
perceptual activity in the sensory areas of the brain. (Hesslow,
2002, p. 242)

That means, internal simulations of perception and action
can be coupled through an anticipatory mechanism, which
enables the agent to simulate chains of behavior that range
several time steps into the future (Grush, 2004; Hesslow,
2002). Essentially, simulating chains of behavior is the
process by which (simulated) perceptual activity generated
by a simulated action can serve as a stimulus for a new
response, either in the form of an overt action, a covert
simulated action or new perceptual activity.
Barsalou (1999; cf. Barsalou et al. 2003) proposed a
similar kind of simulation mechanism based on perceptual
symbols, which are records of the neural states that underlie
perception. That is, during perception, the sensorimotor
activity in the brain is recorded and thus captures
information about the perceived events. The perceptual
symbol is not a symbol in the sense that it by itself stands
for something in the world, but can only be construed as a
representation in that sense when it is used by a mechanism
called a simulator. The simulator enables objects and events
to be connected enabling the agent to, e.g., simulate event
sequences such as what would happen if you put your hand

In contrast to traditional cognitive science, some theories of
embodied cognition have suggested that cognition often
reaches out into the world allowing external entities to act as
representations in the cognitive system consisting of both
individual and environment (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998;
Hutchins, 1995; Zhang, 1997). The perhaps most obvious
use of this kind of off-loading or externalization mechanism
is external reminders. Vygotsky (1929/1977), already in the
1920s, emphasized this type of activity. For example, he
used the example of tying a knot in a handkerchief as a
reminder, which means that the person is “constructing the
process of memorizing by externally forcing an external
object to remind him of something” (Vygotsky, 1929/1977,
p. 68). Since then, several other examples of ways in which
humans and animals exploit external states have been
reported in the literature (e.g., Larkin & Simon, 1987;
Reisberg, 1987; Zhang, 1997; Susi, in press).
Studies of external representation are often not explicitly
interested in theoretical discussions of what is or what is not
an actual representation, but rather, how these external
entities affect the individual cognizer’s ability to perform a
certain task and provide a more genuine understanding of
the distributed nature of cognition. Clark and Chalmers
(1998), on the other hand, explicitly argued that external
entities if coupled with a cognitive system can be regarded
as cognitive states with the same status as other cognitive
states. Even though they do not explicitly mention
representations, it follows that external representations
could be considered mental representations. However, this
does not mean that they are arguing that something nonliving can have mentality (cf. Susi, Lindblom, & Ziemke,
2003).

Embodied Representation: Which are the
Criteria?
So far a number of possible representational mechanisms
within models/theories of embodied cognition have been
identified and briefly described. This section explicates
some theoretical frameworks and criteria that might be
useful in answering the question whether or not these
candidate mechanisms should be considered representations.
The section proceeds by outlining the criteria of
representationhood that are found in five theories of
representation in embodied cognition. However, the point is
not to determine what will turn out to be the correct criteria
to identify actual representations but merely to point out the
underlying criteria for representationhood in embodied
cognition.

2118

different environments, which means that there is only an
informational relationship not an explicit representation that
says anything about the properties of the environment. Only
when the indicated future outcomes are used to create future
indications, which may e.g. hold when all “X-type
environments are indicated to be also Y-type environments”
(Bickhard, 2000, p. 70).

(Radical) Constructivism & Enactivism
The radical constructivism framework (e.g. von Glaserfeld,
1995) and the enactive cognition framework (e.g. Maturana
& Varela, 1987; Varela, Thompson & Rosch, 1991)
emphasize cognition and knowledge as the active
construction of a subject, rather than passive re-presentation
of an external reality. From a radical constructivist point of
view, the notion of representation as standing in is nonsensical because radical constructivism normally does not
view cognition as the manipulation of representations of an
independent reality, but the reality only “perturbs” (see e.g.
Maturana & Varela, 1987, p. 98-99) the semantically closed
and self-organizing cognitive system (Peschl & Riegler,
1999). In this sense, there are no representations but only
presentations (von Glaserfeld, 1995) in that the ontological
reality never enters into the representational function and
gets to be re-presented in the cognitive agent (Peschl &
Riegler, 1999). To consider anything a representation
according to this theoretical framework the traditional
notion of representation as a stand in for things in the world
has to be abandoned in favor of representation as internal
states or processes constructed by the individual subject,
which have the power to achieve adaptive behavior and thus
might not be generally thought of as re-presentations.

Guidance Theory

Interactivist Representations

Recently, Rosenberg & Anderson (2004, forthcoming) have
developed a theory of representation, guidance theory, based
on the assumption that action and interaction is essential for
any cognitive being. According to guidance theory, for a
token to be a representation it is not important whether the
representation co-varies with, is isomorphic to, or is in
causal connection to the entity it tracks. In other words,
what the representation is is not the right question to ask,
but instead any theory of representation need to ask what the
representation does for the cognitive subject. The crucial
insight is that it is the cognitive subject use of the token to
guide, i.e. determine, which particular motor or cognitive
action it will perform that makes it a representational token
(Rosenberg and Anderson, 2004, forthcoming).
Thus, guidance theory does not specify any particular
form or any particular kind of correspondence with the
external world for a token to be a representation. What
matters is that the token are used in a particular
circumstance (the subject’s internal state and immediate
environment) to guide actions. As such, it defines
representation as something the agent does to achieve a
particular state. This means that the representations are thus
closely linked to expectations of what state should be
achieved (Rosenberg & Anderson, forthcoming), which is
also emphasized by interactivism.

Bickhard (e.g. 1998, 2000; Bickhard & Terveen, 1995) has
constructed a theory of representation, interactivism, based
on the pragmatist school of thought, which has also
influenced various constructivist approaches including
radical constructivism.
According to interactivism, any theory of representation
must be capable of explaining the ability of representations
to have a truth value and not only truth value per se. The
agent itself must have the possibility to detect error or
misrepresentation. Bickhard (2000; Bickhard & Terveen,
1995) argued that this means that representation cannot be
based on any notion of correspondence or isomorphism to
establish representational content, because such accounts
find themselves trapped by the fact that any check for truth
value must be achieved by comparing representations to the
things and events in the external world. The problem with
this is that the only epistemic access the agent has to the
world is through those representations, thus any use of
representation to check representation will be circular (e.g.
Bickhard, 2000).
It is also evident that it is necessary for any representation
to be embedded within an agent capable of interaction and
consequently setting up expectations of future interactions
(Bickhard, 1998), because representational content is only
achieved by connecting earlier with further potential
outcomes, where the former has been tested through
interaction (Bickhard, 2000). To be more precise, according
to Bickhard (2000), an indicated potential outcome has no
explicit representational content. It has only implicit
representational content in that it only differentiates

Emulation Theory & Simulation Hypothesis

2119

Grush (2004) constructed his theory of representation on the
control theoretic concept of forward models or emulators,
which similar to interactivism and guidance theory
emphasizes expectations or predications of future states.
Representations, according to emulation theory, are found in
emulator circuits in the brains of cognitive beings.
Emulation circuits calculate a forward mapping from
control signals, i.e., motor commands to the anticipated
(sensory) consequences of executing that specific control
command. However, the crucial fact of representations is
that they stand in and that they can be used by the cognitive
system as stand ins. That is, a representation is an internal
state that can be used, in this case by emulator mechanisms,
to stand in for extra-neural states of affairs when these are
not available to the agent by any other means except
through the stand ins, as opposed to direct causal connection
with something in the agent’s near environment (cf. Clark &
Grush, 1999). Representation, thus, requires a kind of
decoupled internal states, which can reliably track the

normal course of affairs that the cognitive agent pursues in
continuous interaction with its environment4.
Furthermore, emulation theory identifies representation as
involving actual sensorimotor states and predictions of
sensorimotor activations in the brain (cf. Keijzer, 2003).
As previously pointed out, while they posit similar
mechanisms, the simulation hypothesis (Hesslow, 2002) is
decidedly non-representational, the emulation theory of
representation and perceptual symbol systems (Barsalou,
1999) keeps the representational vocabulary. Although this
is not a crucial matter, Hesslow probably did not reject
representations as decouplable inner states, but rather
“extravagant ontological assumptions…about the existence
of ‘images’, ‘representations’ or other mental entities” (p.
246); not the ability of simulation mechanisms to be used as
stand ins in that sense.

different as it does not focus that much on the particular
structure or form of the representations but rather their use
and origin in interaction able cognitive agents. In general,
the embodied cognition candidates and criteria for
representation differ from the isomorphism criterion
because the representations are not identified as
psychological or computational states. The criteria for being
a representation stems instead from what the representation
does for the agent or more specific the agents interactions
with the world, it is no longer representation as an internal
mirror of an observer-independent external world that is
motivating the use of representations in cognition.
Although the analysis is admittedly somewhat
preliminary, we will briefly explicate some of the relations
between the candidates and criteria for representationhood.
According to radical constructivism, all of the posited
mechanisms can be considered to create adaptive behavior
for an agent, but as pointed out above this might not be a
criterion for re-presentation per se. Interactivist
representations must be able to be true or false for the
agent. Consequently, representations are internal to an
agent, making external representations less likely candidates
for representationhood. Whether or not emulation also
accounts for the emergence of interactive representation is
an open issue (cf. Grush, 2004; Stojanov & Bickhard,
2004). Guidance theory shares a number of assumptions
about representation with interactivist representation, such
as truth value for the agent and emphasis on action and
interaction. However, the theory could perhaps accept
external representations given that they can provide
guidance to a cognitive agent with respect to what it
represents (cf. Rosenberg & Anderson, forthcoming).
Emulation and simulation theory emphasize the presence of
decouplable states, which could include both interactive
potentials and external representations (cf. Grush, 2004;
Dartnall, 2004). External representation is not mainly about
meaning, but could perhaps be made part of such an
enterprise if considering the use of external entities in agentenvironment interactions (cf. Dartnall, 2004).
To conclude, the purpose of this paper was not to argue
for or against any notion of representation nor determine
what role any of these representations have in cognition.
Instead, we wanted to help structure the debate by
contrasting some of the possible alternatives and
(sometimes hidden) assumptions behind discussions of
representations in embodied cognition. In this respect, the
paper has identified three candidates for representationhood,
and criteria in models/theories of embodied cognition that
can be used to constrain notions of representations, and also
help others see the assumptions behind some of the
representational mechanisms proposed in embodied
cognition. This, we hope, can help to clarify discussions
about representations in cognitive science.

External Representation
Distributed cognition and external cognition approaches
extends the view of representation to include also external
artifacts as representations. Representations are not only
entities inside the head of a cognitive agent that are
supposed to correspond to objects and events in the external
world. Rather in the case of external representations, the
representational states not only represent things in the sense
that they correspond to something else or are about
something. Rather, external representations can be identified
by the different purposes they serve for cognitive agents (cf.
Susi, in press). The external states or are not only inputs or
representations of other entities, but are often able to affect
cognition directly (e.g., Zhang, 1997). In other words, the
“representation can determine what information can be
perceived, what processes can be activated, and what
structures can be discovered from the specific
representation” (Zhang, 1997, p. 213).
External representations are external entities that directly
guide actions and cognition, without being transduced into
any kind of internal language of thought. What makes these
structures representations is their effect on the cognitive
agent, but they do not contain content independently of a
cognitive observer. In this respect, external representation is
not
interactive
representation,
which
identifies
representationhood as anticipatory processes inside the
interactive agents. However, external representations often
figure as theoretical entities (cf. Grush, 2004), rather then in
the strictly realist sense called for by Haselager et al. (2003).

Summary & Conclusion
This paper has outlined a number of candidates and criteria
for cognition not based on cognitivist representations
identified
through
one-to-one
mappings
(or
correspondences) between computational structures and
physical structures. Instead, the view of represenationhood
that emerges from the field of embodied cognition is rather

Acknowledgements

4

See also discussions in Wheeler (2001) and Haselager et al.
(2003).
2120

We would like to thank Jessica Lindblom and Tarja Susi for
comments and discussions contributing to this paper.

References
Bickhard, M. H. (1998). Robots and Representations. From
Animals to Animats 5. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bickhard, M. H., & Terveen, L. (1995). Foundational issues
in artificial intelligence and cognitive science: impasse
and solution. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bickhard, M. H. (2000). Information and representation in
autonomous agents. Cognitive Systems Research, 1, 6575.
Beer, R.D. (1995). A dynamical systems perspective on
autonomous agents. Artificial Intelligence 72, 173–215.
Beer, R. D. (2003). The dynamics of active categorical
perception in an evolved model agent. Adaptive Behavior,
11(4), 209-243
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence without representation.
Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139-159.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W., Niedenthal, P. M., Barbey, A. K., &
Ruppert, J. M. (2003). Social embodiment. In B. H. Ross
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol.
43). San Diego: Academic Press.
Clark, A., & Grush, R. (1999). Towards a cognitive
robotics. Adaptive Behavior, 7, 5-16.
Clark, A. (2003). Forces, fields, and the role of knowledge
in action. Adaptive Behavior, 11, 270-272.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dartnall, T. (2004). Epistemology, emulators, and extended
minds. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 401-402.
Dorffner, G. (1997). Radical connectionism – a neural
bottom-up approach to AI. In: G. Dorffner (Ed.) Neural
networks and a new artificial intelligence. London:
International Computer Press.
Edelman, S. (2003). But will it scale up? Not without
representations. Adaptive Behavior, 11, 273-275.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. New York:
Crowell.
Fodor, J. A., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988). Connectionism and
cognitive architecture: a critical analysis. In: S. Pinker and
J. Mehler (Eds.), Connections and Symbols. Cambridge,
MA; MIT Press.
Gardner, H. (1987). The minds new science: A history of the
cognitive revolution. NewYork: Basic Books
von Glaserfeld, E. (1995). Radical constructivism – a way of
knowing and learning. London: Falmer Press.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 377-442.
Haselager, P., de Groot, A., & van Rappard, H. (2003).
Representationalism vs. anti-representationalism: a debate
for the sake of appearance. Philosophical Psychology, 16,
5-23.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation of
behaviour and perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
6, 242-247.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Keijzer, F. (2003). Making decisions does not suffice for
minimal cognition. Adaptive Behavior, 11, 266-269.
Kim, J. (1998). Philosophy of mind. Boulder: Westview
Press.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Peschl, M. F. & Riegler, A. (1999). Does representation
need reality. In: A. Riegler, A. von Stein & M. Peschl
(Eds.), Understanding representation in the cognitive
sciences. New York: Plenum Press.
Reisberg, D. (1987). External representations and the
advantages of externalizing one’s thought. In: Proc. of the
Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.
Rosenberg, G. & Anderson, M. L. (2004). A brief
introduction to the guidance theory of representation.
Proc. of the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rosenberg, G. & Anderson, M. L. (forthcoming). Content
and action: the guidance theory of representation.
Stojanov, G., & Bickhard, M. H. (2004). Representation:
emulation and anticipation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 418.
Svensson, H., & Ziemke, T. (2004). Making Sense of
Embodiment. Proc. of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Svensson, H., Lindblom, J., & Ziemke, T. (in press).
Making sense of embodied cognition. In: T. Ziemke, J.
Zlatev, & R. Frank (Eds.), Body Language and Mind,
forthcoming.
Suchman, L. A. (1987). Plans and situated actions. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Susi, T., Lindblom, J., & Ziemke, T. (2003). Beyond the
bounds of cognition. Proc. of the 25th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Susi, T. (in press). In search of the holy grail: understanding
artifact mediation in social interactions. Proc. of the 27th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Alpha, NJ: Sheridan Printing Company.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky (1929/1977). The development of higher
psychological functions. Soviet psychology, 16, 60-73.
Wheeler, M. (2001). Two threats to representation.
Synthese, 129, 211–231,
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(4), 625-636.
Yang, H., & Wang, Y. (2004). Representation is more than
emulating. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 420-421.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21, 179-217.
Ziemke, T. (2003). What's that thing called embodiment?
In: Proc. of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

2121

