UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Epistemic Motivation and Groups' Reaction to Change: Effects of Need for Cognitive Closure
on Norms Transmissions in a Laboratory Micro-Culture

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1778d2tn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Kenny, David A.
Kruglanski, Aarie W.
Livi, Stefano A.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Epistemic Motivation and Groups’ Reaction to Change: Effects of Need
for Cognitive Closure on Norms Transmissions in a Laboratory Micro-Culture
Stefano Livi (stefano.livi@uniroma1.it), Lucia Mannetti, (lucia.mannetti@uniroma1.it)
Antonio Pierro (antonio.pierro@uniroma1.it)
Department of Social and Development Psychology, University of Rome “La Sapienza”
Via dei Marsi, 78, 00183, Roma, Italy

Arie W. Kruglanski (arie@psyc.umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA

David A. Kenny (kenny@uconnvm.uconn.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269-1020
Moreover, need for closure can also represent a stable
individual disposition. In fact, some individuals may display a
systematic proclivity to value closure positively, while, on the
other hand, some others may be predisposed to avoid closure
and prefer openness (Webster & Kruglanski, 1994).
Consequences of need for closure are to be found in the
urgency and permanence tendencies. The urgency tendency
refers to the inclination to quickly seize on closure, relying on
early cues and first answers despite their validity. The
permanence tendency reflects the propensity to freeze on
existing knowledge in order to preserve past and future
cognition.
Need for closure has both cognitive and social consequences,
as the urgency and the permanency tendencies affect a wide
range of psychosocial phenomena mediated by information
processing at individual, interpersonal and group level (for a
review see Kruglanski, 1996; Kruglanski & Webster, 1996;
Webster & Kruglanski, 1998).

Abstract
The role of need for cognitive closure (NCC, Kruglanski, 1989,
2004) plays in the transmission of a group norm is studied
applying the Jacobs and Campbell's (1961) experimental
generation paradigm. It is hypothesized that the permanence
tendency, linked to an high Need of Cognitive Closure
produces a greater resistance to change of experimentally
induced group norms. Two studies were conducted on a total of
320 participants In the first, NCC was induced with noise of the
environment in which task is performed (vs. control condition
without noise), in second study NCC was measured with the
NCC Scale, Italian version, and an high score of participants
(vs. control condition represented by participants with low
score) is used. Results showed that participants in condition of
high NCC (both experimentally induced and measured) change
less, through generations, the experimentally induced norm, and
that this effect is produced by the conformity of the newcomers
of each generation.

Instroduction
Within the framework of Lay Epistemology Theory
(Kruglanski, 1989), Need for Cognitive Closure was defined
as a desire for a quick firm answer (any answer) to a question
(Webster & Kruglanski, 1998). from this point of view, the
term “need” is used to indicate a motivational tendency or an
inclination, rather than a tissue deficit, that is function of an
individual weight of costs and benefits of a closure (or a lack
of closure) of the epistemic process (Kruglanski & Webster,
1996). Need for closure can be situationally induced or
represent a stable trait of individual difference, and varies
along a continuum of motivation of closure, ranging from an
high need to obtain closure to a strong need to avoid closure.
The antecedents of the epistemic motivation towards a non
specific closure can be found in those circumstances that
highlight the perceived benefits and reduce the perceived
costs of closure. Those contextual factors are for instance
time pressure, environmental noise, mental fatigue, boredom
or dullness of a cognitive task. By contrast, the need to avoid
closure may be instilled in those conditions that stress the
costs of closure and the benefits of a lack of closure (i.e.
accountability, fear of invalidity, evaluation apprehension).

Overview of the Studies and Hypotheses.

1308

In social group context, permanence tendency assumed to be
induced by a heightened need for closure implies that groups
experiencing such a need would be unlikely to change and so
would remain relatively stable across shifting circumstances.
This hypothesis was tested in two studies using generations
design (Jacobs & Campbell, 1961; Kenny, Hallmark,
Sullivan, Kashy, 1993) to investigate need for closure effects
on stability of individual behavior, conformity to the group
norms, and persistence of norms across generations.
Stability of group norms across shifts in membership
relatively sparse research attention from social psychologists
(Kenny et al., 1993; Nielsen & Miller, 1997). The few extant
studies of this phenomenon demonstrate that an arbitrary
norm may exhibit some stability (Jacobs & Campbell, 1961),
inversely related to the norm’s degree of arbitrariness, that is,
deviation from members’ own inclinations (MacNeil &
Sherif, 1981), and effortfulness of maintenance (Weick &
Gilfillan, 1971). Those findings imply that member
motivations (e.g., follow own inclinations or the desire to
save effort) may constitute an important underlying factor of

Study 1. Noise vs. no-noise condition
Participants
Participants were 160 females students of psychology at the
University of Rome “La Sapienza”, whose average age was
21.3 (s.d.=2.4). They were randomly assigned into 10
laboratory micro-cultures. They performed the task in the
noise condition (Kruglanski & Webster , 1991; Kruglanski et
al., 1993), and 10 in the control condition (no-noise).
Procedure
In a mass session, one up to two months before the
experiment, participants completed a small booklet
containing various scales. At the end of this booklet,
participants were asked to volunteer for a study concerning a
group simulation. Those agreeing were subsequently
contacted by phone and invited to appear at the laboratory of
the Department of Social and Developmental Psychology at
the University of Rome.
After arriving, all participants (including two confederates)
were greeted by two experimenters and accompanied to a
waiting room close to the Social Psychology Laboratory. One
experimenter then explained that they would be called in a
random order. In the experimental condition, groups
performed the task under environmental noise simulated with
a broken air conditioning fan. The experimenter, offering his
apologies for the noise, said he contacted the technical service
in order to repair the malfunction, but that the technician
would repair air-conditioning only within a week. Then he
asked participants whether they wanted to schedule
appointment for next week or complete the task in any case.
All participants chose to do the experiment anyway. The
ambient noise was indeed caused by a small speaker hidden
in the intake of the air conditioning; this speaker, connected
with the computer in the control room, run a file of a looped
sampled registration of the rotor of a broken fan. Next, the
first three participants (the first two being confederates) were
invited to follow the first experimenter to the lab, while the
second experimenter waited with other participants in order to
control that they would not actively socialize with each other
by offering magazines and newspapers.

Three-person groups participated in a generational procedure
in which at the end of each cycle an old member was dropped
from the group and a new one was added. The group task was
a modified version of Sullivan (1991). Eight naïve subjects
and two confederates were assembled to form a fictitious
company called Caesar Soft Inc. They were informed that the
company just issued a new product, a computerized software
for the language recognition. The participant’s task was to
meet in a group and decide two different issues: mean age and
monthly income of the target user of the software. These two
tasks was chosen due to their different perceived difficulty.
The first group was then formed including the two
confederates and one naïve subject. Each member of the
group, in turn, stated a numeric opinion. For statistical reason
related to the method of data-analysis (Kenny et al., 1993), no
discussion between members took place. After all members
stated their opinion, the experimenter informed the group of
their decision consisting of the arithmetic mean of the
different members’ estimates. The two confederates stated
opinions toward the low end of the response scale for each
issue, namely 20 and 21 for the age and for the monthly
income, 880 and 980 euros.
Following the group decision , one confederate left the room,
and was replaced by a new naïve subject. The group decision
process was repeated and the second confederate was
replaced by naïve subject. At the end of each cycle, when the
participant back to the waiting room, the second experimenter
gave the post-experiment questionnaire with manipulation
checks.
Six subsequent generational-cycles were run with naïve
subjects exclusively. Only data from those trials were
analyzed. Each set of eight generations (Two with
confederates, and six without) are referred as a culture (see
table 1).
Table 1 Note: underlined subjects were confederates; A, B
and C indicate the answer rank order
Subjects

1
2
3

Generations

normative stability. It is presently assumed that a major
motivation for normative stability is need for closure (NFC).
Specifically, the permanence tendency mentioned earlier may
contribute to members’ tendency to resist normative change
and uphold the group’s existing norms across generations.
Two experiments were designed and conducted to test the
hypothesis that epistemic motivation towards closure induces
the stability of the group's norm and affects both the stability
and the conformity of group members. In the first study, need
for closure was situationally manipulated through
environmental noise, whereas in the second study need for
closure was manipulated as individual difference; groups
composed by individuals low dispositional NFC were
compared to groups formed by individuals with high
dispositional NFC.

4
5
6
7
8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

C

A

B

10

C

1309

In the experimental condition, groups performed the task
under environmental noise, whereas in the control condition

they completed the same task in a silent environment.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
experimental conditions.

Results
Stability and Conformity Table 2 shows the influence
coefficients for the present study. For the age variable,
stability coefficient are high and statistically significant both
in noise and no-noise conditions. That means that people does
not change their response from a generation to another and
remain both freezed on their opinion. Evident differences are
present in conformity behavior of newcomers: In no noise
condition, conformity coefficient is low and not significant
(.41), whereas in the noise condition they increase and
become significant (.70).
For Income, perceived to be the more difficult task by
participants, the stability coefficients are fairly similar for
both old members. Looking at level of conformity, results
shows higher coefficients, confirming prior results of Kenny
and colleagues (1993). No appreciable differential effect was
found for old members’ conformity, while for the newcomers,
as the previous variable, the noise (vs. no noise) condition
presents higher coefficients (.60 vs. .88, both significant).
Again, for income variable, the newcomers appear to adopt
the group’s norm in the noise condition than in the no-noise
condition.

Measures
The main dependent measure was the opinion expressed by
subjects on each cycle. Moreover, a post experimental
questionnaire was administered including measures of
manipulation checks and some measure to control for
undesired effects of noise, such as participants’ arousal and
mood (see Kruglanski & Webster, 1991).

Data Analysis
The basic datum was each subject’s numeric opinion
concerning the two decision issues (target mean age and
mean income). The data analysis used GENERAL software
(GENERations anALysis, Kenny, 1991), aimed to estimates
both stability and conformity coefficients from data collected
with the generation design (for a detailed description, see
Kenny et al., 1993). In the GENERAL model, the stability
parameter denote to the old member’s behavior determined
by her past behavior, thus the extent to winch a person’s
behavior (numerical opinion) is determined by her past
behavior (in the previous cycles in which she had
participated). Because past behavior may have been
conforming only a portion of stability is truly conforming.
Additionally, a person's behavior is influenced by other
members of the actual or past generations. For newcomer, the
conformity parameter refers to influence exerted by the other
two old members of the current generation. For the two old
members, conformity could have different paths: In fact,
people could be influenced by other members of the group of
which they are members, or they can be influenced by the
opinions expressed in the previous generation. In the present
study, we set the conformity coefficient so that the oldest
member is influenced only by the answer of the newcomer of
the previous generation, while the “younger” old member, is
influenced by the answer of the oldest member in the current
generation.
The method of coefficients estimation presume that responses
are in a fixed sequence and therefore is clear the direction of
the influence (i.e. older member influence new members) For
this reason, no discussion was permitted during each
generation, otherwise, participants could influence each other
and regression model would be become much more
complicated due to this mutual influence.
The influence coefficient is the regression coefficient that
measures the extent to which a person is conformist (i.e.
influenced by other) or stable (i.e. influenced by the person’s
own past).

Table 2
Control Condition
Variable

Answer rank

Age

Income

Conformity

Stability

A

-.09

.96*

B

.09

.79*

C newcomer

.41

-

A

.11

1*

B

-.02

.93*

C newcomer

.60*

-

Noise condition
Variable

Answer rank

Age

Income

Conformity

Stability

A

.01

.95*

B

.15

.74*

C newcomer

.70*

-

A

.22

.70*

B

-.01

.93*

C newcomer

.88*

-

Study 2 High NCC vs. Low NCC condition
This study is a replication of study 1 with NCC
operationalized as an individual difference.

Participants

Participants were 160 females students of psychology at the
University of Rome “La Sapienza”, whose average age was

1310

22.8 (s.d.=2.8). They were randomly assigned into 10
laboratory micro-cultures.

Table 3

Procedure and Task

Low NCC

In two mass testing one to two months prior to the
experimental session, participants completed the Italian
version of Need for closure scale (Webster & Kruglanski,
1994) and a consent form to the experiment participation.
Following prior research (Mannetti, Pierro, Kruglanski, Taris,
Bezinovic, 2002), in the present study we used a reduced
version of the NFC scale without decisiveness items.
Afterwards, according to the scores on the scale subjects were
divided into three groups: low, middle and high. Subjects
with low NCC score and high NCC score were contacted by
phone and asked to volunteer for a study concerning a group
simulation. Those agreeing were invited to appear at the
laboratory of the Department of Social and Developmental
Psychology at the University of Rome. The procedure for the
study was identical to the procedure of the first study with no
noise condition.

Variable

Answer rank

Conformity

Stability

Age

A

.06

.85*

B

11

.91*

C newcomer

.45*

-

A

.07

.88*

B

-.07

.97*

C newcomer

.65*

-

Income

High NCC
Variable

Answer rank

Conformity

Stability

Age

A

.04

.77*

B

-.11

1*

C newcomer

.71*

-

A

-.07

1*

Measures

B

.07

.91*

C newcomer

.82*

-

Income

Need for Closure. The Italian version of the need for closure
scale was administered (Pierro, Mannetti, Converso, Garsia,
Miglietta, Ravenna, Rubini, 1995; Webster & Kruglanski,
1994). This scale is composed by 35 items aimed to measure
four different aspect of the need for closure: preference for
order and structure, intolerance of ambiguity, need for
predictability, close-mindedness (Webster & Kruglanski,
1994). Participants state their agreement or disagreement to
the items on seven points ranging from completely disagree
(1) to completely agree (7). The overall reliability was
satisfactory, the Cronbach α being .86. An overall score was
computed and used to divided participants into high and low
groups in need for closure.

Conclusions

Results

Findings from both studies were conceptually consistent with
our theoretical derivation concerning the positive relation
between need for closure and resistance to change: Groups in
NFC conditions (both with high score in NFC Scale or under
environmental noise) maintain arbitrary norms stable through
social contexts changes, showing that individuals with a high
need for closure find change aversive and resist to group’s
internal change attempts, potentially originated by fresh
opinions and ideas contributed by newcomers.
These results confirm both the theory and empirical studies
on Need for Cognitive Closure: for example, Kruglanski e
Webster, (1991), Doherty (1998), found that need for
cognitive closure increase rejection of deviant opinions,
desire to avoid ambiguity in order to find a stable and shared
reality within group (cfr. Harding e Higgins, 1996). The
present studies show that Need For Cognitive Closure induce
people to control their own behavior in order to reduce
opinion divergence, following standards suggested by old
members of the group.
Trying to generalize results to a more natural context, results
propose that in families with members with high need for
closure, children will be more prone to assimilate traditions,
passing family cultures from a generation to another with
slight changes. At the same time, in organizational
workgroups that work with high time pressure or noise
conditions, newcomers will be more watchful to
organizational norms expressed by full members and will
freeze upon those norms.
Some methodological limitations should be taken into
account: the generational paradigm have the advantage to

Stability and Conformity. Table 3 shows results that
confirms coefficients reported in the previous study. Looking
first at “age” variable, stability coefficients are both high and
significant in the two NCC conditions. Resembling the study
1, the conformity coefficient are different: in the Low NCC
condition, conformity coefficient is .45 while in High NCC is
.71. Thus, results show that subjects high in the NCC scale
are more conforming to group’s norm then low NCC. Also
Income variable shows the same pattern, increasing only
conformity behavior from Low to High NCC (.64 vs. .82).

1311

offer a rigorous experimental procedure that allow to control
norms’ transmission, but the absence of interaction delete an
important factor in group interaction, that is social control
through feedback.
Despite of this limitation, future research could use simpler
research designs, such as a correlational study, in order to
verify, for example, the relation between dispositional need
for cognitive closure and norms’ acceptance from old
members or previous generation

References
Doherty, K.T. (1998). A mind of her own: Effect of need for
cognitive closure and gender reactions to nonconformity.
Sex Role, 38 (9-10), 801-819.
Harding, C.T., Higgins, E.T. (1996). Shared reality: How
social verification makes subjective objective. In R.M.
Sorrentino e E.T. Higgins (a cura di). Handbook of
motivation and Cognition: Vol. 3 The Interpersonal
Context. 28-84. New York: Guilford Press.
Jacobs, R.. Campbell, D. (1961). The perpetuation of an
arbitrary norm tradition through several generations of
laboratory microculture. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 62, 649-658.
Kenny, D.A. (1991). GENERAL: A Fortran Computer
Program for the Analysis of Generational Designs. The
University of Connecticut.
Kenny, D.A., Hallmark, B.W., Sullivan, P., Kashy, D.A.
(1993). The Analysis of individuals are in more then one
group. British Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 173-190.
Kruglanski, A.W. (1996). Motivated Social Cognition:
Principles of the interface. In E.T. Higgins, A.W.
Kruglanski (a cura di) Social psychology: Handbook of
basic principles (pp. 493-520). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Kruglanski, A.W. (1989). Lay Epistemic and Human
Knowledge: Cognitive and motivational bases. New York:
Plenum.
Kruglanski, A.W. e Webster, D.M. (1991). Group members
reactions to opinion deviates and conformists at varying

degrees of proximity to decision deadline and
environmental noise. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 61, 215-225.
Kruglanski, A.W., Webster, D.M. (1996). Motivated closing
of the mind: «Seizing» and «Freezing». Psychological
Review, 103, 263-283.
MacNeil, M., Sherif, M. (1981). Norm change over subject
generations as a function of arbitrariness of prescribed
norms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34,
762-773.
Mannetti, L., Pierro, A., Kruglanski, A.W., Taris, T.,
Bezinovic, P. (2002). Need for Cognitive Closure Scale: A
comparison of its structure in Croatia, Italy, USA and The
Netherlands. British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 139156.
Mayseless, O. e Kruglanski, A.W. (1987). What makes you
so sure? Effects of epistemic motivations on judgmental
confidence. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 39, 162-183.
Nielsen, M.E., Miller, C.E. (1997). The trasmission of norms
regarding group decision rules. Personality and Social
Psychology Bullettin, 23, 5, 516-525.
Pierro, A., Mannetti, L., Converso, D. Garsia, V., Miglietta,
A. Ravenna, M., Rubini, M. (1995). Caratteristiche
strutturali della versione italiana della scala di bisogno di
chiusura cognitiva (di Webster e Kruglanski), TPM
(Testing, Psicometria, Metodologia), 2, 125-141.
Webster, D.M., Kruglanski, A.W. (1994). Individual
Differences in Need for Cognitive Closure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1049-1062.
Webster, D.M., Kruglanski, A.W. (1998). Cognitive and
social consequence of the Need for Cognitive Closure.
European Review of Social Psychology, 8, 133-171.
Weick, K., Gilfillan, D. (1971). Toward a theory of
organizational socialization. In B.Staw (a cura di).
Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 1, pp.. 209-264).
Greenwich, CT: JAI.

1312

