teractions of the two components (e.g., Norman, et.al, 1992).
Therefore, we quantify the interactions between perceptual
and conceptual processing by developing our own protocols
analysis method, and attempt to demonstrate the effects of
expertise on the interactions of the two components.

Method
In order to investigate medical image diagnosis in a realistic
context, the experiment was performed in a room located in
the radiology department at Nagoya University, where participants in our experiment usually work.
In the experiment, participants were required to make “differential diagnoses of lung nodules (malignant/benign).” We
considered that this task has an advantage for investigating
the interactions between perceptual and conceptual processing. In order to make a differential diagnosis of lung nodules,
physicians are required to consider several diseases entities,
such as pneumonia, tuberculosis, benign tumors, malignant
tumors, etc. Additionally, since these diseases show common
features on medical images, physicians need to consider complex conjunctions of several physical features [e.g., “spiculation,” “over 1 cm,” “round shape,” and “converging bloodvessels.”] Therefore, we thought that not only perceptual processing but also conceptual processing is inevitably involved
in solving the task.

Materials
Cases We chose case materials from a research database,
which consisted of cases whose diagnoses had already been
determined by operations, biopsies, or follow-up examinations. The cases were randomly chosen, all of which contain at least one nodular lesion. In a later section, we refer
the most significant nodular lesion in each case as a target
lesion. The selected cases consisted of eight benign and six
malignant cases. The benign cases had been diagnosed as
tuberculosis, organizing pneumonia, amyloidosis, or benign
tumor, while the malignant cases included a variety of lung
cancers, such as well differentiated carcinoma and squamous
cell carcinoma.
CT data sets Each of the cases consisted of three types of
CT data sets; we refer hereafter to these three types of CT
data as lung window CT, mediastinal window CT, and highresolution CT.
The lung window CT data set means the CT data with a
window level of -600 H.U., a window width of 1800 H.U,
and a slice thickness of 5-10 mm, and shows the overall lung
area composed of 30 to 50 slices. By using this type of data
set, a physician judges the location of a target lesion and observes a base diseases of the lung area such as emphysema or
interstitial pneumonia.
The mediastinal window CT data set is the same as the
lung window CT data set, except that display conditions are
adjusted to show the mediastinal area clearly (window level,
50 H.U; window width, 300 H.U). By using this type of image, physicians investigate abnormalities in mediastinal re-

gions and axillary regions. This data set is used to confirm
the presence of calcifications inside the target lesion.
The high-resolution CT means the data set focusing on the
target lesion (resolution, about 300 µm; slice thickness, 0.5 to
2 mm). Usually, physicians use this type of image to investigate important features of the target lesion (density, shape)
and relations to lung tissues (blood vessels, bronchi, and pleural membranes).
Clinical histories In this experiment, no clinical information other that CT images was presented because the previous
studies indicated significant influence of clinical histories on
the accuracy of diagnosis.
Devices for viewing CT images The CT images were presented by using the tools usually employed by the participants (a workstation, two medical monochrome LCDs, and
a DICOM viewer). Each of the two LCDs is able to display
several slices at the same time, and the operations can use
the workstation’ mouse to transform those slices displayed.
Furthermore, the DICOM viewer provides several supporting tools, such as a tuning function of window level, a measurement tool for sizes and densities of shadows, and a synchronization function for different types of CT data sets. In
this experiment, participants were allowed to use theses tools
without any constraints.
Devices for writing medical reports To enhance the reality of the experimental situation, we asked participants to
write formal medical reports. The medical reports were written using a reporting system that provides two text forms:
“findings” and “impressions”.

Participants
Ten participants were recruited from the radiology department at Nagoya University, including five experts and five
novices. All of the experts were radiologists, who were on
the academic staff of the radiology department. They had five
to twenty years experience in image diagnosis. On the other
hand, the novices were residents and graduate students of the
radiology department. They were physicians who had completed the degree of undergraduate medicine, and had less
than two years experience in image diagnosis.

Procedure
The experiment required a total of two to four hours, which
was divided into the following four stages.
1. Instructions Each participant was given the following
instructions: “imagine the situations where abnormal findings were detected as a result of screening tests. Your task is
to make differential diagnoses of the detected abnormal findings.” Following this, the participant was also instructed to
verbalize all of their thoughts without filtering them.
2. A Practice Task Each participant diagnosed one of the
benign cases while being prompted to talk aloud. If the participant did not talk aloud for more than about ten seconds, the

1542

experimenter prompted the participants by an encouragement
such as “please continue to talk aloud.” The data obtained in
the practice task were excluded from the later analysis.

Table 1: Definitions of tags
Category
Percept

3. Main tasks In the main tasks, each participant made diagnoses on thirteen cases that included seven benign and six
malignant cases. The presentation order was randomized between the participants. For each case, the participants investigated the CT images and wrote a medical report about abnormal findings and suspected diseases. Since writing a medical
report proceeded almost simultaneously with investigation of
the CT images, we did not discriminate the two activities in
the later analysis.

Concept

Region

4. Interviews Following the diagnosis of each case, an experimenter interviewed the participants. Preventing the participants from a specific bias in answering, the experimenter
used only the following three questions.
1. Explain their own diagnostic processes. The participant
was asked to report how he/she discovered the findings written down in the medical reports.
2. Report findings that were not written in the reports. The
participant was prompted to report findings that he/she did
not write down in the medical reports.
3. Rate the probability of malignancy. The participant was
asked to rate how strong he/she felt the target lesion was malignant (0: absolutely benign to 10: absolutely malignant).

Data analysis
Recorded data We recorded all verbalizations and videotaped the images and texts on the LCDs. The verbalizations
and the texts in the medical reports were transcribed. Therefore, the protocols data included: (1) the verbalizations during the main tasks, (2) the texts written in the medical reports, and (3) the verbalizations during the interviews. Since
the first and second types of data are supposed to represent
the participants’ thinking process in the main tasks, we analyzed two types of data all together to explore their diagnostic
processes. On the other hand, the third type of data were retrospective reports. Therefore, we used the data in analysis
only when we investigated overall trends of their diagnoses.
Protocols analysis The protocols data obtained in our experiment were so large that the traditional hand-coding protocols analysis was practically difficult. In order to ensure reliability of coding, and to conduct detailed quantitative analysis,
we developed a semi-automatic protocols analysis method, in
which the Japanese morphological analysis system ChaSen
was used. ChaSen is a standard tool for text analysis and
text mining in Japan. The system automatically converts
plain texts to word sequences, using dictionaries of words and
grammar. In this analysis, we directly described semantic
tags in ChaSen’s word dictionary, ChaSen outputted tagged
words sequentially. The coding procedure comprised the following five stages.
1. Morphological analysis with the default dictionary.
First, all of the protocol data were input into ChaSen. ChaSen

Goal

Subcategory
Size
Shape
Outline
Number
Inside
Relation
Disease
Surgery
Artifact
Treatment
Judgment
Others
Lung
Mediastinum
Abdomen
Bronchus
Blood vein
Pleura
Image
Action

Examples
small, large, cm
round, polygon
spiculation, borderline
singly, multiple, several
dark, grand-glass-opacity
continue, attract
tuberculosis, Lung cancer
post surgery, cut off
gravity,
follow-up, biospy
benign-malignancy
meta, infarction, emphysema
right/left-lung, S1, S2...
heart, main-artery
liver, pancreas
B1, B2...
blood-vein
major-fissure, chest-wall
window-level, HRCT
diagnosis, differentiate

Table 2: Outputs of ChaSen with a new dictionary
Example 1
Words
S8
S10
right-lung
S10
light
nodule
spicula

Sub
lung
lung
lung
lung
dense
shape
line

Cat
reg
reg
reg
reg
per
per
per

Example 2
Words
pneumonia
trace
pneumonia
benign-tumor
trace
malignant
deny

Sub
disease
other
disease
disease
others
disease
judge

Cat
con
con
con
con
con
con
con

then analyzed the data with the default word dictionary, and
output 104,473 words.
2. Selecting the words. Most of the words output by the
above procedure were syncategorematic terms (e.g., prepositions), or words that did not directly relate to the diagnostic
activities (e.g., conjunctions, fillers). Therefore, these kinds
of word were eliminated in the later analysis.
3. Creating a new dictionary. We created a new word dictionary comprising the words selected by the above procedure. Additionally, technical terms that were not appropriately discriminated by the default dictionary were registered
into the dictionary.
4. Marking semantic tags. A semantic tag was labeled in
each of the words. Examples of the tags are shown in Table
1. The tags were divided into four main categories: percept
(338 words), concept (143 words), region (166 words), and
goal (15 words). The percept concerns a vocabulary of perceptual features, which can be directly observed from the CT
images. The concept indicates a word concerning physiological or pathological features on the CT images, such as a disease name and a surgery method. The region indicates lung
area or an organization of the lung, which is a technical term
of anatomy, and the goal indicates a word concerning a type
of CT images or a word relating the task that the physicians
performed.
5. Morphological analysis with the new dictionary. After
deletion of the default dictionary, morphological analysis was
again conducted with the new dictionary. ChaSen with the

1543

Table 3: Performance [Mean (SD)]
Novices
Experts

Accuracy score
1.05 (2.32)
1.55 (2.46)

Time (seconds)
539 (87)
491 (121)

new dictionary output a total of 19,678 words (13,984 in the
main tasks; 5,694 in the interviews). Table 2 shows examples
of the output words.
Statistical tests In this paper, a unit of statistical tests was
the average value for each case (n = 13).

Results and Discussion
1. Performance
Prior to presenting the results of protocols analysis, we indicate overall performances of the experts and novices. Table 3
shows (a) accuracy score, and (b) time (seconds) to complete
medical reports.
(a) Accuracy score The accuracy score was calculated by
subtracting five points from a participant’s rating score of malignancy. In the cases where the target lesion was benign, the
scores were reversed. Thus, the scores ranged from −5 to 5,
with higher scores indicate more confident correct diagnoses,
and lower scores more confident incorrect diagnoses. A dependent groups t test revealed that the experts made more accurate diagnoses than the novices did [t(12) = 1.80, p < .05].
(b) Required time Past research indicated that the development of expertise reduces the time to make a diagnosis (e.g.,
Azevedo and Lajoie, 1998). From this, we tried to confirm
the difference between the experts and the novices in the time
taken to complete the medical reports. A dependent groups t
test revealed that the experts made diagnoses faster than the
novices [t(12) = 1.81, p < .05].
The above two results confirmed that the experts were superior to the novices in 3D-CT diagnosis.

2. Results of protocols analysis
In this section, we show three results of protocols analysis:
(a) overall patterns of tagged words, (b) patterns of tagged
words in the earlier and later phases of the diagnostic process,
and (3) frequencies of the interactive cycles of perceptual and
conceptual processing. The first analysis aimed to reconfirm
the previous findings of X-ray film diagnosis, while the second and third analyses concerned the interactive process of
the perceptual and conceptual processing1 .
(a) Overall patterns of tagged words Table 4 shows two
scores of four tag types: (1) mean numbers of words per case,
and (2) mean numbers of different types of word per case.
1
The first analysis was based on all of the protocols data including the verbalizations in the interviews, whereas the second and third
analyses were based on the protocols data in the main task excluding
the verbalizations in the interviews.

The difference of the first and second scores is in whether duplicated identical words were counted or not. The first score
indicates the total amount of protocols data, whereas the second score indicates the variety of protocols data. We compared the experts with the novices in each of the scores for
each of the tag types.
In all of the tag types except region, the number of words
in the experts was higher than that of the novices [percept,
t(12) = 1.96, p < .05; concept, t(12) = 2.61, p < .01; region,
t(12) = 1.55, ns.,; goal, t(12) = 3.51, p < .01]. There are
also significant differences among the types of word in all
of the tag types [percept, t(12) = 7.52, p < .01; concept,
t(12) = 8.94, p < .01; region, t(12) = 2.96, p < .05; goal,
t(12) = 5.11, p < .01].
Roughly speaking, the above results are consistent with the
previous findings of X-ray film diagnosis. As noted earlier,
Lesgold et al (1988) confirmed that experts verbalized more
types of finding and more types of hypothesis than novices.
Also, Rufaste, Eyrolle, & Marine (1996) revealed that semantic networks constructed from experts’ verbalizations were
richer than those from novices’ verbalizations.
(b) Tagged words in the earlier and later diagnostic processes Our main area of interest was to understand the nature of the interactions between perceptual and conceptual
processing. Therefore, we investigated the transition of words
from the earlier to later phases of diagnostic process. That
is, each word sequence was divided at the center of the process, and we counted words appearing in the earlier and later
phases. The result is shown in Figure 1. In this analysis, we
counted only words tagged as percept and concept, disregarding words tagged as region and goal.
We conducted two 2 × 2 expertise (within) × phases
(within) one-way analyses of variance with each of percept
and concept as dependent measures. The ANOVA with percept revealed that words tagged as percept significantly decreased from the earlier to later phases regardless of expertise [a main effect of the phases, F(1, 12) = 9.43, p < .01;
a main effect of the expertise, F(1, 12) = 1.74, ns.; an interaction between the expertise and the phases, F(1, 12) =
0.09, ns.,]. On the other hand, the ANOVA with concept
revealed not only a significant main effect of the phases
[F(1, 12) = 14.42, p < .01], but also a significant main effect
of the expertise [F(1, 12) = 7.37, p < .05], and a significant
interaction between the expertise and the phases [F(1, 12) =
6.80, p < .05]. As results of analyses of simple main effects,
it was confirmed that the number of words tagged as concept increased from the earlier to later phases, both among
the experts [F(1, 12) = 8.25, p < .05] and for the novices
[F(1, 12) = 18.79]. Furthermore, it was also confirmed that
the experts more frequently reported words tagged as concept
than the novices in the earlier phase [F(1, 12) = 20.31, p <
.01.], but not in the later phase [F(1, 12) = 1.09, ns.].
The above results suggest that the process of medical image diagnosis is basically a serial bottom-up process, which
is consistent with the traditional view of medical image diag-

1544

Table 4: Overall patterns of tagged words [Mean (SD)]
Novices
Experts

Words
Types
Words
Types

Percepts
61.89 (15.75)
26.78 (5.19)
71.69 (16.12)
34.16 (6.44)

Concepts
24.21 (6.93)
9.80 (2.00)
31.29 (9.29)
12.41 (2.54)

nosis noted earlier (as a decrease of percept and an increase
of concept from the earlier to later phases). However, the
significant interaction in concept, which indicates that the experts frequently reported words tagged as concept in the earlier phase, suggests that the development of expertise changes
the methods of interactions of the two components.

35
Number of tagged words

(c) Cycles of perceptual and conceptual processing To
investigate the interactive process of medical image diagnosis
more directly, we analyzed local transition patterns of word
sequences. That is, we distinguished segments concerning
perceptual processing from segments concerning conceptual
processing. We assumed the earlier segments as continuous
appearances of percept (e.g., Example 1 of Table 2), and the
latter as continuous appearances of concept (Example 2 of
Table 2). Region and goal were disregarded in this analysis
because these two tag types seemed to relate to both perceptual and conceptual processing. Following this, we counted
the number of transitions from the percept segments to the
concept segments, which roughly indicates the frequency of
cycles between perceptual and conceptual processing. The
number of cycles, C, was counted using the following procedure.
If n’s tag value = n − 1’s tag value
Then n = n + 1
Else
If n’s tag value = ”percept” or ”concept”
Then{
back to previous ”percept” or ”concept”
If n’ tag value = previous tag value
Then n = n + 1
Else {C = C + 1, n = n + 1}}
Else n = n + 1
Table 5 shows the result of this analysis. Number indicates a
mean number of cycles per case, while proportion indicates a
mean proportion of the number of cycles to the total amount
of words per case. Therefore, proportion indicates how long a
particular segment type continued until the other type of segment appeared. Two dependent group t tests revealed that the
cycles of the expert were more frequent and more rapid than
those of the novices [number of cycles, t(12) = 3.39, p < .01;
proportion of cycles, t(12) = 2.83, p < .05]. The results
suggest that the development of expertise changes how two
components interact with each other. That is, the experts
switched the two components more frequently, whereas the
novices continued the sequence longer in each component.

Regions
41.98 (8.29)
21.06 (3.50)
45.69 (8.55)
23.56 (5.02)

Goals
11.32 (2.07)
4.29 (0.62)
14.38 (3.06)
5.04 (1.01)

Novice-percept
Expert-percept
Novice-concept
Expert-concept

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Earlier

Later

Phase

Figure 1: Tagged words in the earlier and later diagnostic
processes. Note. Error bars represent one standard error of
mean.
Table 5: Cycles [Mean (SD)]
Novices
Experts

Number
15.73 (6.03)
19.33 (7.09)

Proportion
0.150 (0.04)
0.177 (0.05)

General Discussion
In this study, we investigated the development of expertise in
3D-CT image diagnosis. Roughly speaking, our results are
consistent with the previous findings of X-ray film diagnosis
(Lesgold et. al., 1988; Raufaste, Eyrolle, & Mariné, 1998)
in that the experts exhibited superior diagnostic performance.
The results of protocols analysis also demonstrated that the
development of expertise changes both perceptual and conceptual processing.
Furthermore, our study revealed effects of expertise on the
interactions between the two components, which had been
unclear in the previous studies. Overall, both the experts
and the novices made their entire diagnoses in the bottom-up
manner; however, the experts engaged in conceptual processing in the earlier stages. They produced more frequent cycles
of the two components. Although further investigation is required, the clear results presented in this paper have a strong
implication for understanding the nature of expertise in medical image diagnosis.
We believe that our results have implications for the general goal of cognitive science studies, such as deep understanding of human cognition. Through evolutions of cog-

1545

nitive science, the interactions between perception (external world, or data) and concept (schema, or hypothesis)
have been frequently discussed (e.g., Simon, and Lea, 1974;
Neisser, 1978; Goldstone, Steyvers, Spencer-Smith, and Kersten, 2000). In particular, we consider that the process presented in this paper is similar to those of design and scientific discovery. For example, the design studies revealed that
“novel perception and novel concept are generated through
the interactive process of perceptual and conceptual activities” (Suwa, Gero, and Purcell, 2000). Additionally, beginning with the dual-space search model, proposed by Simon,
and Lea (1974), the studies of scientific discovery intensively
explored the interactions of data search and hypothesis generation, which provide opportunities of historical discoveries. Furthermore, we speculate that hypothesis testing strategies such as the negative test strategy are important skills for
medical image diagnosis. In fact, one of the experts gave
a verbalization that suggests the use of negative-tests such as
“because the shadow apparently looked malignant, I searched
features that belonged to benign cases” (similar findings in
Pani, Chariker, and Fell, 2004).
Additionally, we consider that our study has a methodological implication in protocols analysis studies. In this study,
the morphological analysis tool made it possible to analyze
large amounts of protocols data, and successfully quantified
the interactions between perceptual and conceptual processing. Although there are some limitations in our methods, we
believe that further elaborations of the methods will make it
possible to understand the details of the cognitive process.
Finally we would like to assert contributions of our study
from the viewpoint of cognitive engineering. This study is
part of a larger project that is being conducted in collaboration with researchers of image-processing engineering and radiologists, with the aim of developing intelligent systems that
support the diagnostic process (details in Morita, Miwa, Kitasaka, Mori, Suenaga, Iwano, Ikeda, and Ishigaki, 2004). So
far, image-processing engineering has developed elaborated
tools that mainly support physicians’ perceptual processing
(e.g., Mori, Hasegawa, Suenaga, & Toriwaki, 2000). We believe that the combination of image-processing engineering
and cognitive scientific analysis will make possible to create innovative tools for supporting the interactive process in
medical image diagnosis.

Goldstone, R.L., Steyvers, M., Spencer-Smith, J., & Kersten,
A., (2000). Interactions between Perceptual and Conceptual Learning, In E. Diettrich & A.B.Markman(Eds.) Cognitive Dynamics: Conceptual Change in Humans and Machines., 191–228.

Acknowledgments

Rogers, E., (1996). A Study of Visual Reasoning in Medical
Diagnosis. In proceedings of the eiteenth annual conference of the cognitive science society, Lawrence Erlbaum:
Mahwah, NJ, 213–218.

This work was supported in part by the Grant-In-Aid for 21st
COE program provided by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the Japanese government. The authors thank the physicians of Nagoya University
Hospital for participating in the experiment.

References
Azevedo, R, & Lajoie, S. P., (1998). The cognitive basis for
the design of a mammography interpretation tutor. International journal of artificial intelligence in education, 9,
32–44.

Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovitch, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer,
D., & Wang, Y., (1988). Expertise in a complex skill: Diagnosing X-ray pictures. In M. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. Farr,
M. (Eds.), The nature of expertise, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
311–342.
Krupinski, E., (2003). The future of image perception in radiology: Synergy between humans and computers. Academic radiology, 10, 1–3.
Mori, K., Hasegawa, J., Suenaga, Y., & Toriwaki, J., (2000).
Automated anatomical labeling of the bronchial branch and
its application to the virtual bronchoscopy system. IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging. 19, 103–114.
Morita, J., Miwa, K. Kitasaka, T., Mori, K., Suenaga, Y.,
Iwano, S., Ikeda, M., & Ishigaki, T., (2004). Chance Discovery in Image Diagnosis: Analysis of Perceptual Cycles.
In proceedings of the first European Workshop on Chance
Discovery, 16th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence. 162–171.
Myles-Worsley, M., Johnston, W. A., & Simons, M. A.,
(1988). The influence of expertise on X-ray image processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 14, 553–557.
Neisser, U., (1978). Cognition and reality. W.H. Freeman and
Company.
Norman, G. R., Brooks, L. R., Coblentz, C. L., & Babcook,
C. J., (1992). The correlation of feature identification and
category judgments in diagnostic radiology. Memory &
Cognition, 20, 344–355.
Pani, J. R., Chariker, J. H., & Fell, R. D., (2004). Toward a
theory of qualitative vidual reasoning in microanatomy, In
proceedings of the eighteenth International workshop on
qualitative reasoning.
Raufaste, E., Eyrolle, H., & Mariné, C., (1998). Pertinence
generation in radiological diagnosis: Spreading activation
and the nature of expertise. Cognitive Science, 22, 517–
546.

Suwa, M., Gero, J. & Purcell, T. (2000) Unexpected discoveries and S-invention of design requirements: Important vehicles for a design process. Design Studies, 21, 539–567.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G., (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: unified view. In L. Gregg, (eds.), Knowledge
and Cognition, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 105–127.
Woods, B. P., (1999) Visual Expertise. Radiology, 211, 1–3.

1546

