UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expectancy for the Morphological Form of Verbs During Semantic Priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rn8q25g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Elman, Jeffrey L.
Ferretti, Todd R.
McRae, Ken
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expectancy for the Morphological Form of Verbs During Semantic Priming
Todd R. Ferretti (tferrett@wlu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3C5

Ken McRae (kenm@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology, Social Science Center
University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5C2

Jeffrey L. Elman (elman@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Candace Ramshaw (candacesakic19@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Wilfrid Laurier University
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3C5
demonstrated using a short SOA (250 ms) priming
paradigm that verbs such as arrest prime nouns that are
common fillers of the verb’s thematic roles (e.g., agent cop, patient – crook, and instrument – gun). These results
suggest that detailed conceptual information about events
becomes activated very quickly from verbs.
More recently, McRae, Hare, Elman, and Ferretti (in
press) have demonstrated that nouns which are common
fillers of a verb’s thematic roles, such as agent (herorescuing), patient (movie-rented), instrument (crutcheswalking) and location (sandbox-digging), prime those verbs
in short SOA (250 ms) and long SOA (500 ms) word-word
priming tasks. These results suggest that not only can
semantic priming occur through relational information such
as thematic roles, but that this information becomes
available very quickly from words presented in isolation.
Because short SOAs of 25O ms or less are commonly
viewed as capturing the “automatic” activation of
information from words, the observed priming effects
cannot be due to explicit strategic expectancy generation
that is thought to occur at longer SOAs (e.g., Becker,
1980). Furthermore, previous research (Kahen, Neely, &
Forsythe, 1999) has demonstrated that backward priming
between words can occur at short, but not long SOAs.
Because McRae et al. observed the same pattern of priming
at a long SOA, their results cannot be due to backward
priming from the verbs to the nouns.

Abstract
We examined whether event knowledge about the roles that
nouns play in specific events interacts with the
morphological form of active and passive verbs during short
SOA (250 ms), noun-verb semantic priming. In Experiment
1, we investigated how quickly participants pronounce verbs
inflected with -ing or -ed (arresting vs. arrested) when
preceded by primes consisting of a good-agent or a goodpatient and the auxiliary was (cop was vs. crook was). In
Experiment 2, the primes included the determiner The, and
participants made lexical decisions to the same target verbs.
In both experiments, participants responded more quickly to
active verbs, and made more pronunciation errors in
Experiment 1, when preceded by good-agent, rather than
good-patient noun primes. Alternatively, response latencies
and errors for passive verbs were similar regardless of noun
type.
Keywords: semantic priming, morphology, thematic roles

Introduction
The majority of past research investigating semantic
priming between words has investigated nouns. However,
researchers have recently investigated semantic priming
from nouns to verbs (e.g., McRae, Hare, Elman, & Ferretti,
in press), and from verbs to nouns (Ferretti, Kutas, &
McRae, 2004; Ferretti, McRae, & Hatherell, 2001).
Investigating semantic priming between nouns and verbs is
important because successful language comprehension
involves deriving the appropriate conceptual and syntactic
relationships between entities and events mentioned in
discourse. Semantic priming methodology is useful in this
regard because it provides insight into how and when
semantic and syntactic information becomes available from
words to influence the comprehension process.
The results from semantic priming research indicate that
event information becomes activated by noun and verb
primes to influence priming in word-word semantic
priming tasks. For example, Ferretti et al. (2001)

Accounting for Noun-Verb Semantic Priming
The most common explanation of short SOA (250 ms or
less) word-word priming results is based on the notion of
spreading activation and associative relatedness through cooccurrence. The original instantiations of semantic
networks focused on noun representations (e.g., Collins &
Loftus, 1975). Further extensions implemented verb
meaning into this framework (e.g., Gentner, 1975). But
these verb nodes included minimal semantic content.
The noun-verb priming results of McRae et al. (in press)
could be accounted for by spreading activation if one were
654

manipulation enabled us to investigate whether the event
expectations generated from nouns is for their specific roles
in events (cop was arresting/arrested, crook was
arresting/arrested), and provides insight into how world
knowledge of events interacts with grammatical
morphemes during on-line sentence comprehension.
Recent psycholinguistic research has shown that the
activation of event knowledge is influenced by voice
(Ferretti et al., 2001) and verb aspect (Ferretti et al., 2004;
Madden & Zwaan, 2003). For example, Ferretti et al.
(2001) presented verbs as part of short auditorallypresented active (She arrested the) and passive sentence
fragments (She was arrested by the), and participants
named a visual target (cop) presented at their offset. Agents
and patients were presented in their congruent role (She
was arrested by the / cop) and their incongruent role (She
arrested the / cop). Priming was found only when nouns
were in their congruent roles. Ferretti et al. (2004) have
extended these results by showing how imperfective (was
skating) and perfect verb aspect (had skated) influence the
activation of location knowledge (arena) using Short SOA
priming. They found that common locations in which
specific events occur are primed when they are preceded by
imperfective verbs, but not when preceded by the same
verbs in their perfect form. Thus, the current experiments
add to research examining the interplay between event
knowledge and grammatical morphemes by examining if
voice interacts with peoples event knowledge about
common agents and patients in events during short SOA
semantic priming.

willing to expand current semantic networks. For example,
it could be assumed that nodes for common agents,
patients, instruments, and locations in events become
linked to verb nodes representing those events over time as
a result of experience with situations to which the verb
refers, and linguistic descriptions of them. If all words or
concepts that tend to co-occur frequently in situations are
linked in semantics, and/or orthography and phonology via
an associative relation, then priming from typical role
fillers to specific events might occur. McRae et al. point
out, however, that typical measures of associative
relatedness such as word-association norms, do not reveal
associative relatedness between verbs and nouns that are
related through thematic relations. Rather, people generally
recall words from the same grammatical category as the
stimulus. One might still argue, however, that the common
noun fillers and their corresponding verbs are associated
through co-occurrence in the real world and in linguistic
descriptions, regardless if they are not shown to be
associated through typical association norms. Indeed, the
nouns and the participants and locations that they denote
along with their corresponding events are associated in this
manner.
In contrast to spreading activation and accounts based on
simple co-occurrence, McRae et al. (in press) propose that
their results are best accounted for by a prospective
expectancy generation mechanism. According to this
approach, reading a noun prime leads to activation of
detailed well-learned event knowledge, which predicatively
activates verbs that correspond to these events. However,
unlike strategic expectancy models which suggest that
people generate expectations for specific words (e.g.,
Becker, 1980), McRae and colleagues’ approach (Ferretti et
al. 2001; McRae, Ferretti, & Amyote, 1997; McRae et al.,
in press) holds that a concept or class of concepts is
activated. Priming between noun and verbs occurs when
the verb’s representation overlaps with the predicted event
space generated from nouns.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we used a naming task to examine how
grammatical inflections associated with the active and
passive forms of verbs interact with people’s event
knowledge about the roles that nouns play in specific
events. If people do generate expectancies from nouns
about the events that they typically play a role in, and if
these expectancies are specific to the thematic roles that the
nouns typically play in those events, then active verbs
should be responded to more quickly after the presentation
of good-agents than good-patients, and passive verbs
should be facilitated after the presentation of good-patients
than good-agents. Alternatively, if short SOA semantic
priming between nouns and verbs occurs through spreading
activation or an associative relatedness mechanism based
on co-occurrence, then we would expect no difference
between how quickly people respond to active and passive
verbs when they are preceded by good-agents and goodpatients.
Another prediction that follows from an event-based
expectancy account, is that people may make more
pronunciation errors when the thematic role of the noun
primes and the morphological form of the verb primes
mismatch (cop was – arrested / crook was arresting)
compared to when they match (cop was – arresting / crook
was - arrested). The rationale is that if people are
generating expectancies for the morphological form of the
verbs, then they may sometimes mispronounce those words

Event-Knowledge and Grammatical Morphemes
In the following research, we extend McRae et al’s (in
press) results in two ways that contribute to this debate.
First, we examine whether the predicted event space
generated from nouns is specific to the thematic roles that
these nouns play in those events, or whether it is only for
the events in general. This is an important issue because a
spreading activation account would hold that priming
should be found for the events in general. That is, the goodagent and good-patient nouns should become linked to the
same verb node and, therefore, priming should be found
between these nouns and the verbs that denote those events.
Alternatively, an account based on event memory would
hold that the expectancy generated from the nouns should
include information about the specific role that those nouns
play in those events.
Second, we manipulated the morphological form of the
verb targets so that they were presented in either active
(was arresting) or passive voice (was arrested). This
655

when the inflections (-ing, -ed) turn out to be inconsistent
with these expectations.

Design. Naming latency and squared root of the number of
errors were analyzed using separate three-way analyses of
variance. The factors of interest were the thematic role of
the noun primes (agent versus patient), which was within
participants and items, and voice of the verb targets (active,
passive), which also was within participants and items.
Planned comparisons investigated the effect of thematic
role separately for active and passive voice. List was
included as a between-participants dummy variable and
item rotation group as a between-items dummy variable to
stabilize variance that may result from rotating participants
and items over the two lists.

Method
Participants. Fifty-two undergraduate students from
Wilfrid Laurier University participated for course credit.
Participants all had normal or corrected-to-normal visual
acuity and all were native speakers of English.
Materials. The noun-verb combinations were selected
from a previous norming study by McRae et al. (1997). In
this study, participants rated the agenthood (How common
is it for a/an _____ to arrest someone?) and patienthood
(How common is for a/an _____ to be arrested by
someone) of each noun-verb combination on a 7-point
scale, where 1 corresponded to very uncommon and 7 to
very common. Thirty-six verbs were chosen from this study
on the basis that a good-agent and good-patient noun could
be found for each of the verb’s agent and patient roles. All
nouns were animate and referred to different kinds of
human beings (cop, crook, prosecutor, etc). The 36 goodagent nouns and their corresponding verbs were rated
higher for agenthood (M = 6.4, range = 4.4 - 7.0) than
patienthood (M = 2.2, range = 1.2 – 4.0), t2(35) = 18.61, p <
.01. Alternatively the good-patient nouns were rated higher
for patienthood (M = 5.8, range = 3.0 – 7.0) than agenthood
(M = 2.5, range = 1.2 – 5.7), t2(35) = 13.99, p < .01.
Four lists were constructed and each contained 9 goodagent active pairs (doctor was - curing), 9 good-agent
passive pairs (doctor was - cured), 9 good-patient active
pairs (thief was - chasing), and 9 good-patient passive pairs
(thief was - chased). Across the four lists, each item
appeared in each of the 4 conditions, and no participant saw
any noun or verb more than once. Another 144 unrelated
noun-verb combinations (dispatcher was - swimming) were
added that served as filler trials. These filler items allowed
us to keep the relatedness proportion low (36/180 or 0.2).
Across all 180 trials, half of the verbs appeared in active
form and the other half in passive form. Finally, 10
unrelated practice trials were used for each participant’s
practice session.

Results and Discussion
Mean response times and percentage of pronunciation
errors for each condition are presented in Table 1.
Response latencies greater than 3 standard deviations from
the mean were replaced by that value (less than 1% of the
target trials). Overall, 6.4% of the target trials were
removed from the response time analysis due to
microphone malfunction (3.6%) and pronunciation errors
(2.8%).
Naming Latency. The interaction between voice and
thematic role was only marginally significant in the
participant analysis, F1(1, 48) = 3.36, p < .08, F2(1, 32) =
2.33, p > .13. Planned comparisons revealed that active
verbs were pronounced more quickly when preceded by
good-agents than good-patients, F1(1, 48) = 5.26, p < .03,
F2(1, 32) = 4.13, p = .05. Alternatively, passive verbs were
pronounced at a similar rate regardless of the thematic role
of the noun primes, both Fs < 1. Overall, passive verbs (M
= 626 ms) were responded to marginally more quickly than
active verbs (M = 633 ms), F1(1, 48) = 3.28, p < .08, F2(1,
32) = 3.53, p < .07. Finally, there was no main effect of
thematic role, F1(1, 48) = 1.82, p > .18, F2(1, 32) = 1.92, p
> .17
Pronunciation Error Analysis. The interaction between
voice and thematic role was not significant, F1 < 1, F2(1,
32) = 1.63, p > .20. However, planned comparisons
demonstrated that people made more pronunciation errors
for active verbs preceded by good-patient nouns than goodagent nouns, F1(1, 48) = 3.44, p < .07, F2(1, 32) = 5.29, p <
.03. Alternatively, people made a similar amount of errors
to passive verbs when they were preceded by good-agent
and good-patient nouns, both Fs < 1. Overall, people made
more pronunciation errors to active verbs (M = 1.8%) than
to passive verbs (M = 1%), F1(1, 48) = 10.06, p < .01, F2(1,
32) = 4.92, p < .04, suggesting that people had more
difficulty pronouncing the longer and less frequent form of
these verbs. People also made more pronunciation errors to
the targets when they were preceded by good-patient nouns
(M = 1.7%) than good-agent nouns (M = 1.1%), but this
effect only reached significance in the item analysis, F1(1,
48) = 1.90, p > .17, F2(1, 32) = 4.36, p < .05.

Procedure. Stimuli were displayed on a 17-inch Sony
Trinitron monitor controlled by a Macintosh G4. Each trial
consisted of the following events: a focal point (+) in the
center of the screen for 250 ms; the prime for 250 ms, and
the target until the participant pronounced it into a
microphone. The intertrial interval was 1500 ms. Response
latencies were recorded with ms accuracy via a CMU
button box. Participants were instructed to read the twoword phrase silently (e.g., doctor was) and pronounce the
subsequent verb (curing) into the microphone as quickly
and accurately as possible. The order of the four lists was
counter balanced across participants. The entire task took
approximately 15 minutes to complete.

656

Table 1: Mean Response times (ms) and Percentage of Errors for Experiment 1 and Experiment 2.

Experiment
Experiment 1 (Naming)
Good-agent
Good-patient
Difference
Experiment 2 (Lexical Decision)
Good-agent
Good-patient
Difference

Active Voice
Passive Voice
________________________________________________________________
Response Times Errors
Response Times Errors
626
641
15*

.7%
1.2%
.5%*

627
625
-2

.4%
.5%
.1%

870
907
37*

1.4%
1.5%
.1%

831
826
-5

.7%
1.3%
.6%

* Significant at p < .05
the first few letters of the word. Given that the critical
target manipulation was an inflection at the end of the
verbs, it is possible that the results of Experiment 1 were
not as strong because on some trials response time was not
influenced by the suffixes. This possibility is supported by
the fact that in Experiment 1 people made significantly
more pronunciation errors to active verbs preceded by
good-patient than good-agent nouns. With a lexical
decision task, however, people must read the entire word
before they respond, otherwise they would not be
performing the task correctly. Finally, adding the
determiner at the beginning of the primes created prime target combinations that capture the beginning of the main
clause (NP-V-NP) in English sentences, which is the most
frequent form of sentences in the language. This increase in
prime context provides a closer approximation to how
active and passive verbs normally appear in text while
maintaining the basic parameters of a short SOA priming
paradigm.

The results of Experiment 1 provide support for the
prediction that the thematic role of the noun primes and the
morphological form of the target verbs should interact
during semantic priming. People pronounced active verbs
more quickly when they were preceded by good-agent than
good-patient nouns, and they also made more
pronunciation errors to those verbs when they were
preceded by good-patient nouns than good-agent nouns.
This pattern is what would be expected on an account
based on the assumption that people quickly generate
expectations about specific events when they read nouns
that are common participants in those events. These results
also suggest that these expectations are more detailed than
a general activation of the related event. Specifically, the
interaction with grammatical morpheme shows that the
expectancy generated from the nouns was for specific roles
in the events.
The pattern of results for the passive verbs was not as
predicted, however. People were expected to respond more
quickly to passive verbs preceded by good-patients than by
good-agents. The lack of a difference between the two
different types of nouns could be a result of a number of
possible factors. We discuss some possibilities after we
present a replication of the current experiment.

Method

Participants. Fifty-two undergraduate students from
Wilfrid Laurier University participated for course credit.
Participants all had normal or corrected-to-normal visual
acuity and all were native speakers of English.
Materials. The same primes, targets, and filler items used
in Experiment 1 were used in Experiment 2, with two
exceptions. First, 90 of the 144 filler items were
pronounceable nonword verb targets (e.g., explainicated).
Second, the determiner The was added to the primes so that
they formed three word phrases such as The doctor was.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we replicate and extend the present
results by 1) using a different task, in this case Lexical
Decision, and 2) to increase the contextual information
provided in the primes by adding the determiner The. The
main motivation for changing tasks was to generalize the
findings across tasks, and to use a task that ensures that on
each trial people read the entire word before responding. In
a naming task, it is possible that people may start
pronouncing the target words before they have completely
identified the word. This would be more likely to happen if
people are generating expectancies for the target
events/verbs from the nouns. For example, if reading cop
leads to expectancy for the verb arresting, then people may
be more likely to start pronouncing arrest after seeing just

Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
except that participants made lexical decisions to the target
words instead of naming them.
Design. The design was identical to Experiment 1.
Results and Discussion. Mean response times and
percentage of errors for each condition are presented in
Table 1. Response latencies greater than 3 standard
657

good-patient nouns. This latter finding is not that surprising
though, as the lexical decision task ensured that individuals
read the inflections on target verb before making their
response.
Regardless of the differences in overall response times
and error rates, the results of Experiment 2 again
demonstrated that peoples’ expectancies about the roles
nouns play in specific events interacted with the different
morphological forms of verbs denoting identical events.

deviations from the mean were replaced by that value (less
than 1% of the scores). In total, people made lexical
decision errors to 4.9% of the target trials, and these trials
were excluded from the response time analysis presented
below.
Decision Latency Analysis. Voice and thematic role
interacted, F1(1, 48) = 4.18, p < .05, F2(1, 32) = 4.62, p <
.05. Planned comparisons demonstrated that active verbs
were responded to more quickly when preceded by goodagent nouns than good-patient nouns, F1(1, 48) = 6.35, p <
.02, F2(1, 32) = 6.16, p < .02. Alternatively, passive verbs
were responded to at a similar rate regardless of the
thematic role of the noun primes, both Fs < 1. Collapsed
across thematic role, passive verbs (M = 829 ms) were
responded to more quickly than active verbs (M = 889 ms),
F1(1, 48) = 30.89, p < .01, F2(1, 32) = 15.15, p < .01.
Finally, there was no main effect of thematic role, F1(1, 48)
= 2.24, p > .14, F2(1, 32) = 1.13, p > .29.

General Discussion
The main goal of this research was to investigate an
Prospective Expectancy account of noun-verb semantic
priming. On this account, we expected that people should
respond more quickly in both types of semantic priming
tasks when the morphological form of the verb and the
thematic role type of the nouns matched (i.e., The cop was
– arresting, The crook was – arrested) than when they
mismatched (The cop was – arrested / The crook wasarresting). The results for the active verbs did show that
they were responded to more quickly when they were
preceded by their congruent role filer compared to
incongruent filler, but there were no differences found
when passive verbs were preceded by good-agents and
good-patients. Therefore, the results are consistent with the
overall prediction that noun type and voice should interact,
but the form of this interaction was not entirely consistent
with all of our predictions.
We suggest that there may be a couple of reasons why
passive verbs were not responded to differently when
preceded by good-agent and good-patient nouns. First,
previous research by McRae et al. (1997) has demonstrated
that for many transitive verbs, the agent role is often more
constrained in the range of possible noun fillers that can be
acceptable relative to the patient role of the same verbs. For
example, many nouns denoting humans can be arrested,
including cops and other kinds of common arrestors.
However, the same cannot be said for the nouns that denote
good-patients of arrest. Crooks, thieves, murderers and so
on are generally not capable of being an agent of an
arresting event. Of course, there are cases in which cops are
also crooks and murderers, but this not very common in
general. Because we investigated events that involve very
specific kind of human agents (doctors, lawyers, judges,
etc) we may have also selected events that cannot be
conducted by the patients of those events (patients,
defendants, convicts, etc).
Another possibility is that our response times could
have been influenced by English word order constraints.
The most common sentence type in English are active
sentences in which the initial NP is the agent of the main
verb. Passive sentences that begin with an initial NP that is
a patient of the subsequent verb are much less common. It
could be the case that this initial agent-verb frequency
advantage for active sentences in English is having an
influence in the semantic priming tasks. Specifically,
people may have a general bias to evaluate the initial noun

Lexical Decision Error Analysis. Voice and thematic role
did not interact, F1 < 1, F2(1, 32) = 2.55, p > .12. Planned
comparisons indicated that active verbs were responded to
correctly equally often when preceded by good-agent nouns
and good-patient nouns, both Fs < 1. Although there was a
trend for passive verbs to be responded to correctly more
frequently when preceded by good-agent than good-patient
nouns, this trend did not reach statistical significance, F1(1,
48) = 1.74, p > .19, F2(1, 32) = 3.01, p < .10. Collapsed
across thematic role, active verbs (M = 2.9%) were
responded to incorrectly more often than passive verbs (M
= 2% ms), but this trend was only marginally significant in
the analysis by participants, F1(1, 48) = 3.51, p < .07, F2(1,
32) = 1.70, p > .2. Finally, there was no main effect of
thematic role, both Fs < 1.
The same pattern of response time results found in
Experiment 1 was replicated in Experiment 2 using a
different task and primes that included the determiner The.
The changes in the procedure also had the desired effect of
strengthening the response time analysis as the interaction
between thematic role of noun and voice was significant in
both analysis by participants and items. Another difference
between the two experiments was the differences in overall
response time. Lexical decision latencies are normally
longer than naming latencies, but in the current experiment
the lexical decision latencies seem considerably longer than
normally found with word-word priming tasks. One
possibility for the increase in response times is that the
determiner The added to the each of the primes may have
caused people to take longer to process the primes and,
therefore, longer to respond to the targets. Another
possibility is that people may find it relatively difficult to
make lexical decisions to verbs in general because of the
morphological complexity of verbs relative to nouns.
Finally, the error data again demonstrated that people tend
to make more errors to active than passive verbs. However,
unlike Experiment 1 there was no significant differences in
errors when active verbs were preceded by good-agent than
658

for the agent role rather than patient role of the subsequent
verb.
Differentiating between alternative accounts of these
results is difficult without further experimentation. We are
currently extending these results by conducting a similar
lexical decision experiment that includes an unrelated
baseline condition. By adding an unrelated condition, we
will get a better understanding as to whether the lack of
difference in response times for the passive verbs is due to
facilitation to both good-agent and good-patient nouns or
perhaps not due to priming at all. Similarly, we can also
gain insight into whether the differences found for active
verbs is due to priming for the good agents, no priming for
good-patients, or perhaps even inhibition to the good
patients.
The results reported above have important implications
for models of semantic memory. Because we used short
SOA priming, the results cannot be attributed to
retrospective or strategic processes, such as Becker’s
(1980) verification model. Furthermore, prospective
models based on associative relatedness or spreading
activation (e.g., Collins & Loftus, 1975), cannot account
for the observed interaction between nouns that are both
commonly involved in the same events, and verbs that refer
to those events with different morphological forms. If verbs
were linked through undifferentiated links to their typical
agents and patients, one would have expected equal
response times, regardless of the voice of the verb. Our
results suggest that this fundamental assumption of an
undifferentiated spread of activation in semantic memory
must be modified so that it can be constrained by syntactic
information such as grammatical inflections on verbs.
Thus, spreading activation networks could incorporate ad
hoc assumptions well outside the scope of current versions
to account for the present data, but they would no longer be
in the same spirit upon which the notion of spreading
activation was based. Similarly, because of the overlap
between the good agent and patients with events, it is
difficult to see how an account based on strict cooccurrence can account for our results - both nouns do
appear with the verb frequently in language, and the entities
referred to by the nouns appear frequently appear together
in real world events.
In conclusion, we present evidence that when people
read nouns it leads to the generation of expectancies for the
specific roles that those nouns play in specific events,
which in turn leads to expectations for specific
morphological form of verbs. Although more research is
needed to clarify differences between agent and patient
roles in this research, our initial results are most consistent
with a prospective expectancy account of noun-verb
semantic priming.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an NSERC discovery grant
to the first author.

References
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Ferretti, T. R., McRae, K., & Hatherell, A. (2001).
Integrating verbs, situation schemas, and thematic role
concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 516547.
Ferretti, T. R., Kutas, M., & McRae, K. (2004). Verb
Aspect and the Activation of Location knowledge from
Verbs Presented in Isolation and in Sentences. Paper
presented at the 14th Annual Conference of the
Canadian Society of Brain, Behaviour and Cognitive
Science. St. John’s, Newfoundland.
Gentner, D. (1975). Evidence for the psychological reality
of semantic components: The verbs of possession. In D.
A. Norman and D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Explorations in
cognition (pp. 211-246). San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman.
Kahen, T. A., Neely, J. H., & Forsythe, W. J. (1999).
Dissociated backward priming effects in lexical
decision and pronunciation tasks. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 6, 105-110.
Madden, C. J., & Zwaan, R. A. (2003). How does verb
aspect constrain event representations? Memory &
Cognition, 31, 663-672.
McRae, K., Ferretti, T. R., & Amyote, L. (1997). Thematic
roles as verb-specific concepts. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 12, 137-176.
McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J., & Ferretti, T. R. (In press).
A Basis for Generating Expectancies for Verbs from
Nouns. Memory and Cognition.
Stoltz, J. H., & Neely, J. H. (1995). When target
degradation does and does not enhance semantic
context effects in word recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 21, 596-611.

659

