UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explaining Resource Undermatching with Agent-Based Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vn2g8k7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Goldstone, Robert L.
Roberts, Michael E.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explaining Resource Undermatching with Agent-Based Models
Michael E. Roberts (Robertsm@Indiana.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (Rgoldsto@Indiana.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract

difference in emphasis, both studies seem to agree that
perceptual limitations – whether due to individual ability or
occlusion from high density – led to decreased available
information about
the pools and subsequently
undermatching. However, other studies (Harper, 1982;
Kennedy & Gray, 1993) cite competitive differences among
organisms and travel costs between locations as critical
factors in producing undermatching. Baum and Kraft
(1998) consistently found undermatching in a group of 30
pigeons distributing between two resource patches, although
the degree of undermatching varied as a factor of resource
distributions and travel constraints, and they were unable to
detect whether competitive abilities varied. In a metaanalysis of undermatching in animal foraging studies,
Kennedy and Gray (1993) conclude that information
regarding the “relative and absolute resource availability,
number of animals, perceptual abilities of animals,
competitive interactions, competitive abilities of animals,
and the effects of travel between sites” may all lead to
undermatching and violate the IFD.
In the present article, we describe two agent-based models
that capture several phenomena of group foraging across
perceptual and resource conditions. These models show that
complex group-level behaviors can emerge from simple
agent behaviors. Furthermore, the models allow us to test
changes in dynamic group behavior as a result of
environmental manipulations, and give rise to a novel
explanation of undermatching in group foraging.

We propose two agent-based models of group foraging for
two perceptual conditions. These models exhibit complex
group-level behavior using only a simple rule set with a
homogeneous group of agents. The models are shown to
replicate results from Goldstone and Ashpole (2004), and we
describe a series of simulations that test the sources of the
resource undermatching often found in group foraging
experiments. After testing the effects of travel costs, the
number of agents, and uniform variance food distributions, we
conclude that many group foraging studies have overlooked
the interplay of spatial constraints with food rates in causing
undermatching.

Introduction
The ideal free distribution (IFD) model (Fretwell & Lucas,
1970) predicts that a group of foragers will distribute to
resource patches in proportion to the relative resources
available at each patch. In an environment where one
resource pool holds 80% of the resources while a second
pool holds the remaining 20% of resources, the IFD predicts
that a group of foragers will optimally distribute themselves
to the resource pools, with 80% of the foragers in the first
pool and 20% in the second pool. In predicting this optimal
distribution, the model assumes the foragers have both
freedom of movement and ‘perfect’ of the locations,
amounts, and appearance rates of all the resources, thereby
allowing the foragers to correctly value the resources and
optimally distribute as a group. However, in experiments
with two patch options, many studies report systematic
undermatching in which fewer than expected foragers attend
the more profitable patch while more than expected foragers
attend the less profitable patch. Godin and Keenleyside
(1984) found undermatching in cichlid fish, with the largest
degree of undermatching occurring in the condition with the
largest rate difference between resource pools. Gillis and
Kramer (1987) obtained similar results for large populations
(120 and 240) of zebrafish distributing between three
resource pools, although they did not find significant
deviations for small populations (30 and 60).
Whereas Godin and Keenleyside concluded that
differential competitive abilities had broken the IFD
assumption of equal payoff for each animal at a pool, Gillis
and Kramer concluded that high population density broke
the IFD assumption of perfect information. Despite the

Agent-Based Models
Goldstone and Ashpole (2004) recently examined dynamic
group foraging behavior among humans by using an
experimental networked Java platform to create a common
virtual world (an 80 x 80 grid) across computers.
Participants sat at their respective computer monitors and
foraged for resources in real time by using the computers’
arrow keys to move up, down, left, and right in order to step
on a food pellet and thereby consume it. We will briefly
describe the experimental manipulations because the
Goldstone and Ashpole foraging environment and data serve
as the basis for our subsequent agent models.
In the Goldstone and Ashpole foraging experiments,
participants engaged in 6 five-minute sessions, consisting of
all permutations of two perceptual conditions and three

1872

resource conditions, and all participants experienced the
same conditions in a given session. In the “visible”
perceptual condition, a participant could see himself or
herself as a yellow dot in the virtual world, and other
participants were visible as blue dots while available food
pellets were represented as green dots. In the “invisible”
perceptual condition, a participant could see himself or
herself as a yellow dot in the virtual world, but no other
participants or food were visible in the world. A new food
pellet was dropped in one of two resource pools every 4/N
seconds (where N is the number of participants), and there
were three distribution conditions that probabilistically
determined which pool received the pellet: 50/50, 65/35,
and 80/20. For example, in the 65/35 distribution condition,
65% of food arrived at one pool while 35% arrived at the
other pool. At each pool, new pellets were dropped
according to a Gaussian distribution with a mean at the
pool’s center and a variance of 5 units horizontally and
vertically. Food release was constrained so that only one
pellet could occupy a cell at a given time, and resource pool
locations changed from session to session. In the invisible
perceptual condition, a pellet appeared on the screen for two
seconds for the participant who stepped on it, and therefore,
participants could gradually ascertain the locations of the
resources by exploring the world and occasionally obtaining
pellets.
Goldstone and Ashpole discuss three results:
undermatching, systematic cycles of population migration
between pools, and high variance of participants’ locations
relative to food locations. Although our agent-based models
capture all of these phenomena using the same parameter
values, we are most concerned with the undermatching for
the present article.
Goldstone and Ashpole found
significant undermatching at the 80/20 and 65/35
distribution levels, with more pronounced undermatching in
the more extreme 80/20 conditions. Since individuals do not
directly interfere with each other, competitive interference
can be removed as a possible explanation of the
phenomenon. Furthermore, since undermatching occurs
even in the visible conditions, where ‘perfect’ knowledge is
available, straightforward accounts in terms of perceptual
constraints can be removed as explanations. Our agentbased models seek to reproduce these results while testing
the other undermatching alternatives – different competitive
abilities, travel costs, and the number of foragers – from
Kennedy and Gray’s (1993) meta-analysis.

Visible Model
An agent-based model should have minimal representational
requirements while also being sufficiently robust to handle
changes in the empirical environment, such as a sudden
increase in food rates or number of participants. Gallistel
(1990) has argued that a strong set of internal
representations are necessary in any reasonable treatment of
the IFD, but Magnuson (1998) proposed a relatively
successful simple foraging model that utilized two rules:
move to the nearest piece of food, and stay at a piece of
1873

food for a number of time steps proportional to the
magnitude of the food. In a favorable environment, these
rules lead to resource matching; however, such ‘favorable’
environments are very constrained and very rare. Our
visible model offers a compromise between the Gallistel and
Magnuson approaches. Whereas Magnuson’s goal was
simply to demonstrate the feasibility of group matching with
simple rules, we propose an enhanced rule set in hopes of
building a bridge between low-level agent behaviors and a
collection of high-level group phenomena.
In our model, each agent is randomly assigned a location
on the 80 x 80 grid-world at the beginning of the
experiment. As in Goldstone and Ashpole (2004), food is
dropped at a rate of 4/N seconds, and for all simulations
reported in this article, N is set to 20 agents, corresponding
to the average number of participants in the Goldstone and
Ashpole experiment. Agents move every 100 milliseconds,
and a movement consists of choosing an available food
pellet and moving one grid unit towards the chosen pellet.
The interesting aspects of the model lie in the parameters for
action selection. During a time step, each agent judges the
value of every available piece of food relative to the agent.
Four factors determine a pellet’s worth: 1. Euclidean
distance from the agent to the pellet, 2. Euclidean distance
from the pellet to the agent’s sustained goal, 3. Food density
in the local area of the pellet, and 4. Agent density in the
local area of the pellet. Each factor is multiplied by a free
parameter, yielding Equation 1 on the following page.
Individual factors can have varying importance depending
on the current environment, but as a rule set, they produce
robust, complex behavior. In particular, Euclidean distance
captures the notion that animals will tend to approach the
food nearest to them, since it is easiest to obtain and
requires the least energy expenditure. The sustained goal
factor (goal bias) makes an agent more likely to continue
towards the previous goal pellet, thereby promoting inertia
and countering a tendency for behavioral synchrony and
generally unrealistic switching behavior found in
Magnuson’s agents. The food density factor addresses
another shortcoming of the Magnuson model. Magnuson’s
agents were unable to differentiate between two resource
pools with vastly different resource densities, despite the
improved reward rate that can be obtained by such a
distinction. In our model, if there are two unequally
rewarding resource pools and an equal number of agents at
each pool, food density will bias agents to leave the less
plentiful pool in favor of the more plentiful pool. Finally,
agent density is similar to food density, but it captures the
idea that agents do indeed know the locations of other
foragers in the visible condition, and they may want to
avoid regions with high densities of competitors. In contrast
to the food density factor, if two resource pools have equal
available resources but different numbers of agents, agents
in the dense pool should be encouraged to migrate to the
other pool.
In addition to these factors, the model also incorporates
the softmax action selection algorithm (Equation 2) to

Equation 1:

Pellet(i, j) = (P1 * Dis tan ce)+ (P2 * GoalBias)+ (P3 * FoodDensity)" (P4 * AgentDensity)
Value (i, j )

Equation 2:

Pr(i, j) =

!
Equation 3:

e

K

Value (x, y )

"" e
x

K

y

Cell(i, j,t) = Cell(i, j,t " 1)+ (P1 * Reward)+ (P2 * GoalBias)" (P3 * Penalty)
Box 1: Equations

!
!
probabilistically
choose a pellet, given each pellet’s relative

abilities could affect the IFD, we are showing why
undermatching should be expected more generally, and why
Kennedy and Gray’s (1993) meta-analysis found such a
preponderance of undermatching in group foraging studies.
Finally, although not discussed in detail in this article, our
model also captures other emergent group-level phenomena
such as population oscillations using the identical parameter
values.
In our invisible model, each agent has memory for all cells
in the 80 x 80 gridworld. At the beginning of a session,
every cell in an agent’s memory is initialized to a constant
value. Thus, every cell looks equally attractive for action
selection purposes. During a time step, each agent chooses
a cell by estimating every cell’s value and then using the
softmax algorithm (Equation 2) to assign a movement
probability to each cell. Whereas the visible model’s agents
decide between pellets by using current perceptual
information, the invisible model’s agents rely on their
interaction histories with the environment. In particular, if
an agent steps on a cell and receives a pellet, the cell’s value
receives a large boost in the agent’s memory, and the
neighboring cells are also boosted to a lesser extent. This
neighborhood assumption leads to quicker learning, and its
ecological validity arises from two phenomena: perceptual
discrimination and generalization. On one hand, human
foragers may not be making fine perceptual discriminations
between cells, especially given the sheer number of cells.
Thus, a forager may be rewarded at a location but not make
a clear distinction between the rewarding cell and the
rewarding cell’s neighbors. Generalization, on the other
hand, implies a more purposeful credit attribution to similar
options. If one cell provides a reward, its neighbors may be
likely to provide rewards too, because there is often
underlying order in the environment. In any case, the
boosted values in an agent’s memory increase the
probability of choosing those cells in the future. When an
agent steps on a cell without receiving a pellet, however, a
penalty is assessed to the cell and its neighbors. For both
rewards and penalties, we set the relative strength of a
neighbor’s reward or penalty as an inverse function of its
distance from the current cell.
By exploring the
environment and obtaining a history of rewards and
penalties, each agent constructs a dynamic representation of
the resource patches in the environment. Finally, much like
the visible model, when an agent chooses a cell, a goal bias
boosts the cell’s value for the next action selection step,

value to the agent calculated in Equation 1. Although we
have tried to make the expression generic to also
accommodate the invisible model, we should point out that
the denominator in Equation 2 only sums over pellets
currently on the gridworld. In the softmax equation, K is a
constant that shifts action selction to be more exploratory or
more exploitative. When K is large, even highly valued
pellets become small values and thereby indistinguishable,
leading to uniform random movement choices. When K is
small, differences between the pellet values are exaggerated
by exponentiation, and the probability of choosing the
highest valued pellet approaches 1 as K approaches 0.
Together, the Euclidean measures and softmax action
selection create a degree of agent independence while
maintaining the essential dependence on resource and agent
distributions for choosing where to move.

Invisible Model
For the invisible condition of Goldstone and Ashpole
(2004), participants only saw a food pellet if they happened
to step on it, so the perceptual factors from the visible model
do not apply. Instead, foraging performance seems to rely
on some form of memory, leading foragers to continue
exploring regions where they have been rewarded in the
past. Harley (1981) proposed a ‘relative payoff sum’ rule in
which an agent’s probability of choosing an option is equal
to the proportion of past rewards from that option relative to
the sum of past rewards from all options. Harley also
included prior expectations and a memory decay factor in
his model, and he successfully conducted computer
simulations showing that a group could achieve IFD with
the rule. Regelmann (1984) subsequently extended Harley’s
model to allow for competitive differences between
individuals.
Our invisible model is somewhat similar to Harley and
Regelmann’s models, but in addition to component
differences, it has several key differences in intent. First,
we are very concerned with maintaining the spatial
representation – i.e. foragers in a gridworld – rather than the
discrete patch choices used by Harley, Regelmann, and
many other modelers. Indeed, our results will show that the
spatial nature of foraging is a critical aspect overlooked by
many models. Furthermore, whereas Harley sought to show
that IFD could be achieved with a simple rule, and
Regelmann sought to show that deviations in competitive
1874

Figure 1: Matching results for the visible and invisible models
thereby promoting probabilistic inertia towards a cell until it
is reached. Equation 3 shows the additive calculation an
agent makes for each cell, and the cell values are then input
to the softmax algorithm to obtain selection probabilities.

models appear robust and reliable across several measures
of group behavior, and we can now discuss additional
simulations designed to discover the source of
undermatching. Note that given Kennedy and Gray’s
(1993) meta-analysis and our earlier analysis of the
Goldstone and Ashpole results, competitive abilities, travel
costs, and the number of foragers could all be causes of
undermatching.
However, we can already eliminate
competitive abilities as the explanation since the agents in
our models share the same attributes.

Model Results
Undermatching
Figure 1 shows the matching results for the visible and
invisible models at the three resource distribution levels of
Goldstone and Ashpole (2004). The graphs show the
proportion of agents in each pool (within a 25 unit radius of
a pool’s center) at a given time, after normalizing to exclude
agents outside both pools. Each graph shows the averaged
results from 30 trials, with 20 agents per trial. Importantly,
although the parameter values are different for the two
models, the same parameter values are used for all resource
distribution levels of a model and for all subsequent
manipulations discussed in this article. Our model results
prior to normalization also match Goldstone and Ashpole’s
results prior to normalization. The matching results show
that our agent-based models have captured the
undermatching reported by Goldstone and Ashpole, and in
fact our model results also show significantly more
undermatching at the extreme 80/20 distribution levels. The
same trials also exhibited the respective levels of population
oscillations found by Goldstone and Ashpole, as well as
high variance of agents’ locations relative to resource
locations and a comparable amount of switching between
pools. We use these additional measures to confirm that the

Travel Costs
Travel costs between resource pools are sometimes used to
explain undermatching (Baum & Kraft, 1998) due to the
fact that foragers switch less frequently when the pools are
farther apart, and therefore foragers obtain less information
about the resources and make worse decisions. In order to
test this explanation while trying to avoid possible
confounds from changing the world size, we ran several
simulations with agents starting inside the pools instead of
random locations around the world. Figure 2 shows the
matching results, averaged over 30 trials, from the visible
model at the 80/20 distribution level, and results were
similar for the invisible model and other distribution levels.
Note that these experiments show less undermatching than
Figure 1, but this is due to a more restrictive definition of
being in a pool. For these simulations, we wanted to guard
against possible matching biases caused by the pools’
respective locations in the gridworld, so we placed the pools
in diagonally opposite corners and restricted the pool
definitions (20 units from the center) to avoid intersection
1875

Figure 2: Agent starting locations

Figure 3: Number of Agents

with the edges of the gridworld. In the left graph of Figure
2, we started all agents at random locations inside the 80%
pool. In the middle graph, we started all agents at random
locations inside the 20% pool, and in the right graph, we
started 80% of agents inside the 80% resource pool and 20%
of agents inside the 20% resource pool. Interestingly, all of
these experiments result in the same undermatching
asymptote despite differences in initial foraging behaviors.
In addition, a more powerful observation can be made by
examining the data prior to normalization. The 20% pool
always has approximately 20% of agents, and
undermatching arises because some agents leave the 80%
pool and are outside both pools. The cost of switching does
not seem to drive behavior. Of course, another argument
against travel costs comes from the fact that Goldstone and
Ashpole found undermatching in the visible conditions,
despite participants constantly seeing the number of food
pellets at each resource pool and thereby having relatively
good information. Although we suspect that travel costs do
indeed contribute to undermatching in many foraging
situations, there appears to be another factor leading agents
to selectively leave the plentiful pool and undermatch.

number of agents -- does affect undermatching, but it is
unclear why the effects take place.

Spatial Constraints

Number of Agents
We examined the effects of different numbers of foragers by
running visible and invisible simulations at the 80/20
distribution level with 10, 20, and 30 agents, respectively.
Once again, agents began in random locations, but here the
food rate was held constant across conditions, with food
dropped every 4/20 seconds (200 milliseconds). The
constant food rate allowed us to gauge the effects due to the
number of agents.
Figure 3 shows the matching results, averaged over 30
trials, for 10, 20, and 30 agents. These graphs are taken
from the visible model, but the invisible model results are
similar. Post-hoc ANOVA results indicate that 10 agents
show significantly less (p<.001) undermatching than the 20
agents condition, and 20 agents showed significantly less
(p<.001) undermatching than the 30 agents condition.
Interestingly, none of the conditions are significantly
different with respect to the 20% pool. Instead, the greater
undermatching with respect to the large resource pool leads
to more agents outside the pools. Thus, the number of
agents -- or, equivalently, changes in food rate given a fixed

1876

Our novel explanation for undermatching contends that the
spatial environment of foraging critically determines how
well foragers can distribute to the resources. Imagine a
forager with a finite speed covering a finite territory. Now
introduce five more foragers to that territory. As you add
foragers, the reward rate for each forager correspondingly
decreases. In the context of the Goldstone and Ashpole
visible condition, a relatively small number of foragers can
cover the two resource pools and easily pick up food soon
after it is dropped every 4/N seconds, since the food rate is
not high enough to tax their foraging abilities. The
Gaussian food distribution enhances this effect, because
only a few foragers are needed to pick up the majority of the
food near the Gaussian centers, while a few additional
foragers can dart to the food dropped on the peripheries. By
this argument, most of the foragers are actually unnecessary,
although they can certainly compete for resources. Thus,
undermatching arises because only a limited number of
foragers are required to pick up the available food in a given
amount of time, and excess foragers simply increase indirect
competition.
In the Goldstone and Ashpole experiments, both resource
pools have equal variances, so the 20% pool can occupy as
much space as the 80% pool. Although more food is
dropped in the 80% pool, the spatial distribution means that
there does not need to be an equal increase in the number of
foragers to pick up that food. These considerations seem to
be absent from the literature, and that may be due to the
preponderance of models that treat foraging and probability
matching as discrete choices between options, rather than
often occurring in spatially instantiated situations.
Furthermore, even empirical studies overlook this interplay
of food rate, number of foragers, and spatial constraints. In
Baum and Kraft’s (1998) study of 30 pigeons distributing
between two resource pools, the authors seem to
erroneously conclude that food rate is unimportant.
However, it appears that the authors did not use a
sufficiently high feeding rate. Thus, a relatively small
number of pigeons could eat the food regardless of the rate,
because the rate never exceeded a few pigeons’ capacities.
As a result, pigeon distributions did not significantly change

for a novel explanation of undermatching: spatial
constraints. We hesitate to use a single phrase for this
phenomenon, because the effects truly arise from the
interplay of spatial considerations with the food rate and the
number of foragers. In our simulations, we showed that
food distribution variances had a particularly large effect for
this experimental set-up, but we suspect that other spatial
issues – such as rugged terrain allowing different movement
speeds – can lead to undermatching for similar reasons. In
essence, we conclude that seemingly small changes in
environmental parameters can have large effects on group
foraging behavior due to the interaction effects of complex
systems.

Figure 4: Uniform Variance
because the rate increase did not correspondingly increase
information.

Acknowledgments

Uniform Variances
Given the preceding argument for undermatching, we
should expect significantly less undermatching if Goldstone
and Ashpole had used uniform variance food distributions
rather than Gaussian distributions, because the Gaussian
distribution allows a lucky few to collect all the food at the
center, greatly decreasing the distinguishing information
between pools and requiring fewer foragers. Using our
visible and invisible models, we conducted simulations with
uniform variance food distributions. Figure 4 shows results
from the visible model. The first number in each graph
indicates the radius (for simplification, a centered square
was used) of food droppings in the 80% pool, and the
second number indicates the radius of food droppings for
the 20% pool. Thus, the “16 vs. 8” condition creates an
80% pool that is four times larger than the 20% pool, so the
probabilistic food distribution is reflected by pool size.
The graphs clearly support our undermatching
explanation. When the pool variances are identical (8 vs. 8),
the agents distribute themselves in approximately matching
proportions. In these cases, food rate is the only factor that
distinguishes between the two pools. In the 16 vs. 8
condition, the rarely observed phenomenon of overmatching
occurs, and the explanation lies in the fact that the densities
of the pools are equal, but the coverage times are unequal
because the food rate is low. As each new piece of food is
grabbed relatively quickly, foragers begin to converge as
they chase new pellets. This convergence, along with the
large pool size, can gradually increase the time it takes to
reach a new pellet on a far side of the pool, and therefore the
new pellet looks more attractive to migrators switching
pools. Meanwhile, agents in the 20% pool have less area to
cover and fewer pieces of food, so the pick-up time remains
comparatively low. Finally, the reverse condition (8 vs. 16)
leads to dramatic undermatching for similar reasons. The
pick-up time in the 20% pool increases as agents converge,
then new pellets dropped far away from the group attract
additional foragers to switch from the 80% pool.

Conclusion
We have shown that agent-based models can produce
complex group-level foraging behavior, and we have argued
1877

Support was provided by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship to MER.

References
Baum, W.M., & Kraft, J.R. (1998).
Group choice:
Competition, travel, and the ideal free distribution.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 69,
227-245.
Estes, W.K., & Straughan, J.H. (1954). Analysis of a verbal
conditioning situation in terms of statistical learning
theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 225.
Fretwell, S.D., & Lucas, H.J. (1970). Ideal free distribution.
Acta Biotheory, 19, 16-21.
Gallistel, C.R. (1990).
The,organization of learning,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gillis, D.M., & Kramer, D.L. (1987). Ideal interference
distributions: Population density and patch use by
zebrafish. Animal Behavior, 35, 1875-1882.
Godin, M.J., & Keenleyside, M.H.A. (1984). Foraging on
patchily distributed prey by a cichlid fish (Teleosti,
Chiclideae): A test of the ideal free distribution theory.
Animal Behavior, 32, 120-131.
Goldstone, R.L., & Ashpole, B.C. (2004). Human foraging
behavior in a virtual environment. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 11, 508-514.
Harley, C.B. (1981). Learning the evolutionarily stable
strategy. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 89, 611-633.
Harper, D.G.C. (1982). Competitive foraging in mallards:
Ideal free ducks. Animal Behavior, 30, 575-584.
Kennedy, M., & Gray, R.D. (1993). Can ecological theory
predict the distribution of foraging animals? A critical
analysis of experiments on the ideal free distribution.
Oikos, 68, 158-166.
Magnuson, J.S. (1997). Does complex behavior require
complex representations? Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
472-477). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Regelmann, K. (1984). Competitive resource sharing: A
simulation model. Animal Behavior, 32, 226-232.

