UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
FMRI-Evidence for a Three-Stage-Model of Deductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kb1c6jq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Famgmeier, Thomas
Knauff, Markus
Ruff, Christian C.
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

FMRI-Evidence for a Three-Stage-Model of Deductive Reasoning
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
Centre for Cognitive Science, University Freiburg, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Thomas Famgmeier (thomas.fangmeier@cognition.iig.uni-freiburg.de)
Centre for Cognitive Science, University Freiburg,
79098 Freiburg, Germany

Christian C. Ruff (c.ruff@ucl.ac.uk)
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London,
London WC1N 3AR, United Kingdom

Vladimir Sloutsky (Sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
In an event-related fMRI study, we investigated the neurocognitive processes underlying deductive reasoning. We
specifically focused on three temporally separable phases: (1)
the premise processing phase, (2) the integration phase, and
(3) the validation phase. We found distinct patterns of cortical
activity during these phases, with initial temporo-occipital
activation shifting to prefrontal and then parietal cortex during
the reasoning process. Our findings demonstrate that human
reasoning proceeds in separable phases, which are associated
with distinct neuro-cognitive processes.

Introduction
Deductive reasoning starts with premises and yields a
logically necessary conclusion that is not explicit in the
premises. But what happens in the brain when we solve
such deductive problems? Recent functional brain imaging
studies have provided some first insights into the brain
circuits underlying deductive reasoning. Reasoning with
abstract premises seems to involve the right hemisphere,
whereas reasoning with concrete material relies on
processing in the left hemisphere (Goel, & Dolan, 2001;
Goel, Büchel, Frith, & Dolan, 2000). During reasoning,
portions of the parieto-occipital cortices are active, pointing
to the role of visuo-spatial processes (Knauff, Mulack,
Kassubek, Salih, & Greenlee, 2002; Knauff, Fangmeier,
Ruff, & Johnson-Laird, 2003; Ruff, Knauff, Fangmeier, &
Spreer, 2003). The more visual features are described in the
reasoning problem, the more activity in occipital cortical
areas can be found (Knauff, Fangmeier, Ruff, & JohnsonLaird, 2003). Moreover, reasoning-related activity in
parietal areas correlates with visuo-spatial ability (Ruff,
Knauff, Fangmeier, & Spreer, 2003).
However, most of these studies have one pitfall in
common. They presented the problems as sentences, either
on the screen or via headphones. This means that reasoningrelated brain activity may have been confounded by higherlevel linguistic processing. In addition, many of these
studies examined the brain activation during the whole
reasoning process in a blocked fashion, and thus could not
distinguish reasoning-related processes during different

stages of problem processing. Only a few study so far
compared the neuronal processes during the crucial
conclusion sentence of the reasoning problem with the
presentation of irrelevant control sentences (e.g. Goel, &
Dolan, 2001). However, these control sentences clearly did
not need to be processed as elaborately as the reasoning
problems and the study did not provide any information
what happens during premises processing. Thus, it is
unclear whether reasoning is associated with distinct subprocesses not related to sentence processing, and how these
processes may be differentially involved in different stages
of reasoning.
The aim of the present study was to disentangle the neurocognitive subprocesses underlying the different phases in
the reasoning process, and at the same time to overcome the
potential linguistic confound in the previous studies on the
neuronal basis of deductive reasoning. We employed eventrelated functional magnetic resonance imaging with twelve
participants, who solved (while in the scanner) 32 linear
syllogisms (explanation below) with a spatial content. We
decided to use problems with a spatial content, because
spatial relations are easily understood by logically untrained
participants. Since we aimed at distinguishing the pure
reasoning process from the maintenance of information in
working memory, in a second condition participants had to
simply keep the premises of the identical problems in
working memory (maintenance task) without making
inferences (explanation below). Crucially, the premises and
the conclusion of the inference problems were presented
each as single display frames, by replacing the sentential
premises with graphic arrangements describing the spatial
relations between the letters V, X and Z. With this
procedure no further linguistic processing was necessary to
extract the spatial relations between the objects. Moreover,
the processing of the first premise, the second premise and
the conclusion was time-locked to the short presentation of
the letter arrangements. Thus, we could examine the brain
activity elicited by the different phases of the reasoning
process. Based on behavioral findings concerning the
cognitive processes involved in reasoning (Johnson-Laird,
& Byrne, 1991; Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993; Rader, &
Sloutsky, 2002), we predicted that there should be different

1160

patterns of neuronal activation associated with three phases
of the reasoning process: During the presentation of the first
premise, reasoners have to process and keep in mind the two
letters and their spatial relation (premise processing phase).
During the second premise exclusively, the second premise
together with the first premise must be integrated into one
unified representation – a mental model – and a putative
conclusion must be drawn (integration phase). Finally,
reasoners compare the conclusion they drew from the
putative model with the displayed conclusion, and indicate
by pressing a button whether the displayed conclusion is
“True” or “False” (validation phase). It is critical to
appreciate that the processing of the matched maintenance
problems also proceeded in three phases, but that
participants only had to remember the premises and match it
with the presented third sentence. They did not make any
inferences. Although the different presentations thus cannot
be called “premises” in the literal sense, we henceforth use
the terms to clarify the correspondence to the reasoning
problems. Prior to the problem presentation, a small letter
was displayed, which identified the following problem as
reasoning or maintenance problem. We hypothesized that
the reasoning and the control maintenance task should both
entail the maintenance of premises, but that only the
reasoning problems should demand for the integration of the
premises and the validation of a putative conclusion.

An event-related brain imaging study
Methods
Participants. Twelve right-handed male undergraduate and
graduate students (mean age 22.4, SD 1.98) with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision (contact lenses) gave their
informed consent prior to their participation in the study.
None of the volunteers had any history of neurological or
psychiatric disorders, or of significant drug abuse. All
procedures complied with both university and hospital
ethical approval.
Materials. The materials consisted of 32 reasoning and 32
maintenance tasks. The reasoning problems contained two
premises and a conclusion. The participants had to decide
whether the conclusion logically (necessarily) followed
from the premises. Here is an example of a reasoning task
with a valid conclusion:
Premise 1:
Premise 2:
Conclusion:

V
X
V

X
Z
Z

The letter of the premises and conclusions appeared
sequentially on the screen. A sentential version of the given
example would be: “V is to the left of X” (first premise) and
“X is to the left of Z” (second premise). From these
premises it follows “V is to the left of Z” (conclusion).
Participants used an MRI-compatible response box to
indicate whether a conclusion was ”True” or “False”. The
letter V, X, and Z were used, because they have almost the

same black-white ratio and no task-related words (in
German) can be build from them. In the maintenance
problems, the presentation of the two premises was the same
as in the reasoning task, but the participants had to decide
whether the term order of the third sentence was identical to
one of the previous premises or not. Thus, no inference
between the two premises had to be made. Here is an
example for a maintenance task:
Premise 1:
Premise 2:
Maintenance:

V
X
V

X
Z
X

In this case, participants had to press the “TRUE” key,
because the third sentence is an exact repetition of the first
premise. Prior to each task a “S” or an “E” was presented
for 1 sec to identify the next trial as reasoning problem
(“Schließen” in German) or maintenance problem
(“Erinnern” in German), respectively. The spatial relation
between the two letters of each premise or conclusion was
coded through placing it right or left from the midpoint of
the screen. Each trial began with presentation of the first
letter for 1500 ms, followed by the second letter for 1500
ms, and a pause for 1000 (first premise). The time period for
the second premise and the conclusion or maintenance was
the same as during the first premise. Each trial lasted for
about 12 sec. In half of the premises and conclusions, the
letter at the left side appeared first, followed by the letter on
the right, while the other half were presented in the reverse
order. This variation of term order is well-established in
reasoning research, and prevented participants from
anticipating the next letter and from drawing the conclusion
during the second premise.
Behavioral data acquisition. Participants responded with
index and middle finger on a response box in order to record
the reaction time and accuracy of each task. Prior to the
imaging study, participants were trained on 12 similar tasks
outside the scanner to at least 75 % response accuracy.
Procedure and fMRI Data Acquisition. Problems were
presented in an event-related design with four separate runs.
Each run contained eight reasoning and eight recognition
tasks in a pseudo-randomized order. All tasks were
presented for an equal amount of time, and each premise or
conclusion lasted for 4000 ms. Scanning was performed on
a 1.5 T Siemens Vision scanner and the participant’s head
was fixed in the head coil. A mirror was placed on the coil
so that participants could see a projection screen mounted
on the rear of the scanner bore. All visual stimuli were
projected onto this screen using a video projector. Further
Information on the fMRI data preprocessing and the
statistical analysis is provided as complementary materials
under:
http://cognition.iig-uni.freiburg.de/team/members/
fangmeier/download/md1_methods.pdf.

Results

1161

The behavioral data collected inside the scanner showed that
reasoning problems were significantly more difficult than

maintenance problems in terms of accuracy (91 % < 97%
correct answers Z = 2.31, p = 0.021) and latency (3021 ms >
2843 ms response time Z = -2.04, p = 0.041, WilcoxonTest, because of non-normal distributions and
inhomogeneity of variances, the non-parametric WilcoxonTest is appropriate for assessing the significance of
differences in within-subjects experiments, Siegel, &
Castellan, 1989).
The brain imaging data showed clearly distinguishable
brain activation patterns during the three phases of
deductive reasoning. First, as shown in Figure 1a, the
premise processing phase (contrast second premise minus
first premise) activated two large bilateral clusters of
activation in the occipito-temporal cortex (OTC). Second,
shown in Figure 1b, during the integration phase (contrast
second premise minus conclusion) these two clusters in the
OTC and an additional cluster in the anterior prefrontal
cortex (APFC) were activated. The latter covered parts of
the middle frontal (BA 10) and medial frontal gyrus (BA
32). Third, shown in Figure 1c, the validation phase
(contrast conclusion minus second premise) activated three
clusters, two in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and one in the
posterior parietal cortex. More precisely, the clusters in the
PFC were located in the middle frontal gyrus (Brodmann
Area BA 9, 8, and 6), extending into the medial frontal and
the cingulate gyrus (BA 32) in the right hemisphere. The
activation of the PPC covered parts of the precuneus (BA 7),
and of the superior and inferior parietal lobule (BA 7, 40) in
both hemispheres. The contrasts for the analysis of the
maintenance task were calculated in a similar fashion as
those for reasoning (all contrast are in parallel to the
reasoning analyses). During the premise processing phase,
we found slightly elevated activations in OTC as we had
obtained during reasoning (compare Fig. 1a with 2a).
However, overall in this phase the patterns of activation
were quite similar. During presentation of the second
premise (premise maintenance phase), which now required
only premise maintenance but not integration, we again
found similar OTC activation, but significantly lower APFC
activation (compare Figure 1b with 2b). A region of interest
(ROI) analysis of the mean activity in these clusters
confirmed that the APFC activity elicited by the processing
of the second premise was higher during reasoning than
during the maintenance task (analysis of variance [ANOVA]
interaction Task x Phase: F(2,22) = 7.066; p ≤ 0.01, onetailed t-test: t(11) = 3.995; p ≤ 0.01), while the mean signal
in the OTC clusters did not differ. Finally, during of the
third phase of the maintenance problem (recognition of
premises), there were significantly lower PFC activations,
and less extensive right PPC activation than during the
reasoning problems (compare Fig. 1c with 2c), as confirmed
by the significant differences in ROI analyses in these
clusters (PFC: ANOVA interaction Task x Phase: F(2,22) =
6.551; p ≤ 0.01, one-tailed t-test: t(11) = 2.738; p ≤ 0.05,
PPC: ANOVA interaction Task x Phase: F(2,22) = 6.227; p
≤ 0.01, one-tailed t-test t(11) = 2.183; p ≤ 0.1). For further
information concerning Tailarach coordinates, Z-scores,
beta-values, etc., please visit the complementary materials
on the above mentioned web-page or have a look into
Fangmeier et al. (2005).
1162

Figure 1. Brain activation during reasoning. The clusters
in the glass brain for the reasoning tasks (a) premise
processing phase, (b) integration phase, (c) validation phase.
The activations were significant at the cluster level
calculated with SPM99 (p ≤ 0.05, corrected, threshold t =
3.0). Circles around parts of the clusters mark the five
selections of voxels (+/- 12 mm) for the ROI analyses
(ANOVA repeated measurements, 2x3 factorial design).

Figure 2. Brain activation during the maintenance tasks. The
clusters in the glass brain for the maintenance tasks (a)
premise processing phase, (b) premise maintenance phase, (c)
validation phase. For more details see legend to Figure 1.

Discussion
The fundamental result of our study is that different cortical
structures are activated during different phases of deductive
thinking. Elevated activation of occipito-temporal structures
was found in the premise processing phase, activation in the
anterior prefrontal cortex in the integration phase, and
activation of the posterior parietal and prefrontal cortex
during the reasoning validation phase. Because problems
were presented as graphic depictions of the state of the
affairs, these distinguishable activations cannot be explained
by reading and linguistic processing of the premises.
Moreover, the maintenance condition employed in the present
study was identical in terms of problem content and visual
display to the reasoning problems. In this condition, the
APFC activation was significantly lower in the premise
integration phase, and the PFC activation significantly lower
in the maintenance validation phase.
Our data show that some neural structures are unique to the
reasoning process, others are more involved in reasoning than
in maintenance, and yet others are involved in both reasoning
and premise maintenance. Although this is a clear pattern of
results, there are also some ambiguities in the present data.
The differences between reasoning and working memory
tasks, for instance, could be due to performance difficulty,
because during performing working memory tasks the
participants showed higher accuracy and faster reaction times
than during reasoning tasks. To rule out this explanation we
computed an additional analysis in which we added the
response times as an additional parametric factor in the SPM
model. In this way we could partial out the difficulty factor.
No critical differences to the present findings were found.
A second question is related to individual differences. In a
previous study, we scanned the brain activity of our
participants during reasoning and also measured their visuospatial ability with a well-known subset of tasks from an
intelligence inventory. Interestingly, the brain activation was
significantly modulated by the participants’ visuo-spatial
skill. The higher the participants’ visuo-spatial skill, the better
their reasoning performance, and the less activation was
present in visual association areas during reasoning (Ruff,
Knauff, Fangmeier & Spreer, 2003). We now computed a
similar analysis based on the present findings. To examine the
influence of individual differences, the participants were
tested after the experiment with the “Block Design Test” of
the German equivalent to the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale (HAWIE-R, Tewes, 1991). We correlated the beta
values for each reasoning phase and cluster with the outcome
of the Block Design Test (BDT) for each participant. The
results showed that performance on the BDT correlated with
the accuracy of the reasoning tasks, although this correlation
was not significant. In the BDT-Activation-correlation we
found positive correlations during the validation phase in the
APFC and the PPC. We also found negative correlations
during the integration phase in the PPC. These findings shed
new light on our previous findings, because they show that
the correlations systematically vary over the different
reasoning phases. These findings and the results concerning
difficulty factors are extensively discussed in Fangmeier,
Knauff, Ruff, and Sloutsky (2005).

The third problematic point is related to the experimental
setup of our study. One could object that the identification of
three different phases is not so surprising, because the
experiment was set up to ensure 3 stages. Although this is
true, we believe that this is one of the main advantages of our
study. As everybody knows there is a many to many mapping
between cortical regions and cognitive functions, and thus
neuropsychological data alone are too weak to formulate
cognitive theories. However, if imaging data are consistent
with behavioral findings this can provide strong support for a
cognitive theory of human reasoning. To study the neural
correlates of high-level cognition, therefore very specific
hypothesis must be formulated and the design of such studies
must be strongly guided by what is known from behavioral
studies. The study reported here is in the spirit of this
connection between neural activation ad behavioral findings,
because the three phases of reasoning are a solid result from
many cognitive experiments (cf. Johnson-Laird, & Byrne,
1991; Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993; Manktelow, 1999).
Given this overlap between the two classes of findings we
here propose a neuro-cognitive three-stage model of human
(relational) reasoning. In Knauff (2005) this model is
described in more detail and proved by many behavioral
findings.
The premise processing phase is related to bilateral cortical
structures in the occipito-temporal cortex (OTC). These areas
are involved in visual working memory (Toga, & Mazziotta,
2000; Postle, Stern, Rosen, & Corkin, 2000; Courtney,
Ungerleider, Keil, & Haxby, 1996; Kosslyn, Alpert,
Thompson, Chabris, Rauch, et al., 1994) and imagery
(Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001), and correspond to the
ventral “what”-stream (Ungerleider, Courtney, & Haxby,
1998). This is consistent with the notion that reasoners use
their general knowledge to construct a visuo-spatial model of
the “state of the affairs” that the premises describe (JohnsonLaird, & Byrne, 1991). It also agrees with the finding that
reasoning with materials that are easy to visualize leads to
activity in the visual association cortex (Goel, Buchel, Frith,
& Dolan, 2000; Knauff, Mulack, Kassubek, Salih, &
Greenlee, 2002; Knauff, Fangmeier, Ruff, & Johnson-Laird,
2003; Ruff, Knauff, Fangmeier, & Spreer, 2003). However, in
contrast to previous studies these visuo-spatial processes can
now be linked to specific phases of the reasoning process,
namely the first (and second phase, see below) of reasoning.
It is critical to see that in this phase there was no significant
difference
between
reasoning
and
maintenance,
demonstrating the premises are similarly processed under
both conditions. Thus, these processes are not specific to
reasoning, but primarily related to working memory.
In the integration phase reasoners construct a single
integrated model of the state of affairs described in the
premises, so that the premises of the reasoning problem are
no longer represented as separate entities in working memory
(as assumed by rule-based theories of reasoning; Rips, 1994;
Braine, & O'Brien, 1998). From this model a putative
conclusion can be drawn. The activation of the APFC and the
anterior cingulate cortex during this stage of the reasoning
process supports this assumption of premise integration, as
the APFC has been found to be specifically involved in
relational integration during reasoning, or in considering

1163

multiple relations simultaneously (Waltz, Knowlton,
Holyoak, Boone, Mishkin, et al., 1999; Prabhakaran,
Narayanan, Zhao, & Gabrieli, 2000; Christoff, Prabhakaran,
Dorfman, Zhao, Kroger, et al., 2001). Note also that crucially,
such integration processes are not necessary during pure
maintenance problems, for which we found significantly
lower APFC activation during the premise maintenance
phase.
In the validation phase the putative conclusion must be
verified. Here we found activations in the right PPC and the
bilaterial PFC, which were more marked for the reasoning
than for the maintenance tasks. The PPC plays a crucial role
in spatial processing and working memory (Baker, Frith,
Frackowiak, & Dolan, 1996; Oliveri, Turriziani, Carlesimo,
Koch, Tomaiuolo, et al., 2001; Postle, Berger, & D'Esposito,
1999; Smith, Jonides, Marshuetz, & Koeppe, 1998; Burgess,
Maguire, Spiers, & O'Keefe, 2001) and in the integration of
sensory information from all modalities into egocentric
spatial representations (Andersen, Snyder, Bradley, & Xing,
1997; Bushara, Weeks, Ishii, Catalan, Tian, et al., 1999;
Colby, & Duhamel, 1996; Xing, & Andersen, 2000). Our
finding thus highlights the critical role of modalityindependent spatial representations specifically during the
validation of the premises.
Note that this account also resolves inconsistencies in
previous neuroimaging studies on reasoning. These studies
have similarly implied that the parietal cortex may play a key
role in reasoning based on mental models, which are
supposed to be of abstract spatial nature. However, these
studies have often shown concurrent activation of visual
association cortices (Goel, & Dolan, 2001; Goel, Buchel,
Frith, & Dolan, 2000), which points to the role of “visual
mental imagery” in reasoning (Ruff, Knauff, Fangmeier, &
Spreer, 2003). The present study unifies these accounts, since
it shows for the first time that visual association areas are
indeed involved in premise processing and the construction of
an initial static representation of the initial model, but that
more abstract spatial representations held in parietal cortices
are crucial for subsequent processes, in particular when the
model must be verified. The supplementary activation in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, BA 9 left hemisphere)
in association with the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
during validation of the conclusion indicates that further
executive processes are exclusively devoted to the control of
this validation of spatial mental models (Smith, & Jonides,
1999; Fletcher, & Henson, 2001).

Conclusion
In sum, our study on the neuro-cognitive processes
underlying reasoning supports the notion that reasoning can
be described as a three-stage process, reflecting premise
processing, integration, and validation. For all these phases
we identified the corresponding neural structures. The two
latter phases are specific to reasoning, and they resulted in
higher activation of anterior frontal, as well as the prefrontal
and right posterior parietal cortices, respectively.
Our three-stage model of the neural correlates of reasoning
is strongly related to a strictly cognitive framework of human
reasoning (Johnson-Laird, 2001). This so-called “mental
models theory” relies on behavioral data only, but also

assumes that reasoners construct visuo-spatial mental models,
derive a putative conclusion from them, and try to validate
this conclusion by searching for counter-examples
contradicting this conclusion (Johnson-Laird, 2001). Our
present study provides neurophysiological support for such
three distinct phases of reasoning, at least for deductive
reasoning with spatial relations. Since the theory of mental
models claims to be a universal theory of human reasoning,
these three phases should underlie all other sorts of reasoning
as well, e.g., syllogistic reasoning with quantifiers such as
“all” ”some”, “none”, or conditional reasoning with “if” and
“than”. A word of caution, however, is that the cognitive and
neural processes in reasoning might depend on the nature of
the problem. Reasoning with visually presented spatial
relations might elicit mental models, but reasoning with other
problems might elicit other representations and processes.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants to MK from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under contract
number Kn465/2-4 and in the Transregional Collaborative
Research Center Spatial
Cognition, SFB/TR 8
(www.sfbtr8.uni-bremen.de). MK is also supported by a
Heisenberg Award from the DFG. VS is supported by a grant
from the National Science Foundation (REC# 0208103). We
thank three anonymous reviewers for many very smart
comments on the earlier version of the paper.

References
Andersen, R. A., Snyder, L. H., Bradley, D. C., & Xing, J.
(1997). Multimodal representation of space in the posterior
parietal cortex and its use in planning movements. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 20, 303-30.
Baker, S. C., Frith, C. D., Frackowiak, R. S., & Dolan, R. J.
(1996). Active representation of shape and spatial location
in man. Cerebral Cortex, 6 (4), 612-9.
Braine, M. D. S., & O'Brien, D. P. (1998). Mental logic.
Mahwah (NJ): Erlbaum.
Burgess, N., Maguire, E. A., Spiers, H. J., & O'Keefe, J.
(2001). A temporoparietal and prefrontal network for
retrieving the spatial context of lifelike events.
Neuroimage, 14 (2), 439-53.
Bushara, K. O., Weeks, R. A., Ishii, K., Catalan, M. J., Tian,
B., et al. (1999). Modality-specific frontal and parietal
areas for auditory and visual spatial localization in humans.
Nature Neuroscience, 2 (8), 759-66.
Christoff, K., Prabhakaran, V., Dorfman, J., Zhao, Z., Kroger,
J. K., et al. (2001). Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex
involvement in relational integration during reasoning.
Neuroimage, 14 (5), 1136-49.
Colby, C. L., & Duhamel, J. R. (1996). Spatial
representations for action in parietal cortex. Cognitive
Brain Research, 5 (1-2), 105-15.
Courtney, S. M., Ungerleider, L. G., Keil, K., & Haxby, J. V.
(1996). Object and spatial visual working memory activate
separate neural systems in human cortex. Cerebral Cortex,
6 (1), 39-49.

1164

Evans, J. S. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1993).
Human reasoning: The psychology of deduction. Hillsdale,
NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Fangmeier, T., Knauff, M., Ruff, C. C., & Sloutsky V.
(2005). The neural correlates of logical thinking: fMRI
evidence for a three-stage model of deductive reasoning.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, under revision.
Fletcher, P. C., & Henson, R. N. (2001). Frontal lobes and
human memory: insights from functional neuroimaging.
Brain, 124 (Pt 5), 849-81.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2001). Functional neuroanatomy of
three-term relational reasoning. Neuropsychologia, 39 (9),
901-9.
Goel, V., Buchel, C., Frith, C., & Dolan, R. J. (2000).
Dissociation of mechanisms underlying syllogistic
reasoning. Neuroimage, 12 (5), 504-14.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Mental models and deduction.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5 (10), 434-442.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove (UK): Erlbaum.
Knauff, M (in press). A three-stage theory of relational
reasoning with mental models and visual images. In Held,
C., Knauff, M., & Vosgerau, G (Eds.), Mental Models in
Cognitive Psychology, Neuroscience and Philosophy.
North-Holland: Elsevier.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: behavioral
measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15 (4), 559-73.
Knauff, M., Mulack, T., Kassubek, J., Salih, H. R., &
Greenlee, M. W. (2002). Spatial imagery in deductive
reasoning: a functional MRI study. Cognitive Brain
Research, 13 (2), 203-12.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Mental models in spatial reasoning. In Freksa, C., Habel,
C., & Wender, K. F. (Ed.), Spatial cognition - an
interdisciplinary approach to representation and
processing of spatial knowledge (pp. 267 - 291). Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Kosslyn, S. M., Alpert, N. M., Thompson, W. L., Chabris, C.
F., Rauch, S. L., et al. (1994). Identifying objects seen from
different viewpoints. A PET investigation. Brain, 117 (Pt
5), 1055-71.
Kosslyn, S. M., Ganis, G., & Thompson, W. L. (2001).
Neural foundations of imagery. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2 (9), 635-42.
Manktelow, K. (1999). Reasoning and thinking. Hove (UK):
Psychology Press.
Oliveri, M., Turriziani, P., Carlesimo, G. A., Koch, G.,
Tomaiuolo, F., et al. (2001). Parieto-frontal interactions in
visual-object and visual-spatial working memory: evidence
from transcranial magnetic stimulation. Cerebral Cortex,
11 (7), 606-18.

1165

Postle, B. R., Berger, J. S., & D'Esposito, M. (1999).
Functional neuroanatomical double dissociation of
mnemonic and executive control processes contributing to
working memory performance. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A, 96 (22), 12959-64.
Postle, B. R., Stern, C. E., Rosen, B. R., & Corkin, S. (2000).
An fMRI investigation of cortical contributions to spatial
and nonspatial visual working memory. Neuroimage, 11,
409-23.
Prabhakaran, V., Narayanan, K., Zhao, Z., & Gabrieli, J. D.
(2000). Integration of diverse information in working
memory within the frontal lobe. Nature Neuroscience, 3
(1), 85-90.
Presentation ® [computer software] (2003). Albany (USA,
CA): Neurobehavioral Systems.
Rader, A. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2002). Processing of
logically valid and logically invalid conditional inferences
in discourse comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28 (1), 5968.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof: Cambridge, MA,
US: The MIT Press.
Ruff, C. C., Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., & Spreer, J. (2003).
Reasoning and working memory: common and distinct
neuronal processes. Neuropsychologia, 41 (9), 1241-53.
SPM99 [computer software] (1999). London (UK):
Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology.
Siegel, S., & Castellan, N. J. (1989). Nonparametric statistics
for the behavioral sciences. New York u.a.: McGraw-Hill.
Smith, E. E., & Jonides, J. (1999). Storage and executive
processes in the frontal lobes. Science, 283 (5408), 165761.
Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., Marshuetz, C., & Koeppe, R. A.
(1998). Components of verbal working memory: evidence
from neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, U.S.A, 95 (3), 876-82.
Tewes R. (1991). Hamburg-Wechsler-Intelligenztest für
Erwachsene [German version of the HAWIE-R].
Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Toga, A. W., & Mazziotta, J. C. (2000). Brain mapping: The
Systems. San Diego: Academic Press.
Ungerleider, L. G., Courtney, S. M., & Haxby, J. V. (1998).
A neural system for human visual working memory.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A,
95 (3), 883-90.
Waltz, J. A., Knowlton, B. J., Holyoak, K. J., Boone, K. B.,
Mishkin, F. S., et al. (1999). A System for Relational
Reasoning in Human Prefrontal Cortex. Psychological
Science (10), 119-25.
Xing, J., & Andersen, R. A. (2000). Models of the posterior
parietal cortex which perform multimodal integration and
represent space in several coordinate frames. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 12 (4), 601-14.

