UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Folk Theory of the Social Mind: Policies, Principles, and Foundational Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7j658834

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Clancey, William J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Folk Theory of the Social Mind: Policies, Principles, and Foundational Metaphors
William J. Clancey (William.J.Clancey@NASA.gov)
NASA Ames Research Center & Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition
Intelligent Systems Division, MS 269-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035
abortion and welfare) that embody how society should
categorize problematic situations and act rationally to shape
the behaviors of its members. In turn, this belief system
incorporates a folk psychological theory of individual
motivation and learning.
In analyzing Lakoff’s work in this way, pointing out the
folk theory of the social mind as an organizing framework
for developing social policies, I am presenting a kind of
ethnomethodological analysis (Heritage, 1984). In
articulating and debating social policies, people are framing
and prioritizing social problems (e.g., laziness vs. poverty,
insects in crops vs. dangerous genetic modifications) and
how individual, governmental, and corporate behaviors will
be evaluated (e.g., by the bible, global law, science). At
issue is how “society” should reason and what cultural
knowledge (e.g., moral principles of nurturance, selfdiscipline, hard work) should be drawn upon to define the
nature of social problems (e.g., abortion) and how they
should be resolved.
I assume here that Lakoff’s analyses are accurate and
build broader and deeper theories upon the data he provides:
1) The modes of reasoning constitute alternative theories of
the utopian society (Mannheim, 1936) as a collective,
rational agent that individuals assimilate in their identity and
reproduce in word and deed. 2) These modes of reasoning
are cognitively and socially functional strategies that use a
moral context to make social concepts more or less welldefined and society more or less rule-governed with more or
less strict interpretations (i.e., theories of the social mind
deal differently with the flexibility of conceptualization and
written laws). 3) Theories of belief revision for political
debates need to explain how a statement is viewed as being
information (a claim meriting attention) and how the
activity of debating is itself shaped by the notions of “the
enemy” and “evil” in a theory of the social mind.
Lakoff’s analyses are specifically about American
politics, so this paper should only be viewed as a case study
using this data. However, the framework presented can be
readily tested for generality given data about political
discourse in other countries.
Subsequent sections of the paper provide a synopsis of
Lakoff’s Moral Politics, discuss the belief structure of a
theory of the social mind, argue that the opposing political
world views have a functional cognitive and social basis,
and review how theories of belief revision need to be
augmented to handle political debates.

Abstract
A polarization has developed in American political debates
concerning the nature of society as a rational agent that
implements policies to govern individual behavior. As
analyzed by Lakoff, the reasons for discord are not entirely
based on logical consistency, but originate in radically
different moral principles based on metaphors, values, and
faith. How people attend to alternative views, handling
disparity, ambiguity, and exceptions in political debates
constitutes a mode of reasoning—favoring facts or moral
principles—that is part of the world view being debated. This
paper explores the idea that both the conservative (defined
categories, rule-based) and progressive (open categories,
empathy-based) modes of reasoning are stable and
tenaciously held because they are a cognitively functional,
socially provided and reinforced means for making
conceptual systems coherent. Furthermore, the liberalprogressive and conservative world views may relate to
individual neural biases in how conceptual discord is
managed, involving assimilation (joining) or disjunction
(splitting) of categories.

Introduction
“Self-government relies, in the end, on the governing of
the self. That edifice of character is built in families,
supported by communities with standards, and sustained
in our national life by the truths of Sinai, the Sermon on
the Mount, the words of the Koran, and the varied faiths
of our people.”
George W. Bush, Inaugural Address, January 20, 2005
This paper considers the implications of Lakoff’s Moral
Politics for theories of conceptual change. At issue is why
two radically different metaphorical systems (world views)
developed and are stable within substantial subpopulations
of the present American society. Social, psychological, and
neural factors that inhibit conceptual change are considered.
In cognitive science research, the combination of “social”
and “mind” commonly refers to mental experience and
learning of an individual person (viz, “the mind in society,”
Vygotsky, 1978). This notion is certainly central in the
analysis presented here. However, the phrase “social mind”
here refers to people’s understanding and theorizing about
how society should work if it is to act as a rational,
collective agent. This is a “folk theory,” not academic, but
rather an everyday understanding articulated by, elaborated
upon, referred to, and argued for by ordinary members of
society.
The folk theory of the social mind is not a set of isolated
political opinions, but a system of thought that relates causal
(moral) principles to social policies (e.g., concerning

Synopsis of Lakoff’s Moral Politics
In Moral Politics: How liberals and conservatives think
Lakoff (2002) sought to explain “why certain stands on
465

nurturance will result in earning authority (as a natural,
nurturing leader) and promote liberty, equality, and hence
growth for others, which will realize the potential of the
group.
As Lakoff stresses, “conservative” and “liberal” are radial
categories, not definable by properties that all members of
the group possess (p. 7-8). Roughly 60% of the American
population is estimated to hold mixtures of these
prototypical world views, or to apply them differently in
different circumstances (e.g., home, work, local
communities, and foreign policy). Nevertheless, I take as
given that there are two opposing “camps”—suggesting two
stable attractors for forming a political conceptual system—
and friends, family, and government officials have had great
difficulty understanding each other. This polarization of
political discourse cries out for a cognitive explanation
going beyond the articulation of the metaphorical and
conceptual relations of the world views.
Further analysis reveals some striking patterns that Lakoff
articulates:
1) The models are built from the same conceptual
elements (e.g., authority/rules, self-reliance, fairness,
competition, moral strength), but formulate principles from
them that give the concepts different meanings and
priorities (p. 35). For example, both world views stress the
importance of freedom. But “When Bush is talking about
freedom, he isn’t talking about ‘freedom to marry.’ Or
‘freedom for a woman to control her own body and
reproduction.’ Or ‘freedom to unfurl a banner protesting the
president’” (Lakoff, quoted by Garofoli, 2005).
2) Beliefs about political issues are based on values
grounded in different metaphors for the family, which I call
foundational metaphors. Metaphors about the nature of life
frame the entire discourse: life as struggle (conservative) vs.
life as growth (liberal).
3) The world views and foundational metaphors are
largely subconscious conceptual relations, as well as modes
of reasoning and even ways of debating.
4) The moral principles produce radically different
conclusions about social policies (e.g., abortion, social
programs and taxes, regulation and the environment,
affirmative action, crime and the death penalty).
5) Alternative world views appear to be incoherent (e.g., a
liberal finds the conservative’s pro-death penalty and antiabortion positions to be contradictory).
5) People reductively view opponents as being stupid or
even evil,1 because alternative policies appear to be
inconsistent and hence unprincipled.
These are very powerful, general observations, which go
well beyond political substance to raise issues of broad
cognitive and social importance. Lakoff of course stresses
the nature of categories and metaphors, and emphasizes that
the world views constitute modes of reasoning and not just

issues go together… why the puzzles for liberals are not
puzzles for conservatives and conversely; and … topic
choice, word choice, and forms of reasoning in conservative
and liberal discourse” (p. 33). Lakoff explicates how liberals
and conservatives analyze social issues in different ways:
Do the poor need nurturing (education and health) to enable
them to participate or are they manifesting inherent laziness
and lack of discipline? Is the death penalty murder or a
deserved punishment, promoting self-discipline?
In brief, the two political world views are based on two
models of the family, Strict Father (conservative, Figure 1)
and Nurturing Parent (liberal or progressive, Figure 2),
presented here a schematic conceptual relations.

Figure 1: “Strict Father” conservative world view. Social
utopia will be realized by each person realizing their
potential for individual strength. Authority nurtures
individuals by articulating and enforcing strict norms, in
adhering to which individuals will develop self-discipline.
Self-discipline enables promoting one’s self-interest, with
the goal of developing self-reliance, which realizes the
potential of the self, the greatest good. Self-discipline
(moral strength) is inhibited by evils, external and internal,
which are actions, actors, and influencing forces that do not
adhere to the norms and strict guidelines laid down by
authority.

Figure 2: “Nurturing Parent” progressive world view.
Social utopia will be realized from society realizing its
potential strength, participating within larger orders. In this
world view, the proper expression of self-interest is to help
others (by nurturing ties and taking care of oneself) and to
fulfill oneself so as to develop empathy for others. Empathy
and more strength (discipline) enables properly nurturing
others (which includes defining guidelines for them). Proper

1
Because conservatives hold that only one world view is possible,
non-conservative policies are immoral. That is, alternative policies
do not relate to the conservative view of the family, so they are not
based on values at all, and hence are immoral.

466

facilitated are stressed, and the rest is said to be a matter of
value and morality. Yet, we find that policies really address
the nature of the human mind in society and how society
should act rationally to develop a utopian collective.
In summary, the theory of the social mind is based on a
causal conceptualization of human behavior in a social
environment. Policies prevent bad conditions (e.g., don’t
allow people to grow up without proper nurture) or attempt
to shape behavior via fear (punishment) or strict control
(people in jail can’t commit crimes). In the face of complex
and perhaps contradictory issues of (for example)
economics, individual freedom, ethnic differences, and
religion, it is not surprising that social policies do not rest
exclusively on scientific fact, but rather derive from fears,
values, and stereotypes. But why has a dichotomy of
theories of the social mind arisen? What accounts for the
stability of two antagonistic theories? Why is it so difficult
for individuals to understand or even listen to alternative
points of view?

collections of belief. I believe the content analysis can be
taken further: At issue is the very nature of conceptual
systems; something fundamental is being revealed about the
intertwining of the social, psychological, and neural aspects
of learning. Subsequent sections explore this idea.

The Society as Agent: Relating Policies to
Principles and Metaphors
Lakoff observes that people make sense of their political
views through a “common understanding of the nation as a
family, with the government as parent” (p. 35). I develop
this metaphor in a slightly different way, to emphasize
society as being a rational agent: Society forms policies
(laws and regulatory systems) by which the collective acts
on individuals to enforce moral principles by which utopia
will be attained. The relation of the individual to society is a
central theme addressed by a theory of the social mind.
In particular, the conservative and liberal theories of the
social mind frame policies for prodding and rewarding
people in different ways: Getting them to realize their
potential (Strict Father guidelines) vs. providing basic needs
and then opportunities to learn and participate (Nurturing
Parent). These views are supported by different causal
social-psychological theories of human performance: By the
liberal view, participation is predominately natural and
universally possible (e.g., based on an inherent need to
develop one’s identity by participating in group activities;
Lave & Wenger, 1991). By the conservative view,
participation requires strong shaping (e.g., because of inborn differences in capability and the temptation of external
evil influences).
Despite having a grounding in values and metaphors,
rather than facts, the theory of the social mind nevertheless
adheres to a logical, causal structure:
Metaphors => Moral Principles => Social Policies
Put one way, violating a social policy (e.g., allowing samesex marriage) violates moral principles (e.g., marriage is
“sacred” and is defined by authority), that are intended to
respect foundational metaphors (e.g., marriage embodies the
nature of family created by God). Put the other way,
metaphors imply moral principles (e.g., rewarding hard
work) that within a framing of the theory of the society as
agent and a theory of the working of the individual mind
require policies (e.g., on taxation) that respect and promote
the moral principles. For example, the belief that individuals
may be lazy and will seek unearned rewards makes social
welfare both immoral (for it is unfair to those who worked
hard for their money) and illogical (it is against the interest
of society to provide disincentives for hard work).
In summary, I am stressing that the foundational
metaphors are developed as conceptual systems about the
nature of society as an agent, supported by a theory of the
individual. Although it should not be surprising that policies
about education, crime, marriage, etc. should be based on a
theory of human nature, political debates do not appear to
articulate this level of the argument. Instead, the nature of
what is good or bad, what needs to be rewarded or

Does Political World View Have a Functional
Cognitive Basis?
I hypothesize that a folk “theory of the social mind”
constitutes a reasoning framework for handling the
psychological
uncertainty
that
is
inherent
in
conceptualization of social life. Lakoff observes that the
liberal world view, with its tolerance of different
perspectives and more open, interpretable definitions, is
more consistent with the nature of conceptual systems and
that the conservative view, in insisting on well-defined
conceptual boundaries, is inconsistent with cognitive
science. However, we must still explain why the
conservative view appears to be so satisfying and practical
to millions of people.
The idea that everyday concepts are family resemblances
of graded distinctions was philosophically explored by
Wittgenstein (1953), demonstrated experimentally by Rosch
and Mervis (1975), and articulated by Lakoff (1987; 2002,
pp. 9-10) as relations of “radial categories” (central
subcategory, typical case, ideal case, anti-ideal prototype,
stereotype, salient exemplar, and essential prototype).
Lakoff (2002) emphasizes that the categories of political
discourse (e.g., marriage, forms of harm, freedom) are radial
categories. Furthermore, the conservative principle of moral
strength, a metaphorical concept, conceptualizes moral
action “by strict boundaries that clearly delineate paths of
behavior” (p. 90). The metaphor of moral wholeness
conceptualizes an ideal “unity of form,” such that an entity
(e.g., a group) is stable by virtue of being homogeneous and
thus “predictable in the way it functions” (based on the idea
that “things made of radically different substances may not
hold together,” p. 90). In short, conservative morality is tied
to notions of rules, authority, discipline, and integrity that
favor social homogeneity through “natural, strict, uniform,
unchanging standards of behavior” (p. 90). Consequently,
anti-ideal prototypes (e.g., feminists, gays, unwed mothers,
“able-bodied people on welfare,” environmentalists, gun

467

rewarded. Conservative schemes for naming and evaluating
situations and behaviors present and reinforce a social world
of definiteness that makes the individual’s conceptual
system less blurred and less open to interpretation.
In summary, the conservative world view solves a
problem for society about how the mind works. Where
belief systems might be uncertain, incommensurate, and
idiosyncratic (or fragmented among many ethnic-cultural
variations), the conservative mode of reasoning holds that
only one world view is correct, that the best organization is
hierarchical and based on performance, that power and
ability trumps everything, and that all difficult matters have
solutions dictated by the highest authority, God.
The data presented by Lakoff of the existence, substance,
and stability of the conservative world view suggests a
broader view of the openness of conceptual systems—
through external, social organizations and discourse,
individual concepts may be more sharply defined. The open
nature of radial categories may always be a logical
possibility (as evidenced by the Nurturing Parent world
view), but may be made tractable as a social-psychological
reality by imposition of verbal definitions and laws on
social categories. Concepts such as “mother” may still be
radial categories in practice (e.g., conservatives admit that a
widow can still be a mother), but the conservative mode of
reasoning deliberately restricts usage of terms and
interpretations in political discourse to cope with what
would otherwise be arbitrarily open usage (e.g., allowing a
lesbian to become a legal father). Liberal views restrict
usage, too, but by principles of nurturance that accept (and
even celebrate) circumstantial variability and “creative”
solutions (e.g., same-sex marriage promotes adoption).
It is not too surprising that a social order relates to a
psychological theory of individuals. But could there also be
a neural influence as well? Could the existence of two stable
populations of conceptual systems be related to a
predisposition (or reinforcement) of inherent, opposing and
complementary neural processes? Specifically, there could
be an individual neural bias for assimilation (admitting
differences as acceptable variations of a category) and
another bias for distinction (forcing differences into
alternative categories, such as “deviants”). People with these
two learning strategies are commonly called joiners and
splitters: “Protagonists in academic debates often
characterize themselves as ‘natural splitters’ or ‘natural
joiners’ according to whether they prefer to emphasize
theoretical integration or to focus on conceptual
distinctions” (Harris, 2002).
Ironically, by this framing, a world view is conserved by
making many conceptual distinctions of variants and
perversions, corresponding to “other” people and “wrong”
behaviors. A progressive is biased to view differences not as
separate or “not me,” but as acceptable, or at least workable
variations within a common “rainbow” conception of
humanity, one that broadens to admit variations of identity
as being within a theme or having a common motivation.

control advocates) are “demons” because their behavior
does not follow the conservative’s explicitly defined
categories (p. 170-71).
Lakoff concludes that the conservative world view is “out
of touch with the realities of the human mind” (p. 366)
because it presumes that social categories and rules of
behavior can be based on fixed, literal, unequivocal,
general, precisely defined distinctions (p. 367)—“moral
absolutism requires conceptual absolutism” (p. 369).
Therefore, (in my terms) the conservative theory of the
social mind is based on psychological theory of the
individual mind that is invalid (e.g., for punishment to work,
it must not be viewed as a reward by the person breaking
rules, p. 369). Lakoff states that “none of Strict Father
morality’s requirements for what the human mind must be
are actually met by real human minds functioning in real
discourses” (p. 376). Indeed, he says that the Strict Father
model is incoherent (p. 373).
But this conclusion presents a paradox. For it is apparent
that a vast subpopulation of Americans (at least) find the
notions of well-defined categories, strict rule interpretation,
the conduit metaphor of communication, and Skinnerian
punishment-reward schemes to be understandable, useful,
and practical. Thus, these apparently unscientific ways of
thinking are indeed functional in real discourses. Even if in
some theoretic respect, the idealized Conservative world
view cannot endure (e.g., because it would lead to the
destruction of the environment on which it depends), we
must explain why the Conservative world view is so
satisfying to so many people, and in particular what socialpsychological and perhaps neural factors favor its
development and sustained (even tenacious) nature.
To begin, consider the conservative view that “the
meaning of a rule must be invariant from person to person
and occasion to occasion” (p. 371). This could be sustained
cognitively if external authority continuously reiterates the
rule, justifies its truth in terms of the foundational metaphor,
and enforces narrow interpretations (e.g., Bush’s anticlemency policy as governor of Texas produced 152
executions; Prejean, 2005). Thus, the conservative social
system sustains what appears to be a cognitively implausible
psychological theory of meaning and rule following. Put
another way, the conservative theory of mind (how society
must work rationally) follows from its folk theory of
categories, rules, and behavior. For example, for marriage to
be enforced as a strictly defined category (“a sacred act
between a man and a woman” is a common phrase), then
society should articulate policies and enforce laws that
prevent same-sex marriage (e.g., Bush proposed during the
2004 election to modify the US constitution accordingly).
Public discourse about social issues is providing
individuals with well-defined categories, principles,
policies, organizations, and actions that sustain the metaphor
of moral wholeness. The authority of the Strict Father world
view provides a solution to mental ambiguity, by drawing
sharp conceptual boundaries about what is right and wrong,
what is proper, who is in control, and how behavior will be

468

standardized testing, not standardized educational
opportunity.
What makes a statement a contradiction, that is,
information that must be resolved? The reasoning operation
is not just logical comparison or derivation, but involves a
willingness to work through unsettling implications: “Either
discard the facts or give up the clear and comforting
worldview that they contradicted” (Danner, 2005, p. 51).
A perhaps radical kind of satisficing is at work in political
debates—dealing with claims by ignoring them if possible
or by wholesale stereotyping of discourse (e.g., discussing
abortion with another party is stressful and hopeless).
Accordingly, the failure of analogical argumentation in
the study of Keane, M. T. and Bohan, A. (2004) might result
from viewing analogies purely structurally (“they involve
one-to-one mappings” p. 5), rather than considering the
origin and implication of the analogy with respect to moral
principles. Thus, an analogy might be “good” with respect
to its abstract form, but difficult to evaluate with respect to a
given theory of the social mind. For example, a liberal
might not be convinced by the argument for invading Iraq
based on an analogy with Saddam being like Hitler (because
the liberal more fundamentally rejects the view of the US as
an authority that disciplines another country, which is
different from self defense).
Keane and Bohan’s conclusion that facts and figures are
more effective than analogies is strongly disputed by
Lakoff: “As soon as progressives argue the details,
conservatives come back and argue their own details, and
nobody knows the difference. And as soon as you get into
the technical details, the liberals lose. Because the other
guys are arguing values” (Garofoli, 2005). To oppose
arguments based on values, one must argue back with other
values, an alternative theory of the social mind, grounded in
its own principles and foundational metaphor. For example,
in articulating environmental policy, one could frame issues
in terms of health and security, not the loss of species
(Butler, 2004). Furthermore, the choice of words is
important; rather than “global warming,” which might
convey something pleasant, use a term like “climate
collapse” (p. 65).

I do not have the evidence to support this hypothesis
further, but only seek here to stress that what appears to be
an illogical, untenable political position may be revealing
how social life biases conceptualization: The conservative
view is a useful, practical mode of reasoning, preventing
social disorder otherwise fostered by a blurred nature of
social categories. Put another way, Lakoff’s data provides
clues about how higher-order cognition can bias the neural
processes by which hierarchical conceptual systems develop
(i.e., promoting splitting or joining).
It is too soon to know whether neural biases might be
developed in social discourse or shaping which camps
individuals choose to join. Nevertheless, much more can be
said about the individual experience of resistance to
conceptual change, the topic of the next section.

Revising Political Beliefs: Social-Psychological
Inhibitors of Conceptual Change
I argue that theories of belief systems, concept learning, and
causal reasoning must be refined to account for resistance to
conceptual change, and indeed, the vehement emotional
discord individuals may experience in political debates.
Changing beliefs about diet, for example, is easier than
engaging in a discussion about capital punishment, in which
one’s world view may be treated as immoral.
First, social argumentation involves reasoning about
policies, not cases. Read, Snow, and Damon (2003) examine
“everyday social judgments, such as whether a couple we
know is likely to get married or whether someone is guilty
of a crime” (p. 1). But at issue in social debates is who is
allowed to get married and why crime occurs. On the other
hand, policy debate does fit the overall form that “decisions
are determined by the representation constructed rather than
by the “raw evidence” (p. 5). That is, people are working
with conceptualizations of social terms (e.g., abortion, harm,
freedom), coherently related by a theory of the social mind.
Why a statement of fact is simply discredited because of
priorities, rather then being viewed as an inconsistency,
does not appear to be sufficiently considered in theories of
belief revision. For example, a liberal might say that
disallowing abortion harms the freedom of the mother; a
conservative doesn’t necessarily disagree with this, but
simply views the harm to the infant as more important
because of moral principles. These policies and principles
are entrenched (cf. Gardenfors, 1988), and it is not clear
what kind of “incontrovertible fact” (Hasson & JohnsonLaird, 2003) would provide a context that enables
reorganization of the entire conceptual system.
Similarly, Walsh and Sloman (2004) appear to treat
“credible information” as non-problematic: “When we
discover credible information that contradicts our existing
beliefs, then rationally we must revise our beliefs in order to
restore consistency.” For example, on being told that not
educating the poor perpetuates poverty, a conservative
might respond, “Yes, but it’s worse that students graduating
with diplomas can’t read or write properly”—hence the
American education law “No Child Left Behind” promotes

Conclusions
This paper has elaborated Lakoff’s analysis in Moral
Politics by viewing the combination of foundational
metaphor, moral principles, and social policies as
constituting a folk theory of the social mind, such that if
society is rational, the greatest good will result for all. This
in turn relies on a theory of the individual mind in society
that at least tacitly claims how nature and nurture affect
individual behavior and the mechanisms/influences by
which society can and should shape individual behavior.
Rather than saying that the conservative view is
scientifically incoherent, I suggest that it provides a socialcognitive strategy for handling the inherent openness of
radial categories and the interpretation of rule statements.
This strategy is cognitively functional for the individual by

469

Gardenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in flux. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.
Garofoli, J. (2005). Bush puts his own spin on ‘freedom.’
San Francisco Chronicle, Jan. 21, A15.
Harman, G. (1986). Change in view. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Harris, T. (2002). Attachment-related psychodynamics:
Another shake to the kaleidoscope. Attachment & Human
Development, 4 (2) 201-6.
Hasson, U. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2004). Why
believability cannot explain belief revision. Proceedings
of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, CD-ROM.
Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Keane, M. T., & Bohan, A. (2004). Should politicians stop
using analogies? Whether analogical arguments are better
than their factual equivalents. Proceedings of the Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, CD-ROM.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. (2002). Moral politics: How liberals and
conservatives think (2nd Ed.). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate
peripheral participation. New York: Cambridge.
Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2003).
Models of consistency. Psychological Science, 14, 131137.
Mannheim, K. (1936). Ideology and utopia. New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.
Prejean, Sister Helen. (2005). Death in Texas. The New
York Review, LII (1) 4-6, January 13.
Read, S. J., Snow, C. J., & Simon, D. (2003). Constraint
satisfaction processes in social reasoning. Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
CD-ROM.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cog Psych,
7, 573-605.
Simon, D. & Holyoak, K. J. (2002). Structural dynamics of
cognition: From consistency theories to constraint
satisfaction. Personality and social psychology review, 6,
283-294.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12, 435-502.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development
of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Walsh, C. R. & Sloman, S. A. (2004). Revising causal
beliefs. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, CD-ROM.
Wilden, A. (1987). The rules are no game: The strategy of
communication. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New
York: The Macmillan Company.

providing a mode of reasoning (articulated and sustained by
social authority and laws) that makes social categories
ostensibly well-defined and laws apparently objectively
interpretable. The same strategy is socially functional by
providing apparent order through enforced norms that seek
social homogenization, clarity, and predictability. The
liberal world view, shown by Lakoff to be consistent with
cognitive science theory, may also be viewed as functional,
by justifying categorical ambiguity and flexible, empathetic
law interpretation (e.g., for death penalty clemency; Prejean,
2005) as morally right and socially valuable.
I further argued that existing theories of belief revision
need to be extended to explain how people engage in
debates about values and why they would view a fact as
something that must be incorporated in their understanding.
That is, the very starting point of theories of argumentation
and belief revision must be examined, especially if a socialcognitive analysis is to be of practical value for helping
people understand each other and develop mutually
acceptable social policies.
Might heuristics based on theories of conceptual systems
facilitate social discourse? Are political belief systems
amenable to change through crafted interaction? Wilden’s
(1987) analysis suggests that polarization into either-or
dichotomies (e.g., authority vs. tolerance) may be resolved
by a Both-And conceptualization (e.g., social progress lies
in both externally enforced self-discipline and nurturance).
What can we learn from related analyses of other countries’
political systems, foundational metaphors, and modes of
reasoning? Do we find only variants of the joiners and
splitters? How does a society articulate and sustain a BothAnd mode of reasoning?
Although the present analysis may require adjustment as
Lakoff’s analysis of American politics might be revised, the
overall form of my argument, linking political debates to a
theory of the social mind with mutual relations to social
order and psychological experience, suggests a fundamental
elaboration in how we view the relation of individual
cognition and society. Whether this relation further reveals a
strategic, environmental adaptation of how any human
being’s conceptualization can become neurally biased
(favoring assimilation vs. disjuncture), or an individual,
natural bias for one mode of learning over another (as a way
of categorizing differences) remains to be seen. As a BothAnd thinker, I expect a blend of the two processes are at
work, both nature and nurture.

References
Blanchette, I. & Dunbar, K. (2001). Analogy use in
naturalistic settings: The influence of audience, emotion,
and goals. Memory & Cognition 29(5), 730-735.
Butler, K. (2004). Winning words. Sierra, July/August, 5465.
Danner, M. (2005). How Bush really won. The New York
Review, LII (1) 48-53, January 13.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Oxford: Row, Peterson.

470

