UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Formalizing Diagnosticity in Concept Combinations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wk1c6sq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ferrari, Daniela
Keane, Mark

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Formalizing Diagnosticity in Concept Combinations
Daniela Ferrari (daniela.ferrari@ucd.ie)
Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy

Mark Keane (mark.keane@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science,
University College Dublin,
Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract
understood by aligning the constituents and mapping the
property from one concept to the other. Costello & Keane
(2000) propose a constraint-satisfaction theory which sees
property and relational compounds as being formed and
understood by a unitary mechanism that shapes the meaning
using the constraints of diagnosticity, plausibility and
informativeness.
Costello & Keane have argued that diagnosticity plays a
key role in selecting one predicate over another when
interpreting all types of compounds. A diagnostic predicate is
one that differentiates a concept from all other concepts (for
related ideas see Hampton's, 1987, importance; Tversky's,
1977 diagnosticity; Rosch's, 1974, cue validity). So the
interpretation of a cactus fish as “a prickly fish” appears to be
a more acceptable interpretation than “a green fish” because
prickly is more diagnostic of cactus than green. Costello &
Keane (1997) confirmed this hypothesis empirically by
showing that people rated interpretations using diagnostic
properties as being more acceptable than those using nondiagnostic properties. Furthermore, several computational
models have shown that diagnosticity operates as an
important selection criterion in modelling concept
combination (see Costello & Keane, 2000; Lynott, Tagalakis,
& Keane, 2004).
However, the use of the diagnosticity idea is not without its
problems. First, all of the empirical evidence on diagnosticity
has only been shown for property compounds not relational
ones. Second, and more seriously, it is not at all clear how
one could operationally define diagnosticity for relational
predicates. People can give ratings for the diagnosticity of the
properties prickly and green for cactus but it does not seem
sensible to ask people to rate the diagnosticity of operates-at
for train. Relational predicates seem to be more external to
concepts than properties, in a way that makes them
inappropriate for use in direct rating tasks.
In this paper, we tackle both of these problems in reverse
order. First, we develop a new methodology for
characterizing the diagnosticity of all predicates, whether they
be property or relational ones, using information retrieval
ideas, in particular the tf-idf schema (van Rijsbergen, 1979;
see Experiment 1). Second, we report two experiments using
these diagnosticity measures to test for their effects in
property compounds (Experiment 2) and relational
compounds (Experiment 3). Our results indicate that the role

A new way to formalize diagnosticity, based on information
retrieval ideas, is advanced and then used to examine the effects
of diagnosticity on the understanding of novel, noun-noun
compounds. Three experiments are reported in which the
pattern of diagnosticities on the combination’s constituent
concepts is used to predict how the compound will be
interpreted. Predictions about how distributions of diagnosticity
values affect the number of interpretations produced in property
and relational compounds are also tested. The implications of
this new methodology and these results for theories of concept
combination are discussed.

Introduction
Conceptual combinations are to language generativity, what
fruit flies are to genetics. By examining how people
understand noun-noun combinations (e.g. night train, finger
cup, and so on) it has been possible to begin to understand the
combinatorial richness of human language, a compositional
fluency that allows people to create new meanings from
previously unseen combinations of known words.
One of the key findings in this research area is that there
are two main classes of interpretations produced from nounnoun compounds (see e.g., Costello & Keane, 1997;
Hampton, 1997; Wisniewski & Gentner, 1991): property
interpretations (e.g. when finger cup is interpreted as “a thin
cup” by using the property predicate thin from the concept
finger) and relational interpretations (e.g., when night train is
interpreted using the relational predicate operates-at to
connect the two concepts). Indeed, it has been shown that
concept combinations tend to be interpreted predominantly in
either a property or a relational way, allowing them to be
termed property compounds or relational compounds (see
Gagné, 2000; Tagalakis & Keane, 2004; Wisniewski, 1996;
Wisniewski & Love, 1998).
There are several different accounts of how such
combinations are understood, that have raised issues about
whether relational compounds are more “natural” than
property compounds (cf. Gagné, 2000; Gagné & Shoben,
1997). Stressing the importance of distributional knowledge
about the relations associated with the compounds
constituents, Gagné (2000) has proposed that relational
compounds are understood by selecting a relation highlyfrequently associated with the modifier (the first word in the
compound) to provide an interpretation. Wisniewski and his
colleagues have argued that property compounds are

648

predicate. This matrix returns varying diagnosticity values for
predicates across the whole set of concepts and can give the
same predicate different diagnosticity values in different
concepts.

of diagnosticity may be very different in the two compound
types.

Formalizing Diagnosticity
Costello & Keane (2000) developed their diagnosticity scores
by asking people to directly rate participant-derived
properties. This approach will not work for relational
predicates and may well be sub-optimal for property
predicates. In their computational model, Costello & Keane
(ivi) claim that a feature is diagnostic of a concept if that
feature occurs frequently in instances of that concept and
rarely in instances of the other concept. Asking people to rate
such predicate features for diagnosticity is a poor proxy for
this notion. Sartori and Lombardi (2000) have proposed a
better method for determining, what they call, relevance by
adapting ideas from information retrieval.
As for information retrieval, queries are based on terms. If
a term occurs in a query, then its presence in a document
means that the document is relevant to the query. However,
different terms can be differentially important to a document.
A term is important if it has a high frequency in a document
and a low frequency in the rest of the documents of the
collection. This idea is clearly analogous to Costello &
Keane’s definition of diagnosticity. So, a similar procedure
could be used to formalize diagnosticity if we replace terms
with feature predicates and documents with concepts.
In information retrieval, term frequency (tfd,t) refers to the
frequency of a term in a document and the frequency across a
collection of documents is referred to as inverse document
frequency (idft). Given that N is the number of documents in
the collection and nt the number of documents containing
term t, the inverse document frequency is expressed by:

F1

f1,1

f2,1

. . .

fm,1

F2

f1,2

f2,2

. . .

fm,2

. .
.

. .
.

Fn

f1,n

f1,n

. .
.

Cm

. . .

fm,n

Method
Material Sixty novel, noun-noun compounds were drawn
from the larger corpus of Tagalakis and Keane (2003); none
of these compounds were lexicalized and none used nouns
that could be understood as adjectives. Half of these 60 were
property compounds and half relational compounds, as
established by previous studies. Using the British National
Corpus (BNC: Burnard, 1995), half of these 30 property
compounds were classified as infrequent (no hit in the corpus)
and half as frequent (one or more hits in the corpus). The
relational compounds were similarly split into frequent and
infrequent. Independent ratings gathered by Tagalakis &
Keane (2003) show that almost all (90%) of the infrequent
items were consistently rated as “unfamiliar” by people, while
all the frequent items were rated as “familiar”. All
compounds were broken down into their constituents, giving
120 individual concepts to which another 120 were added as
fillers randomly chosen from categories of common living
things and artifacts.

(ii)

which, in virtue of (i), can be in turn stated as:
* log2 N/nt

. . .

Experiment 1: Predicting Compound Types

The relevance of term t for document d is a composition of
tfd,t with idf t:

Rd,t = tfd,t

C2

To evaluate this methodology for computing diagnosticity we
performed a general test to see if diagnosticity predicted types
of compound (i.e., property or relational). If diagnosticity
plays a role in comprehending compounds, then we should
find that for a given compound if its property predicates have
a higher diagnosticity score, then it should tend to yield
property interpretations (i.e., be a property compound).
Similarly, if a given compound has relational predicates with
higher diagnosticity scores, then it should tend to yield
relational interpretations (i.e., be a relational compound).

(i)

Rd,t = tfd,t * idft

C1

. .
.

idft = Log2 N/nt

Table 1: The Concepts Matrix

(iii)

In reusing these ideas to compute diagnosticity we clearly
need a database of predicate features and concepts. Sartori &
Lombardi (2000) suggest that this database should be
obtained from people’s listings of features for a corpus of
words.
After people have described the word concepts using a
variety of descriptors, each concept description can be
divided into one or more property predicates (e.g., is red, is
fluffy, is fast) and relational predicates (e.g., comes-from-milk,
for-getting-attention, eats-wood). These predicates and
concepts can then be arranged in a Concepts Matrix. The
frequency of predicate feature f in concept c (fc,f) is computed
for every feature predicate that occurs in a concept, as
illustrated in Table 1. At this point transformation of the
frequency values by application of formula (ii) will lead to a
new matrix that contains diagnosticity values for each feature

Participants and Procedure Eight native English-speaking
students from University College Dublin were paid to take
part in the experiment. They received 5 booklets, one at the
time, with instructions to describe “how the thing looks”,
“what it is used for”, and “any other information that comes
to mind” (following Sartori & Lombardi, 2000). This
procedure was designed to encourage participants to describe
649

Difference value tend to be relational compounds. This key
prediction was confirmed by results.
Overall, the diagnosticity values of predicates in the
Concept Matrix ranged from 0 (when the feature did not
appear in the description of a given concept) to 63.25 (haseight-legs for concept octopus). The mean diagnosticity of all
predicates was 12.22. After computing the TPD and TRD
scores for all concepts we combined these scores to determine
the Diagnosticity Difference value for each compound.
A t-test analysis of the Diagnosticity Difference values
showed that property compounds (M = 107.79) were reliably
different to relational compounds (M = 17.52; t(58) = 5.49,
p<.001). A chi-square test also showed a reliable relationship
between the sign of Diagnosticity Difference value (negative
or positive) and the class of the compounds (property or
relational), χ2(1) = 16.7, p <.001.
In confirming such an intuitive hypothesis, that the most
diagnostic predicates will be reflected in the class of the
compound, we can have some confidence that this measure of
diagnosticity holds some validity. In the next two
experiments, we go further in examining the distribution of
predicate diagnosticities in property (Experiment 2) and
relational compounds (Experiment 3) with a view to
developing more precise predictions.

both the perceptual and functional features of the concepts,
and additional associative or encyclopedic relevant
information. The task took between three and four hours,
during which time participants were given rest breaks.
The descriptions given were broken down into distinct
predicate representations. Where possible, complex meanings
were broken down into simpler ones that had already been
used by other subjects (e.g. sweetening into sweet and
flavouring, where flavouring could be used for the concept
salt as well). Synonyms and other closely related concepts
were grouped (e.g. ornament, aesthetics, decoration). The
distinction between active and passive forms was kept (e.g.,
burns fuel and burned as fuel were considered two different
meanings). Only positive attributes were considered (e.g.,
hairless, don’t fly, don’t have teeth were excluded).
Disjunctions were treated as inclusive (e.g. if the concept
apple was described as ‘green or red’ each colour was
counted once).
Analysis Using the Concept Matrix Using the above
procedure a total of 722 distinct predicate features were
identified, each classified as a property predicate or relational
predicate. Property predicates typically involved perceptual or
physical features of objects (e.g. is hollow, has big ears,
smells). Relational predicates were ones that put the concept
in connection with other objects (e.g. eats bananas, is in
desert) or were related to functions (e.g., used for sitting on).
A 240 (concepts) x 722 (predicates) Concept Matrix was thus
built in which the diagnosticity of each predicate was
computed using (ii) as described above.

Experiment 2: Property Compounds
We have seen that overall property compounds have positive
Diagnosticity Difference values (whereas relational
compounds have negative values); that is, the TPD for the
two concepts in the compounds is higher than the TRD.
However, this is quite a rough characterisation of the
diagnosticities of a compound. Each concept in the compound
could have several property predicates, each of which could
have a different diagnosticity score. The TPD merely sums up
all of these diagnosticity values for each concept but it says
nothing about the distribution of those scores. Yet, it is clear
that these property predicates could be distributed in different
ways. A given concept could have a peaked distribution
where there is a single, highly-diagnostic predicate (e.g.,
prickly for cactus) among many low-diagnostic predicates or
it could have a flat distribution, where all the predicates have
roughly equal diagnosticity values. In this experiment, we
examine predictions about compounds with peaked and flat
distributions.
Our first prediction is that if the constituent concepts of a
compound have a peaked distribution there should be a
tendency to produce fewer different interpretations from it
across a group of participants, as interpretations will focus on
using the single, highly-diagnostic predicate. Conversely,
when the distribution is flat, there should be a tendency to
produce many different interpretations based on the different
equally-diagnostic predicates.
There is one further twist to the distribution prediction. In
Experiment 1, we did not distinguish between the head and
modifier of the compound, but clearly we must consider that
both head and modifier will have different predicate
distributions that may be peaked or flat. In the interpretation
of property compounds a property predicate of the modifier is
asserted of the head (e.g., a bullet train is a fast train). So, we

Table 2: Diagnosticity Values for Devil woman
Modifier

Head

Combination

TPD

TRD

TPD

TRD

TPD

TRD

TPD -TRD

161.15

23.72

82.65

67.99

243.81

91.71

152.09

By summing the values of all the property predicates and
relational predicates mentioned in descriptions of that
concept, each concept was described by two values: the total
property diagnosticity (TPD) and total relational diagnosticity
(TRD). Therefore for any given combination, both concepts,
the first concept (or modifier) and the second concept (the
head), have TPD and TRD scores. Table 2 shows these values
for the modifier and head of devil woman, along with the
combined TRD and TPD scores for the combination as a
whole. It also shows the difference between the TPD and
TRD (i.e., TPD-TRD). This Diagnosticity Difference score is
important because if it is positive it means that the
diagnosticity of the property predicates dominates that of the
relational predicates and vice versa if the Diagnosticity
Difference is negative.

Results & Discussion
The key prediction of interest here is whether
Difference scores predict the class of
Specifically, whether compounds with
Diagnosticity Difference value tend to
compounds and compounds with a negative

Diagnosticity
compounds.
a positive
be property
Diagnosticity

650

PEAK MODIFIER one (M = 3.33; t(28) = 3.408, p <.05; see
Figure 1).

would expect that the greatest effect of the peaked/flat
distribution should be found for modifiers rather than heads.
The second prediction we make, following on from
Experiment 1, is that compounds with a higher TPD than
TRD (i.e., a positive Diagnosticity Difference) should be
interpreted as property compounds. That is, they should
predominantly be interpreted using property rather than
relational interpretations.

7

Mean Number of interpretations

6

Method
Materials Sixty novel, noun-noun compounds were created
from the concepts analysed in Experiment 1. All of these
compounds had positive Diagnosticity Difference values. The
set of compounds had 15 compounds in which the modifier
had a peaked distribution (PEAK MODIFIER), 15
compounds with a modifier with a flat distribution (FLAT
MODIFIER), 15 compounds with a head with a peaked
distribution (PEAK HEAD), 15 compounds with a head with
a flat distribution (FLAT HEAD). In each of these conditions
the corresponding head/modifier paired in the compound was
counterbalanced (roughly half had peaked distributions, while
the other half had flat distributions). A peaked distribution for
a concept was defined as one in which there was one
predicate with a diagnosticity score one standard deviation
above the mean score (M = 12.22) of the whole feature set;
this means it had to have a value ≥23.10. Thirty filler
relational compounds were used to obviate the development
of specialised interpretation strategies.

5

4

3

2
FLAT H.

FLAT M.

PEAKED H.

PEAKED M.

COND

Figure 1: Experiment 2. Mean property interpretations
generated across conditions.
In contrast, no such difference was found between the FLAT
HEAD (M = 4.47) and PEAK HEAD (M = 4.79) conditions,
t(27)1 = -394, p>.05. This result essentially shows that when a
modifier concept has a set of predicates with a flat
distribution then many interpretations are produced, whereas
fewer are produced from modifiers with peaked distributions.
Head concepts do not have the same impact at all on
frequency of production of different interpretations.
Second, as expected we found that most of the compounds
were interpreted as property compounds (see Figure 2).
Participants produced many more property interpretations (M
= 17.40) than relational interpretations (M = 6.50; t(59) =
6.375, p <.001) Furthermore, a one-way ANOVA on the
differences between the mean frequencies of property
interpretations versus relational interpretations, reveals a
reliable main effect of condition, F (59) = 3.875, p <.02. Pairwise comparisons show that this effect is most pronounced
between the PEAK MODIFIER (M = 19.47) and FLAT
MODIFIER (M = 6.60) conditions, t(28)= -3.84, p<.001.
There is no reliable difference between the PEAK HEAD (M
= 11.73) and FLAT HEAD conditions (M = 5.80; t = -1.091
p>0.5).
Taken together these results indicate that diagnosticity
plays a key role in the generation of interpretations to
conceptual combinations. Further confirming the result of
Experiment 1, we have found that compounds with a positive
Diagnosticity Difference are interpreted as property
compounds. Moreover, the locus of this effect mainly lies in
modifier concept rather than the head one. If the compound’s
modifier has many property predicates with a flat distribution
of diagnosticity values then many property interpretations are

Subjects, Procedure & Scoring Thirty native Englishspeaking undergraduates from the University College Dublin
participated in the experiment for partial course credits.
Combinations were presented on a PC, one combination per
screen shown, in random order. Subjects were given
instructions to type in their first interpretation next to the
combination. Subjects completed the task in approximately
twenty minutes. Interpretations were classified into five
categories: Property, Relation, Mixed, Like and Other.
Interpretations in which a property feature was involved were
classified as Property. Those in which a relation was
established were classified as Relation. Interpretations that
used both a property and a relation were classed as Mixed.
Interpretations using ‘like’ without specification of a
dimension were considered a class on their own, for there is
disagreement in the literature as to their status. Unclear
interpretations and interpretations that just renamed the
combinations with synonyms constituted the class Other.
Ratings by the first author were validated by an independent
judge who was unaware of the hypotheses of the experiment
(with 90% agreement).

Results and Discussion
Overall, the two predictions made were confirmed. First, as
predicted, there was a main effect of condition on the number
of different interpretations produced as revealed by a one-way
ANOVA (F(58) = 4.714, p<.02). The mean number of
property interpretations produced in the FLAT MODIFIER
condition (M = 6.6) was reliably greater than that found in the

1

Degrees of freedom are different because one item was
responded to completely in a relational way.

651

produced. If the compound’s modifier has a peaked
distribution then fewer interpretations are produced.

30

30

20
20

10

Mean

Mean

10

P
0
FLAT M.

PEAKED H.

0

R
FLAT H.

R
FLAT H.

P

FLAT M.

PEAKED H.

PEAKED M.

COND

PEAKED M.

COND

Figure 3: Experiment 3. Mean frequencies of property and
relation interpretations across conditions.

Figure 2: Experiment 2. Mean frequencies of property and
relation interpretations across conditions.

Experiment 2. Ratings were carried out by the first author and
an independent judge who was unaware of the hypotheses of
the experiment (agreement between raters was 92.3%).

Experiment 3: Relational Compounds

Results and Discussion

In this experiment, we essentially repeated Experiment 2 but
this time used a set of compounds with negative Diagnosticity
Difference values (i.e., compounds that should turn out to be
relational compounds); that is, compounds in which the
balance of diagnosticity scores were higher for the relational
predicates than the property predicates (i.e., TRD>TPD).
If the way diagnosticity operates in these compounds is the
same as in property compounds then we should see the same
pattern of results for these compounds: (i) compounds with a
flat distribution on their modifier should produce more
interpretations than those with a peaked distribution on the
modifier; (ii) more relational interpretations should be
produced from these negative Diagnosticity Difference
compounds as the balance of their diagnosticities is in favour
of relations.

Overall, the first prediction was not supported but the second
was confirmed. Taking the bad news first, all of the
conditions produced relatively uniform numbers of
interpretations. T-tests revealed no reliable differences
between the four conditions, which had the following means:
PEAK MODIFIER (M = 3.40), FLAT MODIFIER (M =
3.40), PEAK HEAD (M = 3.07), and FLAT HEAD (M =
3.80). These results show in a fairly unambiguous fashion that
diagnostic, relational predicates do not operate in anything
like the same way as diagnostic, property predicates. The
reasons for these effects are not immediately apparent, though
one possibility is that relations cannot be used as flexibly as
properties to construct interpretations. Within constraint
theory, this would be seen as a result of another constraint,
plausibility, overwhelming the influence of diagnosticity. The
plausibility constraint prevents even highly diagnostic
relations from being used in full-fledged interpretations.
Costello & Keane (2000) envisaged such a possibility in the
interpretation of compounds but they did not realise that it
could occur in such a widespread fashion in relational
compounds.
The good news is that the second hypothesis was confirmed
(see Figure 3). Overall, participants consistently produced
more relational (M = 23.86) than property interpretations (M
= 2.60; t(59) = 20.803, p= <.001), as predicted. This effect
was marked in all conditions: in condition MODIFIER PEAK
relational interpretation (M = 25.40) > property interpretation
(M = 1.87, t(14) = 15.668, p<.001); MODIFIER FLAT
relational interpretation (M = 22.47) > property interpretation
(M = 3.67, t(14) = 6.785, p<.001); HEAD PEAK relational
interpretation (M = 24.13) > property interpretation (M =

Method
Material Sixty combinations were made using the same
method as in Experiment 2, according to the constraint that
TRD scores were higher than TPD scores. Here, the
distribution of relational predicates was modified instead of
the property predicates for heads and modifiers. The resulting
four sets of materials were: 15 compounds in with a modifier
with a peaked distribution (PEAK MODIFIER), 15 with a
modifier with a flat distribution (FLAT MODIFIER), 15 with
a head with a peaked distribution (PEAK HEAD), 15 with a
head with a flat distribution (FLAT HEAD). In each set the
other constituent was counter-balanced in its distribution.
Subjects and Procedure Thirty native English-speaking
undergraduate and postgraduate students from the University
College Dublin voluntarily participated in the experiment.
The procedure and scoring were as in
652

Cree, G. S. & McRee, K. (2003). Analyzing the factors
underlying the structure and computation of the meaning
of chipmunk, cherry, cheese, and cello (and many other
such concrete nouns). Journal of experimental
psychology: general, 132 (2) 163,201.
Gagné, C. L. (2000). Relation-based combinations versus
property-based combinations: A test of the CARIN
theory and dual-process theory of conceptual
combination. Journal of Memory and Language, 42,
365-389.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J., (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, memory, and Cognition, 23, 71-78.
Hampton, J., A., (1987) Inheritance of attributes in natural
concept conjunctions. Memory and cognition 15 (1), 5571.
Hampton, J. (1997). Conceptual combination. In Lamberts
K., Shanks D. (Eds.) Knowledge, concepts and
categories. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Lynott, D., Tagalakis, G., & Keane, M.T. (2004). Conceptual
Combination with PUNC. Artificial Intelligence Review,
21(3-4), 353-374.
Rosch, E., (1974). Linguistic relativity. In A. Silverstein
(Ed.), Human communication: theoretical explorations.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblance: studies
in the internal structure o categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 382-407.
Sartori, G. & Lombardi, L., (2004). Semantic relevance and
semantic disorders. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
16, 439-452.
Tagalakis, G. & Keane, M.T. (2003). Modelling the
understanding of noun-noun compounds: The role of
familiarity. Proceedings the European Cognitive Science
Conference (EuroCogSci03) (pp 319-324). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
review, 84 (4), 327-352.
van Rijsbergen, C. (1979). Information Retrieval. London:
Butterworth.
Wisniewski, E., J. (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.
Wisniewski, E. J. & Gentner, D. (1991). On the combinatorial
semantics of noun pairs: Minor and major adjustments to
meaning. In. Simpson G.B (Ed.) Understanding word
and sentence. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Wisniewski, E. J. & Love, B.C. (1998). Relations versus
properties in conceptual combination. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 177-202.

2.73, t(14) = 11.107, p<.001); HEAD FLAT relational
interpretation (M = 23.47) > property interpretation (M =
2.13, t(14) = 11.985, p<.001).

General Discussion
In this paper, we have advanced a new method for
formalizing diagnosticity for property and relational
predicates. We have then shown that this metric is accurately
reflected in the known property and relational compounds
(Experiment 1). In Experiment 2, we have shown that when
one constructs compounds with higher diagnosticities on their
property predicates, they turn out to be interpreted, as
predicted, as property compounds. In Experiment 3, we saw
that that when one constructs compounds with higher
diagnosticities on their relational predicates, they turn out to
be interpreted, as predicted, as relational compounds.
Furthermore, we have shown that for property compounds,
when the modifier has a flat distribution, many more
interpretations are produced than in any other condition
(Experiment 2). However, this effect is unique to property
compounds, it does not occur in relational compounds
(Experiment 3).
These results open up a whole new vista of possible
empirical tests of theories of conceptual combination. Armed
with this new instrument for characterizing diagnosticity it
should be possible to poke the cognitive fruit fly much more
accurately than before.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant to the second author
from University College Dublin. The authors thank Georgios
Tagalakis for his generous help in the work and Giuseppe
Sartori for first introducing them to relevance.

References
Burnard, L. (1995). Users guide for the British National
Corpus. British National Corpus Consortium, Oxford
University Computing Service.
Costello, F. & Keane, M., T. (1977). Polysemy in conceptual
combination: Testing the constraint theory of
combination. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 147142). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Costello, F. & Keane, M., T. (2000). Efficient creativity:
constraint-guided conceptual combination. Cognitive
Science 24(2), 299-349.
Costello, F. & Keane, M., T. (2001). Alignment versus
diagnosticity in the comprehension and production of
combined concepts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:LMC, 27, 255-271.

653

