UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fostering the Understanding of Multi-Representational Examples by Self-Explanation
Prompts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h47b7x3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Berthold, Kirsten
Renkl, Alexander

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fostering the Understanding of Multi-Representational Examples
by Self-Explanation Prompts
Kirsten Berthold (kirsten.berthold@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, Educational Psychology
Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany

Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, Educational Psychology
Engelbergerstr. 41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany

& Jehng, 1990) argue that the ability to construct and switch
between multiple representations is fundamental to successful learning. Mayer (e.g., Mayer & Sims, 1994) describes a
theory of multi-media learning, which states that learners
acquire more procedural and conceptual knowledge when
they receive multiple representations.
According to a functional taxonomy of Ainsworth (1999),
multiple representations are provided for three main purposes: (1) to support different ideas and processes, (2) to
constrain representations, and (3) to promote a deeper understanding. The last aspect is focused in this research.
In sum, learners cannot only learn how different individual representations with their strengths and weaknesses operate. They can also gain an understanding how the representations relate to each other. The latter is often a unique
contribution to learning.

Abstract
Multiple representations in learning materials are usually employed in order to foster understanding. However, they also
impose high demands on the learners (e.g., need for
integration). By embedding multi-representations in workedout examples, cognitive capacity is released that can be used
for self-explanations on the integration and understanding of
multiple representations. The effects of two types of selfexplanation prompts were investigated by conducting an
experiment
comprising
three
conditions
(domain:
mathematics). The learners (N = 62) received either (1) selfexplanation prompts, (2) self-explanation prompts in a
scaffolding-fading procedure, or (3) no prompts. Both types
of self-explanation prompts fostered procedural and
conceptual knowledge. With respect to procedural knowledge,
the different self-explanations prompts did not differ in their
effectiveness. However, conceptual knowledge and especially
knowledge indicating the integration of multiple
representations was particularly fostered by scaffolded selfexplanation prompts. Thus, for enhancing conceptual
understanding, such self-explanation prompts should be
provided because they scaffold the learners to reach their zone
of proximal development.
Keywords: multiple
worked-out examples

representations;

Problems of Multiple Representations
A major problem in employing multiple representations for
learning is that very often the expected learning outcomes
do not occur (e.g., de Jong et al., 1998). This is due to the
fact that learners are faced with complex learning demands
when they are presented with a novel multi-representational
system (Ainsworth, 1999): (a) They must learn the format
and operators of each representation, (b) understand the relation between each representation and the domain it represents, and (c) learn how the representations relate to each
other. Particularly with the latter, the learners experience
difficulties. Very often they just concentrate on one type of
representation or fail to link different representations to each
other so that the positive effects that were intended by the
use of multiple representations do not occur to the expected
extent (e.g., Ainsworth, Bibby, & Wood, 1998). If learners
have difficulties in mapping their knowledge between representations, the benefits of multiple representations may
never arise (cf. Ainsworth et al., 2002).
On the one hand, multiple representations offer unique
possibilities of fostering understanding. On the other hand,
they impose high demands on the learners. This state of affairs suggests that multiple representations have to be implemented in a learning approach which reduces demands
on the learner – such as learning with worked-out examples.
Thereby, cognitive load is relieved. The opportunity arises
to use this free cognitive capacity for integrating and deeply
understanding the multiple representations.

self-explanations;

Learning with Multiple Representations
Potentials of Multiple Representations
Multiple representations in learning materials (e.g., combinations of pictorial and arithmetical representations) are
commonly used because they promise unique potential in
fostering understanding. By combining different representations with different properties, learners are not limited by
the strengths and weaknesses of one particular representation (cf. Ainsworth, Bibby, & Wood, 2002). Furthermore, it
is expected that if you provide learners with a rich source of
different representations of a domain, then they build references across these representations (Ainsworth, 1999). In this
context, Kaput (1989, pp. 179-180) states that the “cognitive
linking of representations creates a whole that is more than
the sum of its parts…it enables us to see complex ideas in a
new way and apply them more effectively.” In their cognitive flexibility theory, Spiro and his colleagues (e.g., Spiro
250

Multiple Representations in
Worked-Out Examples

tively used for integrating and understanding the representations.

Worked-out examples consist of a problem formulation,
solution steps, and the final solution itself. Learning from
worked-out examples is a very effective method for cognitive skill acquisition in well-structured domains such as
mathematics (for an overview, see Atkinson et al., 2000)
because the learners are relieved from finding a solution on
their own. Thereby – in terms of the cognitive load theory –
extraneous load (load not directly relevant to learning) is
reduced (cf. Paas, Renkl, & Sweller, 2003). Thus, the learners can concentrate on understanding the solution (which
can be presented in a multi-representational format) and the
underlying principles. Thereby, germane load (load
imposed by processes aimed to gain understanding) is
enhanced.
However, studies on worked-out examples which were
presented in a split-source format – that included multiple
representations – showed that materials requiring learners to
split their attention among multiple information sources
imposed a heavy extraneous load and, as a consequence,
eliminated the worked-out example effect (e.g., Tarmizi &
Sweller, 1988). This phenomenon was labeled the splitattention effect. However, worked-out examples in which
the multiple representations were integrated (integrated
format) enhanced learning in comparison to conventional
problem solving and split-source worked-out examples.
Thus, multi-representational solutions in worked-out
examples should be presented in an integrated format.
Thereby, mapping between representations is easier, which
makes cognitive resources available for productive learning
processes such as self-explanations (germane load).
The classical study of Chi et al. (1989) analyzed individual differences with respect to how intensively learners selfexplained the solution steps of worked-out examples (from
the domain of physics). They found that learners who explained the worked-out examples more actively to themselves learned more. Renkl (1997) showed that even when
the study time was held constant, self-explanation activity
was related to learning outcomes.
In sum, the quality of self-explanations is a major determinant of what is learned from studying worked-out examples. However, learners show clear individual differences in
processing worked-out examples. Most learners do not actively self-explain worked-out examples, that is, they do not
productively use their free cognitive capacity for germane
load (Renkl, 1997). This suggests that self-explaining has to
be instructionally supported, by making the link between
representations salient (e.g., integrated format) and by
prompting self-explanations.

Scaffolding Self-Explanations
It has to be taken into account that relying only on selfexplanations has several disadvantages – even when selfexplaining is elicited by prompts. The quality of the selfexplanations elicited by self-explanation prompts were in
many cases far from being optimal. Sometimes the learner is
not able to self-explain a specific solution step, the self-explanation is only partially correct, or the given self-explanations are even incorrect (Renkl, 2002). This can lead to incomplete or incorrect knowledge that, at worst, can severely
impede further learning. Thus, the challenging task is to find
ways to support self-explanations further than is possible
with prompts.
The instructional method of scaffolding offers a promising starting point. Collins, Brown, and Newman (1989) refer to scaffolding as a support for the learners that relieve
them of parts of an overall task that the learner cannot yet
manage, for instance, explaining why the multiplication rule
has to be applied in probability theory. The intention is,
however, to hand over responsibility to the learners as soon
as possible. The latter implies a fading process. Fading consists of the gradual removal of support until students are
working on their own.
According to Vygotskian’s approaches, scaffolding is related to the zone of proximal development (Vygotsky,
1978). This is the region of activity in which learners can
perform successfully given the aid of a supporting context.
Thus, it is sensible to support learners by scaffolding on
knowledge construction that would be out of reach for the
learners without assistance.
Yet, studies on different scaffolding procedures show
mixed results. In a qualitative study, Chi (1996) demonstrated that a tutor’s actions of co-construction of knowledge (which included self-explanations of the tutee) led to
the learners’ deep understanding. In an experimental study,
Hilbert, Schworm, and Renkl (2004) fostered learning either
by self-explanation prompts or by instructional support
which changed during the course of learning from instructional explanations to self-explanation prompts. However,
the transition from instructional explanations to self-explanation prompts was equally effective as giving only selfexplanation prompts. Thus, constructing an effective scaffolding method is not a trivial task.
In sum, a combination of worked-out examples and multiple representations might be very effective: It can be
argued that the employment of worked-out examples in an
integrated format reduces extraneous cognitive load which
enables the learners to use "free" cognitive capacity for selfexplanations (germane load) on the integration and understanding of multiple representations. This in turn may bring
to bear the advantages of learning with multiple representations. In this research, the effects of using open selfexplanation prompts (questions to induce self-explanations)
and scaffolded self-explanation prompts (“fill-in-the-blank”
explanations) to foster the understanding of multirepresentational examples are investigated. Probability
theory was chosen as the learning domain. Procedural

Prompting Self-explanations
Renkl et al. (1998) found that spontaneous self-explanations
during worked-out example study were not as effective as
self-explanations that were enhanced by prompting.
Prompts elicit self-explanation activities that the learners are
capable of doing but which they spontaneously do not show.
Thus, it is sensible to design prompts that foster self-explanations in order to ensure that the free capacity that is available for studying multi-representational examples is effec251

Learning Environment

knowledge (problem-solving performance) and conceptual
knowledge (knowledge about concepts and principles) were
assessed as learning outcomes.

Probability theory (specifically: complex events) was chosen as the learning domain because it is suited for the use of
different representation codes (pictorial and arithmetical). In
addition, it is relatively difficult for learners. Eight workedout examples were presented in a computer-based learning
environment. Specifically, four principles of the topic complex events were addressed in the worked-out examples. On
each principle, the learners were provided with two isomorphic worked-out examples. The participants were allowed to
regulate the processing speed of the worked-out examples
on their own. The worked-out examples were presented with
multiple-representational solution procedures: a pictorial,
tree-like solution and an arithmetical solution (see Figure 1).
The learners were supported in integrating the information
from the tree (e.g., the ramifications) with the respective
arithmetical information (e.g., the multiplication signs). This
was accomplished by having the corresponding information
from the different representations simultaneously flashing in
the same color – “information pair” after “information pair”.
At the end, a colored freeze image was presented. One focus
of our learning environment was the understanding of the
multiplication rule. This rule has to be applied to calculate
the probability of the complex events. Usually, the learners
understand that the multiplication rule has to be applied, but
they rarely understand why the fractions have to be
multiplied. For many learners, the latter is not apparent.
However, it is “encapsulated” in the multi-representational
solution. The learner can “unpack” it by integrating the
information of the multiplication sign of the arithmetical
code with the ramifications in the tree-diagram (for the numerator in Figure 1: there is twice one branch; for the denominator there are five times four branches).

Hypotheses
Specifically, the following hypotheses were tested:
(1) Self-explanation prompts (scaffolded and open) foster
procedural knowledge acquired from multi-representational
examples.
(2) Scaffolded self-explanation prompts have additional
effects on procedural knowledge when compared to open
self-explanation prompts.
(3) Self-explanation prompts (scaffolded and open) foster
conceptual knowledge acquired from multi-representational
examples.
(4) Scaffolded self-explanation prompts on multi-representational examples have additional effects on conceptual
knowledge when compared to open self-explanation
prompts.
Furthermore, a focus of our learning environment was on
understanding the multiplication rule. Thus, we were especially interested whether conceptual knowledge of the multiplication rule could be enhanced.

Methods
Sample and Design
The participants of this study were 42 female and 20 male
students of the University of Freiburg, Germany. The mean
age was 25 years (M = 25.02, SD = 6.12). A one-factorial
experimental design with three groups was conducted (see
Table 1).
Table 1: Design and sample size.
Scaffolded selfexplanation
prompts
n = 20

Open self-explanation prompts

No prompts

n = 22

n = 20

In a computer-based learning environment all learners
worked on eight worked-out examples which included
multiple-representational solution procedures. Additionally,
participants of the condition “scaffolded self-explanation
prompts” received “fill-in-the-blank” explanations in the
first worked-out examples (e.g., “There are □ times □
branches. Thus, all possible outcomes are included.”). In
following isomorphic examples, this support was faded out
and they received open self-explanation prompts. The answers had to be typed into corresponding boxes. In the condition “open self-explanation prompts”, the learners were
provided only with open self-explanation prompts (e.g.,
“Why do you calculate the total acceptable outcomes by
multiplying?”). The group “no prompts” (control group)
included no additional support; the learners were just provided with a text box in order to take notes.

Figure 1: Multi-representational solution procedure
in an integrated format (originally, it was colored).

Procedure
The experiment was conducted in individual sessions. First,
the participants were asked to fill in a demographic
questionnaire. Afterwards, the learners worked on a pretest.
Then, they entered the computer-based learning environment and worked individually in front of a computer. In
252

Results

order to provide or re-activate basic knowledge that allowed
the participants to understand the following worked-out examples, an instructional text on basic principles of probability was provided. Afterwards, the participants studied eight
worked-out examples. During this phase, the experimental
manipulation was realized, that is, the participants were
provided with the scaffolded self-explanation prompts, open
self-explanation prompts, or no prompts. Finally, the participants completed a post-test on procedural and conceptual
knowledge. The experiment lasted approximately two hours
(M (in minutes) = 128.63, SD = 31.30).

Table 2 presents the mean scores and standard deviations for
the three experimental groups on the pretest as well as on
the procedural and conceptual knowledge. Additionally,
knowledge of the multiplication rule (which was part of the
conceptual knowledge) is reported. The measures on learning outcomes were subjected to a priori contrasts that correspond to the hypotheses (i.e., one-tailed t tests). An alphalevel of .05 was used for all statistical tests.
With respect to the students’ topic-specific prior knowledge, an ANOVA revealed no significant differences, F < 1.
Hence, there was no a priori difference between groups with
respect to prior knowledge.

Instruments
Pretest: Assessment of Prior Knowledge A short pretest
on complex events containing six problems examined the
topic-specific prior knowledge of the participants. The
maximum score for the pretest was six points.

Procedural
knowledge

Conceptual
knowledge

Multiplication
Rule

Post-test: Assessment of Learning Outcomes The learning
outcomes were measured with a post-test which contained
14 problems (seven problems on procedural knowledge and
seven problems on conceptual knowledge).
(1) Procedural Knowledge (Problem-Solving Performance). Procedural knowledge contains actions or
manipulations that are valid within a domain (de Jong &
Ferguson-Hessler, 1996), e.g. multiplying two fractions to
calculate the probability of a complex event. This category
included four near transfer items (same structure as the
worked-out examples presented for learning but different
surface features, such as the cover story) and three far
transfer items (different surface features and also different
structure, which means that a modified solution procedure
had to be found). An example of a near transfer item is
“Bicycle number-locks usually have four digits. What is the
probability that one guesses the right digit sequence on the
first guess?” In each task, 0.5 points could be achieved if the
numerator of the solution was correct and 0.5 points if the
denominator was correct. These scores were summed up to
a total score of procedural knowledge. Thus, a maximum
score of seven points could be achieved in this category.
(2) Conceptual Knowledge. Conceptual knowledge refers
to static knowledge about facts, concepts, and principles that
apply within a domain (de Jong & Ferguson-Hessler, 1996).
In particular, it includes understanding about “what is behind the solution procedure”. This category contained seven
open questions which required written explanations on conceptual knowledge of the principles presented in the learning phase. For example, the learners were to explain why the
multiplication rule has to be applied (e.g., “Why are the two
fractions multiplied?”). As the rationale for the
multiplication rule can be figured out relatively easily when
the pictorial and the arithmetical representations are
integrated, this post-test measure also tapped on the quality
of representation integration. Two independent raters scored
the open answers by using a 6-point rating scale ranging
from 1 (no conceptual understanding) to 6 (very clear
conceptual understanding). A very clear conceptual
understanding was indicated by a correct answer with a high
degree of reasoning and elaboration. Inter-rater reliability
was very good (intra-class-coefficient .90).

Pretest

Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses)
on the pretest and on the dependent measures.

Scaffolded selfexplanation
prompts

2.30
(1.41)

4.55
(1.20)

3.63
(1.02)

3.57
(1.65)

Open selfexplanation
prompts

2.52
(1.69)

4.41
(1.05)

2.98
(.87)

2.00
(1.08)

No prompts

2.35
(1.86)

3.63
(1.36)

2.58
(.77)

1.85
(.89)

(1) Effects of Self-Explanation Prompts on Procedural
Knowledge. Descriptively, we obtained higher means in the
groups with self-explanations prompts (scaffolded self-explanation prompts and open self-explanation prompts) for
procedural knowledge. To test this difference, we aggregated the two groups with self-explanation prompts and
compared them with the control group. A t test yielded a
significant and medium to strong difference for procedural
knowledge in favor of the self-explanation prompts conditions, t(60) = 2.62, p = .005, d = .68. Hence, the participants
who had received self-explanation prompts performed significantly better on procedural knowledge compared with
those learners who had received no such prompts.
(2) Effects of Scaffolded vs. Open Self-Explanation
Prompts on Procedural Knowledge. To test for additional
effects of scaffolded self-explanation prompts on procedural
knowledge when compared to open self-explanation
prompts, a t test was performed. However, it failed to reach
statistical significance, t(40) = .41, p = .688. Thus, the two
conditions with self-explanation prompts did not differ with
respect to procedural knowledge. Hence, with respect to
procedural knowledge, scaffolded and open self-explanation
253

folded or with open self-explanation prompts. However,
with respect to conceptual knowledge (especially: understanding of the multiplication rule), an overall effect of the
self-explanation prompts can be mainly ascribed to the scaffolded self-explanation prompts.

prompts fostered procedural knowledge. Yet, the two selfexplanation prompts groups did not differ in this respect.
(3) Effects of Self-Explanation Prompts (Scaffolded and
Open) on Conceptual Knowledge. Descriptively, we obtained the highest mean in the condition scaffolded self-explanation prompts, followed by the mean of the group open
self-explanation prompts. The lowest mean revealed for the
group no prompts. A t test comparing the groups with selfexplanation prompts against the control group yielded a
significant and strong effect, t(60) = 2.84, p = .003, d = .80.
Evidently, the participants of the conditions with self-explanation prompts outperformed their counterparts of the group
no prompts with respect to conceptual knowledge. However, did scaffolded and open self-explanation prompts have
diverse effects on conceptual knowledge?
(4) Effects of Scaffolded vs. Open Self-Explanation
Prompts on Conceptual Knowledge. A t test which tested
whether the group scaffolded self-explanation prompts outperformed the group open self-explanation prompts revealed
a significant and medium to strong effect, t(40) = 2.23, p =
.016, d = .68. Thus, scaffolded self-explanation prompts had
additional effects on conceptual knowledge in comparison
to open self-explanation prompts. In sum, with respect to
conceptual knowledge, scaffolded and open self-explanation
prompts were effective. Obviously, especially scaffolded
self-explanation prompts fostered this type of knowledge.
A special focus of our learning environment was to understand why the multiplication rule has to be applied. This
type of knowledge also indicates to what extent the different
representations were integrated because it can hardly be
understood by studying just one representation but by
mapping the multiplication sign of the arithmetical code
with the ramifications in the tree-diagram (in the
denominator in Figure 1, there are five times four branches
which represent the possible combinations). Therefore, we
tested whether scaffolded and open self-explanation
prompts fostered understanding of the multiplication rule.
Descriptively, we obtained the highest mean in the
condition scaffolded self-explanation prompts, whereas the
means of the conditions open self-explanation prompts and
no prompts were relatively low. A t test which tested
whether the groups with self-explanation prompts
outperformed the group no prompts revealed a significant
and medium to strong effect, t(60) = 2.36, p = .011, d = .70.
Thus, the participants of the conditions with selfexplanation prompts outperformed their counterparts of the
group no prompts with respect to understanding of the
multiplication rule.
To test whether the condition scaffolded self-explanation
prompts fostered understanding of the multiplication rule
more effectively than the group open self-explanation
prompts, a t test was performed. A significant and strong
effect was obtained, t(40) = 3.67, p < .001, d = 1.13. Hence,
the overall pattern of performance indicates that especially
scaffolded self-explanation prompts fostered the integration
of multiple representations.
In sum, self-explanation prompts on multi-representational examples fostered procedural and conceptual knowledge. With respect to procedural knowledge, it did not make
a difference whether the learners were provided with scaf-

Discussion
In summary, our study revealed four essential contributions
for the problem of supporting effective self-explanations
during learning with multi-representational examples: (1)
Self-explanation prompts foster procedural and conceptual
knowledge. This result adds to the growing body of
evidence that shows that prompting self-explanations is
crucial with respect to learning outcomes in example-based
learning. In particular, we were able to show that prompting
self-explanations is also very effective in understanding
multi-representational examples. (2) With respect to
procedural knowledge, it is equally effective to use open or
scaffolded self-explanation prompts. (3) Yet, with respect to
conceptual knowledge, especially scaffolded selfexplanation prompts are effective. (4) In particular, this is
true for integrating multiple representations, as indicated by
the understanding of the multiplication rule. This rule can be
understood by integrating the multiplication sign of the
arithmetic equations and the ramifications of the tree
diagram. Thus, our findings also suggest that scaffolded
prompts particularly support the integration of multiple
representations.
The question arises why especially scaffolded self-explanation prompts were effective with respect to conceptual
knowledge, whereas with respect to procedural knowledge,
providing open self-explanation prompts were sufficient.
Conceptual understanding, for example, understanding of
the multiplication rule, is more demanding than gaining
procedural knowledge – in particular because such type of
conceptual understanding is seldomly addressed in
mathematics lessons in school or at university.
Nevertheless, it is crucial for further learning. The finding
that scaffolded self-explanation prompts (as opposed to
open self-explanation prompts) showed to be effective with
respect to conceptual knowledge may be related to the zone
of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978). The scaffolded
self-explanation prompts fostered the integration of the
multiple representations and the conceptual understanding
that was both slightly out of reach for learners without this
assistance. For instance, the learners were not able to selfexplain the rationale of the multiplication rule – even if they
were prompted. The “fill-in-the-blank” explanations
provided the learners with the pieces of information they
needed to integrate and conceptually understand the multirepresentational examples (e.g., “There are □ times □
branches. Thus, all possible outcomes are included.”).
Conceptual understanding refers in particular to an understanding about what the logic of (here: multi-representational) solution procedures is. Obviously, the scaffolds supported the learners to look behind the multi-representational
solutions and in understanding the relation between the
multiple representations and the domain (Ainsworth, 1999).
Our findings suggest that scaffolded self-explanation
prompts have to be provided if understanding the learning

254

Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989).
Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,
writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
Knowing, learning, and instruction. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
de Jong, T., Ainsworth, S., Dobson, M., van der Hulst, A.,
Levonen, J., Reimann, P., Sime, J.-A., van Someren, M.
W., Spada, H., & Swaak, J. (1998). Acquiring knowledge
in science and mathematics: The use of multiple
representations
in
technology-based
learning
environments. In M. van Someren, P. Reimann, H.
Boshuizen, & T. de Jong (Eds.), Learning with multiple
representations. Oxford: Elsevier Sciences.
de Jong, T., & Ferguson-Hessler, M. G. M. (1996). Types
and qualities of knowledge. Educational Psychologist, 31,
105–113.
Hilbert, T. S., Schworm, S., & Renkl, A. (2004). Learning
from worked-out examples: The transition from
instructional explanations to self-explanation prompts. In
P. Gerjets, J. Elen, R. Joiner, & P. Kirschner (Eds.),
Instructional design for effective and enjoyable computersupported learning. Tübingen: Knowledge Media
Research Center.
Kaput, J. J. (1989). Linking representations in the symbol
systems of algebra. In S. Wagner & C. Kieran (Eds.),
Research issues in the learning and teaching of algebra.
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture
worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual coding
theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 86, 339–401.
Paas, F., Renkl, A., & Sweller, J. (2003). Cognitive load
theory and instructional design: Recent developments.
Educational Psychologist, 38, 1–4.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1–
29.
Renkl, A. (2002). Learning from worked-out examples:
Instructional explanations support self-explanations.
Learning and Instruction, 12, 529–556.
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., & Mandl, H. (1998).
Learning from worked-out examples: the effects of
example variability and elicited self-explanations.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 23, 90–108.
Spiro, R. J., & Jehng, J.-C. (1990). Cognitive flexibility and
hypertext: Theory and technology for nonlinear and
multi-dimensional traversal of complex subject matter. In
D. Nix & R. J. Spiro (Eds). Cognition, education and
multi-media: Exploring ideas in high technology.
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Tarmizi, R., & Sweller, J. (1988). Guidance during
mathematical problem solving. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 80, 424–436.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development
of higher psychological processes. (M. Cole, V. JohnSteiner, S. Scribner, E. Souberman, Eds. and Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

contents is slightly out of reach for learners without this
assistance. Yet, to diagnose the dimensions of the zone of
proximal development is a difficult task (Ainsworth et al.,
1998). Nevertheless, we should be able to identify its lower
boundary by analyzing the learner’s unscaffolded performance. With this information, it should be possible to construct scaffolded prompts on knowledge that is out of reach
for the unsupported learner and which therefore falls within
the learner’s zone of proximal development.
By providing only “fill-in-the-blank” explanations instead
of complete instructional explanations and by fading out the
scaffolds in the following isomorphic examples, it was
assured that the learners did not superficially and passively
but rather actively process the new information. Yet, as the
scaffolded self-explanation prompts included additional
information compared to the open self-explanation prompts,
it might be that not the scaffolding-fading procedure was
fostering learning but only the additional information.
However, usually instructional explanations in worked-out
examples proved to be rather inefficient (Hilbert et al.,
2004; Renkl, 2002). Thus, it is not probable that the pure,
partial instructional explanation in the scaffolded selfexplanation prompts was the crucial factor. Nevertheless,
further studies should explore the specific contribution of
the additional information in the scaffolded self-explanation
prompts.

Acknowledgments
The research of this article was funded by the “Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft” (DFG 1040/11-1). We would like
to thank the members of the NWO-DFG LEMMA-cooperation for jointly constructing the tasks of the learning environment as well as Norman Marko, Heidi Roeder, and
Stephan Rueckert for their assistance in programming, conducting the experiment, and analyzing the tests.

References
Ainsworth, S. E. (1999). Designing effective multirepresentational learning environments (Tech. Rep.).
Nottingham, UK: University of Nottingham.
Ainsworth, S. E., Bibby, P. A., & Wood, D. J. (1998).
Analysing the costs and benefits of multi-representational
learning environments. In H. Spada, P. Reimann, E.
Boshuizen, & T. de Jong (Eds.) Learning with multiple
representations. Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Ainsworth, S., Bibby, P. A., & Wood, D. J. (2002).
Examining
the
effects
of different
multiple
representational systems in learning primary mathematics.
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 11, 25–61.
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70, 181–214.
Chi, M. T. H. (1996). Constructing self-explanations and
scaffolded explanations in tutoring. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 10, 33–49.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145–182.
255

