UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Framing Effects and Modal Illusions: How to Characterize Framing Effects as an Intensional
Phenomenon?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nq9v83q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Bourgeois-Gironde, Sacha

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Framing Effects and Modal Illusions: How to Characterize Framing Effects
as An Intensional Phenomenon?
Sacha Bourgeois-Gironde (sbgironde@hotmail.com)
ENS-lsh, Lyon1
1

survivors), in their choices or expressions of preferences,
to the detriment of the other (e.g. irrespective of the
complementary number of dead).

Empirically observed cognitive biases raise a challenge
for the more formal and normative approach to
rationality. Logicians, when facing these cases, can be led
to reflect on some basic principles of theirs. Framing
effects have been defined in terms of an intensional
phenomenon (Schick, 1997)2. Framing effects can
basically be defined as such: they occur when equivalent
descriptions of a decision problem give rise to divergent
decisions. Framing effects come in various guises: some
possible risky choice, some goal, or some attribute of an
object or a situation is framed and yields a framing effecti.
Different interpretations have been proposed for framing
effects as well as a drastic recasting of decision-theory.
My more specific intention here is to try to understand in
which sense framing effects constitute an instance of
intensionality, i.e. a violation of a principle of
extensionality, or invariance, in decision-theory and to
what extent this form of intensionality is related to other
phenomena of non compliance with extensionality in
logic and cognition. Arrow (1982) seems to be the first to
characterize framing effects as displaying intensionality,
as D. Kahnenam in his Nobel lecture reminds: “Framing
effects violate a basic requirement of rationality which we
called invariance (Kahneman and Tversky, 1984) and
Arrow (1982) called extensionality”.

Frederic Schick suggests a strong notion of intensionality
for framing effects as subjects being aware of the logical
equivalence of two propositions may avoid processing
them as co-extensional or as “co-reportive” in valuation
and decision contexts. However it is hard to make a
pronouncement about the degree of acknowledgment of
co-extensionality by subjects in the absence of empirical
data on that question. Under Schick’s definition, framing
effects imply that even though the extensional
equivalence of two propositions P1 and P2 is subjectively
realized, they are not substitutable in choice or valuation
contexts. A different approach would have it that even
though logical equivalence is perceived between P1 and
P2, P1 and P2 do not convey the same information as they
bear distinct connotations. For this reason, framing effects
do not exemplify any form of intensionality. This is the
case if logic and information or perception of logical
equivalence and perception of information equivalence
can be wholly separated in the study of our phenomenon.
The defender of framing effects as significant violations
of extensionality faces this dilemma: either he postulates a
strong form of epistemic lucidity (perception of logical
and/or informational equivalence) on the part of the
subject – and it is hard to see how divergent decisions do
not confine, then, to the irrationality of his choices and
preferences –, or he, so to say, trivializes framing effects
by saying that they systematically collapse to the justified
perception of some informational discrepancies. There is,
however, a way out which precisely stems back from the
classical notion of intensionality. Information and logical
behavior of sentences are related in the sense that bits and
states of descriptive knowledge license some inferences
and substitutions which others don’t. Implementation of
logic depends on epistemic lucidity, but, given some
accurate analysis of the intensional phenomenon at stake,
trivialization doesn’t necessarily ensue even when
subjects are lucid about logical equivalence of the
statements which they consider because of the possibility
of cognitively divergent aspects of the same piece of
information conveyed by those statements in the subject’s
mind. Sense or connotation, to adopt a classical
philosophical terminology, can be cognitively divided as
the study of so-called modal illusions has shown in the

I am especially interested in the correlation between
logical and informational lucidity and the possibility of
framing effects. My point is to reflect on correlations
between levels of subjective perception of logical and
informational equivalence and decisions that obviously
diverge from available knowledge. Traditionally it is to
the extent that some piece of information or the relation
between several co-reportive pieces of information is not
cognitively processed that a diagnosis of intensionality is
in order. When facing the extensional equivalence
between P1: « 400 survivors out of 600 contaminated
people » and P2: « 200 survivors out of 600 contaminated
people » (speaking of the same group of 600 people),
some psychological and pragmatic reasons may lead the
subjects to focus on one piece of information (e.g. 200
1

I thank Raphaël Giraud for ongoing conceptual discussions in
view of the clarification of the topic of the intensional character
of framing effects. I thank Andrea Armeni for his impulse to
submit these ideas to the Stresa conference.
2
F. Schick, Making Choices : A Recasting of Decision Theory,
Cambridge University Press.

331

D. If program D is adopted, there is 1/3 that nobody will
die, and 2/3 probability that 600 people will die.

philosophy of mind. The more specific purpose of this
paper is to envision some analogy between framing
effects and modal illusions, in order to embrace the
former with the resources of intensional semantics.

Other framings, according to Levin and al., concern the
attributes of an object or the characteristics of an event or
a situation and affect their evaluation. This type of
framing is very useful to assess the hypothesis that
framing effects depend on implicit reference points or
baselines with which objects, events or situations are in
fact implicitly contrasted. For instance if a medical
treatment for an epidemics is presented as leading to a
65% survival rate or a 35% mortality rate, the first
positive framing might well be accepted instead of the
second because of some implicit reference to a lesser
efficiency of a former similar treatment also framed in
terms of a survival rate. Valence and implicit reference
points jointly explain, in this case, the framing effect
usually observed. A third type of framing is the framing
of a goal which affects, according to Levin and his
colleagues, the persuasiveness of communication. We will
be mainly interested, in the rest, by attributes and risky
choices framings.

I will retain this broad characterization of framing effects:
it is not the case that « P1 is logically equivalent to P2 »
cognitively entails that « P1 is indifferent to P2 ». This is
the phenomenon which I will try to theoretically account
for. Labeling it a violation of the invariance principle of
decision theory stresses a deep connection between
extensionality in logic and indifference in choice and it
consequently confers on classical logic an implicit
normative scope in decision theory. Taking seriously into
account the intensional phenomenon of framing effects
invites to partially relax this normative constraint. It also
invites to a retrospective look over the family of
intensional phenomena. Intensionality has been
traditionally linked to the cognitive division of
information in a subject’s mind. What is left of
intensionality when complete information is in principle
immediately available to the subject, as Schick suggests
with his condition of epistemic lucidity.
1.

Framing
lucidity

effects,

ambiguity

and

A framing effect then combines ways of describing or
presenting options, objects or prospects, which are
normatively equivalent, and divergent levels of
acceptance or commitment for some of those framed
elements. We generally conclude from the higher
acceptance of an option that it is the option preferred by
the subject, the one to which she really commits and she
would choose if actual choice were in order. We further
traditionally conclude that given that those commitments
are normatively inconsistent, the preferences of the agent
do not exemplify rationality. However we can be reluctant
to draw this inference from acceptance of a description to
inconsistency in the set of preferences as long as we
haven’t justified how levels of epistemic acceptance
collapse to an ordering of preferences. If one wants to
take seriously the lessons of observable framing effects,
of one type or another, one must be in a position to state
that the agent’s ordering of preferences is affected, which
is, allegedly, a different diagnosis from saying that she
has inconsistent or incomplete beliefs or epistemic
attitudes; hence the importance to define and locate the
intensionality of framing effects. If the information
conveyed by the phrasing of the various options is
completely processed by subjects, then it is reasonable to
say that framing effects show an inconsistency or even a
kind of irrationality in choice and preferences, which
would require a proper explanation. If, otherwise, one can
suspect that information is not homogeneous or processed
as such by subjects, intensionality only affects choices
within the context of the agent’s epistemic attitudes and
one has thus vindicated the rationality of preferences. The
picture, though, might be a little more complex: it is not
possible to clearly distinguish between processing of

epistemic

Framing effects are of various types. Typologies have
been established by several authors. We can retain the one
by Levin, Schneider and Gaeth who classify valence
framing effects, i.e. variation of positive and negative
elements in concurring descriptions, among three main
categories. They propose correlations between what is
affected by framing effects and what is framed. If what is
framed is a risky option, what is affected is the
willingness to take a risk. The framing of risky choices
has been largely documented by T&K (1981), in
particular through the paramount example of the ADP
problem:
Imagine the U.K. is preparing for the outbreak of an
unusual Asian disease, which is expected to kill 600
people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease
have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific
estimates of the consequences of the program are as
follows :
A. If program A is adopted 400 people will live
B. If program B is adopted, there is a 2/3 chance that 600
people will live and 1/3 chance that nobody will live
C. If program C is adopted, 200 people will die.

332

information and expression of preferences, and this mere
basic cognitive confusion may be at the source of framing
effects. While this is the most basic explanatory
hypothesis I entertain, I will have to take into account a
few more pinpointed hypotheses about how information
correlates with framing effects.

descriptions used to fix extension independently mentally
convey. The striking effect is that what descriptions
convey may lead the agent to think he prefers to establish
one fact rather than the other while there is only one. But
descriptions also help to fix the extension of the terms
contained in sentences. So one might prefer to contrast
logical equivalence and informational equivalence of two
descriptions or sentences as, for instance, Craig
McKenzie does: « A pair of statements is logically
equivalent if each member of the pair necessarily entails
the other. (…). When there is no choice-relevant
background condition C about whose probability a
listener can draw inferences from the speaker’s choice
between frames A and B, we say that A and B are
« information equivalent » »4. In that definition the two
notions of equivalence are better distinguished than in the
Fregean approach: description does not help to fix
extension, it is kept independent from the logical
component of the problem, but it can continue to provide
the required explanation for divergent choices.

It is interesting to note that some researchers would not
recommend ADP as a foremost and a good instance of a
framing effect. Levels of informational explicitness
between descriptions A-B-C-D are ambiguous. The lack
of homogeneity could explain the divergent choices of
subjects more than a lack of perception of informational
equivalence when it is not clear that there is some.
Mandel stresses, then, how the control of informational
ambiguity between the several options might decrease the
extent of observed framing effects in the case of the
ADP3. A situation in which information is equally
transparent or ambiguous for every proposed alternative
might not completely reduce, though, framing effects
because other factors can play a role. Among them,
researchers generally emphasize salience and/or emotive
value associated with the valence of descriptions. When
risky choices are framed in terms of gains or losses,
associated emotions may naturally explain why the
behavior of subjects is not symmetrical. When some
words like « dead » or « survivors » are used, salience of
attributes, or associated mental pictures, can explain the
discrepancies in choices and judgments too. Now our
main question, here, is what to qualify as
« informational » and what role information plays in the
characterization of framing effects as an intensional
phenomenon. It is only in connection with information,
and not with emotion, that talk of intensionality of
framing effects makes sense.

There is a clear dividing line between logic and
information in McKenzie’s account. Logically equivalent
options may lead to divergent choices insofar as leakage
of information from the different descriptions is itself
different. From the fact that a speaker chooses the frame
A, C may be inferred, which is not the case from a frame
B. That a less successful treatment was previously
administered in cases of some epidemics may be inferred
from the description of a medicine in terms of a 65%
survival rate; it is maybe less obvious to draw the same
inference from the description of the same medicine in
terms of a 35% mortality rate. McKenzie’s distinction
relies upon a pragmatic charity principle : in case of
apparent violations of invariance, some relevant
information C must lie in the background : « Suppose (…)
that speakers, choosing between uttering ‘A’ and uttering
‘B’, are more likely to utter ‘A’ when some background
condition C holds than when C fails. In that case, a
listener who hears a speaker say ‘A’ can safely infer a
higher probability of C being true than if the speaker had
said ‘B’, that is, p(C|speaker says ‘A’) > p(C|speaker says
‘B’). If knowledge about the background condition C is
relevant to the choice at hand, then the speaker’s utterance
of the two logically equivalent statements A and B may
with impunity lead to different decisions ».

Some disambiguation, of terminology this time, must be
in order. The usual characterization of framing effects is
put in terms of equivalent descriptions of a decision
problem yielding systematic divergent decisions. What
kind of equivalence? There are at least two possible
candidates: logic and information. What does it mean for
descriptions or propositions, in a decision problem, to be
either logically or informatively equivalent? How does
either kind of equivalence or choice bear on the
rationality of decision? One is led here to contrast, in the
traditional Fregean way, reference, or extension, and
sense, or intension. Reference is what contributes to the
extensional characterization of the full sentence, the fact
that it reports, or here, the fact that would be the case if an
act in view of its establishment were taken. Sense is what

The difference between Frege’s and McKenzie’s
approaches to intensionality can be phrased in the
following way. For Frege different senses might
determine the same extension (i.e. the same fact or object
corresponding respectively to the different sentences or
descriptions). But a subject being unaware of this
equivalence prevents him from recognizing the logical

3

Mandel, D. R. (2001). Gain-loss framing and choice:
Separating outcome formulations from descriptor formulations.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 85,
56-76.

4

333

Personal communication, under press.

Fregean intensionality is captured in terms of the lack of
epistemic acceptance of two pieces of information as
being co-reportive preventing the perception of logical
equivalence. McKenzie’s notion of intensionality amounts
to the non systematic entailment of informational
equivalence from the acceptance of logical equivalence
between options. This is McKenzie’s basic account for
framing effects.
The third grade of intensionality suggested is quite
speculative and confines to the irrationality of subjects
who would display the corresponding behaviorii. It
amounts to the epistemic perception of logical and
informational equivalence not preventing framing effects
to occur. If such a phenomenon occurred, it would show a
more profound discrepancy between processing of
information and logic on one side and choice on the other
side than the two former notions of intensionality. So we
could be content to say that the contrast between logical
and informational equivalences captures a good deal of
what could be meant when applying this notion of
intensionality to framing effects. However, we cannot
completely discard the third grade of intensionality as it
reveals some inherent risk in McKenzie’s position. The
problem is that no phenomenon of framing effects can be
connected with irrationality under McKenzie’s view if
there is always a reference-point or a background
information C that a listener can infer from the choice of
some frame by a speaker. However we cannot be sure that
framing effects are not a symptom of a more irreducible
form of epistemic inconsistency or even of a form of
meta-inconsistency between epistemic acceptance on one
side and choice or decision making on the other side. This
is the hypothesis we clearly follow now when we try to
establish an analogy between framing effects and modal
illusions.

equivalence between sentences and, thus, from drawing
the same inferences from each of them. The phenomenon
is then as such: lack of perception of co-referentiality (or
generally co-extensionality) leads to the non-application
of a principle of logic (the substitution of co-extensional
expressions in sentences that contain them). What is
interesting with framing effects, as McKenzie understands
them, is that we have somewhat the reverse cognitive
situation: even though logical equivalence is perceived
and admitted by the subjects, one description may not be
substituted to the other in choice contexts (or even in
contexts in which subjects are led to merely express their
'epistemic' preferences), one inference, to the presence of
some piece of background information, drawn from one
sentence may not be drawn from another. This is due to
connotations or informational implications conveyed by
such and such descriptions (even when they are
extensionally equivalent). So instead of a lack of
cognitive connection between co-reportive pieces of
information yielding a violation of logic - in the classical
post-Fregean notion of intensionality - we have, in
McKenzie's explanation of framing effects, the perception
of logical equivalence not being a sufficient cognitive
ground to operate normative substitutions of
coextensional descriptions.
2. Intensionality
It just then imparts some thoughts about how this notion
of intensionality, with which philosophers are familiar,
really applies in the discussion of framing effects. In fact
its first interest is to help to raise some fundamental points
about this distinction between logical equivalence and
information equivalence. Logical equivalence is an
"objective" datum while information equivalence is a
subjective one - or this view is prevalent and makes most
people prone to locate the source of normativity in
decision theory in logical equivalence. Let’s introduce a
notation for these two notions of equivalence: xIy for x is
informatively equivalent to y and xEy for x is logically
equivalent to y. The prevalent hypothesis on the source of
normativity becomes: xEy => xIy. Now one can
distinguish three grades of intensionality. I use a non
specific epistemic or cognitive operator Bp to note p is
epistemically accepted by the agent, with no more ado,
for the time being, about what 'epistemic' exactly means
in this context:

3. Framing effects and modal illusions
One way of stating in which sense framing effects
instantiate intensionality, that is without the
presupposition that explicit or latent equivalent pieces of
information are not perceived as such, is, to borrow from
the philosophical literature5 and say that the subject is
victim of a ‘modal illusion’. Let’s spell out that
suggestion and see how the agent’s rationality can be
preserved when choice situations are analyzed from this
modal angle, even though his preferences seem to conflate
with his epistemic states.

- Fregean intensionality: not B'xIy' => not B'xEy
Modal illusions have been recognized in the philosophical
literature as cases in which subjects make systematic

- McKenzie's intensionality : not (B'xEy' => xIy) = FE
(framing effect)

5

See the anthology by Gendler, T. S. and Hawthorne, J.,
“Conceivability and Possibility”, Clarendon Press, Oxford 2002,
especially the introduction where the philosophical notion of
modal illusion is presented.

- "hyperintensionality" : not [(B'xEy' and B'xEy') => not
FE]

334

Let us return to the previous example of a modal illusion
where a subject experiences no epistemic qualms in
accepting the possibility that water is not H2O while the
subject also accepts in principle some normative
standpoint that would bring forth the a posteriori necessity
that water is H2O.

mistakes on the modal status of some classes of
propositions. Some proposition P is necessarily false
while it will be usually deemed as possible. Water is
necessarily H2O while some will judge it could have
turned out that water is chemically different from H2O.
Metaphysical and semantic reasons have been given to
justify the claim that some proposition X displays a
necessity and that a statement to the contrary constitutes
the basis of a modal illusion. But not much has been said
on the psychological phenomenon that underlies so-called
modal illusions. While it is not our purpose to get into this
analysis here, it is interesting to focus on this more
psychological aspect. It is not clear that subjects are
absolutely blind to the modal status of the original
proposition they consider. An alternative explanation is
that while they recognize the actual necessity of, say,
water being H2O, they project themselves in some
counter-actual situation in which the facts are less
metaphysically determined. It is a case of epistemic
indeterminacy that does not necessarily points to any kind
of ignorance of what is actually the case. Philosophers
have used formal devices to give a simple account of this
epistemic shift. They used what is named “2-Dimensional
Modal Semantics” (henceforth 2DMS). 2DMS predicts
that the actual modal value of a statement can be
‘necessary’ when epistemic focus is borne exclusively on
the actual world, while it can vary when epistemic focus
is made less determinate and can encompass other
reference worlds than the actual world. Let’s restate this
modal variation and compare it with what we said so far
on framing effects, information and epistemic lucidity.

A first point to notice is the possibility that, given this
isomorphism, the two situations of modal illusions and
framing effects can be dealt with, to some extent, through
a common framework, 2DMS. 2DMS is a logical
framework that allows for a modalized sentence to be
interpreted relatively to pairs of worlds rather than to
worlds simpliciter. Any sentence, then, can be interpreted
relatively to the actual world and relatively to any other
world taken as actual; its counterfactual content is then
contrasted with either of the worlds considered as actual,
whether actually actual or not. So in jointly admitting the
stance that “Water could be different from H2O” and that
“Necessarily water is H2O” the 2DMS reading of the
apparent inconsistency holds that in the first case the
subject envisions as its reference-world in one case the
counter-actual world, and in the second case the actual
world.
2DMS disambiguates reference-worlds for the
interpretation of modal sentences. A counter-actual world
is associated with some private epistemic state of the
subject: it is the world to which the most idiosyncratic
beliefs of the agent can be made relative. Even if this
private state can be found in more than one and even a
majority of subjects, counter-actual worlds reflect
subjective meanings people associate with the acceptance
of some sentence as possible while it is normatively
impossible. To insist on this subjective side of modal
beliefs: people entertain an impossible state of affairs and
they find private meanings that describe a possible
scenario they circumstantially take as their referenceworld. Now, intensionality would be limited, in the case
of modal illusions, if the worlds people select as their
points of evaluation could be systematically related to the
actual world as we know it. This, however, can’t be the
case. In order for 2DMS to properly apply, no backward
reference to actuality (actual actuality) can be made in the
purview of a counter-actual standpoint, lest the latter
immediately cease to be a full-fledged counter-actual
standpoint. A resort to a 2DMS explanation of modal
illusions does not per se allow one to have it both ways:
private and yet explicitly informational. It can still be
taken as a good device of disambiguation between private
and public meanings when the two are, unconsciously or
consciously, kept epistemically apart by the subjects. This
ideal epistemic separation is what makes the 2DMS
treatment of modal illusions potentially congenial to the
study of the kind of intensionality framing effects are
endowed with.

Let us start by looking at an isomorphism between
framing effects and modal illusions.
Framing effects share this common structure:
A is equivalent to B
(Two options are normatively equivalent)
And still:
A>B
(A is behaviorally preferred to B).
Modal illusions exhibit the reverse isomorphic structure:
A≈B
(A seems epistemically equivalent to B)
While in fact (from an accepted normative standpoint
underlying modal judgments)
A >* B
(A is a closer possibility than B)

335

maintains that he uses the terms to refer back to the same
thing (for instance to water as we know it). One makes
what could be called a hyperrigid use of those terms: he
wishes to maintain reference of those terms in context
where such reference is not available. When victims of
framing effects, on the contrary, agents do not see that
descriptions bear on the same object, that is, they fail to
see co-referentiality and show an extreme form of
intensionality (in not allowing for the substitution of
equivalent descriptions).
This isomorphism between modal illusions and framing
effects may be the symptom that those two types of
cognitive biases may represent two faces of a common
phenomenon: the role modal cognition plays in decisions
as well as conceivability. This cognitive ability has some
particular features and when conflated with other
cognitive abilities such as reasoning or processing
information, some apparent mistakes or failures may
appear. One needs not diagnose deep irrationality though,
to the extent that we are able to identify the biases and to
disambiguate modal reference points (rather than
informational reference points), we rather see the typical
contribution that modal cognition make to decision
processes, a contribution that was shadowed by more
purely informational approach to decision processes and
biases attached to them.

In both framing effects and modal illusions, subjects
make themselves locally blind to some informational
equivalence between two propositions and display
epistemic preference for one over the other. One can
connect framing effects to modal illusions in the
following way: favoring one possibility can be interpreted
as taking this possibility as implying a reference-world
different from the one the other possibility would imply
and failing to see that the two possibilities in principle
refer back to the same world. We have here a kind of inbuilt modal illusion in the following sense. It is as if,
indeed, the options expressed by two extensionally
equivalent propositions, in a framing effect, were not
counterfactually related one to another by the subject. It is
as if their equivalence was not perceived and as if, for the
subject, the two options reflected two essentially different
things rather than two distinct descriptions of the same
thing. In other terms the modal illusion is here deepened
into a form of objective illusion. The various options
presented in a choice situation in which a framing effect
arises are perceived as different objects even more than as
different descriptions of the same object. This deepened
modal illusion seems to provide a tentative diagnosis of
what kind of errors could be involved in framing effects.
One can express the reverse isomorphism between modal
illusions and framing effects in more than one way. In a
modal illusion we need a disambiguating framework in
order to realize that we use the same words to refer to
different objects. In a framing effect we seem to
disambiguate when we need not because the terms (the
descriptions associated with the options) actually refer to
the same object (option). When an agent rejects the
2DMS diagnosis for modal illusions because one

i
ii

See the typology by Levin, Schneider and Gaeth, ***
Tests in order to see how subjects behave when faced with pairs A/C and B/D (within subjects tests) should be proceeded.

336

