UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Frame Effects in Persuasive Messages Against Smoking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3w01t0ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Monaghan, Padraic
St. Clair, Michelle C.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Frame Effects in Persuasive Messages Against Smoking
Alessandra Tasso (a.tasso@univda.it)
Università della Valle d’Aosta, Strada Cappuccini 2A, 11100
Aosta, ITALY

Maria Grazia Monaci (m.monaci@univda.it)
Università della Valle d’Aosta, Strada Cappuccini 2A, 11100
Aosta, ITALY

Rosanna Trentin (rosanna.trentin@unipd.it)
Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, Via Venezia 8, 35131
Padova, ITALY

Alessandra Rosabianca (cicredo@yahoo.com)
Dipartimento di Psicologia dello Sviluppo e della Socializzazione, Via Venezia 8, 35131
Padova, ITALY
effects at all (Kühberger, 1998; Levin, Schneider, & Gaeth,
1998).

Abstract
Literature on message framing effects on persuasive
communication shows mixed results. It appears that framing
effects depend on different factors that activate different
processes. We report the results of an experiment in which
smokers and non-smokers judged some characteristics of
messages describing negative consequences of smoking or
positive consequences of not smoking. Positive consequences
were framed either as gains or avoided losses and negative
consequences were framed either as losses or as foregone gains.
Results show that perceived persuasive efficacy increases with
loss and gain messages, particularly when gain messages are
evaluated by smokers and loss messages describe long-term
consequences.
Keywords: Frame; persuasive communication.

Framing Effects and Persuasion

Framing Effects

Framing effects have been also investigated in applicative
research based on non-hypothetical contexts, particularly in
studies that have examined the influence that different
framings have on persuasive communication (Edwards,
Elwyn, Covey, Matthew, & Pill, 2001). In this line of
research it was hypothesized that the way in which a message
is framed affects the persuasive impact of the message in the
following way: a message that promotes a risky behavior is
more persuasive when it is framed in terms of negative
consequences of not adopting the behavior (loss) than when it
is framed in terms of positive consequences of adopting the
behavior (gain). Meyerowitz & Chaiken (1987) have shown
that brochures promoting breast self-examination (BSE) as an
effective behavior in the prevention of breast cancer, are more
persuasive when they focus on the negative consequences of
not doing BSE than when they focus on the positive
consequences of doing BSE. Loss frame, with respect to gain
frame, positively modifies young women’s compliance in
terms of attitudes towards the behavior and intentions of
performing the behavior in the future.
Successive studies, however, have obtained inconsistent
results: in some cases loss frame was more effective than gain
frame (Banks, Salovey, Greener, Rothman, Moyer, Beauvais,
& Epel, 1995; Maheswaran & Meyers-Levy, 1990; Rothman,
Martino, Bedell, Detweiler, & Salovey, 1999), while in other
cases no framing effects were revealed (Siminoff & Fetting,
1989; Steffen, Sternberg, Teegarden, & Sheperd, 1994).
According to Levin et al., (1998), different studies show
inconsistent results as they employ different definitions of
framing and investigate different processes. Risky choice
framing (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), implies a choice
between two different options framed either in terms of gains
(saved lives) or in terms of losses (lost lives), whereas studies
on persuasive communication employ a goal framing by

The framing effect consists in the influence that different
formulations of the same message have on decisional
processes and judgements. According to prospect theory
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), people perceive uncertain
risky situations in terms of potential gains or losses with
respect to a neutral reference point, and consider losses more
important than equivalent gains (it is worse to lose 100$ than
it is better to gain 100$). In the original experiment (i.e.,
Asian Disease Problem, Tversky & Kahneman, 1981), it was
clearly shown that different formulations -- in terms of gain or
loss -- of the same problem have a strong cognitive impact, as
people are risk adverse when the problem is gain framed
(people who will survive), but are risk seeking when the
problem is loss framed (people who will die). This means that
a risky option seems more desiderable if it is framed in terms
of potential loss, and less desiderable if it is framed in terms
of potential gains.
After this first study, many experiments have been
conducted on framing effects, producing mixed results: some
studies showed framing effects, but not always in the same
direction, and some other studies did not show any framing
2162

manipulating different framings of the same option (a
promoted behavior) with the aim of affecting individual
decisions about the behavior (BSE is promoted either by
stressing the positive consequences of performing it or by
stressing the negative consequences of not performing it).
Researchers who found positive goal framing effects
explained them applying prospect theory: if the promoted
behavior is perceived as risky (performing BSE implies the
risk of finding a lump), then loss framed messages are more
persuasive than gain framed messages because people try to
avoid the uncertain negative consequences of not doing the
promoted behavior (Meyerowitz & Chaiken 1987).
According to Levin et al., (1998), this explanation is not
plausible because it is not possible to identify in advance
which option is perceived by people as riskier (performing vs.
not performing BSE). They suggest an alternative
explanation: in psychological literature it has been clearly
demonstrated that negative information is processed more
systematically and has a stronger impact on decision and
judgement processes than positive information (Fiske &
Taylor, 1991; Peeters & Czapinski, 1990). Indipendently of
the perceived risk, a negativity bias can account for framing
effects: loss framed messages are more persuasive than gain
framed messages in that it is more important to avoid a loss
than to obtain a gain of the same size (Levin et al., 1998).
Goal framings are more complex than other frames in that
more aspects of persuasive messages can be manipulated,
producing many linguistic variations: positive consequences
of doing the promoted behavior (if you stop smoking) can be
described as obtained gains (you prolong your heart and lungs
life) or as avoided losses (you don’t shorten your heart and
lungs life); negative consequences of not doing the behavior
can be described as suffered losses (you shorten your heart
and lungs life) or as foregone gains (you don’t prolong your
heart and lungs life).
Furthermore, goal framing seems to interact with several
factors: according to Maheswaran & Meyers-Levy (1990),
personal involvement in the issue promoted by a persuasive
message motivates people to process information in detail: by
manipulating participants’ processing involvement, they
showed that loss framed messages were more effective in the
high-involvement condition, whereas gain framed messages
were more effective in the low-involvement condition.
Smith & Petty (1996) showed that framing effects interact
with the strength of message arguments. According to the
authors, loss framed messages are more effective because the
negative information they convey is processed more deeply
than the equivalent -- but with an opposite valence -information conveyed by gain framed messages. In their
study, information processing was measured by manipulating
the strength of message arguments: participants’ attitudes
were more influenced by strong than by weak arguments in
the messages when messages were loss framed.
It appears that goal framing effects depends both on the
persuasiveness of the messages and on the situations that
probably activate different cognitive, affective, and thinking
processes that occur at the same time.

The experiment
Framing effects have been investigated by a number of
applicative studies. However, there are no studies that
systematically manipulate at the same time linguistic
characteristics, content of persuasive message, the degree of
participants’ personal involvement and the intensity of
framing effects.
The aim of our research is to systematically evaluate the
impact of different factors on persuasive communication, as
part of a broader project focused on the promotion of healthy
behaviors in a population of young people. The project
investigates the role that affective motivations and strategies
of emotional regulation have on the adoption of health-related
behaviors in adolescents (Tice & Bratslavsky, 2000).
Following what both the WHO and the Community Action
Program on Health of the European Parliament recommend, it
seems very important to plan preventive interventions in
young populations that promote health behaviors and
prevents risky behaviors such as smoking, alcohol abuse,
drug taking, risky sex, etc…
Our research is a necessary contribution to the broader
project, as a better understanding of mechanisms of
persuasive communication makes it possible to implement
efficacious interventions to promote preventive behaviors.
Among many possible risky behaviors, we focused at first on
cigarettes smoking. We had undergraduate participants judge
and evaluate several aspects of many different messages
about smoking or not smoking. We manipulated different
variables at the same time. Frame: messages were framed as
gains or losses, and both gains and losses were presented with
or without negations, as a means of assessing the impact of all
the linguistic variations, as suggested by Levin et al., (1998).
Consequences: messages described two kinds of
consequences, short-term consequences and long-term
consequences as a means of assessing the impact of different
arguments (Smith & Petty, 1996). Personal involvement:
participants were either smokers or non smokers, as a means
of assessing differences due to a different degree of personal
involvement (Maheswaran & Meyers-Levy, 1990).

Method

2163

Participants were 65 undergraduates students, either smokers
(N = 33) or non smokers (N = 32). Participants were informed
that the experiment concerned the planning of a campaign
against smoking. Their task was to read and evaluate 24
messages describing the positive consequences of the
promoted behavior (stop smoking) or the negative
consequences of the opposite behavior (keep smoking).
Positive consequences were framed either as gains (you save
money) or as avoided losses (you don’t waste money),
negative consequences were framed either as losses (you
waste money) or as foregone gains (you don’t save money).
Messages described either 3 possible long-term consequences
(addiction to/freedom from cigarettes; heart and lungs life;
one’s and other’s damage/protection) or short-term
consequences (bad/good example; waste/save money;
hard/right breathing). Participants evaluated on 5 point scales
(1 = not at all; 5 = very much) 7 characteristics of each
message: Is this message… 1. …clear? 2. …interesting? 3.

…hard to understand? 4. … grabbing the reader’s attention?
5. …efficacious in modifying a smoker’s habits? 6. Do you
like this message? 7. Would you use this message in a
campaign against smoking?.

Results
Repeated measures analyses of variance 4 (Frame: gain, loss,
foregone gain, avoided loss; within) X 2 (Consequences:
short/long terms; within) X 2 (Smoking: yes/no; between)
were conducted on participants’ judgments of the 7
characteristics of messages. We report here only results about
the perceived efficacy and the agreement in using a message
in a campaign against smoking as in our opinion they are the
most interesting from a persuasive communication point of
view. Analyses revealed the following effects.
Perceived efficacy. Frame: F(3,189) = 12,58, p < .001.
Participants consider more efficacious gain (mean = 2,56) and
loss (mean = 2,55) frames than avoided loss (mean = 2,31)
and foregone gain (mean = 2,28); Consequences: F(1,63) =
6,55, p < .01. Participants judge more efficacious messages
that describe long-term consequences (mean = 2,51) than
short-term consequences (mean = 2,34). Smoking: F(1,63) =
5,59, p < .005. No smokers show a higher perceived efficacy
(mean = 2,62) than smokers (mean = 2,24). Frame X Smoke:
F(3,63) = 2,85, p < .05. Smokers perceive as more efficacious
gain messages (mean = 2,45) than loss messages (mean =
2,29) whereas non-smokers perceive as more efficacious loss
messages (mean = 2,81) than gain messages (mean = 2,67).
Frame X Consequences: F(3,189) = 6,38, p < .001. When
messages are gain framed, participants perceive equally
efficacious messages describing long-term consequences
(mean = 2,6) and messages describing short-term
consequences (mean = 2,52), whereas when messages are
loss framed, participants perceive more efficacious messages
describing long-term consequences (mean = 2,76) than
messages describing short-term consequences (mean = 2,34).
3,5

3

gain
loss
foregone gain
avoided loss

frames. For no smokers and short term consequences both
loss and gain frames are preferred to avoided loss frame. For
smokers and long term consequences the three gain, loss, and
avoided loss frames are preferred to foregone gain frame. For
no smokers and long term consequences loss frame is
preferred to the other three frames.
Would you use this message? Frame: F(3,189) = 19,37, p < .001.
Participants would use gain (mean = 2,52) and loss (mean =
2,58) frames more than avoided loss (mean = 2,21) and
foregone gain (mean = 2,81) frames; Consequences: F(1,63) =
4,96, p < .05. Participants would use messages describing
long-term consequences (mean = 2,45) more than messages
describing
short-term
consequences
(mean
=
3,5

3

2

1,5

1

1,5

1

short term

long term

long term

SMOKERS

NO SMOKERS

short term

long term

long term

SMOKERS

NO SMOKERS

SMOKERS

NO SMOKERS

2,29). Frame X Smoke: F(3,63) = 3,96, p < .05. Smokers would
use equally gain messages (mean = 2,42) and loss messages
(mean = 2,33) whereas non-smokers would use loss messages
(mean = 2,83) more than gain messages (mean = 2,62). Frame
X Consequences: F(3,189) = 6,95, p < .001. When messages are
gain framed, participants would use equally messages
describing long-term consequences (mean = 2,55) and
messages describing short-term consequences (mean = 2,48),
whereas when messages are loss framed, participants would
use messages describing long-term consequences (mean =
2,85) more than messages describing short-term
consequences (mean = 2,3).
Post-hoc analyses (t-test) revealed the following significant
differences (p < .05) among the four frames. For smokers and
short term consequences, the gain frame would be more used
than both loss and foregone gain frames. For no smokers and
short term consequences, gain frame is preferred to avoided
loss and foregone gain frames, and loss frame is preferred to
avoided loss frame. For smokers and long term consequences,
both gain and loss frames are preferred to foregone gain and
avoided loss frames. For no smokers and long term
consequences, loss frame is preferred to the other three
frames.

2

NO SMOKERS

short term

Figure 2: Means of “Would you use this message in a
campaign against smoking?” across conditions

2,5

SMOKERS

Would you use it?

2,5

Efficacy

short term

gain
loss
foregone gain
avoided loss

Figure 1: Means of perceived efficacy of the persuasive
messages across conditions
The three-way interaction was not significant.
Post-hoc analyses (t-test) revealed the following significant
differences (p < .05) among the four frames. For smokers and
short term consequences, the gain frame was perceived as
more efficacious than loss, avoided loss and foregone gain

Discussion

2164

Our results show that loss frames are not generally preferred
over gain frames, but both loss and gain frames are perceived
as more efficacious and would be used in a campaign with

respect to avoided loss and foregone gain frames. This is
probably due to the fact that both avoided loss and foregone
gain messages contain negations and are linguistically more
complex. Indeed, participants judge them less clear and
harder to understand. As our results show, message content
has an important effect: participants perceive as more
efficacious and would use messages describing long-term
consequences, probably because they refer to stronger
arguments referring to permanent and bigger changes in one’s
life and health. Furthermore, message content interacts with
message frame allowing a frame effect to emerge: loss
framed messages, but not gain-framed messages, reveal a
difference between long-term and short-term consequences.
This result goes in the same direction as results obtained by
Smith and Petty (1996) who suggest that loss framings
enhance message processing and that this function served by
loss framings is shown when arguments strength is varied.
Given that long-term consequences are preferred by
participants, we can reasonably assume that they work as
strong arguments. Smokers and non smokers perceive
efficacy of gain framed messages and loss framed messages
in an opposite way: non smokers prefer loss framed messages
over gain framed messages but smokers either judge gain
framed messages more persuasive than loss messages, or
would use both frames. As smokers should be more involved
than non smokers in the issue, our results seem to go in the
opposite direction with respect to the results previously
obtained by Maheswaran & Meyers-Levy, (1990) who
showed in the high-involvement condition loss frames are
more persuasive, and in the low-involvement condition gain
frames are more persuasive. We think that our result can be
accounted for assuming that participants’ expectancies
modulate the effect of personal involvement. Campaigns
against smoking are nowadays very frequent and very
aggressive in describing negative consequences of smoking,
and loss frames are more expected than gain frames,
especially by smokers who are more often exposed to them
than non smokers (in Italy negatively framed messages are
printed on each cigarettes box). According to Smith and Petty
(1996), framing effects depend on detailed processing and
detailed processing may be induced by not expected
framings. Our results show that probably the effect of
unexpected framings emerges only for personally involved
participants, in that only smokers reveal this effect.
Our research suggests that in planning campaigns
promoting healthy behaviors, we should pay attention to
some important factors that appear to affect persuasive
communication. Thus, a general strategy may be to use loss
framed messages that describe long-term negative
consequences, but this strategy should be combined with
unexpected message frames that affect involved people: in
order to convince smokers to give up with cigarettes, it might
be more efficacious to also use gain framed messages and not
only loss framed messages. The current study does not
incorporate direct measures of behavioral changes, and this of
course limits the significance of our results. Further research
is needed in order to test if variables affecting the perceived
efficacy of persuasive messages also affect participants’
intentions and behavior.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant COFIN 2002.

References

2165

Banks, S.M., Salovey, P., Greener, S., Rothman, A.J., Moyer,
A., Beauvais, J., & Epel, E. (1995). The effect of message
framing on mammography utilization. Health Psychology,
14, 178-184.
Edwards, A., Elwyn, G., Covey, J., Matthew, E., & Pill, R.
(2001). Presenting risk information. A review of the effects
of “framing”and other manipulations on patients outcomes.
Journal of Health Communication, 6, 61-82.
Fiske, S.T., & Taylor, S.E. (1991). Social Cognition. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Kühberger, A. (1998). Theinfluence of framing on risky
decisions: A meta-analysis. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 75, 23-55.
Levin, I.P., Schneider, S.L., & Gaeth, G.J. (1998). All frames
are not created equal: A typology and critical analysisof
framing effects. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 76, 149-188.
Maheswaran, D., & Meyers-Levy, J. (1990). The influence of
message framing and issue involvement. Journal of
Marketing Research, 27, 361-367.
Meyerowitz, B.E., & Chaiken, S. (1987). The effect of
message framing on breast self-examination: Attitudes,
intentions, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 52, 500-510.
Peeters, G., & Czapinski, J. (1990). Positive-negative
asymmetry in evaluations: The distinction between
affective and informational negativity effects. European
Review of Social Psychology, 1, 33-60.
Rothman, A.J., Martino, S.C., Bedell, B.T., Detweiler, J.B., &
Salovey, P. (1999). The systematic influence of gain-andloss-framed messages on interest and use of different types
of health behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Bullettin, 25, 1355-1369.
Siminoff, L.A., & Fetting, J.H. (1989). Effects of outcome
framing on treatment decisions in the real world: Impact of
framing on adjiuvant breast cancer decisions. Medical
Decision Making, 9, 262-271.
Smith, S.M., & Petty, R.E. (1996). Message framing and
persuasion: A message processing analysis. Personality
and Social Psychology Bullettin, 22, 257-268.
Steffen, V.J., Sternberg, L., Teegarden, L.A., & Sheperd, K.
(1994). Practice and persuasive frame: Effects on beliefs,
intention, and performance of a cancer self-examination.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24, 897-925.
Tice, D.M., & Bratslavsky, E. (2000). Giving in to feel good:
The palce of emotion regulation in the context of general
self-control. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 149-160.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decision and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453458.

