UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From Reflection to Interaction: Use of Memory in Interactive Knowledge Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7s9434hz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Kim, Jihie

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From Reflection to Interaction:
Use of Memory in Interactive Knowledge Acquisition
Jihie Kim (jihie@isi.edu)
University of Southern California/Information Sciences Institute
4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey, CA 90292 USA

predictions that similar changes may occur in similar
situations in the future. In this paper, we describe our
analysis on various memory-inspired techniques and how
they could be incorporated into interactive acquisition tools.
The paper starts with a brief discussion on the focus of our
analysis, how existing techniques could be useful for KA
tools. We then present a set of memory-inspired techniques
that seem useful in improving interactions during knowledge
acquisition and knowledge use. We also show how existing
capabilities in KA tools can be mapped to these techniques
and how KA tools can be enhanced by adopting the
techniques thoroughly and widely. We conclude the paper
with a brief introduction of the KA tool that we have
developed based on the analysis.

Abstract
Most existing tools for interactive knowledge acquisition have
limited understanding of how past knowledge authoring
activities are related to current situation and provide limited
assistance in organizing various knowledge acquisition tasks.
Many tools do not keep track of how users perform KA tasks,
how acquired knowledge is tested and used, and what needs to
be improved. This paper describes our analysis of the literature
on memory-inspired techniques developed in cognitive science
and computer science research and presents a compilation of
useful techniques that interactive knowledge acquisition tools
can use in making the interactions more successful. The focus
of our analysis is on how memory-inspired techniques could
support reflection on various aspects of knowledge acquisition
and knowledge use, and how reflection results can be used in
providing better assistance to the user. Based on this analysis
we are developing more proactive and effective acquisition
tools.

Use of Memory in Cognitive Systems and in
Interactive Knowledge Acquisition
In models of cognitive systems (both models of human
cognition and other artificial intelligence systems), memories
play critical role in learning and problem solving (Tulving
1983). Especially, metacognitive strategies that promote
reflective thinking and self-assessment are known to increase
the effectiveness of learning. Interactive knowledge
acquisition tools can be seen as students learning new
knowledge from the teacher (i.e., the user) (Kim and Gil
2003) and they could benefit from applying similar memoryinspired strategies. The systems could maintain memories of
past episodes of knowledge acquisition and knowledge use
(i.e., problem solving with acquired knowledge), and reflect
on what worked and what needs improving. Based on these
reflection results, the system could help the user organize
their KA tasks in terms of achieving needed improvement.
The focus of our analysis is not on exhaustive compilation
of memory techniques in cognitive science and computer
science research but on how use of memory could improve
the interactions during knowledge acquisition and knowledge
use. How can they help the user prevent repetitive mistakes?
How can they help users modify knowledge when there are
dynamic changes in the world? How to apply acquired
knowledge to the problem at hand? How the system can
become self-reflective and provide more insightful
assistance?

Keywords: artificial intelligence, knowledge acquisition.

Introduction
Acquiring knowledge from end users who have no formal
training in computer science remains a challenging task
(Blythe et al 2001; Clark et al 2001; McGuinness et al., 2000;
Eriksson et al., 1995). Existing knowledge acquisition (KA)
tools use various approaches including graphical and
structured editors, diagnosing errors and helping users to fix
them, using existing knowledge to generate guidance for
users, etc. However, users are mainly responsible for the
process in terms of deciding when, what, how, and how well
to enter knowledge. Most existing tools do not reflect on how
users perform KA tasks, how acquired knowledge is tested
and used, what needs to be improved, etc. Users themselves
have to keep track of past mistakes, current status, potential
new problems in order to decide the best options among
alternatives. Users can easily become lost in the process of
performing various tasks involved in knowledge authoring
(Kim & Gil 2000; Pool et al., 2003).
When the user makes the same type of mistake in creating
or modifying knowledge, the system could recognize
repetitive problems and could provide help in preventing
similar problems in the future. When the captured knowledge
is used in problem solving, they could be applied based on the
level of confidence assessed through their usage patterns. If
confident knowledge were overridden or modified, the system
could notice them as unexpected events and generate
1138

Memory-inspired techniques

Literature/System

Related KA aspects

human experts (Bransford et al., 2000)

Predefined KA events (Clark et al 2001,
McGuinness et al., 2000; Blythe et al 2001;…)

Organize around common parts of similar
episodes

MOP (Schank 1982), CBR systems (Kolodner
1993 )

Organizing exemplars (Bareiss et al., 1990)

Organize in ways that reflect deep
understanding

human learners (Tulving, 1983; Brown 1987),
human experts(Bransford et al., 2000)

1. Collecting Experience
Notice meaningful patterns of information
2. Organizing Experience

3. Introspect with Experience
Remember and predict failures & successes

failure driven learning (Cox & Ram 1999),
CBR systems (Hammond 1989).

Detect errors (Davis, 1979; Clark et al 2001,
McGuinness et al., 2000; Blythe et al 2001)

Goal driven memory search

human learners(Brown 1987), goal-driven
adaptation(Leake 1994)

Implicit KA goals (Davis, 1979; Clark et al
2001, McGuinness et al., 2000; Blythe et al
2001)

Retrieve knowledge based on context

Soar (Rosenbloom et al., 1993), human
experts(Bransford et al., 2000)

Use context in assisting users (Marcus &
McDermott 1989; Tallis & Gil 1997; Huffman
& Laird, 1995; Witbrock et al., 2003)

Use similar experience in solving new
problems

human learners(Ausubel 1968), CBR systems
(Kolodner 1993, Hammond 1989; Veloso &
Carbonell 1993).

Use similarity/differences of exemplars
(Bareiss et al., 1990)

Use experience to perform similar tasks
more efficiently

Prodigy (Veloso et al., 1995) Soar
(Rosenbloom et al., 1993),

Present varying levels of flexibility to new
situations

human experts (Bransford et al., 2000),
human learners (Piaget & Inhelder 1973),
capturing adaptation cases (Craw et al.,
2001), temporal learning(Oats 2002)

4. Retrieval of Experience

5. Problem Solving with Experience

6. Knowledge Refinement with Experience
Generalize/specialize based on range of
application
Strengthen knowledge that is used often

ACT-R(Anderson & Lebiere 1998), models of
memory (Schank 1982; Kolodner 1993)

Knowledge refinement with example cases
(Ginsberg et al, 1985; Bareiss et al., 1990)

ACT-R(Anderson. & Lebiere. 1998)

7. Memory Management
forget low utility knowledge

Memory management in CBR systems
(Smyth & Keane 1995; Zhu & Yang 1999;
Kira & Arkin 2004)

Table 1: Some of the memory-inspired techniques that are useful for interactive knowledge acquisition
Some of the issues in memory-inspired techniques may not
be directly related to our analysis. For example, approaches
to understand how biological brains work and building
models that are tuned to match biological functions are less
essential in our analysis. Also our systems are not subject to
cognitive limitations of typical human subjects and can
exploit superb computational skills that are not common in
models of biological systems.

experience, organizing experience in memory, introspect,
retrieval of experience from memory, use of experience
during problem solving, knowledge refinement using
experience, and memory management.

1. Collecting Experience

Memory Inspired Techniques Useful for
Interactive Knowledge Acquisition

Notice meaningful patterns of information based on past
experience
Skillful experts can make use of their experience in
distinguishing meaningful features among the features they
observe while novice experts may not recognize them easily
(Bransford et al., 2000).
Many KA systems pre-define specific events that they want
to recognize in assisting users. For example, systems define
specific types of errors and user mistakes they want to check
(Clark et al., 2001, Blythe et al., 2001, McGuinness et al.,
2000). Some systems exploit prototypical sequences of user
actions in recognizing the status of the KA process (Tallis &
Gil 1997). Recognized problems or status are used in
generating suggestions that are suitable for the situation.

The studies that we have used include 1) memory related
techniques developed in the artificial intelligence (AI) field
that support various problem solving and learning
capabilities, 2) models of cognitive systems, and 3) how
skillful experts use their memory such as how they approach
and solve problems and how they are different from novices.
Table 1 shows a summary of the techniques we found useful
for interactive knowledge acquisition.
We divide the techniques into seven thematic phases, each
with a different emphasis on how memory is used: collecting
1139

Adopting the technique more closely, KA systems could
dynamically learn what features are more meaningful based
on their experiences such as situations where users needed
more assistance. They also could learn to recognize situations
where problem solving may dynamically change and help the
user modify relevant problem solving knowledge. These
additions could be used together with pre-defined event types.

relevant aspects of knowledge acquisition and knowledge use,
such as how failures are related to each other.

4. Retrieval of Experience

2. Organizing Experience in Memory

Goal driven memory search
Some case based reasoning approaches formulate goals (such
as goals of adaptive problems solving) in performing memory
search and learn how to perform goal-driven search (Leake
1994). The retrieved results support adaptation and problem
solving. Metacognitive learners control cognitive activities to
ensure that a cognitive goal has been met (Brown 1987).
Interactions in existing KA systems are driven by various
implicit goals developed in the design of the tools. That is,
most of their goals (such as find missing definitions, detect
conflicting definitions, etc.) are buried in the design and they
influence the interaction depending on how they are
implemented in the underlying code. By adopting goal driven
approaches and making their goals explicit, the systems could
reason on how various events are related to the goals and
drive the interactions towards achieving the goals.
Retrieve knowledge based on context
Human experts are good at retrieving important ideas and
useful concepts in a given context (Bransford et al., 2000).
Some of the cognitive systems are built to perform problem
solving through problem spaces, and past experiences are
saved and retrieved with respect to problem solving context
(Rosenbloom et al., 1993).
Some of the existing KA systems exploit problem solving
context in guiding the acquisition process. For example, given
generic problem solver or inference structure defined for
particular type of tasks (such as configuration design tasks),
acquisition systems help user enter domain-specific
knowledge that play specific roles during problem solving
(Marcus & McDermott 1989). Typical KA tasks and their
sequences also provide hints on the kinds of help needed by
the user (Tallis & Gil 1997). Some acquisition systems
exploit problem solving context in inducing proper
representation of user input that fit into the situation at hand
(Huffman & Laird, 1995). Some other systems divide
knowledge bases into separate micro-theories to provide
context boundaries (Witbrock et al., 2003). These existing
techniques could be exploited in using memory as well as in
assisting the user during knowledge authoring. Acquisition
systems could use context in relating past KA events and
build additional strategies for assisting users in certain
problem solving context. For example, there could be
common difficulties the user has in entering the same type of
design parameters in configuration design domain, and the
system could build a general strategy for them.

Organize around common parts of similar episodes
Many models of memory organize experiences based on
similar properties they share (Kolodner 1993; Schank 1982),
often based on predictions of future retrieval tasks. Some of
the KA tools actually use similar strategies in organizing and
indexing exemplars based on similarities and differences in
their domain features (Bareiss et al., 1990). These indices are
used in refining category concepts that are being built with
the user.
This technique could be more widely used in organizing
other experiences in interacting with users. For example,
episodes of system assistance that led to successful results
(e.g., acquired knowledge leading to successful problem
solving) could be distinguished from unsuccessful episodes,
and could be organized based on similarities and differences
of the situations and the interactions. By relating similar
interactions that were successful (such as similar useful
hints), the system may provide better assistance.
Organize experience in ways that reflect deep
understanding of the problems
Human experts organize their experience around important
ideas or concepts (Bransford et al., 2000). Likewise,
competent learners organize their memory in ways that lead
to conceptual understanding (Tulving, 1983;Brown, 1987).
As described above, existing KA systems identify specific
events they keep track of in assisting users. Those events are
defined in terms of the knowledge they acquire and the type
of assistance provided to the user. In order to support deeper
understanding of the problems, the system needs to capture
the context where such events occur and whether the system
responses actually improve the knowledge.

3. Introspect with Experience
Introspect on failure & success: remember and predict
failures and successes
Some machine learning systems develop a set of typical
failures and their causes, and use them in driving their
learning activities (Cox & Ram 1999). Some case-based
reasoning (CBR) systems use past failures in predicting new
failures and apply remedy recipes to avoid similar problems
(Hammond 1989).
Most existing KA systems use various techniques to detect
errors and failures (Davis, 1979; Clark et al., 2001, Blythe et
al., 2001, McGuinness et al., 2000). However, the systems
have limited understanding on relations between failures
(such as similarities among them) and how past failures could
be used in preventing new ones. To be truly introspective, the
system should be self-aware, accessing and reasoning on

5. Problem Solving with Experience

1140

Use similar experience in solving new problems
Like human learners use familiar experiences in learning and
problem solving (Ausubel 1968), given a problem to solve,
case-based reasoners find most similar cases from the
memory, predict possible directions from the retrieved cases,

and generate solutions using various adaptation techniques
(Kolodner 1993, Hammond 1989; Veloso & Carbonell 1993).
Interactive KA tools could be improved by adopting these
techniques by retrieving similar interactions in the past,
forming predictions on possible directions from retrieved
experiences, and generating effective ways to guide the user
based on the similarities and differences between the past
situations and the current situation at hand.
Use experience to perform similar tasks more efficiently
Some cognitive systems use memory for improving
efficiency of performing similar tasks (Rosenbloom et al.,
1993; Veloso et al., 1995). The same result can be produced
with stored productions instead of going through multiple
problem solving steps.
Improving speed of interaction has not been a focus of KA
tools. However, if acquisition systems could compile the
steps that the user has gone through to reach a desired state
(i.e., correct/useful knowledge) or an undesirable state, then
the systems may use them to distinguish interaction paths,
which ones are better than the others.
Present varying levels of flexibility in their approach to
new situations
Adaptation is a key element of cognitive development (Piaget
& Inhelder 1973). Given a new situation, skilled experts can
apply their skills to the new situation and adapt rapidly to new
demands (Bransford et al., 2000). Some of the temporal
reasoning approaches can learn how to detect situation
patterns where things may change (Oates 2002). Also some
CBR systems capture task-dependent adaptation knowledge
from past cases (Craw et al., 2001).
Adopting these principles, interactive KA systems could
learn how to recognize situation changes and develop
adaptation strategies for them. The acquisition systems could
explicitly capture the situations where problem solving
changed in the past and also learn the kinds of modification
that improved the knowledge in such situations. These could
be used in helping users modify knowledge when similar
problem solving changes may occur.

examples due to new findings), the acquisition systems will
need to distinguish invalid or irrelevant experiences, avoiding
modifications due to obsolete examples.
Strengthen knowledge that is used more often
Another interesting aspect of some cognitive systems is that
they can adjust strength of knowledge (such as rules) based
on their associative strength measured from related concepts
(Anderson & Lebiere 1998). Each rule can be used differently
depending on the degree of the strength.
By adopting this technique, interactive KA systems could
measure strength of user entered knowledge based on how
they were created and how they were exercised in problem
solving. When knowledge has been successfully tested or
used multiple times, it can be more confidently applied than it
has not been. Likewise, acquisition systems could evaluate
usefulness of suggestions in a situation based on how they
were followed by the user and how they improved the
knowledge.
More useful suggestions could be more
confidently used.

7. Memory Management
Forget low utility knowledge
There have been approaches to assess utility of knowledge in
the memory in terms of competence level changes due to the
knowledge, and use the assessment in discarding unnecessary
information in the memory (Smyth & Keane 1995; Zhu &
Yang 1999).
Most existing KA systems do not concern management of
unnecessary knowledge. However, similar assessment will
be very useful when there are dynamic changes in the
problem solving and associated knowledge needs to be either
modified or discarded in order to maintain or improve the
overall competence level.

Summary of Analysis: Developing Reflection
Capabilities for Interactive Knowledge Acquisition

6. Knowledge Refinement with Experience

Table 1 shows a summary of the memory-inspired techniques
we found useful for interactive knowledge acquisition. The
table also shows related aspects in knowledge acquisition
approaches in the ‘Related KA aspects’ column. First of all,
most existing tools either ignore past interactions or use them
in limited ways (such as to refine concept definitions with a
suite of past examples). Empty cells in the column indicate
lack of related capabilities in existing acquisition tools. Most
tools do not directly support memory-based reasoning.
However, we notice that many of the techniques in existing
acquisition systems could be exploited in adopting memoryinspired techniques. For example, most systems diagnose and
detect errors in user entered knowledge and have strategies to
help users fix them. By remembering how different user
mistakes were handled in the past and relating mistakes based
on their similarities and differences of the situations where
they occur, the systems could help users avoid similar
mistakes in similar situations. Other existing approaches to
assist users could be exploited in a similar fashion as
described above.

Generalize or specialize knowledge based on range of
application observed
As a part of learning, some cognitive systems define
generalization and discrimination of knowledge in memory as
the knowledge becomes broader or narrow in its range of
application (Anderson & Lebiere 1998). Some models of
memory (Kolodner 1993; Schank 1982) support mechanisms
to generalize or specialize learned knowledge depending their
uses and reliability observed.
Some of the existing KA systems perform similar
knowledge refinement process by generalizing or specializing
rules to correctly classify a suite of test cases (Ginsberg et al,
1985) or finding correct categories based on differences and
similarity of the exemplars (Bareiss et al., 1990).
The knowledge refinement approaches could be further
improved by incorporating adaptation strategies. When the
problem solving changes (e.g. changes in how to classify
1141

making associated modifications. The details of the system
are described in (Kim 2005).
ECHO
Declarative
Reflection Patterns

Knowledge Acquisition
Tools
Add/modify/
delete
knowledge

Assist
knowledge
authoring

user
KB

assess missing knowledge
with related episodes
- step failed without kitem
- system suggested creation
- …
assess inconsistent knowledge
with related episodes
- K inconsistent with result
- K inconsistent with past results
- …

event1
event2
event3

assess changes in problem
solving with related episodes
- confident K became
inconsistent
- user indicated situation changes
- …

Solve
problems

Assist
problem
solving

Problem Solving
Tools

Knowledge
acquisition &
knowledge
use history

...

…

One of the key issues in supporting most of the above
memory-inspired techniques is being self-aware, accessing
and reasoning on interesting aspects of knowledge acquisition
and knowledge use. If the systems want to be more proactive
in preventing errors, they should be able to keep track of past
user mistakes and relations between them. Another common
requirement
in
supporting
abovementioned
KA
improvements is being able to relate current situation to
similar situations in the past. The relations could be used in
evaluating alternative options (such as finding effectiveness
of the options in handling similar problems) to guide the user.
Finally, the systems should provide approaches to recognize
potential changes in the relations and build strategies to cope
with the changes. As indicated in several places above (phase
1, 5, 6, and 7), adaptation is a key element of memoryinspired techniques, and in providing assistance during
knowledge acquisition, the system should recognize what
knowledge needs to be modified and how knowledge
authoring tasks should be changed.

combine assessment results
and send suggestions
- identify suggestions to provide
- compute confidence level

Figure 1: Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Use with
Echo

ECHO: Reflection Patterns for Interactive
Knowledge Acquisition

Summary and Future Work

Based on our observation of memory based strategies
described in the previous section, we have developed a
knowledge acquisition framework called Echo (mEtaCognitive History analysis and Organization). Echo supports
the following capabilities.
• being self-aware, accessing and reasoning on selected
aspects of knowledge acquisition and knowledge use in
assisting users.
• relating the current situation to similar situations in the
past and assessing the levels of confidence in pursuing
alternative options based on the relations.
• recognizing dynamic changes in the problem solving and
deciding how to guide users in modifying and using
relevant knowledge.
Echo adds an additional layer to existing tools and
explicitly keeps track of knowledge acquisition and
knowledge use episodes through a set of declarative reflection
patterns. Reflection patterns define a set of abstractions of
knowledge acquisition and knowledge use episodes that the
system makes use of in assisting users. Each episode is a
sequence of basic knowledge acquisition and knowledge use
events such as the user ignored a suggestion and then the
problem solving failed. The system assesses the levels of
confidence in providing a suggestion based on its supporting
and opposing episodes captured in the reflection patterns.
Any changes that are noticed (e.g. confident knowledge
became inconsistent with problem solving results) and
associated modifications are explicitly captured in the
reflection patterns and are used in guiding the user. A
prototype system has been developed for a domain of
interactive scheduling where the user incrementally builds
scheduling constraints and the user entered constraints assist
users during scheduling. Since scheduling constraints can
change over time, the system should be able to assist users in

1142

We have presented an analysis of memory-inspired
techniques in cognitive science and computers science
research in terms of how the techniques could be useful in the
context of developing interactive KA tools. We have noticed
that although most existing tools either ignore past
interactions or use them in limited ways, many aspects of
existing acquisition approaches can be related to memorybased reflection and the related KA approaches could be
exploited in adopting memory-inspired techniques. We
believe that the resulting reflective capability will play central
role in making the systems truly proactive assistants.
We have developed a novel extension to existing KA tools
where the system organizes memory with as set of declarative
reflection patterns and uses them to recognize selected
knowledge authoring and knowledge use episodes. The
reflection patterns are also used in assessing how the
knowledge acquisition tasks should be done and how to guide
the user. They allow the system to 1) be aware of interesting
knowledge acquisition and knowledge use episodes 2) relate
current episodes to past similar episodes and generate
suggestions based on related episodes, and
3) assess
dynamic changes in the problem solving.
We plan to investigate how Echo’s reflection patterns can
be used in combination with the KA strategies used by
existing KA tools.
For example, existing knowledge
refinement algorithms can be associated with the dynamic
changes noticed by Echo. There has been work on
developing a dialogue tool for interactive knowledge
acquisition (Kim & Gil 2003). The tool incorporates the
dynamics of tutor-student interactions in order to support
users in their role of tutors of computers, making acquisition
tools better students. Assessment of user built knowledge and
their progresses over time in Echo could be combined with
other dialogue strategies and be used in structuring the front-

end interactions for knowledge authoring. We also plan to
perform intensive evaluation of user interactions with Echo in
terms of assessing its reflective capabilities and effectiveness
of assistance provided.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yolanda Gil, Jim Blythe, and Tim Chklovski for
helpful comment on earlier drafts. We gratefully
acknowledge
funding
for
this
work
by
DARPA under contract no. NBCHD030010.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic components
of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ausubel, D. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive
approach. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Blythe, J. Kim, J., Ramachandran, S., and Gil, Y. (2001). An
Integrated Environment for Knowledge Acquisition.
Proceedings of IUI-2001.
Bransford, J., Brown. A., & Cocking, R. (2000). How people
Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School: Expanded
Edition, National Academies Press.
Brown, A. L. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, selfregulation, and other more mysterious mechanisms. In F. E.
Weinert & R. H. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacognition, motivation,
and understanding (pp. 65-116). Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, P., Thompson, J., Barker, K., Porter, B., Chaudhri, V.,
Rodriguez, A., Thomere, J., Mishra, S., Gil, Y., Hayes, P.
and Reichherzer, T. (2001). Knowledge Entry as the
Graphical Assembly of Components. Proceedings of KCap-2001.
Cox, M. T., & Ram, A. (1999). Introspective multistrategy
learning: On the construction of learning strategies.
Artificial Intelligence, 112, 1-55.
Craw, S., Jarmulak, J., & Rowe, R. (2001) Learning and
applying case-based adaptation knowledge., ICCBR-2001.
Davis, R. (1979). Interactive Transfer of Expertise:
Acquisition of New Inference Rules. Artif. Intell. 12(2),.
Eriksson, H. Shahar, Y., Tu S. , Puerta, A., & Musen, M.
(1995). Task modeling with reusable problem-solving
methods. Artificial Intelligence 79:293-326.
Gil, Y. & Kim, J. (2002). Interactive Knowledge Acqusition
Tools: A Tutoring Perspective. In Proceedings of CogSci2002.
Ginsberg, A., Weiss, S., Politakis, P. (1985). SEEK2: A
Generalized Approach to Automatic Knowledge Base
Refinement. Proceedings of IJCAI-1985: 367-374.
Hammond, K. (1990). Case-based planning: a framework for
planning from experience, Cognitive Science 14.
Huffman S. & Laird, J. (1995). Flexibly instructable agents.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 3:271-324.

Kim, J. (2005). Reflection Patterns for Interactive Knowledge
Capture, internal report, USC-ISI.
Kim, J. & Gil, Y. (2000). Acquiring Problem-Solving
Knowledge from End Users: Putting Interdependency
Models to the Test. Proceedings of AAAI-2000.
Kim, J. & Gil, Y. (2003). Proactive Acquisition from
Tutoring and Learning Principles, Proc. of AIEd- 2003.
Kolodner, J. (1993) Case-Based Reasoning, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers.
Leake, D. B. (1994). Towards a computer model of memory
search strategy learning. Proceedings of the Sixteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Marcus , S. & McDermott, J. (1989). SALT: A knowledge
acquisition language for propose-and-revise systems.
Artificial Intelligence 39(1):1-37.
McGuinnes, D., Fikes, R., Rice, J., & Wilde, S. (2000) An
environment for merging and testing large ontologies.
Proceedings of KR-2000.
Oates T.(2002). Peruse: An Unsupervised Algorithm for
Finding Recurring Patterns in Time Series., Proceedings
of ICML-2002.
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1973). Memory and intelligence.
NY: Basic Books.
Pool, M., Murray, K.. Fitzgerald, J,. Mehrotra, M., Schrag, R.,
Blythe, J., Kim, J., Chalupsky, H., Miraglia, P., Russ, T.,
& Schneider D. (2003), Evaluating SME-Authored COA
Critiquing Knowledge, Proc. of K-CAP 2003.
Rosenbloom, P., Laird, J., & Newell, A. (1993). The Soar
papers: research on integrated intelligence., MIT Press.
Schank, R.C. (1982). Dynamic Memory: A Theory of
Reminding and Learning in Computers and People.
Cambridge University Press.
Smyth, B. & Keane, M. (1995). Remembering to Forget: A
Competence-Preserving Deletion Policy for Case-Based
Reasoning". In Proceedings IJCAI-1995.
Tallis, M. & Gil, Y. (1997). A Script-Based Approach to
Modifying Knowledge Bases, Proc. of AAAI-1997.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Veloso, M. & Carbonell, J.(1993). Derivational Analogy in
PRODIGY: Automating Case Acquisition, Storage, and
Utilization. Machine Learning, 10(3):249-278.
Veloso, M., Carbonell, J., Perez, A., Borrajo, D., Fink E., &
Blythe, J.(1995), Integrating Planning and Learning: The
PRODIGY Architecture, Journal of Theoretical and
Experimental Artificial Intelligence, 7(1), 1995.
Witbrock, M., Baxter,D., Curtis,J., Schneider,D., Kahlert, R.,
Miraglia, P., Wagner,P., Panton,K., Matthews, G.,
Vizedom A. (2003) An Interactive Dialogue System for
Knowledge Acquisition in Cyc.. IJCAI-03 Workshop on
Mixed Initiative Intelligent Systems.
Zhu, J. & Yang Q. (1999).Remembering to Add:
Competence-preserving Case-Addition Policies for Case
Base Maintenance. Proceedings of IJCAI-1999.

1143

