UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From the Theory of Mind to the Construction of Social Reality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2wt5z5c4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Boella, Guido
Van der Torre, Leendert

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From the Theory of Mind to the Construction of Social Reality
Guido Boella (guido@di.unito.it)
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Torino - Italy
Cso Svizzera 185, I-10149 Torino, Italy

Leendert van der Torre (torre@cwi.nl)
CWI-Amsterdam and Delft University of Technology
Kruislaan 413, NL-1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
explanation. Even if this last model seems different from
the preceding ones, some authors argue that the approaches
are homogeneous if one regards simulation as one of several
processes involved in attributing mental states (another being
inference) and if one recognizes that both processes rely
crucially on a conceptual framework of mental states and
their relation to behavior.
The theory of mind enables social behavior by means of
the attribution of mental attitudes to other people. Less attention, instead, has been devoted to study which abilities
are necessary to deal with more complex aspects of social
behavior, like acting in a group, playing a role in an organization, living in a reality organized in institutions which
create regulative and constitutive norms to regulate behavior.
In [Searle, 1995]’s terms, these are the abilities necessary to
construct the social reality humans live in.
This paper addresses the following research question: how
is it possible to pass from a theory of mind to the construction of social reality? Moreover, as a sub-question: how it is
possible to explain social reality without introducing further
primitive abilities with respect to the theory of mind?
As methodology we apply the agent metaphor underlying
the theory of mind, where we interpret “agent” as an entity
whose behavior is explained in terms of beliefs, desires and
goals. We claim that like humans attribute mental attitudes to
other humans, thus considering them as agents, humans conceive social reality by attributing mental entities to social entities like groups, roles, institutions, normative systems and organizations [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b]. Thus we say,
metaphorically, that social entities are agents. The attribution
of mental attitudes to social entities is used to conceptualize
them, to reason about them and to predict their behavior as
well as to understand how to behave cooperatively in a group,
how to play a role in an organization or in a society regulated
by norms.
To to make these notions more precise and to provide a
first step towards a computational model for simulation or
analysis, we summarize the logical multiagent framework developed in [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b] illustrating how
the formal model of an agent can be used to describe both the
behavior of an agent and its ability to attribute mental attitudes to other agents, either real or socially constructed.
The paper is organized as follows. First, we motivate the
agent metaphor. Then we apply it to different types of social
entities: groups, normative systems and organizations with
roles. Afterwards, we present the formal model. Conclusion
ends the paper.

Abstract
In this paper we argue that the hypothesis of the theory of mind
advanced in cognitive science can be the basis not only of the
social abilities which allow interaction among individuals, but
also of the construction of social reality. The theory of mind
is the attribution, via the agent metaphor, of mental attitudes,
like beliefs and goals, to other agents. Analogously, we attribute mental attitudes to social entities, like groups, normative systems and organizations with roles. The agent metaphor
explains the necessary abilities to deal with complex aspects
of social behavior, like acting in a group, playing a role in an
organization, and living in a reality organized in institutions
which create regulative and constitutive norms to regulate behavior. To show the feasibility of this approach we provide a
computational model of the construction of social reality based
on multiagent systems.

Introduction
Interpreting other people’s actions and intentions involves a
mutual attribution of mental states so that the understanding
of the people around us becomes coherent and intelligible.
Our interpretive abilities should be viewed as a specific endowment of the human mind to understand others and ourselves in terms of mental states, like beliefs and goals. A new
field of investigation, exploring the so-called theory of mind,
has emerged as a major issue in cognitive science in the last
two decades.
The ability to reason about mental states has been called a
theory of mind because it shares some features with scientific
theories: humans postulate unobservables, predict them from
observables, and use them to explain other observables. Different views of the theory of mind have been proposed. Some
scholars describe the underlying cognitive structure responsible for the theory of mind as an innate, dedicated, fast, automatic, at least partly encapsulated module, that is activated
around three years of age.
A different view is proposed by [Wellman, 1990] who has
argued for a theoretical model of the theory of mind: instead
of seeing it as a mental mechanism, he conceives it as a naive
theory, with axioms and rules of inferences.
A striking different hypothesis,
suggested by
[Gordon, 1986], is mental simulation: the idea that our
capacity of psychological understanding depends on our
ability to run cognitive simulations. According to this view,
it is possible to infer other people’s intentions and future
actions by using our own mind as a model for theirs. This
presupposes only a capacity of pretense and of putting
oneself in the other’s place, and is a more economical

298

The agent metaphor

Recursive modelling considers the practical limitations of agents, since they can build only a finite nesting of models about other agents’ decisions.
[Gmytrasiewicz and Durfee, 1995] uses a quantitative model
of decisions, while in [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b] we
use the attribution of mental attitudes to recursively model
the behavior of other agents in a qualitative model.
To make predictions about behavior, mental attitudes are
attributed to already existing entities, i.e., other agents in the
environment. Nothing prevents, however, that mental attitudes are attributed to entities which do not exist yet. Consider the case of expectations about the behavior of another
agent. Since complex behavior can be better described by
beliefs and goals, as Bratman argues, expectations can be explained by in terms of beliefs and goals too. But these mental
attitudes are not attributed to the agent whose behavior is expected, since the expectations can be different from what he is
predicted to do. Thus expectations describe in terms of beliefs
and goals a fictional entity which is the desired representation of some real agent according to someone else. However,
since this fictional entity is attributed beliefs and goals, we
metaphorically consider it as an agent too.
Expectations are different from predictions of behavior:
both can be given in terms of beliefs and goals, but the entity
whose behavior is predicted is not requested to know what it
is predicted to do. Expectations, instead, have a public character: they are known by the other agents who are associated
with a desired representation of their behavior in terms of beliefs and goals. Moreover, they are also expected to act in
the desired way due to their knowledge of what they are expected to do [Castelfranchi, 1998]. If an agent must be aware
of what he is expected to do, he is requested to understand the
description given in terms of beliefs and goals, i.e., to be an
agent, too.
Using the attribution of mental attitudes to describe expectations is a first step towards a construction of social reality
based on the theory of mind. While predictions describe what
an agent is believed to do, expectations describe something
which different from what is believed to happens: they describe a desired behavior. In the next section, the second step
is to attribute mental attitudes to fictional entities which do
not have a counterpart in the reality, in order to describe the
behavior of these entities.
The use of analogical reasoning to exploit the theory of
mind to construct social reality is cognitively plausible. For
example, [Lakoff and Johnson, 1980] argue that metaphorical reasoning explains complex cognitive abilities in terms of
other more basic abilities. Metaphors, as Lakoff and Johnson
argue, are not only a form of figurative use of language, but
they are at the basis of the cognitive ability of humans. Our
minds use metaphors to understand and reason about concepts which we have no direct bodily experience of. For example, the domain of time is conceptualized and talked about
by means of spatial notions and expressions. In the “time-asspace” metaphor, space is the source domain which is mapped
to the target domain of time: the first is better known to us so
that we can attribute its properties to the less known domain
of time.
Our agent metaphor maps beliefs and goals of agents onto
the features of the social entities we want to understand.

Social reality, to which groups, normative systems and organizations with roles belong, is a complex phenomenon and
it is not directly accessible to our bodily experience. So it is
plausible that to conceptualize and reason about it humans resort to analogical reasoning starting from some better known
source domain which has a structure rich enough to be informative when mapped onto the new target domain of social
reality.
First of all, to proceed in our analysis, we must identify a suitable domain to start from. As source domain in
this paper we use the notion of agent, which is at the basis
also of the theory of mind. This idea is also proposed by
[Dennett, 1987]: attitudes like belief and desire are folk psychology concepts that can be fruitfully used in explanations
of rational human behavior. For an explanation of behavior it
does not matter whether one actually possesses these mental
attitudes: we describe the behavior of an affectionate cat or
an unwilling screw in terms of mental attitudes. Dennett calls
treating a person or artifact as a rational agent the intentional
stance:
“Here is how it works: first you decide to treat the
object whose behavior is to be predicted as a rational
agent; then you figure out what beliefs that agent ought
to have, given its place in the world and its purpose.
Then you figure out what desires it ought to have, on
the same considerations, and finally you predict that this
rational agent will act to further its goals in the light of
its beliefs. A little practical reasoning from the chosen
set of beliefs and desires will in most instances yield a
decision about what the agent ought to do; that is what
you predict the agent will do.”
Predicting the actions of other agents is a necessity when
agents interact in a common environment where they compete for resources. This requirement has been put forward by
[Goffman, 1970], who argues that human actions are always
taken in a situation of strategic interaction:
“When an agent considers which course of action to
follow, before he takes a decision, he depicts in his mind
the consequences of his action for the other involved
agents, their likely reaction, and the influence of this reaction on his own welfare” [Goffman, 1970, p. 12].
To predict the reaction of other agents it is necessary to
have a model of their decision making process. The most economical way is to use the same decision model an agent uses
to take decision himself. In the field of agent theory this idea
has been formalized by [Gmytrasiewicz and Durfee, 1995] as
recursive modelling:
“Recursive modelling method views a multiagent
situation from the perspective of an agent that is individually trying to decide what physical and/or communicative actions it should take right now. [...] In order to
solve its own decision-making situation, the agent needs
an idea of what the other agents are likely to do. The
fact that other agents could also be modelling others, including the original agent, leads to a recursive nesting of
models.”

299

The construction of social reality

goals of the group. Hence, they are committed to mutual
support.

We apply the agent metaphor to explain how humans conceptualize, reason and talk about social entities, like groups,
institutions, normative systems and organizations with roles.
Social entities, which we cannot have a direct bodily experience of, are conceptualized via the agent metaphor: they
are described as they were agents by attributing them mental attitudes. Social entities exist only as far as the members
of a community collectively attribute them a functional status
[Searle, 1995]. In our model this status is defined in terms
of the mental attitudes attributed to social entities. In contrast, the theory of mind is the attribution of mental attitudes
to already existing entities.
A similar view is supported also by [Tuomela, 1995] with
his analysis of collectives like groups, institutions and organizations:

c. When they take a decision, they recursively model the decisions of their partners and their effects under the assumption that the partners are cooperative, too. Hence, they are
mutually responsive to each other.
In more detail, when an agent evaluates a decision, he first
considers which goals and desires of the group are fulfilled by
his decision and which are not (a); only after maximizing the
fulfillment of these motivations he includes in his decision
some actions fulfilling also his private goals. When agents
base their decisions on the goals and desires of the group we
will say that their agent type is cooperative. This classification of agents according to the way they give priority to
desires, goals or obligations is inspired by the BOID agent
architecture presented in [Dastani and van der Torre, 2002].
Taking into accounts the motivations of other agents, and,
thus also the goals and desires of the group, is a cognitive ability called adoption: “having a state of affairs as a
goal because another agent has the same state as a goal”,
[Castelfranchi, 1998]. According to him, adoption is a key
capability for an agent to be social: social agents must be
able to consider the goals of other agents and to have attitudes towards those goals. Hence, sociality also in this case
presupposes a theory of mind.
An agent, to understand the impact of his decisions on his
partners and, thus, on the goals of the group, has to recursively model what his partners will decide and how their decisions will affect the group’s motivations (c). First, by using recursive modelling, the agent understands whether the
group’s performance can be improved by including in his decisions some actions which contribute to his partners’ efforts
(b). Second, the agent understands whether his decision conflicts with the predicted decisions of the other agents. Third,
he understands when he needs to inform the partners when
their goal has been achieved, or to proactively inform them
about his decisions.
Our approach departs from the idea due to [Bratman, 1992]
that shared cooperative activity is defined by individual mental states and their interrelationships, without collective forms
of attitudes that go beyond the mind of individuals and without further mental states characterizing cooperative behavior.
Bratman’s “broadly individualistic” approach contrasts also
with [Tuomela, 1995], who introduces we-intentions - “we
shall do G” - which represent the internalization of the notion of group in its members, and [Searle, 1990] for whom
“collective intentional behavior is a primitive phenomenon”.

The possibility of ascribing goals, beliefs, and actions to collectives relies on the idea that collectives can
be taken to resemble persons. [. . . ] Following commonsense examples, I will accept [...] that both factual and
normative beliefs can be ascribed (somewhat metaphorically) to groups, both formal and informal, structured
and unstructured.
The analogy underlying the agent metaphor, however, is
not complete, since it must respect the constraints on the
target domain: in particular, social entities are not capable
of performing actions, but they only act indirectly via their
members and representatives.
In the following sections we apply the agent metaphor to
groups, normative systems and organizations structured into
roles, detailing the mapping between beliefs and goals and
the features of the different social entities.

Groups as agents
In the model presented in [Boella and van der Torre, 2004a],
we explain cooperative behavior by considering the group as
an agent: a group exists because it is collectively attributed
by all its members mental attitudes like beliefs, desires and
goals. Its beliefs represent the knowledge about how to
achieve their shared goals. Its goals and desires represent the
shared goals of its members as well as their preferences about
the means to fulfill their goals and about costs they incur into.
Note that to the group are attributed as motivations not only
the shared goals, but also some private desires of the agents,
so to minimize the costs for each agent; otherwise, the partners would not agree to stay in the group.
Following [Bratman, 1992] we consider as key features of
shared cooperative activity the following behaviors of the
members: commitment to the joint activity, commitment to
the mutual support and mutual responsiveness. In our model
Bratman’s conditions are realized since agents of a group coordinate with each other, in the following way:

Normative systems as agents
In [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b], we use the agent
metaphor of attributing mental attitudes to normative systems in order to explain normative reasoning in autonomous
agents. The normative system is considered as an agent playing a game with the bearer of the obligation.
We start with a well known definition.

a. When they take a decision, they consider first the goals
of the group and they try to maximize their fulfillment.
Hence, they are committed to the joint activity.

Normative systems are sets of agents (human or artificial) whose interactions can fruitfully be regarded as
norm-governed; the norms prescribe how the agents ideally should and should not behave [...]. Importantly,

b. When they take a decision, they include in it some actions
which contribute to the efforts of their partners to reach the

300

as a five euro bill” and “this piece of land counts as somebody’s private property”. According to [Searle, 1995], they
are at the basis of the construction of social reality. In our
model, a bit of paper counts as money if the community collectively attributes to the normative system the belief that the
bit of paper is money [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b].
Constitutive norms provide an abstract classification of reality which regulative rules can refer to, in the same way as
the goals of an agent refer to the believed state of the world
when an agent has to decide what to do.
We take here full advantage of the metaphor, as also
[Tuomela, 1995] argues for collectives like groups:

the norms allow for the possibility that actual behaviour
may at times deviate from the ideal, i.e. that violations of obligations, or of agents rights, may occur
[Jones and Carmo, 2001].
This definition of Carmo and Jones does not seem to require that the normative system is autonomous, or that its behavior is driven by beliefs, desires and goals.
Our motivation for using the agent metaphor in
[Boella and van der Torre, 2004b] is inspired by the interpretation of normative multiagent systems as dynamic social orders. According to [Castelfranchi, 2000], a social order is
a pattern of interactions among interfering agents “such that
it allows the satisfaction of the interests of some agent A”.
These interests can be a shared goal, a value that is good for
everybody or for most of the members; for example, the interest may be to avoid accidents. We say that agents attribute the
mental attitude ‘goal’ to the normative system, because all or
some of the agents have socially delegated goals to the normative system; these goals are the content of the obligations
regulating it, we will call them normative goals.
Moreover, social order requires social control, “an incessant local (micro) activity of its units” [Castelfranchi, 2000],
aimed at restoring the regularities prescribed by norms. Thus,
the agents attribute to the normative system, besides goals,
also the ability to autonomously enforce the conformity of the
agents to the norms, because a dynamic social order requires
a continuous activity for ensuring that the normative system’s
goals are achieved. To achieve the normative goal the normative system forms the subgoal to consider as a violation the
behavior not conform to it and to sanction violations.
Thus, in [Boella and van der Torre, 2004b] we define obligations in this way: an agent a is obliged by a normative agent
b to do x in context c, Oab (x, s | c) or else he is sanctioned
with s, iff:

“The notions of goal, belief, and action are linked
in the case of a group to approximately the same degree
as in the individual case. In the latter case their interconnection is well established; given that the personanalogy applies to groups [. . . ], these notions apply to
groups as well.”

Roles as agents
In this section, we apply the agent metaphor to explain the
structure of organizations in terms of roles, like director, employee, etc., i.e., the representatives through which a social
entity acts.
Roles are defined in sociology as descriptions of expected
behavior. Again, as descriptions of behavior, roles can be
defined in terms of belief and goals. As expectations these
mental attitudes are attributed to a fictional agent which represents how the real agent playing the role should behave. But
how do roles differ from mere expectations discussed in the
previous section?
The difference between mere expectations towards someone and roles rests in who is attributing mental attitudes to
these fictional agents defining the expected behavior. To have
an expectation it is sufficient that a single agent attributes
mental attitudes to another agent. In contrast, roles are always parts of a social entity, like an organization, which defines them to describe its own structure: they are social roles.
Hence roles are defined via the attribution of mental attitudes,
but these mental attitudes are attributed by a social entity (the
organization) to another social entity: the role. This means
that the entity defining a role needs to be considered as an
agent: attributing mental attitudes to other entities and being
able to behave directed by beliefs and goals are fundamental
features of agents.
This view of roles nicely fits our general approach based
on the agent metaphor. Social entities like normative systems, organizations and groups are considered as agents and
attributed mental attitudes: social entities, qua agents, are
able to define roles by attributing them mental attitudes.
In the metaphorical mapping the role’s expertise is represented by beliefs of the agent and his responsibilities as the
goals of the agent. To play a role an agent has to adopt the
goals representing his responsibilities and to carry out them
according to the beliefs representing his expertise: the player
has to act as if he had the beliefs and goals of the role. Hence,
to play a role it is necessary to understand descriptions of
behaviors in terms of beliefs and goals and to figure out by
recursive modelling which is the expected behavior. Again,
to play a role the theory of mind is necessary.

1. If agent b believes that condition c holds, it wants x holds
too and that agent a adopts x as his decision.
2. If agent b believes ¬x ∧ c then it has the goal that ¬x is
considered as a violation and to sanction a with s.
3. Agent a has the desire not to be sanctioned.
Hence, to reason about what is obligatory for him, an agent
has to recursively model the behavior of the normative agent
to understand whether he will be considered a violator and
sanctioned. Note that obligations are modelled only by means
of motivations, which formalizes the possibility that a normative system does not recognize that a violation counts as such,
or that it does not sanction it. Both the recognition of the violation and the application of the sanction are the result of
autonomous decisions of the normative system who is considered as an agent (but acts via its representatives).
While regulative norms like obligations are defined in
terms of goals, beliefs in our metaphorical mapping define
constitutive rules. Constitutive rules have of the form “such
and such an X counts as Y in context C” where X is any object satisfying certain conditions and Y is a label that qualifies
X as being something of an entirely new sort: an institutional
fact. Examples of constitutive rules are “X counts as a presiding official in a wedding ceremony”, “this bit of paper counts

301

The formal model

attribute to it mental attitudes: {a ∈ RA | b ∈ Aa } =
6 ∅.
To model actions of agents we adopt a simple solution:
the set of variables whose truth value is determined by
an agent (decision variables representing actions) is distinguished from the set of variables which are not controllable (the parameters P ). The parameters P are a subset of
the propositional variables X. The complement of X and
P represents the decision variables controlled by the different agents. Hence we associate to each agent a subset
of X \ P by extending again the agent description relation
AD : A → 2B∪D∪G∪A∪(X\P ) .
We can now define a multiagent system as M AS =
hRA, SA, X, P, B, D, G, AD, M D, ≥, P Li.

In this section we sketch the formal model of multiagent systems which makes precise our theory and
can be used to validate it.
Full details can be
found in other papers like [Boella and van der Torre, 2004a,
Boella and van der Torre, 2004b]. To support the extension
of the agent metaphor to social entities we need a way to
describe agents’ behavior in terms of mental attitudes, and
to model how agents can attribute mental attitudes to other
agents in order to foresee their decisions by means of recursive modelling.
First of all, we need a simple language to describe states
of affairs. For this reason, we introduce a set of propositional
variables X and we extend it to consider also negative states
of affairs: Lit(X) = X ∪ {¬x | x ∈ X} are the literals built
out of X.
To represent mental attitudes like beliefs B, desires D and
goals G we use a rule based formalism: in this way we capture their conditional nature. The rules represent the relations
among propositional variables existing in conditional beliefs,
desires and goals of the agent: Rul(X) = 2Lit(X) × Lit(X)
is the set of pairs of a set of literals built from X and a literal
built from X, written as l1 ∧ . . . ∧ ln → l, and, when n = 0,
⊤ → l.
Starting from a set of literals representing a state - for example a set of observations - and a set of belief rules, it
is possible to incorporate the consequences of belief rules,
using a simple logic of rules called out: out(E, S) is the
transitive closure of a set of literals S ⊆ Lit(X) under the
rules E. For details see the reusable input/output logic in
[Makinson and van der Torre, 2000]. out(Ba , S), e.g., represents the beliefs of agent a which derive from the observations S and the application of its belief rules on S.
Mental attitudes are represented by rules, even if they do
not coincide with them: M D : B ∪D ∪G → Rul(X). To resolve conflicts among motivations M = D ∪ G we introduce
a priority relation by means of a function ≥: A → 2M × 2M
from the set of agents to a transitive and reflexive relation on
the powerset of the motivations containing at least the subset
relation. We write ≥a for ≥ (a).
Different mental attitudes are attributed to the agents A by
the agent description relation AD : A → 2B∪D∪G∪A . We
write Ba = AD(a) ∩ B, Aa = AD(a) ∩ A, for a ∈ A, etc.
As discussed in the previous sections, in our model there
are different sorts of agents in the set of agents A. Besides
real agents RA ⊆ A (either human or artificial) we consider as agents in the model also socially constructed agents
like groups, normative systems, organizations and roles SA
(RA ∩ SA = ∅ and RA ∪ SA = A). Roles are described
as agents but they are also associated with agents playing the
role, P L : SA → RA.
This does not mean that agents SA exist in the usual sense
of the term. Rather, social entities exist only as they are accepted as such by other agents (either real or not): considering
a social entity as an agent allows to describe its behavior in
terms of mental attitudes. Agents are in the target of the AD
relation for the this reason: groups, normative systems and
organizations exist only as profiles attributed by other agents.
The AD relation induces an exists-in-profile relation specifying that an agent b ∈ SA exists only as some other agents

Games among agents
The advantage of the attribution of mental attitudes to social
entities is that standard techniques developed in qualitative
decision and game theory can be applied to interaction among
agents: either real agents or socially constructed ones, whose
behavior can be recursively modelled and predicted using the
mental attitudes attributed to them. Here we consider a simple form of games between two agents a and b in A. For
example, a and b can be two partners in a group, or b can be
a normative system and a is predicting whether his behavior
will be sanctioned.
The set of decisions ∆ is the set of subsets δ = δa ∪ δb ⊆
Lit(X). For an agent a ∈ A and a decision δ ∈ ∆ we write
δa for δ∩Lit(Xa ): the decision of a is the set of actions it performs in a certain situation. When agent a takes its decision
δa it has to minimize the unfulfilled motivational attitudes it
considers relevant: its own desires Da and goals Ga , but also
the desires Db and goals Gb of the group it belongs to or of
the normative system which a is subject to or of the role it
is playing. But when it considers these attitudes, it must not
only consider its decision δa and the consequences of this decision; it must consider also the decision δb of its interactant
b and its consequences out(Ba , δ). So agent a recursively
considers which decision agent b will take depending on its
different decisions δa : out(Bb , δb ∪ (out(Ba , δa )).
On the decisions ∆ we require that their closures under the
beliefs out(Ba , δ) and out(Bb , δb ∪ (out(Ba , δa ))) do not
contain a variable and its negation: a decision of an agent
cannot lead to a situation which is believed inconsistent.
Note that there is no restriction to the possibility that decisions include decision variables which do not contribute to
the goals of the agent. In particular, the decisions can contain
decision variables contributing to the goals to be achieved by
the partners of the agent in a group, or decision variables aiming at respecting the obligations of the normative system.
Given a decision δa , a decision δb is optimal for agent b if
it minimizes the unfulfilled motivational attitudes in Db and
Gb according to the ≥b relation. The decision of agent a is
more complex: for each decision δa it must consider which is
the optimal decision δb for agent b. More formally:
• the unfulfilled motivations of decision δ according to agent
a ∈ A be the set of motivations whose body is part of the
closure of the decision under belief rules but whose head is
not.
U (δ, a) = {m∈M |M D(m)=l1 ∧ . . . ∧ ln → l,
{l1 , . . . , ln } ⊆ out(Ba , δ) and l 6∈ out(Ba , δ)}

302

References

• the unfulfilled motivations of decision δ = δa ∪ δb according to agent b be the set of motivations whose body is in
the observable part of the closure of the decision under belief rules, but whose head is not:
U (δ, b) = {m∈M |M D(m)=l1 ∧ . . . ∧ ln → l,
{l1 , . . . , ln } ⊆ out(Bb , δb ∪ (out(Ba , δa ))) and
l 6∈ out(Bb , δb ∪ (out(Ba , δa )))}

[Boella and van der Torre, 2004a] Boella, G. and van der
Torre, L. (2004a). Groups as agents with mental attitudes.
In Procs. of AAMAS’04, pages 964–971. ACM Press.
[Boella and van der Torre, 2004b] Boella, G. and van der
Torre, L. (2004b). Regulative and constitutive norms in
normative multiagent systems. In Procs. of KR’04, pages
255–265. AAAI Press.

• a decision δ is optimal for agent b if and only if there is
no decision δb′ such that U (δ, b) >b U (δa ∪ δb′ , b). A
decision δ is optimal for agent a and agent b if and only
if it is optimal for agent b and there is no decision δa′ such
that for all decisions δ ′ = δa′ ∪ δb′ and δa ∪ δb′′ optimal for
agent b we have that U (δ ′ , a) >a U (δa ∪ δb′′ , a).

[Boella and van der Torre, 2006] Boella, G. and van der
Torre, L. (2006). A game theoretic approach to contracts
in multiagent systems. IEEE Transactions on SMC.
[Bratman, 1992] Bratman, M. (1992). Shared cooperative
activity. The Philosophical Review, 101:327–341.

Decision making

[Castelfranchi, 1998] Castelfranchi, C. (1998). Modeling social action for AI agents. Artificial Intelligence, 103:157–
182.

The agents value decisions according to the desires and goals
which have been fulfilled and which have not. The agents
can be classified according to the way they give priority to
the different possible motivations: private desires and goals
and desires and goals of the group or of the normative system
or of the role they play that can be adopted. We define agent
types as they have been introduced in the BOID architecture
[Dastani and van der Torre, 2002].
For example, cooperative agents give priority to the desires
and goals of the group; they pursue their private goals only if
they do not prevent the achievement of the group’s objectives:

[Castelfranchi, 2000] Castelfranchi, C. (2000). Engineering
social order. In Procs. of ESAW’00, pages 1–18, Berlin.
Springer Verlag.
[Dastani and van der Torre, 2002] Dastani, M. and van der
Torre, L. (2002). A classification of cognitive agents. In
Procs. of Cogsci’02, pages 256–261.
[Dennett, 1987] Dennett, D. C. (1987). The Intentional
Stance. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[Gmytrasiewicz and Durfee, 1995] Gmytrasiewicz, P. J. and
Durfee, E. H. (1995). Formalization of recursive modeling. In Procs. of ICMAS’95, pages 125–132.

Selfish agent A selfish agent always tries to minimize its
own unfulfilled desires and goals:
Given decisions δ, δ ′ ∈ ∆, if U (δ, a) ≥a U (δ ′ , a) then
U (δ, a) ∩ (Da ∪ Ga ) ≥a U (δ ′ , a) ∩ (Da ∪ Ga )

[Goffman, 1970] Goffman, E. (1970). Strategic Interaction.
Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

Cooperative agent A cooperative agent always tries to minimize the unfulfilled desires and goals of the group b, before minimizing its private goals and desires:

[Gordon, 1986] Gordon, R. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind and Language, 1:158–171.
[Jones and Carmo, 2001] Jones, A. and Carmo, J. (2001).
Deontic logic and contrary-to-duties. In Gabbay, D. and
Guenthner, F., editors, Handbook of Philosophical Logic,
pages 203–279. Kluwer.

Given decisions δ, δ ′ ∈ ∆, if U (δ, a) ≥a U (δ ′ , a) then
U (δ, a) ∩ (Db ∪ Gb ) ≥b U (δ ′ , a) ∩ (Db ∪ Gb )
Similar definitions can be provided for agents who give
precedence to goals with respect to desires, agents who adopt
as their goals the obligations they are subject to, etc.

[Lakoff and Johnson, 1980] Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M.
(1980). Metaphors we live by. UC Press, Chicago.
[Makinson and van der Torre, 2000] Makinson,
D. and
van der Torre, L. (2000). Input-output logics. Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 29:383–408.

Conclusion
In this paper we discuss the role of the theory of mind in the
construction of social reality. We argue that the attribution
of mental attitudes proper of the theory of mind can be fruitfully used to conceptualize social entities like groups, normative systems, organizations and roles. This agent metaphor is
a conceptually economical and cognitively plausible way to
explain a complex aspect of reality and it is supported also
by philosophers like [Tuomela, 1995]. Furthermore, we provide a computational model of the agent metaphor based on
multiagent systems. This model, which is only summarized
in this paper, allows to explain various aspects of social reality, from groups [Boella and van der Torre, 2004a] to legal
reasoning [Boella and van der Torre, 2006]. See these papers
for further details and references.

[Searle, 1990] Searle, J. (1990). Collective intentionality. In
Cohen, P. R., Morgan, J., and Pollack, M. E., editors, Intentions in communication. MIT Press, Cambridge (MA).
[Searle, 1995] Searle, J. (1995). The Construction of Social
Reality. The Free Press, New York.
[Tuomela, 1995] Tuomela, R. (1995). The Importance of Us:
A Philosophical Study of Basic Social Notions. Stanford
University Press.
[Wellman, 1990] Wellman, H. (1990). The child’s theory of
mind. MIT Press, Cambridge (MA).

303

