UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammaticality Judgment of Article Use in Aphasic Speakers of Bulgarian

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vb654f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Andonova, Elena
Janyan, Armina
Kostadinova, Tatyana
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammaticality Judgment of Article Use in Aphasic Speakers of Bulgarian
Elena Andonova (eandonova@nbu.bg)
Armina Janyan (ajanyan@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Katya Stoyanova (katya_smilets@yahoo.com)
National Hospital for Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation
2V Ovcha Kupel Av., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Margarita Raycheva (margiraycheva@yahoo.com)
Alexandrovska University Hospital
1 G.Sofijsky St., 1431 Sofia, Bulgaria

Tatyana Kostadinova (min@tea.bg)
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski
15 Tsar Osvoboditel Av., 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria

However, differences have been reported both with
respect to the kind of grammatical structure impaired and
specificity in cross-language comparisons. Indeed, crosslinguistic studies of the profiles of symptoms and
performance of aphasics have uncovered that against the
general backdrop of deficits exhibited, a large degree of
language-based specificity remains: the same aphasic
syndromes often look very different from one language to
another, with language-specific knowledge largely
preserved in aphasics speaking, for example, English,
Italian, and German (Bates, Friederici, & Wulfeck, 1987).
Because of that Bates et al. have argued that the traditional
distinction between agrammatism and paragrammatism does
not work well for richly-inflected languages, as languagespecific ratios of closed class morphology were preserved
even among non-fluent patients. Thus, an important research
goal nowadays is to contribute to our understanding of
aphasia in diverse language environments, including less
researched languages such as Bulgarian.
Although until recently it was widely believed that
agrammatic aphasics have lost the ability to assign complete
syntactic representations, as in tests showing their failure to
comprehend complex syntactic structures in relative clauses,
this does not necessarily hold for all syntax. Studies have
shown that agrammatic (non-fluent) patients may retain
their syntactic ability which is seen in their above-chance
performance (Lukatela, Shankweiler & Crain, 1995). The
now classic findings of Linebarger, Schwartz, and Saffran
(1983) that agrammatic patients are sensitive to
grammaticality despite their poor ability to use syntatic cues
in comprehension tasks have been replicated and extended
(Berndt, Salasoo, Mitchum & Blumstein, 1988, for
example). Such findings have provided arguments in favor
of the current view that grammatical knowledge is relatively
preserved in agrammatic aphasia. A recent investigation into
the abilities of aphasic patients to make grammaticality
judgments on a variety of syntactic structures in English by

Abstract
In recent years, research on aphasia has benefited from crosslinguistic comparisons. This is the first (online) study of
grammaticality judgment of Bulgarian aphasics in
comparison with age-matched controls. Two groups of
aphasics (11 non-fluent and 8 fluent) judged sentences which
varied in terms of positional constraints on bound
morphemes, i.e., grammatically correct vs. incorrect
placement of the postpositional definite article. Bulgarian
aphasics were able to perform the task with smaller, yet
comparable, speed and success as controls. While the
performance profiles of the aphasic groups and the controls
were similar, aphasic patients made more errors on the
ungrammatical conditions and differed in the following way:
compared with controls, non-fluent participants had problems
with the article misplacement condition and fluent aphasics
experienced difficulties in detecting violations in the overmarking (double article placement) condition. However,
misplacement of the article was a weak point for the fluent
patients as well. In general, Bulgarian-speaking aphasics
show considerable similarities with the performance of
controls, and differences which are mostly quantitative rather
than qualitative.
Keywords: aphasia; grammaticality judgment; article use;
Bulgarian.

Introduction
To understand and produce spoken language, one needs to
be able to process rapidly a variety of information coming
from sources commonly seen as different kinds of
constraints on sound-meaning mappings. Syntactic
constraints operate on the level of combining words and
morphemes in strings that are acceptable to the speakers of a
language as well-formed (grammatical) utterances. Aphasic
patients, especially non-fluent (Broca) patients, have been
shown to be impaired on their ability to use such constraints
due to lesions in the language-dominant hemisphere.

115

conclusion that agrammatic Broca's aphasics are particularly
impaired in the use of articles to construct and/or interpret
phrasal constituents. Hungarian Broca's patients also
showed a very high level of article omission (MacWhinney
& Osman-Sagi, 1991).
While the lack of articles (determiners) has traditionally
been viewed as a major characteristic of the telegraphic
speech of individuals with Broca's aphasia, recent studies
have produced contradictory and ambivalent results. Not all
closed class morphology is equally and uniformly impaired,
and, for example, in a study of French-speaking agrammatic
patients, articles were much less difficult to process than
pronouns and the ability to process gender marked articles
was generally well preserved in these agrammatic patients
(Jarema & Friederici, 1994). In seven Broca’s and three
Wernicke’s Romanian-speaking aphasics, articles showed a
similar use with that of normals (Mihailescu, 1992). German
and Italian patients were also much more likely to furnish
the article before nouns than English-speaking aphasics,
“despite or perhaps because of the fact that articles are more
complex and informative in those languages,” (Bates et al.,
1987).
Thus, the picture of article use by aphasics is not uniform
across languages or tasks. Furthermore, while many studies
see Broca’s aphasics as impaired in this respect, they
typically focus on article omission as an error type. This is
an inevitable limitation when studying languages with
articles functioning as free-standing morphemes and it can
only be overcome by extending studies to languages where
the article is a bound morpheme (usually attached at the end
of the noun and/or its modifiers). Such is the case of
Bulgarian which we will present here. This is also the case
in Swedish where the indefinite article is a free morpheme
and the definite article is a suffix to the noun. In a recent
study of the use of articles in the spontaneous speech of
agrammatic speakers with Broca’s aphasia in Swedish,
Havik & Bastiaanse (2004) conclude that the definite article
is easier to produce probably because it is a bound
morpheme which is less prone to error than the freestanding
indefinite article.
What is characteristic of the Bulgarian determiner
system? It places a special emphasis on the use of the
definite article, a bound (postpositional) morpheme.
Morphological and structural rules govern its proper usage:
(a) as a bound morpheme, the definite article agrees with the
respective noun (and its modifiers) in number and gender;
(b) the structural constraints require the article to be affixed
postpositionally to the head noun or its first modifier. In
Bulgarian, as in other languages, the definite article is one
of the most frequently used markers of given information –
it is affixed to nouns that are contextually known entities. Its
use, however, is much wider than that of its counterpart in
English, possibly also because of a lack of an indefinite
article in the Bulgarian system. The opposition is in fact
between the definite article and its absence, rather than
between two types of articles (definite vs. indefinite, as in
English). Furthermore, the use of the definite article is
optional in a variety of contexts.

Wilson and Saygin (2004) has led them to argue that the
pattern of performance they obtain does not result from any
particular component of the grammar, or any particular
brain region, being selectively compromised.
Indeed, theoretical accounts have tried to explain such
diverse findings by either narrowing down the perimeter of
impairment to ever more specific language structures
(Grodzinsky & Finkel, 1998), on the one hand, or by
searching for explanations in the deficiencies of more
general cognitive mechanisms, e.g., working memory,
disrupted timing (Kolk, 1995), or allocation of attention,
especially inhibitory mechanisms (Wiener, Connor & Obler,
2004).
Furthermore, numerous studies have revealed highly
similar profiles in the performance of fluent and non-fluent
aphasics on certain tasks in a number of languages.
Akhutina et al. (2001), for example, found context effects to
be unrelated to specific aphasic symptoms or subtypes in a
gender priming experiment with Russian-speaking aphasics.
In Chinese, the performance of the fluent and non-fluent
groups differed quantitatively rather than qualitatively, with
better performance on all categories by the fluent group on a
cloze test of production of grammatical morphemes (Law &
Cheng, 2002). In a recent study of Dutch and English
Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia, Bastiaanse & Edwards
(2004) established that the proportions and types of errors
made by each group were similar on their sentence
comprehension and sentence anagram tasks. Bates et al.
(1987) discovered that within each language of the three
languages they studied (English, Italian, German), error
patterns were quite similar for Broca's and Wernicke's
aphasics. In sum, the extent of similarity of the profiles of
the non-fluent and fluent aphasics remains an open issue to
explore.
What theory can account for these results? The main line
of explanation follows the notion of “agrammatism”,
however, there are many versions of this theoretical stand,
ranging from central agrammatism, a rather disreputed
theory nowadays, to Grodzinsky and Finkel’s (1998) claim
that agrammatic aphasics are selectively impaired in their
ability to process structures involving traces of maximal
projections (the Trace Deletion Hypothesis). This theoretical
account has come under fire from Caramazza, Capitani,
Rey, and Berndt (2001) and Wilson and Saygin (2004),
among others. The importance of cross-linguistic research is
only highlighted with respect to Grodzinsky’s claim,
however, as there is no evidence for the psychological
reality of such traces in Bulgarian, even in non-aphasic
Bulgarian speakers (controls) (Stamenov & Andonova,
1998), i.e., the claim cannot be put to the test in this
language, or worse, casts doubts on the performance of all
Bulgarian speakers.
Closed-class morphology or functional morphemes are a
special interest in aphasia research, mainly in relation to
agrammatism. Omission and substitution of articles are
typically seen as features of agrammatic speech (Bastiaanse,
Jonkers, Ruigendijk & Van Zonneveld, 2003). For example,
Grossman, Carey, Zurif & Diller (1986) came to the

116

matched with the patients on age, gender, and education
level. All were native speakers of Bulgarian. These patients
exhibited no difference in severity as demonstrated by a ttest, (p>.6); they also did not differ on mean age or mean
education level.

In our study, we set out to examine the real-time
sensitivity to article use and its violations in Bulgarianspeaking aphasics and controls in an on-line task of
grammaticality judgment. In this way, we aim to add to the
growing cross-linguistic literature on aphasia, and especially
to throw light on a specific part of the grammatical system
related to definiteness and its marking via articles. The
performance of non-fluent aphasics was compared with that
of fluent ones, and with two groups of control subjects
(college age and older age-matched controls). We chose
grammaticality judgment as a task, as it is commonly used
as a way of probing into the linguistic competence of
speakers and estimating the degree of preservation of this
competence in patients with neurolinguistic deficits. The
results from previous studies involving grammaticality
judgments in a number of languages, e.g., English, Italian,
Chinese, Russian, German, etc. (Bates et al., 1987; Akhutina
et al., 2001; Lu et al., 2000) have shown that this judgment
is an unstable and probabilistic process, and the ability to
perform such judgment is preserved in at least some
aphasics, e.g., studies of aphasia in German have shown that
the system of subject-verb agreement (inflection) is in
principle intact in German Broca’s (Janssen & Penke,
2002). Some studies with the grammaticality judgment task
have shown that grammatical morphology is more impaired
than word order, i.e., more sensitivity is preserved to
violations of word order (Wulfeck, Bates, & Capasso,
1991). In grammaticality judgment studies, movement
(word order, or structural) violations have been studied
extensively. Bulgarian word order is highly flexible. In
article usage, however, we have a case where positional
constraints and their violations can be studied
systematically. Note that here we examine the positional
constraints of a bound morpheme.
Aphasics have been shown to be able to make online
judgments in English and other languages (Wulfeck et al.,
1991; Lu et al., 2002) using a violation detection task where
they are asked to discriminate between grammatical and
ungrammatical strings. This gives us sufficient confidence
to expect a similar ability in Bulgarian aphasics. As in the
Chinese study cited above, “grammaticality” as an intuitive
notion in everyday discourse is rather dubious; thus, in our
instruction, subjects were asked to judge which sentences
were “right/correct” vs. “wrong/incorrect.”
The research questions we ask in our study are: (a) can
Bulgarian-speaking
aphasics
make
grammaticality
judgments in general, and on the placement of the definite
article, in particular; (b) how do Bulgarian aphasics differ
from controls in this task; (c) can the two groups of
Bulgarian aphasics (non-fluent vs. fluent) be differentiated
on the basis of their performance in terms of accuracy or
speed of judgment? In other words, what are the specific
features of Broca’s aphasia?

Stimuli and Design The stimuli were 72 narrative sentences
in Bulgarian stringing together a subject noun phrase
(adjective + noun), a finite verb, and an object noun phrase
(with the postpositional definite article present on the object
noun). The finite verb was marked for the past tense and the
respective gender suffix (the subject and predicate agree in
gender in these constructions in Bulgarian). In effect, the 72
stimuli were 4 variations each of 18 master sentences in
which article use in the subject noun phrase differed as
follows: (i) condition A (grammatical) – article is correctly
placed on the adjective only, e.g., “krasivata zhena
razhozhdala kucheto” (‘beautiful_Det woman walked
dog_Det’); (ii) condition O (grammatical) – the noun
phrase contains no article, which is permitted by Bulgarian
grammar and resembles English constructions with the use
of the indefinite article, e.g., “krasiva zhena razhozhdala
kucheto” (‘beautiful woman walked dog_Det’); (iii)
condition AN (ungrammatical) – both the adjective and the
noun are followed by the definite article, not permitted in
the grammar, e.g., “krasivata zhenata razhozhdala kucheto”
(‘beautiful_Det woman_Det walked dog_Det’); (iv)
condition N (ungrammatical) – the definite article is placed
on the noun only, not permitted in the grammar, either, e.g.,
“krasiva zhenata razhozhdala kucheto” (‘beautiful
woman_Det walked dog_Det’).
The average auditory length of grammatical (4145 ms)
and ungrammatical (4170 ms) stimuli did not differ as
shown by a t-test (t=0.44, p<0.66).
Procedure Stimuli were presented auditorily in a
randomized order preceded by a 10-trial practice session.
The experimenter read the instruction asking subjects to
press the “YES” button in response to “correct” sentences
and the “NO” button in response to “incorrect” sentences. In
addition, they were instructed to press a middle “?” button
when they had difficulty or uncertainty about the response.
The assignment of YES and NO buttons on the button box
was counterbalanced across subjects. Reaction times were
measured from the offset of each sentence. A Carnegie
Mellon button box recorded reaction times and button
choice. A Power Macintosh 6400/200 equipped with the
PsyScope software (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt & Provost,
1993) controlled stimuli presentation. For controls, the intertrial interval was a random number between 1200 and 2000
ms. For aphasics, a mouse click by the experimenter after
the subject’s response prompted an inter-trial interval that
was a random number between 2000 and 3200 ms.

Method

Results and Discussion

Participants 19 patients (8 fluent and 11 non-fluent
aphasics) participated in this study, as well as two groups of
controls: (a) 19 college students; and (b) 19 older controls

Analyses were run on percent errors and percent of choice
of YES button as the measures of accuracy of judgment.
The reaction time measure (from the end of sentences) was

117

with, non-fluent aphasics’ overall accuracy was worse than
that of the age-matched controls, i.e., they made an average
of 14.3% errors on all four conditions, whereas controls
made 8.9% errors. However, their performance was far from
being at a chance level, i.e., they demonstrated sensitivity to
the grammaticality of these sentences. Furthermore, though
being much greater, non-fluents’ error rate was not
significantly different from that of controls on three out of
the four article placement conditions in this experiment (the
two grammatical conditions, A and O, and the
ungrammatical AN). Their performance was significantly
different, however, as seen in a Duncan posthoc test, on the
ungrammatical condition N where the article is misplaced,
or moved away, from the correct adjective-final to the
incorrect noun-final position in the noun phrase (“krasiva
zhenata razhozhdala kucheto,” Eng.‘beautiful woman_Det
walked dog_Det’). In this condition, non-fluent aphasics
made 30.8% errors in comparison with controls’ 16.4%.
Importantly, the error rate difference between the non-fluent
patients and age-matched controls did not reach significance
on the other ungrammatical condition AN where the
violation consists not of misplacement of the article but of
over-marking the noun phrase by adding a second
(unsanctioned) article on the noun (error rate: 10.3% nonfluent aphasics vs. 3.2% controls). What this means
essentially is that Bulgarian non-fluent aphasics showed an
impaired ability to detect misplacement and a statistically
non-significant (though numerically present) disadvantage
at detecting over-marking.

based on correct responses only. Prior to reaction time
analyses, all trials with incorrect responses, RTs longer than
3000 ms for controls and 5000 ms for aphasics were
removed from the data set, as well as trials falling outside
the range of subjects’ individual mean RT ± 2SD. These
procedures resulted in three kinds of data removal, i.e.,
errors, time window violations, and individual outliers. In
total, 84.3% of the data were accepted for RT analysis in the
college controls group, 84.4% for the age-matched controls,
and 76.8% for the aphasics.
The analyses of the performance of the two groups of
controls (college-aged vs. older age-matched controls) did
not lead to important differences, with the predictable
exception of an overall disadvantage in older controls’
speed. Comparative analyses will be presented here using
the data from the age-matched controls.

Accuracy
First, we present the analysis of error rates in the control and
aphasic groups. Overall, controls made fewer errors, as
expected (8.9%) than aphasics (14.30% for non-fluent and
20.0% for fluent patients). One-way ANOVAs were
conducted for overall grammaticality (grammatical vs.
ungrammatical sentences) for each group of participants on
error rates. Controls’ data yielded no effect of
grammaticality on error rates (p<.9), i.e., there was no
difference in the error rate for the grammatical vs. the
ungrammatical sentences. Neither did it have an effect on
the performance of either group of aphasics (p<.2). This
does not mean that our subjects did not understand the task,
however, or that they reacted in a random manner, as our
analysis showed a clear effect of grammaticality on the
percent ‘YES’ choices across all groups. Ungrammatical
items prompted significantly fewer ‘YES’ responses than
grammatical ones (10% vs. 93%) in college controls
(F(1,70)=490.57, p<.00), and 9% vs. 91% in age-matched
controls (F(1,74)=441.97, p<.00). The two aphasic groups
also accepted ungrammatical items as correct less than
grammatical items, i.e., 21% vs. 92% for non-fluent
aphasics (F(1,42)=101.89, p<.00) and 26% vs. 86% for
fluent aphasics (F(1,30)=42.98, p<.00).
This study was designed to answer questions concerning
article use and its violations in more detail. We now turn to
the analysis of performance on the four article usage
conditions for each of the aphasic groups. As a reminder,
two of these are ungrammatical (conditions N and AN when
the article is placed on the second item in the noun phrase),
and two are grammatical (conditions A and O when the
article is either placed on the modifier or is absent from the
noun phrase).

Fluent aphasics The comparative analysis of the accuracy
(error rate) between fluent aphasics and age-matched
controls revealed a somewhat different picture. First,
however, similarly with non-fluent aphasics, their reactions
were not at a chance level, i.e., they had not lost their ability
to make grammaticality judgments while the overall
accuracy of fluent aphasics was generally lower than that of
age-matched controls (20.0% vs. 8.9%). Their performance
differed significantly from that of controls on only one of
the ungrammatical conditions, a finding that at first glance
may seem familiar from the results on the non-fluent group.
However, importantly, while non-fluent patients had an
impaired ability to detect misplacement as in condition N,
fluent aphasics had difficulty with the other ungrammatical
condition, AN, which is a case of over-marking the noun
phrase with two articles instead of one (e.g., “krasivata
zhenata razhozhdala kucheto,” Eng. ‘beautiful_Det
woman_Det walked dog_Det’), as revealed by a Duncan
post hoc test, with a difference between 23% for fluent
aphasics and 2.1% for controls; their error rate was not
significantly different from that of controls on the
misplacement condition (29.5% vs. 16.4% in fluent and
control groups, respectively). Thus, Bulgarian fluent
aphasics found it particularly difficult to detect overmarking and seemed closer to controls in their detection of
misplacement, although still worse than them. In effect, this
shows a differential picture of impairment in the two
aphasic groups, in that while non-fluent patients had specific

Non-fluent aphasics In order to understand better the
specificity of aphasics’ performance, we ran separate
comparative analyses of each of the two aphasics’ groups
with age-matched controls. These analyses revealed
similarities but also intriguing differences across the
abilities of fluent and non-fluent aphasics to detect
grammatically unacceptable syntactic strings. To begin

118

problems with misplacement, fluent patients were
experiencing their own specific difficulties with overmarking.
This general conclusion on the differential nature of their
performance needs to be modulated, however, as a direct
comparison between the two groups of patients, i.e., fluent
vs. non-fluent aphasics, independent of a comparison with
controls, revealed that the error rates of the two groups were
not significantly different on any of the four article usage
conditions, although fluent aphasics had an overall worse
performance (20.0%) than non-fluent aphasics (14.3%).
Furthermore, while their error rates differed by almost 13%
(23% in fluent vs. 10.3% in non-fluent) on condition AN
(over-marking), it was extremely small on the other
ungrammatical condition N (misplacement), i.e., both
groups had quantitatively similar difficulties with the
misplacement of the article (30.8% non-fluent vs. 29.5%
fluent error rate).

We present here the first online study of aphasia in Bulgaria
which asks a number of research questions in a language
which is under-researched and which offers an opportunity
to explore positional constraints on the use of the article
system. We first asked whether Bulgarian-speaking aphasics
can make (online) grammaticality judgments in general, and
on the placement of the definite article, in particular. Our
findings indicate that, although less successful than the
control groups, both non-fluent and fluent aphasics were
able to perform this task, as evidenced by their well-above
chance performance, and in the case of the non-fluent group,
by their processing speed. In fact, non-fluent patients
appeared to be using a rather ‘local’ strategy in reaching
their judgments by rejecting ungrammatical stimuli almost
immediately after the violation point. Fluent aphasics as
well as most controls, especially the age-matched control
group, were taking a more ‘global’ approach deferring
judgment until they have processed the entire stimulus.
Our second question concerned the different profiles of
aphasics and controls. While their overall performance was
similar to that of controls (e.g., comparable overall error
rates and error patterns, as well as speed of processing
pattern), the two aphasic groups differed from controls on
processing the two ungrammatical conditions of article
placement. Furthermore, in answer to the third research
question on distinctive cross-aphasic profiles, these
differences appeared to be group-specific: while both nonfluent and fluent aphasics experienced difficulties with the
ungrammatical article-misplacement condition, the fluent
group had a specific disadvantage in under-detecting
violations in the condition where the noun phrase
constituents were over-marked with two instead of one
article. The specific underlying mechanisms for this
variation need to be explored further in the future, i.e.,
would the two aphasic groups differ in the same way on
grammaticality judgments of structural constraints other
than article use, would their productive performance mirror
that differentiation in their receptive one, could there be a
more general cognitive dichotomy at work here, e.g.,
weakened sensitivity to over-marking (in fluent) vs. mismarking (in non-fluent), etc. In general, however,
Bulgarian-speaking aphasics exhibit the kind of
performance already established in some other languages:
considerable similarities with the performance of controls,
and differences which are mostly quantitative, rather than
qualitative.
Finally, considerable variation and relatively high error
rates were also obtained in the responses of non-aphasic
participants in this study, pointing out the limitations of
researching a grammatical category such as definiteness in
syntactic strings isolated from a discourse-based context.
This consideration, in combination with the high structural
flexibility in the Bulgarian language, contribute to our
understanding that: (a) it may be particularly difficult to
create strings which would be judged as unambiguously
ungrammatical, and (b) non-aphasic as well as aphasic
speakers of Bulgarian utilize a number of additional

Reaction Times
Non-fluent aphasics Non-fluent aphasics and age-matched
controls differed in their speed of processing the four article
placement conditions. A two-way interaction between group
and condition (F(3,110)=3.14, p<.05) revealed that although
both groups responded similarly to the grammatical
conditions (with almost identical values for reaction times),
non-fluent aphasics were markedly and significantly faster
than controls on both ungrammatical conditions in a Duncan
post-hoc test. The reaction time difference in correctly
rejecting the ungrammatical AN and N conditions was not
significant. Furthermore, both of these ungrammatical
conditions yielded RTs around or below zero, i.e., correct
rejection took place very soon after the occurrence of the
violation (i.e., judgment was rather localistic). This was not
the case with the age-matched controls who appeared to
respond after processing the sentence as a whole, taking a
more globalistic approach.
Fluent aphasics Unlike the non-fluent aphasics, the fluent
ones were much slower than controls, and there was no
interaction between the variables of group (fluent vs.
controls) and article condition (p<.8). A Duncan post-hoc
test revealed that fluent aphasics were significantly slower
on only one of the two grammatical conditions, condition O,
i.e., no article in the noun phrase (a legitimate construction
in Bulgarian). Fluent aphasics were generally slower and
more cautious, waiting well until and beyond the end of the
sentence before they committed to a judgment on the
acceptability of the string. A direct comparison of the
reaction times of the two aphasic groups revealed that their
speed was similar on the grammatical conditions but the
non-fluent patients were much faster at detecting violations
on the ungrammatical conditions and committing to a
negative judgment, i.e., in terms of speed, they seemed to
show greater sensitivity to these local structural violations,
as pointed out above.

Conclusion

119

Grossman, M., Carey, S., Zurif, E., Diller, L. (1986). Proper
and common nouns: form class judgments in Broca's
aphasia. Brain & Language, 28(1), 114-25.
Havik, E., & Bastiaanse, R. (2004). Omission of definite
and indefinite articles in the spontaneous speech of
agrammatic speakers with Broca's aphasia. Aphasiology,
18(12), 1093-1112.
Janssen, U., & Penke, M. (2002). How are inflectional
affixes organized in the mental lexicon: Evidence from
the investigation of agreement errors in agrammatic
aphasics. Brain & Language, 81(1-3), 180-91.
Jarema, G., & Friederici, A.D. (1994). Processing articles
and pronouns in agrammatic aphasia: Evidence from
French. Brain & Language, 46(4), 683-94.
Kolk, H. (1995). A time-based approach to agrammatic
production. Brain & Language, 50(3), 282-303.
Law, S.P., & Cheng, M.Y. (2002). Production of
grammatical
morphemes
in
Chinese
aphasia.
Aphasiology, 16(7), 693-714.
Linebarger, M.C., Schwartz, M.F., & Saffran, E.M. (1983).
Sensitivity to grammatical structure in so-called
agrammatic aphasics. Cognition, 13(3), 361-92.
Lu, C.C., Bates, E., Li, P., Tzeng, O., Hung, D., Tsai, C.H.,
Lee, S.E., & Ng, Y.M. (2000). Judgments of
grammaticality in aphasia: The special case of Chinese.
Aphasiology, 15(10), 1021-1054.
Lukatela, K., Shankweiler, D., & Crain, S. (1995). Syntactic
processing in agrammatic aphasia by speakers of a Slavic
language. Brain & Language, 49 (1), 50-76.
MacWhinney, B., Osman-Sagi, J. (1991) Inflectional
marking in Hungarian aphasics. Brain & Language,
41(2), 165-83
Mihailescu, L. (1992). Vocabulary grammatical structure in
aphasic patients. Romanian Journal of Neurology and
Psychiatry, 30(1), 31-46.
Ruigendijk, E., & Bastiaa nse, R. (2002). Two
characteristics of agrammatic speech: Omission of verbs
and omission of determiners, is there a relation?
Aphasiology, 16(4-6), 383-395.
Stamenov, M. & Andonova, E. (1998). Lexical access and
co-reference processing in Bulgarian. In D. Hillert (Ed.),
Sentence Processing: A Cross-Linguistic Perspective, San
Diego: Academic Press.
Wiener, D., Connor, L.T., & Obler, L.K. (2004). Inhibition
and auditory comprehension in Wernicke’s aphasia.
Aphasiology, 18(5-7), 599-609.
Wilson, S.M., Saygin, A.P. (2004). Grammaticality
judgment in aphasia: Deficits are not specific to syntactic
structures, aphasic syndromes, or lesion sites. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(2), 238-52.
Wulfeck, B., Bates, E., & Capasso, R. (1991). A
crosslinguistic study of grammaticality judgments in
Broca's aphasia. Brain & Language, 41(2), 311-36.

information cues besides grammatical structure in the
process of comprehension.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank a great number of people who
contributed to this study – our patients and experimental
subjects, our colleagues and mentors Elizabeth Bates,
Lyudmil Mavlov, Encho Gerganov, Stefan Mateeff, our
students, and the McDonnell foundation for support of the
cross-linguistic studies of aphasia.

References
Akhutina, T., Kurgansky, A., Kurganskaya, M., Polinsky,
M., Polomskaya, N., Larina, O., Bates, E., & Appelbaum,
M. (2001). Processing of grammatical gender in normal
and aphasic speakers of Russian. Cortex, 37(3), 295-326.
Bastiaanse, R., & Edwards, S. (2004). Word order and
finiteness in Dutch and English Broca’s and Wernicke’s
aphasia. Brain & Language, 89(1), 91-107.
Bastiaanse, R., Jonkers, R., Ruigendijk, E., Van Zonneveld,
R. (2003). Gender and case in agrammatic production.
Cortex, 39(3), 405-17.
Bates, E., Friederici, A., Wulfeck, B. (1987). Grammatical
morphology in aphasia: Evidence from three languages.
Cortex, 23(4), 545-74.
Berndt, R.S., Salasoo, A., Mitchum, C.C., & Blumstein,
S.E. (1988). The role of intonation cues in aphasic
patients' performance of the grammaticality judgment
task. Brain & Language, 34(1), 65-97.
Caramazza, A., Capitani, E., Rey, A., & Berndt, R.S.
(2001). Agrammatic Broca's aphasia is not associated
with a single pattern of comprehension performance.
Brain & Language, 76(2), 158-84.
Cohen, J.D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25(2),
257-271.
Dick, F., Bates, E., Wulfeck, B., Utman, J.A., Dronkers, N.,
& Gernsbacher, M.A. (2001). Language deficits,
localization, and grammar: Evidence for a distributive
model of language breakdown in aphasic patients and
neurologically intact individuals. Psychological Review,
108(4), 759-88.
Faroqi-Shah, Y., & Thompson, C.K. (2003). Effect of
lexical cues on the production of active and passive
sentences in Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasia. Brain &
Language, 85(3), 409-426.
Grodzinsky, Y., & Finkel, L. (1998). The neurology of
empty categories aphasics' failure to detect
ungrammaticality. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
10(2), 281-92.

120

