UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Do Cultural Numerical Concepts Build Upon an Evolved Number Sense?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55p6c79s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
De Cruz, Helen

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Do Cultural Numerical Concepts Build Upon an Evolved Number Sense?
Helen De Cruz (hdecruz@vub.ac.be)

Centre for Logic and Philosophy of Science, Free University of Brussels, Pleinlaan 2
1050 Brussels, Belgium

engages in complex interactions with its environment.
Without conceptual thought, an animal would perceive each
object or event as unique, and generalizations would be
impossible (Bovet & Vauclair, 1998).
Many models have been proposed to explain how the
brain engages in conceptual thought. Evolutionary
psychologists Cosmides and Tooby (1994) contend that the
brain consists of many specialized systems - conceptual
modules - that each have their own specific way to deal with
a given subset of computational problems, in other words,
they are domain-specific. Since problems encountered by
humans and other animals are often mutually incompatible,
natural selection has crafted a dedicated solution for each
recurrent evolutionary problem. Such a conceptual module
is not directly linked to perceptual input, but uses
representations from perceptual modules (or other
conceptual modules) as its input. By deriving information
from other modules, conceptual modules enable the brain to
achieve conceptual integration.

Abstract
Several authors (e.g. Dehaene, 1997) have proposed that
mathematical concepts build upon an evolved innate number
sense, which we share with many other species. However,
they have left unspecified how these mathematical concepts
can come into existence and how they are transmitted. Models
of content biased cultural transmission (e.g. Boyer, 2001)
predict that cultural traits that bear a close fit to or a strong
violation of intuitions provided by evolved cognitive
mechanisms (modules) will be more widespread than others.
Here, I adopt a similar approach to explain the emergence and
spread of two mathematical concepts: positive integers, which
have emerged independently in many cultures, and zero,
which has evolved only once as a true numerical concept, but
has successfully spread to other cultures. I will argue that
these patterns of emergence and transmission lie in their fit
with or their violation of intuitions provided by our evolved
number sense.

Introduction
Many numerical concepts, like symbolic representations of
positive integers, or ways to calculate surface areas, occur
independently in widely varying cultures (Ascher, 1991).
This makes mathematics more universal than science and
even writing. Clearly, such complex concepts are the result
of cultural evolution: a gradual and long accumulation of
mathematical knowledge within different cultures.
Nevertheless, recent evidence from animal, infant and
neuro-imaging studies suggests that mathematical concepts
are rooted in an evolved number sense that does not require
cultural transmission. The relationship between cultural
number concepts and this evolved numerical competence
has not yet been fully explored.
In this paper, I shall examine the role of innately specified
intuitions about number in the transmission of cultural
numerical concepts. First, I shall discuss how evolved ways
of conceptual thinking can influence cultural transmission.
Next, I shall review the growing evidence for a conceptual
number module in infant, animal, adult and neuro-imaging
studies. Finally, I shall provide two case-studies, the
positive integers and zero, to explain how this number
module shapes and influences the emergence and
transmission of cultural numerical concepts.

Conceptual modularity and culture
How can conceptual modularity explain the great diversity
of human cognitive abilities? Most elements of human
culture are too novel and too variable to be the specific
output of any module. Even if we could provide adaptive
explanations for some of these elements, this can never be
true of all, simply because many of them differ widely
across cultures. Sperber (1996) proposes to draw a
distinction between proper and actual domains of modules.
The proper domain is the reason a module exists, it is part of
its evolutionary history, e.g. the proper domain of the
face-recognition module is the human face. The actual
domain is the set of stimuli to which the module responds,
whether it belongs to its proper domain or not, e.g. the facerecognition module responds to smileys and masks as well.
Proper and actual domains of a module are unlikely to
overlap entirely because cognition is a probabilistic activity.
Natural selection can detect the formal properties of a
stimulus to which the module responds, but this cannot rule
out false negatives or false positives. Modules are
mandatory: they are activated when the right type of
stimulus is provided, even if this does not belong to the
domain for which they have evolved. This slight mismatch
between proper and actual domains takes place to a unique
extent in human culture. Humans require much of their
knowledge through cultural transmission. As a result, the
actual domain of some modules can expand much beyond
their proper domain (Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2004). Thus,
cultural transmission results in a vast proliferation of

Conceptual modularity
Animals’ brains enable them to behave adaptively, even in
situations that they have not previously encountered. The
main reason they are able to do this, is their ability to form
conceptual thoughts. This is essential to any organism that
565

olds can predict the outcome of an elementary addition or
subtraction task for small numbers: they look longer at
impossible (1 + 1 = 1) than at expected (1 + 1 = 2)
outcomes. Infants can also keep track of small collections of
items in working memory (e.g. 2 vs. 3) when these are
presented serially, such as crackers being dropped in
different opaque containers (Feigenson, Carey & Hauser,
2002).
This numerical ability is not restricted to small
numerosities. In tasks involving large numbers of elements,
infants compute discrete numbers as well. Six-month-olds
dishabituate when the number of dots on a display changes
from 8 to 16, even when other variables such as total surface
area have been controlled (Xu & Spelke, 2000). They are
capable of predicting outcomes of additions involving large
numerosities, e.g. 5 + 5 = 10 and not 5 (McCrink & Wynn,
2004). This numerical ability apparently extends to different
modalities and formats, including sounds (Lipton & Spelke,
2003) and actions (Wynn, 1998). This suggests that infants
represent numerosities at a semantic level, i.e. as
magnitudes, and not as a function of continuous variables
such as density and duration.

domain-specific concepts, such as imaginary creatures or (as
I shall argue) complex numerical concepts.

Content biases in cultural transmission
Cultural transmission is biased by innate predispositions.
Since modules process information in a domain-specific
manner, they influence how cultural information will be
processed in the brain. This means that cultural traits are
more successfully transmitted if they concur with basic
intuitions of these conceptual modules, since modules are
most likely to respond to cultural stimuli which have a
strong concurrence with their proper domain. However,
some cultural traits are widespread because they are
counterintuitive: they are characterized by both violation of
one module, and strong accordance to others (Boyer, 2001).
Ghosts, for instance, have beliefs, desires and social
interaction, in accordance with naïve psychology. On the
other hand, they violate naïve physics because they can
walk through walls or disappear at will.

Number as the proper domain of a conceptual
module
Numbers - like other mathematical concepts - are abstract
representations that seem far removed from elementary
sense data. They appear to imply knowledge of language:
arithmetic, counting and more complex computations
involving number rely on linguistic tools. It seems therefore
unlikely that number could constitute the proper domain of
one or more dedicated modules. On the other hand, number
is a basic property of the environment. From an
evolutionary perspective, stable properties of the
environment that yield potentially useful information can
exert selective pressures on nervous systems in different
animal species. Therefore, we can expect that modules that
infer gravitational pull, colour, or numerosities occur in
many species. Recognizing numerosities provides an animal
with a mechanism to reduce complicated forms of input
(objects or events in time and space) to simple numerical
relationships.

Various vertebrate species have been demonstrated to
show a sensitivity to number that is similar to that of human
infants. Experiments using operant conditioning show that
pigeons and rats are able to estimate large numerosities (key
presses to obtain a food-reward), with increasing
imprecision as the required number of presses gets larger
(Brannon et al., 2001).
Experiments involving ecologically relevant stimuli
provide evidence that animals spontaneously use numerical
information from their environment to make adaptive
decisions. Lionesses decide whether or not to attack a group
of intruders (simulated as roars played on a tape) on the
basis of the number of roaring lions they hear and the
number of members of their own pride present (McComb,
Packer & Pusey, 1994). When presented with two different
numerosities of food-items, untrained free-ranging rhesus
monkeys (Hauser, Carey & Hauser, 2000) and red-backed
salamanders (Uller et al., 2003) go for the larger quantity.

Numerical competence in humans and animals
Current experimental evidence from different disciplines
suggests that number is more than a cultural invention, and
that human numerical competence has its roots in cognitive
evolution. Three main lines of evidence support this claim.
Numerical competence is present in human infants, prior to
schooling or even language. Similar capacities have been
found in non-human animals even in the absence of training.
Furthermore, functional neuro-imaging studies strongly
suggest that number processing rests on a distinct neural
circuitry. Here, I will briefly review the evidence for the
phylogenetic origins of humans’ and other animals’
numerical competence.

Adults rely on numerical concepts similar to those of
infants and animals when they are prevented from counting.
If asked to press a key a specific number of times, while
pronouncing ‘the’ (to prevent subvocal counting), the mean
number of key presses increases in proportion to the target
number (Cordes, Gelman & Gallistel, 2001). Adults’
accuracy and speed in numerical performance gets worse as
the absolute size of the numbers increase (size effect), and
as the distance between them gets smaller (distance effect),
e.g. a comparison between 7 and 8 typically takes a longer
response time than between 3 and 8. This suggests they
convert sets of discrete Arabic numerals to a continuous
magnitude representation before the comparison process
itself takes place (Moyer & Landauer, 1967). This mental
number line has scalar variability: each number represents a
tuning curve, which gets broader with increasing magnitude.

Infants share with other animals the capacity to reason
about number. Newborns of just a few days old discriminate
between sets of 2 and 3 items, but fail to see the difference
between 4 and 6 (Antell & Keating, 1983). A much
replicated experiment (Wynn, 1992) shows that five-month566

Thus, two large numbers will be harder to distinguish than
two smaller numbers with the same absolute difference
(Gallistel & Gelman, 2000). In sum, the mental number line
makes approximate representations of number: infants,
animals and adults who do not count can only make exact
representations of the smallest quantities.

integers and zero) is influenced by their fit to or violation of
conceptual modules, especially the number module.

The positive integers
Our mind represents reals and not integers. Some
developmental psychologists (e.g. Wynn, 1998) believe that
the positive integers {1,2,3,…} constitute the psychological
foundation from which all other numerical concepts arise.
However, since neurons are only approximately tuned to
different numerosities, the magnitudes infants, animals and
adults who do not count represent are more properly
conceptualized as reals than as integers. Reals (e.g. ) are
uncountable: they cannot be put in a one-to-one
correspondence with natural numbers. We can conceptualize
reals as being on a continuous scale, whereas the positive
integers constitute a discrete set (Gallistel & Gelman, 2000).
Therefore, any model that explains the success and salience
of positive integers in various cultures has to explain why
these are apparently intuitively appealing and culturally
widespread, and reals are not.

The neural architecture underlying numerical
competence
The neural representation of number has been studied
through various neuro-imaging techniques, including fMRI,
PET and ERP. These have yielded a considerable body of
converging evidence that numerical operations generate a
specific pattern of brain-activation which recruits areas that
are associated with linguistic tasks and visuo-spatial tasks
(Dehaene et al., 1999). Models that invoke conceptual
modularity at the neural level suggest that there are areas
(conceptual modules) which are specialized in semanticlevel processing of information of a specific domain. Such
models have been proposed for other categories of semantic
knowledge, e.g. plants and animals (Caramazza & Mahon,
2003). Several neuro-imaging studies indicate that the
horizontal banks of the intraparietal sulci (HIPS) are the
neural correlate of a conceptual module that deals only with
numerical information. Its activation can be reliably
dissociated from non-numerical tasks that require a similar
level of attention, working memory, and spatial cognition
(Simon et al., 2002). Its performance is not affected by the
format or modality in which the task is presented (visual,
auditory, as number words or as Arabic numerals) but
depends on numerical complexity, such as absolute size and
relative distance (Eger et al., 2003).

The role of language in the development of integer
concepts. To date, no language that completely lacks
number words has been recorded. Nevertheless, there is
considerable variation across cultures in their development:
some cultures have elaborate positional number word
systems, whereas others have a very limited number word
vocabulary. Recent investigations in two indigenous South
American hunter-gatherer societies show that some cultures
do not even have true discrete numerical concepts. The
Pirahã (Gordon, 2004) have only words for ‘one’, ‘two’ and
‘many’; sometimes using their word for ‘one’ for small
collections of items. In controlled experiments they
discriminate between very small sets such as {2, 3} while
their performance for {3, 4} is at chance level. They seem to
rely exclusively on an analog magnitude representation
similar to infants and adults prevented from counting,
instead of on positive integers. Like the Pirahã, the
Mundurukú (Pica et al., 2004) are unfamiliar with counting.
They also use number words (up to 5) in an approximate
rather than precise fashion. For instance, when 5 dots are
presented, the subjects respond ‘5’ in only 28 % of the
trials, and ‘4’ or ‘few’ in 15 % of the trials. However, they
are able to discriminate between sets of 20 and 80 dots.
These studies indicate that the mere presence of number
words does not suffice to promote an exact representation of
numerosities. More crucial perhaps is that both cultures lack
a counting routine. Without the principle of one-to-one
correspondence, a true understanding of the positive
integers as discrete entities does not emerge, simply because
the number-sensitive neurons’ representations are too fuzzy
to enable discrete representations. Conversely, humans are
able to make exact representations of magnitude without
number words, e.g. a shepherd may keep track of the size of
his flock by putting tallies into a one-to-one correspondence
with his sheep as they move between shelter and pasture

How can individual neurons recognize numerosities?
Nieder, Freedman and Miller (2002) examined responses of
individual number-sensitive neurons in rhesus monkeys to
displays of 1 to 5 dots. These neurons only respond to
numerical changes, and remain insensitive to changes in
size or shape. Each neuron shows a peak activity to a
specific quantity, and becomes progressively less active as
magnitude increases. A neuron optimally activated by 2, is
less responsive to 1 or 3, and even less so to more items.
Thus, each number is represented by a set of neurons. Since
neurons are only coarsely tuned, close numerosities will
activate similar populations of neurons. Smaller
numerosities yield narrower tuning curves, thus making
them easier to distinguish, while larger numerosities yield
broader tuning curves, which makes their discrimination
fuzzier (Nieder & Miller, 2003).

The epidemiology of numerical concepts
Numerical concepts vary widely between cultures, yet some
are more widespread than others. With a few exceptions
(Pica et al., 2004) positive integers are universal, whereas
reals occur rarely. Here, I shall argue that the emergence
and transmission of numerical concepts (in casu, positive
567

(Ifrah, 1985). Thus, not language per se, but counting by
sequential tagging is the key ingredient to a successful
understanding of positive integers.

If counting is not an evolved ability, why has it emerged
so frequently? The different steps involved in counting are
subserved by neural circuits that lie anatomically close. The
formation of new synaptic connections may be easier
between two anatomically adjacent areas. To ensure that we
count each item in a set exactly once, we shift our attention
to each of them in a systematic, ordered way. This can be
achieved by gesturing, pointing, or gaze direction. Indeed,
under experimental conditions, children have more
difficulties keeping track when they are prevented from
gesturing or pointing (Alibali & DiRusso, 1999). The neural
correlates of gesturing, pointing and visual attention lie very
close to the HIPS (Simon et al., 2002). Culture may key in
on this architectural property of the human brain by creating
synaptic connections between them through learning how to
count.
Similarly, establishing a one-to-one correspondence
between an ordered list of numerical symbols and mental
magnitudes often exploits the structure of the brain. Many
cultures use body-parts (often fingers) as number symbols,
which explains the wide occurrence of base-5, -10 and -20
positional systems (Ifrah, 1985). Neuropsychological
evidence indicates that the identification of body-parts is a
conceptual module, the ‘body schema’, whose impairment
leads to a disability to identify one’s own body parts. This
module is an ideal candidate for a list of symbols with fixed
ordinality (number symbols) because it also represents body
parts in an ordered fashion: the comparison of body parts is
prone to a distance effect similar to that in number
comparison, e.g. to determine that the nose is lower than the
eyes takes a longer response time than judging that the
knees are lower than the eyes (Le Clec’H et al., 2000). The
neural correlates of the body schema lie adjacent to the
HIPS, in the left intraparietal lobule. A temporary disruption
in this area (through rTMS) results in a marked increase in
reaction-time when subjects complete a number comparison
task, suggesting that finger counting continues to play an
important part in adult numerical cognition (Sandrini,
Rossini & Miniussi, 2004).
In brief, positive integers are not universal. They are not
part of our number module, but are cultural constructions.
Like many other cultural domains, they are rooted in more
than one proper domain of conceptual modules (at least the
modules for number, language, attention direction, body
part identification). Indeed, most complex cultural concepts
such as religion, art or mathematics are anchored in more
than one conceptual module (Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2004).

Counting through sequential tagging. The activity of
counting involves a relationship between three sets:
countable items, counting symbols and mental magnitudes
(fig. 1a). The set of items to be counted varies from one
count to another. To count, one establishes a one-to-one
correspondence between each item and a conventionally
defined list of symbols that have a fixed ordinality, e.g. the
number words one, two, three (sequential tagging). The
final item tagged determines the last tag from the counting
sequence, which in turn denotes the cardinality of the set.
This highest number word is mapped onto a corresponding
mental magnitude. Through cultural learning, a synaptic
connection gets established between these tags and the
corresponding mental magnitude. Thus, the population of
neurons in the HIPS that fires preferentially around 3 will
respond to any symbolic representation for this magnitude.
In this way, it becomes possible to establish a discrete, exact
representation of magnitude by mapping an ordered set of
symbols onto mental magnitudes. In contrast, the mental
representation of approximate number words follows a
different neural trajectory (fig. 1b). Here, cardinality is
established directly, without sequential tagging. This
approximate representation is subsequently converted into a
linguistic expression, the approximate number word (e.g.
few, a couple, about a hundred).

Zero
The concept of zero as a numerical value has created
opportunities in Western mathematics that could never have
been realized without it. Zero extends to almost all domains
of mathematics. It might therefore seem strange that zero is
not widespread across cultures and their mathematical
systems. From a content biased perspective on cultural
transmission, however, this is not surprising. Neurons in

Figure 1: The linguistic representation of number in a
(a) counting sequence and (b) approximately.

568

elegant and parsimonious formulation of very large
numbers. Parsimony was important for Vedic texts which
were (and still are) learnt by heart. This eventually resulted
in the invention of a positional system, in which a symbol
for the empty place-holder became essential. However, it
was only in Jain mathematics that zero became a fullyfledged mathematical concept (Joseph, 1990). As a reaction
to Brahmin orthodoxy, Jains no longer practiced complex
offerings. Severed from its religious origins, mathematics
became a discipline studied for its own sake. The Jains had
a fascination for mathematical concepts such as infinity,
positing several types of infinite sets centuries before
Cantor. Words for nothingness such as shunya meant more
to them than absence or void, but implied receptiveness.
Because of their cosmological ideas of time and space,
emptiness could be conceptualized as a thing in its own
right, instead of merely being an empty placeholder. This
led Indian mathematicians like Brahmagupta (ca. 600 AD)
to wonder how numerical operations with zero could be
performed, e.g. whether or not one could divide by zero.
This mature mathematical concept of zero subsequently
spread to China, and the Islamic world, whence it diffused
to the West.
The emergence of zero as numerical concept in Jain
mathematics was possible because it could free-ride on
certain cosmological and philosophical concepts. However,
this does not explain its subsequent spread to other cultures.
A possible explanation for this success is its violation of
intuitive expectations of the number module. A numerical
concept for nothing violates expectations provided by our
evolved number sense. Cross-cultural experiments (Boyer &
Ramble, 2001) show that people are prone to remember
facts or narratives with an element that violates ontological
expectations. Such counter-intuitive ideas are easier to
remember than intuitive ideas (e.g. a creature that can be in
more than one place at the same time versus a creature that
has to eat to sustain itself) (Barrett & Nyhoff, 2001). Thus,
zero as a numerical concept was long in the making because
it is counter-intuitive. However, once originated, it becomes
appealing because it violates ontological expectations.

HIPS and prefrontal cortex fire preferentially at different
numerosities, therefore different populations of neurons
come to represent different numerosities. Zero obviously
means an absence of neural activation in the numbersensitive areas of the brain. There is little point from an
evolutionary perspective in having number-sensitive
neurons that code for nothing. Since these areas are
informationally encapsulated, they cannot reflect on their
own lack of activation. Experiments (e.g. Wynn & Chiang,
1998) lend empirical support for this hypothesis. Eightmonth-olds were confronted with either ‘magical’ or
‘expected’ events. In the 1 – 1 = 1 or 0 condition, they saw
an object on a stage, a screen then occluded it, and a hand
visibly removed it. Once the screen was removed, the
infants either saw the expected result (no object) or a
‘magical’ appearance, in which the removed object was still
there. Intriguingly, the subjects showed no surprise to this
last result (1 – 1 = 1). This finding suggests the number
module is not capable of representing zero, leaving infants
unable to form the expectation that no objects will be seen.
How then did zero come into existence? Zero as byproduct of a positional system that needed a symbolic
representation for an empty place-holder emerged several
times independently. However, the use of such an empty
place-holder does not automatically lead to a true numerical
concept for zero, as is aptly illustrated by Babylonian
mathematics. At around 2000 BC, the positional system
based on 60 emerged. Initially, an empty position was
simply represented by a gap. Because this led to confusion,
a separate symbol was invented to denote the empty space
in the positional system. However, this symbol was never
used in calculations. Since the Babylonian zero had no true
numerical value, it clearly differs from that of Western
mathematics (Ifrah, 1985).
Zero as a numerical value has its roots in classical Indian
mathematics. It has been introduced to Western
mathematics through Arabic mathematics. The oldest Indian
mathematical concepts can be found in the Vedas, a
collection of religious texts dating between 1500 and 500
BC, and the accompanying Vedangas, which contain sutras
or rules that were of vital importance to the performance of
ritual offerings. Large public offerings required altars
constructed from complex geometric figures. If incorrectly
constructed, the offerings would be of no value. Considering
the effort, means and time invested in each public offering,
its success was crucial. This increased selective pressure on
mathematical concepts like geometry, arithmetic and (a
precursor to) algebra. An additional selective pressure was
provided by the fascination for large numerosities, salient in
classical Indian poetry. It originated from stylistic
considerations: since large numerosities impressed readers,
poets felt compelled to use ever increasing magnitudes to
emphasize the age, size or distance of any event, building or
other thing they described. This led to the introduction of
words that could express powers of ten. Combined with
words that denote single digits up to nine, this enabled the

Conclusion
In this paper, I have argued that the emergence and
subsequent spread of cultural number concepts is influenced
by the evolved structure of our brain. The multiple and
frequent cultural invention of positive integers can be
explained as a result of their close fit with intuitions
provided by conceptual modules such as the number
module. The anatomical proximity of this module to other
modules involved in the counting by sequential tagging
procedure further adds to its salience. The unique invention
of zero as a numerical concept and its successful spread can
also be explained as a result of content biased cultural
transmission. Its counter-intuitiveness facilitates its cultural
transmission; once it has emerged, it can easily spread to
neighbouring cultures with positional systems.

569

References

Ifrah, G. (1985). Les chiffres, ou l’histoire d’une grande
invention. Paris: Laffont.
Joseph, G.G. (1990). The crest of the peacock. NonEuropean roots of mathematics. London: Penguin.
Le Clec’H, G., Dehaene, S., Cohen, C., Mehler, J., Dupoux,
E., Poline, J.B., Lehéricy, S., van de Moortele, P.F. & Le
Bihan, D. (2000). Distinct cortical areas for names of
numbers and body parts independent of language and
input modality. NeuroImage, 12, 381-391.
Lipton, J.S. & Spelke, E.S. (2003). Origins of number sense:
large-number discrimination in human infants.
Psychological Science, 14, 396-401.
McComb, K., Packer, C. & Pusey, A. (1994). Roaring and
numerical assessment in contests between groups of
female lions, Panthera leo. Animal Behaviour, 47,
379-387.
McCrink, K. & Wynn, K. (2004). Large-number addition
and subtraction by 9-month-old infants. Psychological
Science, 15, 776-781.
Moyer, R.S. & Landauer, T.K. (1967). Time required for
judgements of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 15191520.
Nieder, A., Freedman, D.J. & Miller, E.K. (2002).
Representation of the quantity of visual items in the
primate prefrontal cortex. Science, 297, 1708-1711.
Nieder, A. & Miller, E.K. (2003). Coding of cognitive
magnitude: compressed scaling of numerical information
in the primate prefrontal cortex. Neuron, 37, 149-157.
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V. & Dehaene, S. (2004). Exact
and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene
group. Science, 306, 499-503.
Sandrini, M., Rossini, P.M. & Miniussi, C. (2004). The
differential involvement of inferior parietal lobule in
number comparison: a rTMS study. Neuropsychologia,
42, 1902-1909.
Simon, O., Mangin, J.-F., Cohen, L., Le Bihan D. &
Dehaene, S. (2002). Topographical layout of hand, eye,
calculation, and language-related areas in the human
parietal lobe. Neuron, 33, 475–487.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture. A naturalistic
approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sperber, D. & Hirschfeld, L.A. (2004). The cognitive
foundations of cultural stability and diversity. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8, 40-46.
Uller, C., Jaeger, R., Guidry, G. & Martin, C. (2003).
Salamanders (Plethodon cinereus) go for more: rudiments
of number in an amphibian. Animal Cognition, 6, 105112.
Wynn, K. (1992). Addition and subtraction by human
infants. Nature, 358, 749-750.
Wynn, K. (1998). Psychological foundations of number:
numerical competence in human infants. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2, 296-303.
Wynn, K. & Chiang, W. (1998). Limits to infants’
knowledge of objects: the case of magical appearance.
Psychological Science, 9, 448-455.
Xu, F. & Spelke, E.S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74, B1-B11.

Alibali, M.W. & DiRusso, A.A. (1999). The function of
gesture in leaning to count: more than keeping track.
Cognitive Development, 14, 37-56.
Antell, S.E., & Keating, D.P. (1983). Perception of
numerical invariance in neonates. Child Development, 54,
697-701.
Ascher, M. (1991). Ethnomathematics: a multicultural view
of mathematical ideas. Belmont, Ca: Chapman & Hall.
Barrett, J.L. & Nyhof, M.A. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts: the role of intuitive conceptual structures in
memory and transmission of cultural materials. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Bovet, D. & Vauclair, J. (1998). Functional categorization
of objects and of their pictures in baboons (Papio anubis).
Learning and Motivation, 29, 309-322.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained. The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York: Basic Books.
Boyer, P. & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts: cross-cultural evidence for recall of
counter-intuitive representations. Cognitive Science, 25,
535-564.
Brannon, E.M., Wusthoff, C.J., Gallistel, C.R. & Gibbon, J.
(2001). Numerical subtraction in the pigeon: evidence for
a linear subjective number scale. Psychological Science,
12, 238-243.
Caramazza, A. & Mahon, B.Z. (2003). The organization of
conceptual knowledge: the evidence from categoryspecific deficits. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,7, 354-361.
Cordes, S., Gelman, R. & Gallistel, C.R. (2001). Variability
signatures distinguish verbal from nonverbal counting for
both large and small numbers. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 698-707.
Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (1994). Origins of domain
specificity: the evolution of functional organization. In
L.A. Hirschfeld & S.A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the
mind. Domain specificity in cognition and culture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R & Tsivkin, S.
(1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: behavioral and
brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284, 970-974.
Eger, E., Sterzer, P., Russ, M.O., Giraud, A.-L. &
Kleinschmidt, A. (2003). A supramodal number
representation in human intraparietal cortex. Neuron, 37,
1-20.
Feigenson, L., Carey S. & Hauser, M. (2002). The
representations underlying infants’ choice of more: object
files versus analog magnitudes. Psychological Science,
13, 150-156.
Gallistel, C.R. & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical
cognition: from reals to integers. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 59-65.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words:
evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Hauser, M.D., Carey, S. & Hauser, L.B. (2000).
Spontaneous number representation in semi-free-ranging
rhesus monkeys. Proceedings of the Royal Society
London B, 267, 829-833.
570

