UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Students Interpret Literal Symbols in Algebra: A Conceptual Change Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jc1n7jd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Christou, Konstaninos P.
Vosniadou, Stella

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Students Interpret Literal Symbols in Algebra: A Conceptual Change
Approach
Konstantinos P. Christou (kochrist@phs.uoa.gr)
Graduate Program in Basic and Applied Cognitive Science. Department of Philosophy and History of Science, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Ano Ilissia, 15771, Greece

Stella Vosniadou (svosniad@phs.uoa.gr)
Graduate Program in Basic and Applied Cognitive Science. Department of Philosophy and History of Science, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Ano Ilissia, 157 71, Greece

to the literal symbol h, when this is used to represent a boy’s
height, because h is the eighth letter of the alphabet. Some
students tend to interpret literal symbols as standing for
abbreviated words such as D for David, h for height, etc.
The researchers tried to trace the origins of these
misunderstandings in students’ intuitive assumptions, prior
analogs with other symbol systems, interference with new
mathematical learning, and problematic instruction.
In the present research, the conceptual change framework
is adopted as an approach to students’ difficulties in
understanding the use of literal symbols in algebra. The
value of the conceptual change approach to mathematics
learning is only recently explored. Vosniadou and
Verschaffel (2004) and Vosniadou, Vamvakoussi and
Christou (2005) argue that the conceptual change
framework can be used as a guide to identify concepts in
mathematics that are going to cause students great difficulty,
to predict and explain students’ systematic errors and
misconceptions, and to provide student-centered
explanations of counter-intuitive mathematical concepts.
According to the conceptual change theoretical framework
developed by Vosniadou (1999), children’s initial, naive
knowledge of the physical world is organized in a
‘framework theory’ which consists of certain ontological
and epistemological beliefs that constrain the way children
understand scientific explanations of physical phenomena.
For example, in the case of physics, young children believe
that physical objects are stable, solid, do not move by
themselves and fall down when not supported (Spelke,
1991). Likewise in mathematics it appears that, from a
young age, children develop a concept of number as natural
number only. This can be a source of difficulties when
numbers other than natural numbers are introduced in the
mathematical curriculum. For example, many errors and
misunderstandings are caused by students’ tendency to
apply properties of natural numbers to fractions (Gelman,
2000, Stafylidou and Vosniadou 2004) to rational numbers
(Resnick, Nesher, Leonard, Magone, Omanson and Peled,
1989; Vamvakoussi and Vosniadou, 2004) to negative
numbers (Gallardo 2002, Vlassis 2004) and to algebraic
notation and rules (Kieran, 1990).
A basic property of natural numbers is that they share a
univocal form. This means that there is a one to one

Abstract
In this paper we present the results of an empirical study
which examined students’ difficulties in interpreting the use
of literal symbols in algebra. Fifty seven students, 38 8th
graders (approximate age 14 years) and 21 9th graders
(approximate age 15 years) completed two questionnaires
with algebraic objects that contained literal symbols. The
results showed that students tended to interpret literal
symbols as standing for natural numbers only. We concluded
that students’ prior knowledge of natural number interferes in
their interpretation of literal symbols in mathematics.

Introduction
In the transition from arithmetic to algebra the concept of
variable appears. Mathematically speaking a variable is
usually represented by a literal symbol, a letter from the
alphabet, which could stand for numerical values or other
algebraic objects. When the variable stands for numerical
values it can act as an unknown, as a changing quantity, or
as a generalized number which refers to any numerical
value. Literal symbols are often part of algebraic objects; for
example, the algebraic objects ‘-b’ and ‘4b’ contain the
literal symbol ‘b’ as well as other symbols such as a minus
sign or the number 4.
The way students interpret the use of literal symbols as
mathematical objects has been the subject of a great deal of
research worldwide. Kucheman (1978) approached
students’ misunderstandings and difficulties with variables
within a developmental framework. He classified students’
responses to questions involving the use of literal symbols
in algebra into general categories and he ordered them into
Piagetian hierarchical levels. According to him the “letter as
generalized number” is described as the upper level of
understanding and only students who attain the formal
operational stage are ready to understand this notion.
Stacey and MacGregor (1997), as long as other
researchers as such Weinberg, Stephens, McNeil, Krill,
Knuth and Alibali (2004), criticized this strict Piagetian
hierarchy on the grounds that it does not take into account
the role of experience. Stacey and MacGregor (1997) argued
that pre-algebra students tend to assign to the literal symbols
different meanings depending on their prior knowledge and
experience. For instance, they assign the numerical value 8
453

randomly. Each student had only one questionnaire to
complete. The experimenter had the opportunity to discuss
with the students any clarification problem they had in
answering the questions.

correspondence between the symbolic representation of the
natural number and the numerical value that it represents. In
the natural number set, every number represents only one
value and different symbols represent different values. This
does not occur in other number sets, such as the real number
set. In the real numbers set a numerical value can be
represented in multiple ways; for example, the numbers 2,0,
4 , 32 , and 4 , can be different symbolic representations
2 16
of the same numerical value 2. Another property of real
numbers which does not apply in the case of the natural
number set is that the opposite of a natural number is not a
natural number.
When introduced to literal symbols in algebraic objects,
students tend to interpret the literal symbols as standing
only for natural numbers and not for fractions, decimals, or
other non-natural numbers in general. The working
hypothesis of the present study is that students’
interpretation of numbers as natural numbers constrains
their understanding of the use of literal symbols in algebra.
Two questionnaires were given to students asking them to
write down numerical values that they thought can (in
Questionnaire A) or cannot (in Questionnaire B) be
assigned to given algebraic objects that contained literal
symbols with different superficial characteristics. We
expected that there would be a strong bias on the part of the
students to substitute the literal symbols only with natural
numbers.

Results
Questionnaire A: Q1 & Q2
In QR/A, Q1 and Q2, the students were asked to write down
the numerical values which they thought could be assigned
to ‘a’ and ‘-b’. Table 1 shows the way we categorized
students’ responses.
Table 1: Percentage of Students’ Responses in the Different
Categories of Responses in QR/A for Q1 and Q2
Questionnaire A
(Write down numerical values that you think can be
assigned to the algebraic objects)
Categories of responses
Q1: a
Q2: -b
No Answer
--Positive Whole Numbers
66%
8%
(natural numbers)
(+F/+N) (-F/+N)
(1, 2, 3, etc)
Negative Whole
4%
72%
Numbers
(-F/+N) (+F/+N)
(e.g. -1, -2, -3, etc)
4%
Positive Numbers
-(-F/-N)
(non-natural, e.g. 2.33, etc)
Negative Numbers
--(non-wholes, eg.-2.33, etc)
Scientific
30%
16%
(all values can be assigned to it)

Method
Participants
Fifty seven students from two public high schools in
Athens, Greece participated in this study: 36 8th graders
(approximate age 14 years) and 21 9th graders (approximate
age 15 years); 31 of them were girls and 26 boys. Twenty
nine students completed Questionnaire A (QR/A) and
twenty eight completed Questionnaire B (QR/B).

The scientific response was to write down that all kind of
values can be assigned to each algebraic object, or to give
some numerical values of any type of numbers as examples.
For example, in ‘a’ or ‘-b’ we considered the scientific
responses to be that “all kind of values can be assigned to
each algebraic object”, or examples of non-natural values as
1, 2, -1, -2, 2 , - 2 , 0.266, -2.66, etc. About less than one
3
3
third of the students (30% in Q1 and 16% in Q2, QR/A)
gave the scientific responses in QR/A. It could be argued
that in QR/A there cannot be any mathematically wrong
responses because all values can be assigned to each
algebraic object, (negative numbers, fractions, etc).
Nevertheless, while the responses in all the other categories
in Table 1 can be considered as correct, they are different
from the responses expected from a mathematically
sophisticated participant and provide useful information
about the way students interpret the use of such symbols.
An examination of students’ non-scientific responses
revealed a clear tendency to interpret ‘a’ as a literal symbol
which stands for natural numbers (positive wholes 66% in
Q1, QR/A) and ‘-b’ as a symbol which stands for the
opposite of natural numbers (negative wholes, 72% in Q2,

Materials
In both questionnaires students were given the following
instructions: “In algebra, we use letters (like a, b, x, y, etc)
to stand for numbers and relations between numbers. In this
questionnaire we use such letters. Read the following seven
questions carefully and write down as many examples of
values as you can”. In QR/A we continued with the
following instructions: “Write down numerical values that
you think can be assigned to Q1: a, Q2: -b, Q3: 4d, Q4: 1/d,
Q5 a/b, Q6: a+a+a and Q7: k+3”. In QR/B, the instructions
were: “Write down numerical values that you think cannot
be assigned to Q1: a, Q2: -b, Q3: 4d, Q4: 1/d, Q5 a/b, Q6:
a+a+a and Q7: k+3”.

Procedure
The participants completed the questionnaires in the
presence of the experimenter and their mathematical teacher
in their class. The questionnaires A and B were distributed
454

substituted the literal symbol itself only with natural
numbers.

QR/A). A chi square analysis of association between
students’ positive and negative responses to ‘a’ and ‘-b’
(QR/A) showed that the difference between students’
responses was statistically significant [x2(2)=29.7, p<.001)].
The students who responded with positive values to ‘a’
responded with negative values to ‘-b’. This means that
when the algebraic object changed its superficial
characteristics, such as its sign, students were affected by it
and made similar changes to the values they assigned to the
literal symbol. We consider these changes to be changes in
the form of the algebraic object, and not in the number itself.
At the same time the students continued to substitute the
literal symbol itself (the ‘b’ in the algebraic object ‘-b’) only
with natural numbers.
In short, it appears that students are influenced by two
things when they assign values to the algebraic objects that
contain literal symbols: a) the form of the algebraic object
(i.e., the superficial characteristics of the algebraic object
such as the presence of a negative sign or the presence of
another number as 4 in ‘4b’), and b) their interpretation of
the literal symbols as always standing for natural numbers.
We marked students’ responses that retained the form of the
algebraic object as ‘+F’ and when they did not as ‘–F’;
similarly, when they substituted literal symbols only with
natural numbers it was marked as ‘+N’ and when they did
not, as ‘-N’. As shown in Table 1, in QR/A the majority of
the students tended to assign numerical values that retained
both the form of the algebraic object and the natural number
(+F/+N), both in Q1 and in Q2.

Table 2: Percentage of Students’ Responses in Different
Categories of Responses in QR/B for Q1 and Q2
Questionnaire B
(Write down numerical values that you think cannot be
assigned to the following algebraic objects)
Categories of responses
Q1: a
Q2: -b
No Answer
4%
6%
Positive Whole Numbers
3%
50%
(natural numbers)
(+F/+N) (-F/+N)
(1, 2, 3, etc)
Negative Whole
46%
4%
Numbers
(-F/+N) (+F/+N)
(e.g. -1, -2, -3, etc)
Positive Numbers
8%
14%
(non-natural, e.g. 2.33, etc)
(-F/-N)
(-F/-N)
Negative Numbers
10%
8%
(non-wholes, eg.-2.33, etc)
(-F/-N)
(-F/-N)
Scientific
29%
18%
(all values can be assigned to it)
In order to further compare QR/A and QR/B, a chi square
analysis of the categories of students’ non scientific
responses was conducted. The results showed statistically
significant differences between students’ responses in the
two questionnaires [x2(2)=57.344, p<.001] that were due to
the fact that students tended to respond with values that
were placed in the category ‘+F/+N’ in QR/A and in
category ‘-F/+N’ in QR/B. This result suggests that students
tended to change the form of the given algebraic object,
when they were asked to write down numerical values that
they thought cannot be assigned to the given algebraic
object, by putting a minus sign in front of it, but they
systematically substituted the literal symbol itself only with
natural numbers.

Questionnaire B: Q1 and Q2
Table 2 shows students’ responses to Q1 and Q2 in QR/B,
where students were asked to write down numerical values
that they thought cannot be assigned to the algebraic objects
‘a’ (Q1) and ‘-b’(Q2). Less than one third of the students
gave scientific responses to Q1 (29%) and Q2 (18%) in
QR/B. Unlike QR/A, in QR/B all responses other than the
scientific ones are incorrect because there are no values that
cannot be assigned to the algebraic objects. Students in
these grades have already been taught that literal symbols in
algebra stand for all numbers.
An examination of students’ incorrect responses showed
that the majority of students (46% in Q1, QR/B) said that
negative whole numbers cannot be assigned to ‘a’ and that
positive whole (natural) numbers cannot be assigned to ‘-b’
(50% in Q2, QR/B). An additional 14% of the students
responded that positive (non-natural) values cannot be
assigned to ‘–b’ (Q2, QR/B) and 10% that negative (nonwhole) values cannot be assigned to ‘a’ (Q1, QR/B).
Students’ tendency to respond with negative values to ‘a’
and with positive values to ‘-b’, when asked to write down
numerical values that cannot be assigned to ‘a’ and ‘-b’, was
statistically significant [x2(2)=27.022, p<.001)]. This result
shows that when students are asked to write down numerical
values that cannot be assigned to a given algebraic object,
they tend to change only its form, by putting a minus sign in
front of it. As in the previous case, however, the students

Questionnaires A and B: Q3 to Q7
Table 3 shows the way we categorized students’ responses
in the remaining questions of QR/A. In this categorization
we distinguished responses that paid attention to the form of
the algebraic object ( ± F) versus the nature of the number
itself ( ± N). For example, students’ responses to ‘4d’ as 4·1,
or 4·2, were scored “+F/+N” (+Form/+Natural). Table 4
shows the way we categorized students’ responses to the
remaining questions of QR/B. The categorization is the
same as in QR/A, presented in Table 3. For example, when
students were asked to write down numerical values that
they thought cannot be assigned to ‘4b’, responses such as
1, 2, 3, or 4·(-1), 4·(-2), were scored as “-F/+N” (-Form
/+Natural). We must make clear that we interpret the use of
the negative sign to represent for the students not a change
in the number itself but a change in the superficial
455

Table 3: Categorization of Students’ Responses in QR/A for Q3 to Q7
Questionnaire A
(Write down numerical values that you think can be assigned to the following algebraic objects)
Categories of Responses
Questions
+F/+N
-F/+N
+F/-N
-F/-N
scientific
1]
[4·2.3,
4·
Q3: 4g
4·1, 4·2
1, 2, 3
2.3, -2.3
all values
2

Q4: 1
g

1, 1
2 3

1, 2, 3

1
[2
3

1
[ 2 ]
25

Q5: a
b

3, 2
4 3

1, 2, 3

Q6: d+d+d

1+1+1
2+2+2

1, 2, 3

Q7: κ+3

2+3, 3+3
larger than 3

1, 2, 3

]

[2+2+2,
3 3 3
2.3+2.3+2.3]
[2.3+3, 2 +3]
3

2.3, -2.3

all values

-1, -2, -3, 2.3, 2
3

all values

2,-2
3 3

all values

2.3, 2.77

all values

that retained both the form of the algebraic object and the
interpretation of the literal symbols as always standing for
natural numbers. In QR/A, 49% of the students gave these
kinds of responses. As expected, in QR/B, where students
were asked to write down numerical values that cannot be
assigned to the algebraic objects, many students changed
the form of the algebraic object but they substituted the
literal symbol itself only with natural numbers (-F/+N). An
important finding that comes out from Table 5 is that the
category “+F/-N” in both QR/A and QR/B is empty. There
was not even a single case were a student changed the
natural number without also changing its form, although it
could be argued that some of these numbers (for example
the double fractions) are rare and not commonly used in
every day mathematics activities.

characteristics of the algebraic object (see Gallardo, 2002).
Example of responses that were expected from students in a
given response category but did not actually appear in our
sample were put in square brackets both in Table 3 and in
Table 4. For example, none of the students gave values such
as 4·2,3 to ‘4d’ (category +F/-N). Table 5 shows the
percentages of students’ responses in QR/A and QR/B for
questions Q3 to Q7 combined. Less than one third of the
students gave the scientific response both in QR/A and
QR/B. It appears that there is a greater number of scientific
responses in QR/B compared to QR/A. However a chi
square analysis showed that these differences were not
statistically significant.
The majority of students who gave non scientific
responses tended to assign values to the algebraic objects

Table 4: Categorization of Students’ Responses in QR/B for Q3 to Q7
Questionnaire B
(Write down numerical values that you think cannot be assigned to the following algebraic objects)
Categories of Responses
Questions
+F/+N
-F/+N
+F/-N
-F/-N
scientific
-1, -2, -3
1, 2, 3
[4·2.3, 4· 1 ]
Q3: 4g
[4·1, 4·2]
all values
-2.3, - 2
2
4·(-1), 4·(-2)
3
1
1, 2, 3·
Q4: 1
[1 1]
[2]
2.3, -2.3
all values
1 , 1
g
2 3
3
−2 −3
Q5:

a
b

Q6: d+d+d

Q7: κ+3

1

−2 , −3
−3 −4

[ 2 ]

2.3, -2.3

all values

[1+1+1,
2+2+2]

1, 2, 3
(-1)+(-1)+(-1),
(-2)+(-2)+(-2)

[2+2+2
3 3 3
2.3+2.3+2.3]

-1, -2, -3,
-2.3, - 1

all values

[2+3, 3+3]

(-2)+3, (-3)+3

[2.3+3, -2.3]

-1, -2, -3
-2.3, - 2
3

[2 ,3 ]
3 4

25

456

2

all values

asked to write down numerical values that could be assigned
to a set of algebraic objects. In this questionnaire, about a
quarter of students gave the scientific response that all
values can be assigned to the literal symbols and about half
of the students substituted the literal symbols with natural
numbers (+F/+N). The remaining responses were either “no
answer” or responses where only the form of the algebraic
objects was changed. There were only 4% of the responses
where the literal symbol was substituted by a non-natural
number of a different form and no responses where the form
of the literal symbol was retained and the number was a
non-natural number.
In QR/B a different sample of students were asked to
write down numerical values that could not be assigned to
the same set of algebraic objects. In this questionnaire there
was an increase, which was not statistically significant, in
the number of scientific responses (36%) but also in “no
answer” responses (26%). About a quarter of students
responded by substituting the literal symbols with negative
whole numbers. Another 16% substituted the literal symbols
with numbers of a different form that were also non-natural.
As was the case in QR/A, there were no response where the
students substituted the literal symbols with non-natural
number without changing also the form of the algebraic
object.
In short, the results of the study supported the hypothesis
that there would be a strong tendency to interpret literal
symbols as standing only for natural numbers. In addition,
the results indicated that students pay attention to the form
of the literal symbol. When they were asked to write down
numerical values that cannot be assigned to the same set of
algebraic object, they exhibited a strong tendency to change
the form of the algebraic object by adding a negative sign.
The analysis of variance showed significant differences
between QR/A and QR/B only when comparing changes in
the form of the literal symbol but not when comparing
changes in the number itself (i.e., from natural to nonnatural numbers). It was noticeable that no students
substituted the literal symbols with non-natural numbers
without changing their form as well.
One could argue that the substitution of the literal
symbols with negative numbers in QR/B should be
interpreted not only as a change in the form of the algebraic
object but also as a change in the number itself (given that
negative numbers are non-natural). However, we believe
that students do not think of negative numbers as nonnatural, but rather, as mentioned also by Gallardo (2002),
they think that negative numbers are ‘signed’ numbers,
where the minus sign is added without changing the number
itself. It appears that students’ strategy to change the
superficial characteristic of the literal symbols by putting a
minus sign in front of it belongs to an intermediate level of
interpreting the use of letters as mathematical objects and
adds further support to the hypothesis that even advanced
high school students think of numbers as natural numbers
only, a tendency that can hinder further development of
algebraic thinking.

Chi square analysis of students’ non scientific responses
showed statistically significant differences between the
category ‘+F/+N’ in QR/A and the category ‘-F/+N’ in
QR/B, [x2(2)=85.39144, p<.001)] confirming students’
tendency to change the superficial characteristic of the
algebraic object by putting a minus sign in front of a natural
number when asked to write down numerical values that
cannot be assigned to the given algebraic objects. Most of
the students who responded by changing both the form and
the number (category -F/-N as shown in Table 4, 16%),
responded with negative whole numbers to all the algebraic
objects except the ones that had the form of a fraction.
Table 5: Percentages of Students’ Responses in QR/A and
QR/B for Q3 to Q7
Questionnaires
Categories
of Responses
No Answer
+F/+N
-F/+N
+F/-N
-F /-N
Scientific
(all values)

QR/A

QR/B

12%
49%
10%
0%
4%

26%
0%
22%
0%
16%

25%

36%

In order to further examine changes in form, students’
responses were subjected in one way ANOVA, where
responses that retained the form were marked as 1, and
responses that did not retain the form were marked as 2.
Scientific responses were marked as 3. The results of the
ANOVA showed a main effect for Questionnaire Type (F(1,
281)= 6.126, p<0.05) due to the fact that students retained
the form of the algebraic objects in QR/A but not in QR/B.
Note that in QR/B students were asked to write down
numerical values that cannot be assigned to the algebraic
objects. In another ANOVA, we examined the hypothesis
that students interpret the literal symbol as always standing
for natural numbers. In this ANOVA, responses that
contained only natural numbers were marked as 1 while
responses that were not were marked as 2. Scientific
responses were again marked as 3. The results showed no
statistically significant differences between the two
questionnaires. In both questionnaires, students appeared
reluctant to assign numerical values other than natural to the
given literal symbols, systematically replacing the literal
symbols with natural numbers. This finding is consistent
with the theoretical hypothesis of this research that students
tend to interpret literal symbol as only standing for natural
numbers.

Discussion
The present study tested the hypothesis that students will
tend to interpret literal symbols as standing only for natural
numbers using two questionnaires. In QR/A, students were
457

It could be argued that the response “all values can be
assigned to each algebraic object” may not be a scientific
response because the students may not think of all nonnatural numbers when giving the response. It could also be
argued that our participants substituted literal symbols with
natural numbers because natural numbers are much more
common than non-natural numbers and not because they do
not know that literal symbols can stand for non-natural
numbers. A deeper investigation of students’ beliefs
regarding exactly which kind of numbers could substitute
literal symbols could be tested by using forced-choice
questionnaires that contain non-natural numbers. We are in
the process of conducting such a study and preliminary
results support our hypothesis.
In general, the results of the present study support the
conceptual change approach in mathematics (see Vosniadou
and Verschaffel, 2004) and show that there is a strong
tendency in students to interpret all numbers as natural
numbers. This tendency may hinder the development of
advanced mathematical thinking. The results of the present
research are consistent with other findings in the
development of the number concept (Gelman, 2000;
Resnick, Nesher, Leonard, Magone, Omanson and Peled,
1989; Stafylidou and Vosniadou, 2004; Vamvakoussi and
Vosniadou, 2004a). We believe that the conceptual change
framework can help to systematize results from previous
research and give a better explanation of some of students’
difficulties in interpreting the use of literal symbols in
algebra. It is of extreme importance for students to
understand the generalized nature of literal symbols in
mathematics. During mathematics instruction students will
deal with new concepts such as the function, the absolute
value of a number, the limit of a function and many others,
in which literal symbols are used to express relationships
between numbers. To understand these concepts, it should
be clear to them that literal symbols in mathematics stand
for numerical values of all kind and not only for natural
numbers.

1990, Mathematics and cognition: A research synthesis
by the international group for the psychology of
mathematics education, Cambridge University Press.
Kucheman, D. (1981). Algebra. In K. M. Hart, (Ed.),
Children’s Understanding of mathematics: 11-16 (pp.
102-119). London: John Murray.
Resnick, L.B., Nesher, P., Leonard, F., Magone, M.,
Omanson, S. and Peled, I., (1989). Conceptual bases of
arithmetic errors: The case of decimal fractions. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, 20, 8–27.
Spelke, S. E., (1991). Physical knowledge in infancy:
reflections on Piaget's theory. In: Carey, S. and Gelman,
R., Editors, 1991. The Epigenesis of mind: Essays on
biology and cognition, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale, NJ, 133–170.
Stacey, K. & MacGregor, M. (1997) Ideas about symbolism
that students bring to algebra. The Mathematics Teacher,
90(2), 110.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). Students’
understanding of the numerical value of fractions: A
conceptual change approach. In S. Vosniadou & L.
Verschaffel, The conceptual change approach to
mathematics learning and teaching, Special Issue of
Learning and Instruction, 14(5), 503-518.
Vamvakoussi, X. & Vosniadou, S. (2004). Understanding
the structure of the set of rational numbers: A conceptual
change approach. In S. Vosniadou & L. Verschaffel, The
conceptual change approach to mathematics learning and
teaching, SpecialIissue of learning and instruction, 14(5),
453-467.
Vlassis, J (2004). Making sense of the minus sign or
becoming flexible in ‘negativity ’. In S. Vosniadou & L.
Verschaffel, The conceptual change approach to
mathematics learning and teaching, Special Issue of
Learning and Instruction, 14(5), 469-484.
Vosniadou, S., (1999). Conceptual change research: State of
the art and future directions. In Schnotz, W., Vosniadou,
S. & Carretero, M. (Eds.) New perspectives on conceptual
change, (pp. 3-13). Elsevier Sciences Ltd.
Vosniadou, S., Verschaffel, L. (2004) Extending the
conceptual change approach to mathematics learning and
teaching. In S. Vosniadou & L. Verschaffel, The
conceptual change approach to mathematics learning and
teaching, Special Issue of Learning and Instruction, 14(5),
pp. 445-451.
Vosniadou, S., Vamavakoussi, X. & Christou K. P. (2005)
What can we gain from a conceptual change approach to
the learning and teaching of mathematics? Proceedings of
the 4th Mediterranean Conference on Mathematics
Education.
Weinberg, A., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M., Krill, D. E.,
Knuth, E. J., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). Students' initial
and developing conceptions of variables. Paper presented
at the Annual Meeting of the American Education
Research Association, San Diego, CA.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted for the PYTHAGORAS
project and is funded by the Operational Programmes for
Education and Initial Vocational Training (EPEAEK)
program, together with the European Social Fund (ESF).

References
Gallardo, A. (2002), The Extension of the natural number
domain to the integers in the transition from arithmetic to
algebra, Educational Studies in Mathematics 49: 171–192.
Gelman, R., (2000). The Epigenesis of mathematical
Thinking. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology
21, 27–37.
Kieran, C., (1990). Cognitive processes involves in learning
school algebra. In P., Nesher & J. Kilpatric, Editors,

458

