UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Do Readers Deal with Flashbacks in Narratives?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dz388t0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Claus, Berry
Kelter, Stephanie

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Do Readers Deal with Flashbacks in Narratives?
Stephanie Kelter (kelter@gp.tu-berlin.de)
Institut für Psychologie und Arbeitswissenschaft, Technical University of Berlin, Sekr. FS1, Franklinstr. 5-7
D-10587 Berlin, Germany

Berry Claus (bclaus@cs.tu-berlin.de)
Institut für Psychologie und Arbeitswissenschaft, Technical University of Berlin, Sekr. FS1, Franklinstr. 5-7
D-10587 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
The study addresses the question of how readers mentally
represent narratives containing flashbacks. Do they insert the
flashback information at the chronologically appropriate
location into their representation or do they encode it as
background information about the situation described
immediately before? To investigate the two hypotheses three
experiments were conducted. Experiment 1 and 2 examine the
reading times for flashback sentences during narrative
processing and Experiment 3 the structure of the
representations that readers construct for narratives containing
flashbacks. The results support the chronological hypothesis.
Keywords: text comprehension; reading; narratives; temporal
information; flashbacks.

Introduction
An essential aspect of narrative comprehension is to
mentally relate the described situations to each other in
order to build an integrated representation of the narrated
world. In this regard, comprehenders may consider certain
dimensions of situations to be especially important.
Empirical findings suggest that comprehenders pay most
attention to the protagonist, to causality, and to the temporal
dimension of the narrated world (e.g., Rinck & Weber,
2003; Zwaan, Magliano, & Graesser, 1995). The special
importance attached to temporal information may to some
extent be due to the fundamental role that the temporal
dimension plays in mentally organizing states of affairs in
direct experience. However, the use of the temporal
dimension for organizing narrated situations may also be
suggested by the structure of narratives themselves. In
narratives, the various situations are typically described in
chronological order, that is, in the order in which they occur
in the narrated world. In order to be better able to assess the
importance that comprehenders attach to temporal relations
per se, it may be useful to investigate the way in which
comprehenders deal with flashbacks in narratives.
In a flashback, an event, process, or state is mentioned
that is temporally located prior to the current narrative now
point. In the following example, sentence (1b) and (1c)
constitute a flashback. John’s TV-watching and falling-inlove-with-Antigua occurred prior to the narrative now point,
which is established by (1a).
(1a) John went to a travel agency to ask about holidays to
the Caribbean.
(1b) Last night he had watched a fascinating TV-report
about Antigua.
(1c) He had fallen in love with this island.

Note that the sentences (1b) and (1c) are in past perfect. In
English, the past perfect is not obligatory in flashback
sentences. However, in German and many other languages,
the temporal precedence has to be indicated by the tense.
How do comprehenders mentally organize the situations
described in narratives containing flashbacks? If they in fact
attach great importance to temporal relations, then it is to be
expected that they re-arrange the text information and
integrate the flashback information at the chronologically
appropriate location into the hitherto constructed
representation.
However, there are reasons to suppose that in the case of
flashbacks, comprehenders may dispense with a strictly
temporal organization of their representation. Discourse
linguistic analyses (e.g., Asher & Lascarides, 2003; Kehler,
1999; ter Meulen, 1995) have shown that flashbacks do not
appear arbitrarily in a text. Rather, a flashback is closely
related to the preceding sentence, providing supplementary
information concerning the cause or other aspects of the
situation described in that sentence. For example, in the text
given above, the mention of John having watched the TVreport elucidates what John had in mind when inquiring
about holidays. Thus, a flashback serves a particular
discourse function. It is to convey background information
about the situation described immediately before.
Accordingly, one may suppose that when encountering a
flashback, comprehenders attach the information given to
the situation described in the previous sentence.
To date, experimental text comprehension research has
barely addressed the processing of flashbacks. There are
some studies showing that narratives describing events in
nonchronological order are more difficult to understand than
narratives in which the order of the description matches the
order in which the events occur in the described world (e.g.,
Baker, 1978; Ohtsuka & Brewer, 1992). This matchmismatch issue was also investigated in some studies of the
processing of complex sentences containing the connective
before or after (e.g., Hoeks, Stowe, & Wunderlink, 2004;
Mandler, 1986; Münte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998). However,
the results of these studies are mixed. Moreover, it is
unclear whether the findings from such studies allow for
conclusions to be made as to the processing of flashbacks,
as the relation between the two clauses of complex temporal
sentences is hardly comparable to the relation between a
flashback and the preceding text. In a complex temporal
sentence, the function of the subordinate clause is to specify
a temporal region within which the time of the situation
described in the main clause is located (cf. Kamp, van

1126

Genabith, & Reyle, in press; Moens & Steedman, 1988).
Neither of the two clauses has the function to provide
background information about the situation mentioned in the
other clause.
We conducted three experiments to investigate whether
readers construct chronologically organized representations
for texts containing flashbacks (chronological hypothesis) or
whether they treat flashback information as background
information about the situation described immediately
before (background hypothesis). Experiment 1 and 2 were
concerned with the time needed for processing a flashback
sentence. Experiment 3 investigated the organization of the
representation that readers construct for a narrative
containing a flashback. The passages used in the
experiments were in German and the participants were
native German speakers.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to compare reading times for
flashback sentences with those for matching progression
sentences, that is, sentences moving the narrative forward.
According to the chronological hypothesis, comprehenders
integrate the information provided by a flashback sentence
into the chronologically appropriate section of the hitherto
constructed representation. To find this section in the
representation can be expected to take extra time. A
progression sentence only requires the continuation of the
representation. Thus, one would expect that the reading
times for a flashback sentence are prolonged.
In contrast, if the background hypothesis is true, then we
should not necessarily expect longer reading times for a
flashback sentence compared to a progression sentence. To
attach the flashback information to the situation that was
just encoded may not take more time than to continue the
representation.
In addition to these two hypotheses, we also took a weak
version of the chronological hypothesis into consideration.
Mentally re-arranging information may require considerable
effort. For this reason, readers might assume a policy of
“wait and see” when encountering a flashback sentence,
waiting for the information of the next sentence. If this
sentence elaborates the flashback, readers decide to insert
the information in its proper chronological position. Thus,
prolonged reading times may only be found for the second
sentence of a flashback.
Accordingly, the narratives presented in Experiment 1
contained flashbacks consisting of two sentences each, with
the second sentence elaborating the event mentioned in the

first sentence. Likewise there were two control progression
sentences for each pair of flashback sentences (see Table 1).
The strong chronological hypothesis predicts prolonged
reading times for both the first and second flashback
sentence. If only the reading times for the second flashback
sentence turn out to be prolonged then this would support
the weak chronological hypothesis. The background
hypothesis does not predict prolonged reading times for
either flashback sentence and would thus be compatible
with a null result. However, there are some other reasons
why one could expect prolonged reading times for the first
flashback sentence. We will come back to this issue in the
Discussion of Experiment 1.

Method
Participants Forty-four students at the Technical University
of Berlin took part in the experiment.
Materials There were 24 experimental and 26 filler
passages. The passages were written in the present tense,
which in German is a common means of making a report or
story more vivid. The structure of the experimental passages
is illustrated by the passage in Table 1. After a few
introductory sentences a particular event was described. The
description consisted of two or three sentences. The next
two sentences were the critical sentences. The first critical
sentence mentioned a particular event, which was elaborated
by the second critical sentence. There were two versions of
this pair of sentences. In the flashback version, the event
was described in a flashback, implying that it occurred in
the fictitious world before the first described event. In the
progression control version, the critical event was described
as immediately following that event. The flashback
sentences and their progression-sentence counterparts were
matched in length (number of words, number of syllables,
and rough number of characters) and as much as possible in
their lexical items. The postcritical sentence, which
followed the second critical sentence, described the
beginning of a new event in the fictitious world. If this
sentence followed the flashback version of the critical
sentences, then it returned to the narrative mainline,
describing the beginning of the event that followed the first
mentioned event. If the sentence followed the progression
control version of the critical sentences, then it described the
same event, but as occurring after the critical event.
Accordingly, the first word of this sentence was either Jetzt
[Now] or Dann [Then]. The sentence was followed by one
or more sentences concluding the story.

Table 1: Sample Passage of Experiment 1 (Translated from German).
Angelika studies biology. Presently, she is an intern in the immunology department at Humboldt University.
During this time, she has learnt to execute many tasks independently. At the moment she is in meeting with
the professor. He compliments Angelika on her work.
Before, she had made copies of some articles in the library. Then she makes xerox copies of some articles in the library.
(1st critical sentence, flashback version)
(1st critical sentence, progression control version)
She had taken great care to make proper copies.
She takes very great care to make proper copies.
(2nd critical sentence, flashback version)
(2nd critical sentence, progression control version)
Now / Then she goes to the laboratory. (postcritical sentence) The professor’s approval has motivated her.

1127

Design and Procedure The 24 experimental passages were
assigned to two sets A and B, comprising 12 passages each.
Half of the participants received set A in the flashback
version and set B in the progression control version. The
other participants received the two sets in the
complementary versions. Experimental and filler passages
were presented to the participants in various mixed random
orders. Participants read the passages sentence by sentence,
self-paced, from a computer screen. A sentence remained on
the screen until the participant pressed the spacebar and then
the next sentence appeared. Participants were tested
individually. They were instructed to read the texts carefully
at their normal reading pace.

Results and Discussion
Analyses were carried out on the reading times for the two
critical sentences. Outliers were determined for the two
sentences in the two versions separately. As the reading
times considerably decreased over the course of the
experimental session, the sequential position at which a
passage was presented to a participant was taken into
account. The difference between each reading time and the
median of the reading times for the respective sequential
position was computed. If a difference score was outlying
according to Tukey’s (1977) inner-fence criterion, then the
respective reading time was discarded. This led to the
elimination of less then 5% of the data in each condition. In
all analyses to be reported in this article, the significance
level was set at .05. F1 and t1 represent results of analyses in
which the error term was based on participant variability,
and F2 and t2 represent results of analyses in which the error
term was based on item variability.
The mean reading times for the first and second critical
sentence in the two versions are displayed in Figure 1. The
data were analysed with a 2(sentence) x 2(version) analysis
of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measurement on both
variables. The main effect of sentence was significant,
F1(1,43) = 41.75, MSE = 36,621; F2(1,23) = 10.51, MSE =
70,873, which is not particularly interesting, however, as the
sentences were not matched for length. More important, the
reading times for flashback sentences proved to be
significantly longer than those for progression control
sentences, F1(1,43) = 9.10, MSE = 39,866; F2(1,23) = 6.85,
MSE = 34,441. The sentence x version interaction was not
significant, F1(1,43) = 1.50, MSE = 20,230, p > .20; F2 < 1.
The results are in line with the strong chronological
hypothesis, which implies that readers integrate flashback
information into the chronologically appropriate location of
the hitherto constructed representation. However, there is
another plausible interpretation of the results. As flashbacks
do not conform to the common chronological structure of
narratives it is conceivable that readers when encountering
the first sentence of a flashback may be bewildered for a
short moment. This could account for the prolonged reading
times for the first sentence of a flashback. As to the second
flashback sentence, one may suppose that the observed

reading-time difference between the flashback and the
progression control version was just a spill-over effect from
the first critical sentence. This possibility was investigated
in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, the passages used in Experiment 1 were
presented without the second critical sentence. The main
focus of interest was on the reading times for the postcritical
sentence, which now immediately followed the first critical
sentence. If it is true that the prolonged reading times for the
flashback elaboration sentence in Experiment 1 were due to
a spill-over effect from the bewilderment elicited by the first
flashback sentence, then we should now find a spill-over
effect for the postcritical sentence. That is, the reading times
for the postcritical sentence should be longer when
following the flashback critical sentence, compared to when
following the control critical sentence. In contrast, if the
prolonged reading times for the flashback elaboration
sentence in Experiment 1 were due to processes specifically
associated with flashback sentences, then obviously no
reading time difference should be obtained for the
postcritical sentence.

Method
Participants Forty-four students at the Technical University
of Berlin took part in the experiment, none of whom had
participated in Experiment 1.
Materials The materials comprised of 24 experimental
passages and 26 filler passages. The experimental passages
were the same as those in Experiment 1, except that the
second critical sentence was omitted.
Design and Procedure The design and procedure were the
same as in Experiment 1.
3000
2800

Reading Time (in ms)

To ensure careful reading, there was a verification
sentence for each passage, presented to the participants after
the end of the respective passage.

1128

flashback condition
control condition

2600

2400

2200

2000

1800

1st critical

2nd critical

Experiment 1

critical

postcritical

Experiment 2

Figure 1: Mean reading times for the critical sentences in
Experiment 1 and the critical and postcritical sentences in
Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Analyses were carried out on the reading times for the
critical sentence (identical to the first critical sentence in
Experiment 1) and the postcritical sentence. Outliers were
determined in the same way as in Experiment 1, resulting in
the removal of 5.2% of the data. A 2(sentence) x 2(version)
ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of sentence,
F1(1,43) = 175.75, MSE = 50,784; F2(1,23) = 16.33, MSE =
273,821, and a significant main effect of version, F1(1,43) =
8.47, MSE = 72,985; F2(1,23) = 9.00, MSE = 34,847. The
sentence x version interaction was significant as well,
F1(1,43) = 9.67, MSE = 91,975; F2(1,23) = 15.49, MSE =
25,000. As Figure 1 shows, the reading times for the critical
sentence were again significantly longer in the flashback
version than in the progression control version, t1(43) =
4.38, SDdiff = 395; t2(23) = 4.42, SDdiff = 268. In contrast, the
reading times for the postcritical sentence were numerically
slightly shorter when the sentence followed a flashback
sentence compared to when it followed a progression
control sentence, with the difference not being significant,
t1, t2 < 1. Thus, Experiment 2 does not provide any evidence
for the alleged spill-over effect. With regard to the results of
Experiment 1 this suggests that the prolonged reading times
for the second flashback sentence are due to the specific
processing costs of flashback sentences.
As can be seen from Figure 1, the reading times for the
first flashback sentence were longer in Experiment 2 than in
Experiment 1. This difference is probably of no theoretical
relevance as mean reading times for all other sentences were
also considerably longer in Experiment 2 (M = 2513 ms)
than in Experiment 1 (M = 2042 ms).
So far, the results are in line with the chronological
hypothesis. However, we do not yet have evidence that
readers actually integrate flashback information into the
chronological correct position of the representation. To
clarify this issue, we conducted Experiment 3.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 investigated the structure of the readers’
mental representation after reading a narrative containing a
flashback. We adapted a methodological approach used in

studies of the comprehension of chronological event
descriptions (Kelter, Kaup, & Claus, 2004; Rinck & Bower,
2000). These studies suggest that an event mentioned in a
narrative becomes gradually less accessible as time moves
forward in the described world. More specifically, a
previously mentioned event was found to be less accessible
when much time had elapsed in the described world (e.g.,
when a long lasting event happened in the meantime)
compared to when little time had elapsed. In Experiment 3,
we examined if such a temporal-distance effect also occurs
for events mentioned in flashbacks, which according to the
text, happened either a long or a short time ago in the
described world.
Readers were presented with passages each of which
described four events that occurred in the described world
successively, in the order E1-E2-E3-E4. In the passages,
however, event E1 was mentioned in a flashback after the
description of event E3. Thus, the order of mention was E2,
E3, E1, E4 (see sample passage in Table 2). The information
about the duration of E2 was manipulated through a durative
adverb, implying either a short or a long duration of E2. At
the end of the passage, the mental accessibility of E1 was
tested by means of a probe-recognition task.
If the chronological hypothesis is correct, then at the time
of testing, readers possess a representation in which E1
precedes E2 (see Figure 2). Therefore, depending on the
duration of E2, event E1 would either be temporally
relatively close to or distant from the current narrative now
point. Given the afore-mentioned relationship between
temporal distance and accessibility, the chronological
hypothesis predicts that the probe-recognition latencies are
longer if the text implies a long duration of E2 compared to
if the text implies a short duration of E2.
The background hypothesis does not predict this probelatency difference. According to this hypothesis, the
flashback information is attached to the previously
mentioned situation, that is, to E3. Thus, the temporal
distance between E1 and the narrative now point at the time
of testing is the same in the two E2-duration conditions (see
Figure 3). Consequently, the accessibility of the flashback
information should not be affected by the information
concerning the duration of E2.

Table 2: Sample Passage of Experiment 3 (Translated from German).
Old Mr. Steinbach was an enthusiastic balloonist in his youth. Now his son has given him as a birthday present a flight in a
historic balloon. Actually, Mr. Steinbach feels a little too old for such an adventure. The balloon flight will take place
today. With mixed emotions Mr. Steinbach climbs into the basket, where the balloon pilot is already waiting for him.
E2
When they take off, Mr. Steinbach feels his old enthusiasm awaken.
For half an hour / For five hours they fly above the countryside.
E3
Then they land and Mr. Steinbach beams with joy.
E1
Before the take-off he had felt somewhat queasy.
Because of that he had taken an anti-sickness pill.
E4
Now Mr. Steinbach climbs out of the balloon basket.
He heartily says good-bye to the balloon pilot.
Probe PILL

1129

E1
E1

E2

E3

E4

Probe

E2

E3

E4

Probe

E1
E1

E2

E3

E4

Probe

E2

Figure 2: Representation according to the chronological
hypothesis.

E3

E4

Probe

Figure 3: Representation according to the background
hypothesis.

Method
Participants Forty students at the Technical University of
Berlin took part in the experiment, none of whom had
participated in Experiment 1 or 2.
Materials The text materials comprised of 24 experimental
and 24 filler passages. The structure of the experimental
passages is illustrated by the passage in Table 2. The first
section portrayed the setting and introduced the protagonist.
Then the situation immediately prior to E2 and the
beginning of E2 were described, each in one sentence. The
next sentence described E2 and stated its duration in terms
of minutes or hours by means of a durative adverb. There
were two versions of this sentence, stating either a short or a
long duration of E2. The numerical values in the adverbial
phrases were selected on the basis of duration estimates that
were collected in a separate study. Twenty participants were
presented with an abridged version of the first half of each
experimental passage, up to the description of event E2 but
without the durative adverb. They were asked to give the
typical duration for each event E2, as well as the minimal
duration and the maximal duration that they considered still
plausible in the context. The values corresponding to the
33rd percentile of the minimal-duration estimates were used
in the short-duration versions in Experiment 3, and the
values corresponding to the 67th percentile of the maximalduration estimates were used in the long-duration versions.
If necessary, values were rounded.
The description of E2 was followed by a sentence
describing E3. The next two sentences constituted a
flashback, mentioning E1. In the first flashback sentence,
explicit reference was made to the time prior to E2. In the
second flashback sentence, the critical entity was mentioned
whose accessibility was later on tested in the proberecognition task. The flashback sentences were followed by
two sentences describing E4.
For each experimental and filler passage there was one
probe word. Probe words were nouns, 5 to 10 characters
long (1 – 3 syllables). With the experimental passages, the
probe word was the name of the critical entity involved in
E1. With 6 of the filler passages, the probe word was
previously mentioned in the text. With the remaining 18
filler passages, the probe word had not been mentioned in

the respective text. As in the previous experiments, there
was a verification sentence for each passage, presented after
the probe-recognition task.
Design and Procedure The 24 experimental passages were
assigned to two sets. Sets and versions were
counterbalanced across participants, as in Experiment 1 and
2. The passages were presented in the same way as in the
previous experiments, with one exception. When the
participants pressed the space bar after having read the final
sentence of a passage, a short auditory signal occurred and
then the probe word appeared on the screen. Participants
indicated their positive or negative response by pressing the
l or d key on the keyboard, respectively.

Results and Discussion
Response accuracy Mean percentage of correct responses
to experimental probes was 90.4% (SD = 7.9) and 91.2%
(SD = 9.2) in the short and long duration condition,
respectively. This difference was not significant (t1, t2 < 1).
Response times Analyses were carried out on the latencies
of correct probe responses and, as control, on the reading
times for the sentence immediately preceding the probe.
Outliers were determined in the same way as in the previous
experiments (4.8% of the data).
Participants needed significantly less time to recognize
the probe word in the short E2-duration condition (M =
1436 ms, SD = 257) compared to the long E2-duration
condition (M = 1482 ms, SD = 332), t1(39) = 1.85, SDdiff =
156, one-tailed p < .05; t2(23) = 1.76, SDdiff = 122, onetailed p < .05. The reading times for the sentence
immediately preceding the probe were almost identical in
the short and long E2-duration condition (short: M = 1883
ms, SD = 376; long: M = 1877 ms, SD = 363), t1, t2 < 1.
The finding that the probe-recognition latencies were
affected by the information about the duration of E2
supports the chronological hypothesis. According to this
hypothesis, the readers inserted the flashback information
(E1) into the representation at the chronologically
appropriate location, that is, before E2. In other words, they
constructed a chronological representation. Thus, a
temporal-distance effect on the accessibility of E1 was

1130

observed, analogous to what has been found in studies using
chronological narratives.
The result is difficult to explain if one assumes that a
flashback is interpreted as providing only background
information about the situation described in the sentence
preceding the flashback. If this were the case, then the
readers of our experiment had integrated the flashback
information into the representation of E3. It is unclear why
the duration of E2 should affect the accessibility of
information contained in the representation of E3.

Conclusions
Our study explored two hypotheses concerning the way in
which comprehenders process flashbacks in narratives.
According to the chronological hypothesis, comprehenders
integrate the flashback information into their representation
of the narrated world at the chronologically appropriate
location. According to the background hypothesis, they
encode flashback information as a supplementary to the
situation described just before. Our results support the
chronological hypothesis. Experiment 1 and 2 showed that
reading flashback sentences takes extra time, suggesting that
flashback information is not simply added to the situation
described immediately before. Experiment 3 provided
evidence that the readers’ mental representation after
reading a narrative containing a flashback is chronologically
organized.
Our results converge with results from other studies
indicating that readers pay significant attention to the
temporal relations between narrated situations (Gennari,
2004; Magliano & Schleich, 2000; Rinck, Gámez, Díaz, &
de Vega, 2003; Rinck & Weber, 2003; Zwaan, 1996; Zwaan
et al., 1995). The specific contribution of our study is the
finding that readers use the temporal dimension for mentally
organizing the narrated situations even if the structure of the
narrative and the discourse relations suggest a different kind
of organization.
This is only an initial study, a first step towards
empirically evaluating the validity of the two different
hypotheses on the processing of flashbacks. It may be
premature to abandon the background hypothesis.
Flashbacks vary with regard to the emphasis that is put on
either the event itself or its result. It is conceivable that in
the case of when the result is clearly in focus flashback
information is processed in the way asserted by the
background hypothesis (e.g., John wore a dark blue suit. He
had bought it in an expensive designer store). Future
research is needed to gain insight into the impact of this
aspect of flashbacks.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Grant Ke 292/5-3 from the
German Research Foundation (DFG) to Stephanie Kelter.
We thank Philippe Büttner and Alexander Richter for their
assistance in collecting the data.

References
Asher, N., & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Baker, L. (1978). Processing temporal relationships in
simple stories: Effects of input sequence. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 559-572.
Gennari, S. P. (2004). Temporal references and temporal
relations in sentence comprehension. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 30, 877-890.
Hoeks, J. C. J., Stowe, L. A., & Wunderlink, C. (2004).
Time is of the essence: processing temporal connectives
during reading. In K. D. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 613618). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kamp, H., van Genabith, J., & Reyle, U. (in press).
Discourse representation theory. In D. Gabbay & F.
Guenthner (Eds.), Handbook of philosophical logic.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Kehler, A. (1999, January). Identifying temporal relations
from tense and coherence. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, Los
Angeles, CA.
Kelter, S., Kaup, B., & Claus, B. (2004). Representing a
described sequence of events: A dynamic view of
narrative comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 451464.
Magliano, J. P., & Schleich, M. C. (2000). Verb aspect and
situation models. Discourse Processes, 29, 83-112.
Mandler, J. M. (1986). On the comprehension of temporal
order. Language and Cognitive Processes, 1, 309-320.
Moens, M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Temporal ontology and
temporal reference. Computational Linguistics, 14, 15-28.
Münte, T. F., Schiltz, K., & Kutas, M. (1998). When
temporal terms belie conceptual order. Nature, 395, 7173.
Ohtsuka, K., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Discourse
organization in the comprehension of temporal order in
narrative texts. Discourse Processes, 15, 317-336.
Rinck, M., & Bower, G. H. (2000). Temporal and spatial
distance in situation models. Memory & Cognition, 28,
1310-1320.
Rinck, M., Gámez, E., Díaz, J. M., & de Vega, M. (2003).
Processing of temporal information: Evidence from eye
movements. Memory & Cognition, 31, 77-86.
Rinck, M., & Weber, U. (2003). Who when where: An
experimental test of the event-indexing model. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 1284-1292.
ter Meulen, A. (1995). Representing time in natural
language: The dynamic interpretation of tense and aspect.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Zwaan, R. A. (1996). Processing narrative time shifts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 1196-1207.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 386-397.

1131

