UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Human Spatial Reorientation using Dual Task Paradigms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8jn6s8hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Nilsson, Hakan
Olsson, Henrik

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Human Spatial Reorientation using Dual Task Paradigms
Kristin R. Ratliff (k.ratliff@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Nora S. Newcombe (newcombe@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

geometric properties of the space and handedness (short
versus long walls to the left or right in the rectangle);
however, the rats did not use other kinds of featural
information, such as a colored wall or patterned corners,
which would allow them to distinguish the correct corner.
Hermer and Spelke (1994, 1996) found similar results
using human children, 18 to 24 months. Based on these
results, the geometric module hypothesis was proposed,
suggesting that the geometric coding abilities of rats and
children are encapsulated. Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, and
Katsnelson (1999) extended the geometric module
hypothesis by claiming that the module is only seen among
humans in children, due to their lack of a developed spatial
language. Replicating the Cheng orientation task with
human adults, Hermer-Vazquez et al. found that adults show
no encapsulation, in that they use both the geometry of a
room and the featural landmark cue of a colored wall to
successfully reorient in a rectangular enclosure. They
proposed that acquiring language, specifically production of
the spatial terms “left” and “right”, may be necessary and
sufficient for integrating geometric and featural information.
Applying a selective interference design to further probe
the necessity of language, Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999)
found that adults simultaneously performing a verbal
shadowing task behave like children and rats, searching
between two geometrically equivalent corners when
reorienting in a rectangular room with one colored wall.
However, when adults performed the reorientation task
while simultaneously performing a nonverbal rhythmclapping task, they successfully integrated the information
from the two domains. These results support their
conclusion that language is necessary for the integration of
geometric and featural spatial information, allowing adults
to overcome the encapsulation of the geometric module.

Abstract
After disorientation, human adults reorient within a
symmetric geometric environment using featural information
as well as the shape of the surrounding space, whereas
children younger than 6 years do not. The hypothesis that use
of features is due to language has been supported by findings
that human adults behave like children when reorienting while
performing a linguistic shadowing task (Hermer-Vazquez,
Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999). In this study we conducted a
replication of the Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) Experiment 1,
together with a condition involving more explicit information
regarding the nature of the task. In this study, we also added
a condition involving a spatial secondary task. Successful
reorientation was more common in the explicit condition than
in the exact replication, although above chance even in the
latter. Reorientation was lowest for participants performing
the spatial secondary task. These results provide evidence
against the idea that language is necessary to overcome the
encapsulation found among children and rats when trying to
integrate geometric and featural information.
Keywords: Spatial cognition; navigation; modularity.

Introduction
To functionally navigate through the environment, humans
and animals rely on two systems of spatial adaptation: the
egocentric “dead reckoning” system, whereby the organism
uses the location of the self as the key to spatial orientation,
and the allocentric system, whereby the surrounding
environment provides landmarks for the organism to
measure distance and direction to code location
(Newcombe, 2002). The allocentric system itself can be
further reduced to two types of spatial information by
distinguishing between geometric and nongeometric
information. The shape of a landmark is typically regarded
as geometric information, while all other characteristics of
the landmark, such as color, texture, and size, are regarded
as nongeometric or featural information.
Cheng (1986) examined how disoriented rats utilized
geometric and featural information to reorient themselves
and find food, which was hidden in one corner of a
rectangular enclosure. Rats can no longer use dead
reckoning once disoriented and must rely on their
allocentric spatial system. Cheng found that the rats
searched for the food at the geometrically equivalent corners
in the rectangular room, suggesting that rats encode the

Evidence Against the Geometric Module

1809

Recent animal research has cast doubt on the existence of a
geometric module by examining various species capable of
integrating geometric information along with featural
landmarks to locate hidden objects. Additionally, these
results raise more questions for the language modulated
geometric module hypothesis, in that these nonhuman
species definitely do not have linguistic capabilities to
integrate the two forms of spatial information.

Vallortigara, Zanforlin and Pasti (1990) have found such
evidence in experiments with chickens, Kelly, Spetch and
Heth (1998) found no encapsulation in pigeons, and
Sovrano, Bisazza and Vallortigara (2002) found evidence
that fish are capable of integrating featural landmarks with
geometric information to find an exit in a small tank within
a larger fish tank. Similarly, Gouteux, Thinus-Blanc, and
Vauclair (2001) found that monkeys showed no
encapsulation of geometric information either, as they used
a colored wall to reorient and find a reward after
disorientation in a rectangular room.
Hermer-Vazquez, Moffet, and Munkholm (2001) have
suggested that these results from non-human studies might
be a reflection of the extensive training typically found
when working with animals. However, doubts concerning
the geometric module hypothesis have also emerged within
the human research area. Learmonth, Newcombe, and
Huttenlocher (2001) replicated Hermer and Spelke (1994,
1996), finding that disoriented children divide their searches
between two geometrically equivalent corners of a
featureless rectangular room. However, by increasing the
area of the room four times that of the original Hermer and
Spelke room, children between 17 and 24 months do use
featural landmarks in addition to the shape of the room to
successfully find the hidden toy.

practice trial prior to performing the reorientation task. In
both conditions, participants performed a reorientation task
within a rectangular enclosure, while either simultaneously
engaged in a secondary verbal shadowing task or no
secondary task. Searches were assessed in each session to
determine if participants successfully found the target object
in the correct corner in the explicit directions condition
significantly more than in the replication condition. These
search results would cast doubt on the hypothesis that the
verbal shadowing task alone hinders adult spatial
capabilities of integrating geometric and featural
information.

Method

Alternatives to a Module

Participants. Thirty-eight college undergraduates at
Temple University were recruited from introductory
psychology classes and given course credit. Seven males
and 12 females were randomly assigned to the replication
condition. One participant was omitted from the original
sample and replaced according to the criteria set by HermerVazquez et al. (1999) because she maintained her sense of
orientation despite the disorientation procedure, as indicated
by perfect search performance in the white room. Five
males and 14 females were randomly assigned to the
explicit direction condition. One participant was omitted
from the original sample and replaced because he could not
perform the verbal shadowing task. Three participants in
each condition had four pauses greater than 2 s but were
included in the data set, after data-analysis confirmed no
significant differences in the findings when they were or
were not excluded.

Two possible alternative explanations may account for the
results supporting the encapsulation found among humans.
In the Hermer-Vazquez et al. study (1999), adults were
informed prior to the disorientation procedure that, “you
will see something happening that you should try to notice,”
and they would be asked about what they saw. The vague
instructions given to the adults may account for their lack of
use of features. When given explicit instructions prior to
the reorientation task, we hypothesize that adult participants
will search the correct corner at greater than chance levels
even while engaged in verbal shadowing.
Another possible explanation for these results is that the
verbal shadowing task used by Hermer-Vazquez et al.
(1999) disrupts the ability to use featural landmarks by not
only interfering with the linguistic process, but also with a
nonlinguistic spatial system (Newcombe, in press). The
nonverbal shadowing condition of a rhythm-clapping task
used by Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) was not an
appropriate control to the verbal shadowing task
(Newcombe, in press). A nonverbal spatial task should be
utilized to examine if it interferes with the integration of
geometric and featural information in the reorientation task.

Experiment 1

Apparatus and materials. Participants were tested in a
small rectangular enclosure with short sides four feet in
length and long sides six feet in length (1.92 x 1.23 x
1.92m) located within a larger experiment room with no
windows or sources of outside noise. The smaller “room”
was constructed of a frame with white fabric covering the
four walls and the ceiling, and four 25-W lights attached at
the top of each corner of the enclosure to illuminate the
room. One of the short walls drew back as a curtain to
permit entry into the room and was sealed with Velcro when
it was closed to retain the symmetry of the room. A blue
sheet of fabric was affixed with Velcro to one short wall,
opposite the entrance, during the featural landmark
conditions, so that it covered the wall completely. Identical
plastic containers, used as potential hiding places for the
target object, were affixed to each of the corners of the
room. During the shadowing session, a portable cassette
player with headphones was used to play a tape recording of
the experimenter reading political articles. During the
nonshadowing conditions, the participants listened to white
noise through the headphones to prevent any sound cues in
maintaining orientation. A key chain with four keys
attached served as the search target object.

To examine the role of explicit directions and language in
spatial processing, a replication of the Hermer-Vazquez,
Spelke, and Katsnelson (1999) Experiment 1 was
performed. In addition to the replication, another condition
was added where participants were given additional
instructions about the nature of the search task and a
1810

Design and Procedures. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions. For each condition,

30s, and changing directions twice. While the participant
rotated, the experimenter also walked around the subject at
varying speeds as to not provide a landmark cue. The
participant was then stopped facing the appropriate
predetermined direction by the experimenter.
The
participant opened his or her eyes and the experimenter
asked, “Where did I hide the keys?” As in Experiment 1, by
Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999), participants either pointed to
a corner, or the experimenter told them to “point” if they
hesitated. Four search trials were given in each of the three
environments with a 1-min break between each
environment.
The experimenter recorded which corner the participant
first indicated the target object was hidden as shown in
figure 1 by coding it as either the correct corner (C), the
rotational equivalent corner based on the shape of the room
(R), the nearest error corner to the correct location (N), or
the farthest error corner (F). To compare across all four
search trials in each environment, we calculated for each
participant a percentage of search trials at correct (C),
geometrically appropriate (C+R), and landmark appropriate
corners (C+N) according to Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999).
We initially compared the search rates to chance levels
(chance = .25 for correct search; chance = .5 for
geometrically appropriate, as well as landmark appropriate
searches). We also performed ANOVAs to compare overall
search performance between the three different
environments, with follow-up contrasts on specific
comparisons.

participants completed four search trials in the room with
one blue wall while verbally shadowing, four trials in the
one blue wall room without the secondary task, and four
trials in the all white room to confirm disorientation in the
space. The hiding corner and facing position of the
participants were counterbalanced in each condition and
matched across conditions, so that an equal number of trials
ended with subjects facing each wall and the object being
hidden in each corner.
One condition was a replication of Experiment 1 by
Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999). Before the experiment
began, participants were instructed, “You will see
something happening that you should try to notice,” and
were informed that they would be asked about what they
saw. Participants were also instructed to allow themselves
to become disoriented in the room instead of trying to
maintain their orientation. Participants were then trained to
perform a verbal shadowing task. While seated at a desk,
participants listened through headphones to a tape recording
of the experimenter reading political articles. Participants
were trained to repeat the verbal material as they heard it,
word by word, instead of waiting for larger phrases. An
experimenter timed their performance until they were fluent
enough to shadow for 2 continuous minutes without pausing
for more than 2 s at any time. Once this criterion had been
reached, the participant began continuously shadowing, and
the experimenter led the participant into the smaller testing
room to begin the reorientation task. They stopped
shadowing once four search trials were completed in the
blue wall room. Participants completed the 12 search trials
in the fixed order as per Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999): four
search trials in the blue wall room while shadowing, four
trials in the blue wall room with no secondary task, and four
trials in the white room.
In the other condition, subjects were given more explicit
instructions as to the nature of the search task. Before the
experiment began, participants were instructed, “This is a
visual search task. I will hide an object in a corner of the
room and you will spin around in place with your eyes
closed. Allow yourself to become disoriented in the room
rather than trying to maintain your orientation. Then open
your eyes and try to find the object.” The participant was
also given one practice trial in the blue wall room without a
secondary task. Additionally, the order of the search trials
was counterbalanced, so that within the condition there were
approximately equivalent numbers of participants
completing each of the six combinations of room orders.
The participant was trained to perform the verbal shadowing
task (as previously described) just prior to the four search
trials in the blue wall room with the secondary task.
For both conditions, the reorientation task consisted of
participants being shown the target item (keys) while
standing in the middle of a rectangular enclosure. The keys
were then hidden in the predetermined corner of the room
by the experimenter and the participant was cued to close
their eyes. The experimenter disoriented the participants by
spinning them around in circles, at least 10 full rotations or

F

C

R

N

Figure 1: Room diagram with one blue wall (C=correct
corner, R=reversal corner, N=near error, F=far error).

Results

1811

Figures 2a and 2b present the mean number of searches in
each environment for the two conditions.
Participants in both conditions searched the geometrically
appropriate corners at equivalent rates across room
environments, F (1, 26) = 0.26, p = .61. Participants in the
explicit directions condition showed significantly greater
landmark-appropriate search rates averaging across the three
room types than the replication participants, F(1, 26) =
11.63, p = .001. The participants in the explicit condition
also showed significantly greater searches in the correct
corner across room environments than participants in the
replication condition, F(1, 26) = 12.50, p < .001.
Overall, participants in the explicit directions condition
successfully used the blue wall as a landmark significantly
more than the participants in the replication condition. This
greater success in using the blue wall led to a higher rate of

F
(a)
R

.16
(.09)

1.47
(.20)

2.16
(.20)

.21
(.10)

C

N

F

R

No Shadowing White Room
F
(b)
R

.21
(.11)

1.74
(.19)

1.63
(.27)

.42
(.15)

.10
(.06)

3.32
(.17)

.21
(.14)

.37
(.16)

C

N

F

R

No Shadowing Blue Wall
C

N

F

R

0
(0)

3.74
(.15)

.10
(.09)

.16
(.14)

.16
(.10)

2.68
(.31)

.84
(.23)

.32
(.17)

C

N

Shadowing Blue Wall
C

N

F

R

.05
(.06)

3.48
(.16)

.21
(.11)

.26
(.11)

C

N

Figure 2: Mean number of searches at each corner (with standard errors in parentheses) in the three different
room environments for (a) the replication condition and (b) the explicit direction condition.
correct corner searches for participants who received the
explicit directions than for the replications condition
participants.
Follow-up tests revealed the most crucial differences
between and within the conditions.
There were no
significant differences found within the explicit directions
condition shadowing and nonshadowing participant’s search
rates in the blue wall room (all p’s >.05). Although
shadowing participants in the replication condition used the
blue wall as a landmark at above chance levels, t(18) = 3.78,
p = .001, their landmark appropriate search performance
was significantly reduced while engaged in verbal
shadowing than when no secondary task was performed,
t(36) = 2.84, p = .003. This differential rate of utilizing the
landmark information resulted in significant reductions in
correct searches for the shadowing compared to
nonshadowing participants in the replication condition, t(36)
= 2.63, p = .005.
Thus a partial replication of Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999)
was found, in that shadowing participants were significantly
worse at using the landmark information than the
nonshadowing participants in the replication condition.
Additionally, combining the geometric information with the
landmark information to guide correct searching was
significantly less likely when participants were engaged in
verbal shadowing.
Shadowing participants in the explicit directions condition
searched the correct corner significantly more than
shadowing participants in the replication condition, t(36) =
3.28, p < .001. It appears that giving participants additional
directions and a practice trial removes the adverse effect
verbal shadowing has on combining geometric and featural
information. These results cast doubt on the hypothesis that
the verbal shadowing task alone hinders adult spatial
capabilities of integrating both geometric and featural
information.

Experiment 2
The nonverbal rhythm-shadowing condition used by
Hermer-Vazquez et al. (1999) can be argued to be an
inappropriate control to the verbal shadowing task. The
rhythm-clapping task, which involves more cerebellar
regions of the brain, would not be expected to be
intrinsically involved with spatial information integration
(Woodruf-Pak, Papka, & Ivry, 1996). Experiment 2
examines how a nonverbal spatial task interferes with the
integration of geometric and featural information during the
reorientation task. If the nonverbal spatial interference does
indeed disrupt the integration process in adults, further
evidence would be provided against the hypothesis of a
geometric module overcome solely through the acquisition
of spatial language.

Method
Participants. Sixteen Temple University undergraduates,
five males and 11 females, were recruited as previously
described. One participant was omitted from the original
sample and replaced because he maintained his sense of
orientation despite the disorientation procedure, as indicated
by perfect search performance in the all white room. One
participant was omitted from the original sample and
replaced because he could not perform the visualizing task.
Apparatus, Design and Procedures. Participants were
tested in the environment described in Experiment 1. The
experimenter read the instructions described in Experiment
1 for the replication condition to the participants, and then
trained them to perform a spatial interference task involving
visual imagery based on a task designed by Brooks (1968).
While seated at a desk, participants viewed a series of
four line diagrams (block letters F, G, N, and Z). On the
initial presentation of each figure, the ten intersecting points

1812

Figure 3: Line diagram used for spatial interference task.
were explicitly pointed out to the participant, as well as the
starting place, which was an asterisk at one corner with an
arrow indicating that the points were taken in a clockwise
direction from the starting place as seen in figure 3.
Retention of each figure and the correct order of points were
assessed by having the participants draw each block letter
from memory, starting from the point indicated by the
asterisk and continuing clockwise as originally directed by
the arrow
Once retention in memory was established, the
experimenter instructed the participant to visualize the letter
and categorize each intersecting point in the diagram
according to one of two categories. If the experimenter said
“top/bottom”, the participant said “yes” for each point that
was either at the most extreme top or bottom of the figure
and “no” for all other points. If the experimenter said
“outside”, the participant said “yes” for each point that was
either at the most extreme right or left side of the figure and
“no” for all other points. The participant then practiced
categorizing the intersecting points repeatedly for each
diagram for one minute or until reaching the criterion of not
pausing for more than 2s at any time during the responses.
Although the response for the visualizing task is verbal, it
is an exceedingly simple response, especially when
compared to the verbal shadowing task. A nonverbal
response of tapping or using an external device would have
provided logistical problems and possible navigation
impediments in the small testing environment.
Additionally, Brooks (1968) found that participants
responding verbally performed significantly faster than
those responding through tapping, or pointing during the
block letter task. These results imply that using the verbal
response of “yes” or “no” while visualizing is the easiest
form of the spatial task. By using the verbal output we
actually decreased our chances of finding any interference
effects. If such effects were to be found, they would be
increased had we used a nonverbal response such as
tapping, which makes the visualizing task significantly more
difficult. Based on these results we trained participants to
perform the block letter task using a verbal response, thus
providing the maximum advantage for participants to
perform the search task with the least amount of
interference.
Once each practice session was successfully completed
for the four block letter diagrams, participants were led into
the testing room with one blue wall and given the
reorientation task. During the search trials the participant
listened to white noise through headphones to avoid any
sound cues. At the beginning of each search trial the
experimenter told the participant to begin visualizing the
letter and gave the category cue. Once the participant began

responding “yes”/“no”, the experimenter placed the keys in
the predetermined corner box and performed the
disorientation procedure described in Experiment 1. After
each trial, the experimenter told the participant to visualize
another letter and gave the category cue until all four block
letter diagrams had been visualized. The participant
completed 12 search trials in the fixed order: four search
trials in the blue wall room while engaging in the spatial
secondary task, four trials in the blue wall room with no
secondary task, and four trials in the white room.
The experimenter recorded the participant’s searches and
analyzed the data as described in Experiment 1.

Results
Figure 4 presents the mean number of searches in each
room environment. As in Experiment 1, participants
performed significantly better while not engaged in the
secondary task in the blue wall room than when in the all
white room, indicating the successful use of the blue wall as
a landmark, t(30) = 6.35, p < .001. Additionally, the
interference task was effective in that participants in the
blue wall room performed significantly better while they
were not performing the secondary task than while engaged
in visualizing, t(30) = 6.10, p < .001.
No Secondary Task White Room
F

R

.12
(.09)

2.0
(.16)

1.63
(.15)

.25
(.11)

C

N

No Secondary Task Blue Wall
F

R

.06
(.06)

3.56
(.16)

.19
(.10)

.19
(.10)

C

N

Spatial Visualizing Task Blue Wall
F

R

.25
(.11)

2.06
(.25)

1.31
(.22)

.38
(.15)

C

N

Figure 4: Mean number of searches at each corner (with
standard errors in parentheses).

1813

However, the most interesting finding is that there were
no significant differences between the search rates for those
in the blue room while engaged in the spatial secondary task
and those in the all white room, all t’s < 1, all p’s > .30.
Participants engaged in the spatial task in the blue wall
room performed as if they were in the all white room.
Overall, participants successfully used the blue wall as a
landmark and the shape of the room to find the target while
they were not performing the secondary task. However,
once participants began visualizing, their accuracy declined
to the level of the all white room. Performing the spatial
task significantly reduced participants’ abilities to combine
the geometric and featural information during reorientation.
Comparing across experiments, verbal shadowing
participants in the replication condition of Experiment 1 and
spatial visualizing participants in Experiment 2 both used
the room shape to guide their search at equivalent rates,
t(33) = .60, p = .28. However, the verbal shadowing
participants in the replication condition of Experiment 1
used the blue wall as a landmark significantly more than the
spatial visualizing participants in Experiment 2, t(33) =
1.64, p = .05, leading to overall higher accuracy searches,
t(33) = 1.64, p = .05. The spatial secondary task interfered
significantly more with the participants’ abilities to use the
featural information in the blue wall room than the verbal
shadowing task did in Experiment 1.

Discussion
In the present experiments we found that adults used both
geometric and featural properties of the surrounding
environment in order to reorient themselves and find a
hidden object. Once adults engaged in a secondary task of
verbal shadowing or spatial visualizing while reorienting in
the blue wall room, their search accuracy declined, though it
was still above chance. The secondary tasks in Experiments
1 and 2 interfered with the participants’ abilities to combine
geometric and featural information in order to successfully
reorient. However, once participants in Experiment 1 were
given explicit directions as to the nature of the search task
and a practice trial, they were not affected by the verbal
shadowing task.
Additionally, successful reorientation was more common
among the verbal shadowing participants in the replication
condition of Experiment 1 than the participants engaged in
spatial visualizing in Experiment 2. Participants who
performed the spatial visualizing task concentrated their
searches most frequently between the correct and
rotationally equivalent corners, whereas verbal shadowing
participants in the replication condition utilized the blue
wall landmark to a higher degree.
The spatial secondary task in Experiment 2 proved to be a
greater interference in adults’ ability to flexibly combine
geometric and featural information than the verbal
shadowing task in Experiment 1. This provides evidence
against the theory that acquiring spatial language is
responsible for overcoming encapsulation when trying to
integrate geometric and featural information. Perhaps the

decline in accuracy caused by verbal shadowing disrupts the
ability to use featural landmarks by interfering with a
nonlinguistic spatial system, as well as the linguistic process
(Newcombe, in press).

References
Brooks, L. (1968). Spatial and verbal components of the act
of recall. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 22, 349-368.
Cheng, K. (1986). A purely geometric model in rat’s spatial
representation. Cognition, 23, 149-178.
Gouteux, S., Thinus-Blanc, C., & Vauclair, J. (2001).
Rhesus monkeys use geometric and nongeometric
information during a reorientation task. Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 505-519.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
spatial reorientation in young children. Nature, 370, 5759.
Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity and
development: the case of spatial reorientation. Cognition,
61, 195-232.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: the case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79, 263-299.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E., & Katsnelson, A. (1999).
Sources of flexibility in human cognition: dual task
studies of space and language. Cognitive Psychology, 39,
3-36.
Kelly, D. M., Spetch, M. L. & Heth, C.D. (1998). Pigeons'
encoding of geometric and featural properties of a spatial
environment. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 112,
259-269.
Learmonth, A., Newcombe, N., & Huttenlocher, J. (2001).
Toddler’s use of metric information and landmarks to
reorient. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 80,
225-244.
Newcombe, N. (2002). Spatial cognition. In D. Medin (Ed.),
Cognition volume, Stevens’ handbook of experimental
psychology, third edition (pp. 113-163). New York: John
Wiley.
Newcombe, N. (in press). Evidence for and against a
geometric module: The roles of language and action. In J.
Rieser, J. Lockman & C. Nelson (Eds.), Action as an
organizer of learning and development. Minnesota
Symposium on Child Development Series. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Sovrano, V., Bisazza, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2002).
Modularity and spatial reorientation in a simple mind:
encoding of geometric and nongeometric properties of a
spatial environment by fish. Cognition, 85, B51-B59.
Vallortigara, G., Zanforlin, M., & Pasti, G. (1990).
Geometric modules in animal spatial representations: a
test with chicks (Gallus gallus). Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 104, 248-254.
Woodruff-Pak, D., Papka, M., & Ivry, R. (1996). Cerebellar
involvement in eyeblink classical conditioning in humans.
Neuropsychology, 10, 443-458.

1814

