UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Imaging Low Probability Events: Contrasting Exemplar Cuing and Frequency Format
Accounts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3zr5t4sd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hayes, Brett K.
Mitchell, Chris
Newell, Ben R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Imagining Low Probability Events: Contrasting Exemplar Cuing
and Frequency Format Accounts
Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Chris Mitchell (chris.mitchell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Brett K. Hayes (b.hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
The extent to which a low probability event can be imagined
appears to increase the weight attached to the possibility of
that event occurring. Two experiments tested contrasting
accounts of how this ‘imagability’ of events is enhanced. The
experiments used negative (e.g. suffering the side effect of a
vaccine) and positive (e.g. winning a lottery) low probability
events. Both experiments found strong support for the
frequency format account, whereby imagability is enhanced
through the use of frequency formats for conveying statistical
information (e.g., 20 out of 2000). However, only limited
support was found for ‘exemplar-cuing theory’ (J.J. Koehler
& L. Macchi, 2004), which proposes two distinct mechanisms
for the generation of instances. Overall, the results support the
claim that the imagability of outcomes plays a role in thinking
about low probability events, but question the underlying
mechanisms specified by exemplar cuing theory for mediating
such effects.

Introduction
A fatal shark attack on a 17-year-old boy off West Beach in
Adelaide left the popular beaches of South Australia almost
deserted this summer. Despite the extreme low probability
of a shark attack occurring, it seems that the extensive
media coverage following the incident was enough to evoke
vivid images of the attack in the minds of beach-goers,
ensuring that they stayed away. Such an effect can be
explained in terms of the ‘availability heuristic’ – the idea
that people judge the probability of an event by the ease
with which instances or associations can be brought to mind
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). In the case of the shark
attack, it is not difficult to understand why the photographs,
headlines, and TV pictures led to the evocation of terrifying
images in the public mind. However, in other less dramatic
cases, we can ask under what circumstances these instances
of low probability events are generated.
One property that seems to affect the availability of an
instance is the ease with which it can be imagined. Instances
that can be easily imagined appear to have a stronger
influence on judgments than those that cannot be easily
imagined (e.g., Epstein, 1994). One factor that is claimed to
affect this ‘imagability’ of instances is whether information
is presented in terms of frequencies or in terms of

probabilities. For example, Slovic, Monahan and
MacGregor (2000) demonstrated that clinicians provided
with recidivism risks presented as frequencies (e.g., 20 out
of 100) judged mental patients as posing higher risks than
when the same information was presented as a probability
(e.g., 20%). The explanation was that only the frequency
presentation generated a ‘terrifying image’ of the recidivist
in the mind of the clinician (Slovic et al., 2000). Purchase
and Slovic (1999) have documented similar frequency
format effects in public assessments of the risks associated
with chemical spills.
The imagability idea is also the basis for Koehler and
Macchi’s (2004) recent “exemplar cuing theory” (EC). EC
states, “the weight decision makers attach to low probability
events is, in part, a function of whether they can easily
generate or imagine exemplars for the event” (p.540).
According to EC, however, the use of a frequency format is
not the crucial factor underlying the imagability of
exemplars. Koehler and Macchi discuss two separate
mechanisms for the facilitation of exemplar generation. The
first mechanism cues exemplars when the product of the
size of the reference class for the event and the incidence
rate of the event is greater than 1 (e.g., an incidence rate of
1% and a reference class of 500,000 generates 5000
exemplars), but not when it is less than 1 (e.g., 1% and 50
generate 0.5 of an exemplar). Importantly, this mechanism
is unaffected by whether incidence rates are provided as
percentages (1%) or frequencies (1 out of 100) (see Macchi,
2000 for more discussion of this claim). The second
mechanism cues exemplars when the numerator of the
incidence rate is 1 or more (e.g., 20 out of 2000) but not
when it is less than 1 (e.g., 0.2 out of 20) (cf. Denes-Raj &
Epstein, 1994; Epstein, 1994).
Koehler and Macchi (2004) tested these predictions in the
context of DNA evidence in mock jury experiments. A key
issue with DNA evidence is the degree to which DNA
matches can be attributed to mere coincidence (Koehler,
1997). Koehler and Macchi reasoned that if exemplars could
be cued of innocent individuals, other than the defendant,
who nonetheless had matching DNA, then the DNA
evidence against the defendant would be given less weight.

1630

In Koehler and Macchi’s first experiment participants
were presented with the incidences of co-incidental matches
in either probability (e.g., 0.001%) or frequency formats
(e.g. 1 in 100,000). Information about the ‘problem-relevant
sample space’ or reference class was also manipulated by
telling participants that police believed the murderer lived in
a town with either a large (5,000,000) or small population
(500). The product of the incidence rate and the reference
class was only greater than 1 for the ‘large population’
group (large: 5,000,000 x 0.001% = 50; small: 500 x
0.001% = 0.005), thus, Koehler and Macchi argued that
exemplars of other individuals with DNA that matched the
defendant’s merely by co-incidence would only be cued in
the large population group. The data were consistent with
this prediction: participants thought the evidence against the
defendant was weaker when the 50 exemplars were cued.
Importantly, the frequency/probability manipulation did not
have a significant effect on judgments.
In the second experiment the numerator of the incidence
rate statistic for the DNA match was presented as either a
fraction or an integer. EC theory predicted that the integer
(e.g. 1 out of 1000) and not the fraction (e.g., 0.1 out of 100)
would call juror’s attention to other individuals who may
match, despite the incidence rates being mathematically
identical. Again, this prediction was supported: jurors were
relatively less impressed by the evidence when a fractional
numerator was used.
Thus the current situation is that there are two contrasting
accounts of how the imagability of low probability events is
enhanced. One account suggests that the use of frequency
formats is crucial to enhancing imagability (e.g., Purchase
& Slovic, 1999; Slovic et al. 2000); the other proposes two
specific mechanisms – the ‘multiplicative’ and the
‘numerator’ – that increase the likelihood that images are
cued, independent of the format employed (Koehler &
Macchi, 2004). In the two experiments we report we created
a design in which we could test 1) the contrasting
predictions of the frequency and exemplar cuing accounts
regarding the format effect, and 2) the specific mechanisms
proposed by the exemplar cuing account.
The design was as follows: Question format (probability
or frequency) was manipulated within subjects, and Number
of exemplars cued (less than 1 or greater than 1) was
manipulated between subjects. The multiplicative
mechanism of the exemplar cuing account was tested by
comparing responses to probability format questions in
which the product of the reference class and the incidence
rate was greater than one (e.g., 2000 and 1%), with
questions in which the product was less than one (e.g. 20
and 1%). The numerator mechanism was tested by
comparing responses to frequency format questions in
which the numerator was greater than 1 (e.g., 50) to those in
which it was less than 1 (e.g., 0.5).
In this design, the exemplar cuing account predicts a main
effect of Number of exemplars cued such that people should
judge an event as more likely to occur when more than one
exemplar is cued either via the multiplicative or numerator

mechanisms. However, the account predicts no effect of
question format. In contrast, the frequency account predicts
a main effect of question format such that events should be
judged more likely when a frequency format is used. It also
predicts a number of exemplars cued effect, but, crucially,
only in the frequency format condition. This is because in
the probability format no vivid images are promoted
(regardless of the product of the incidence rate and reference
class) whereas in the frequency format, the integer
numerator (e.g., 20) is more likely to result in ‘vivid
imagery’ than the fractional one (e.g., 0.2) (c.f., Epstein,
1994; Slovic et al., 2000).
An additional feature of these experiments is that they
test the generality of EC theory. Although they only tested
the theory in the context of DNA evidence, Koehler and
Macchi (2004) speculated that the effects they observed
could have wide ranging practical implications for a variety
of situations in which information about low probability
events is conveyed. For example, would the number of
exemplars generated affect people’s willingness to take
particular vaccines, or undergo medical treatments? Would
participation in lotteries be affected by the extent to which
exemplars of ‘winners’ could be cued? To the extent that
EC is a general theory of how people think about low
probability events, we expect to see exemplar-cuing effects
in such scenarios that are consonant with those observed
previously.

Experiment 1: Negative Events
Experiment 1 tested the predictions of the two accounts in
scenarios in which the low probability event was a negative
outcome for the participant. Participants were asked to
indicate their willingness to take part in clinical trials of a
new laser treatment for birthmarks and a new flu vaccine. In
the case of the laser treatment, the low probability event was
suffering from permanent scarring as a result of having the
treatment. For the vaccine, it was suffering from an
unpleasant allergic reaction following administration of the
vaccine. EC theory predicts that if either cuing mechanism
operates to generate exemplars of other people who have
suffered these side effects, participants should be less
willing to participate in clinical trials of the treatments. The
frequency account predicts that willingness should only
decrease when a frequency format (which enhances the
imagability of other sufferers) is used.
We manipulated the number of exemplars cued
(according to EC) by a) varying the number of individuals
involved in the trials (i.e., problem space or reference class),
and b) varying the numerator of the incidence rate.

Method
Participants

1631

One-hundred and forty undergraduate students from the
University of New South Wales participated in the
experiment.

The experiment was a 2 (Number of Exemplars Cued: >1,
<1) x 2 (Format: probability, frequency) mixed design with
repeated measures on the second factor. Participants were
provided with a questionnaire containing the two questions
about willingness to participate in clinical trials of a flu
vaccine and a laser treatment for birthmark removal. One
question was in a frequency format about one of the
scenarios, the other in a probability format about the other
scenario. For one group both these questions cued
exemplars, for the other group neither of the questions cued
exemplars. The order of frequency/probability questions and
the assignment of formats to the scenarios were fully
counterbalanced.
The size of the reference class was manipulated by
indicating how many other people would participate in the
trial (vaccine: 20 or 2000; laser: 50 or 5000). The incidence
rate of the negative event (vaccine: unpleasant allergic
reaction; laser: permanent scarring) was given as a
probability (1%) or as the equivalent raw frequency (e.g. 20
out of 2000 or 0.2 out of 20). This resulted in a question in
which the product of the reference class and the incidence
rate was greater than one (e.g. 2000 and 1%), a question in
which the product was less than one (e.g. 20 and 1%), a
question in which the numerator cued exemplars (e.g. 20 out
of 2000) and a question in which it did not (e.g. 0.2 out of
20). Table 1 displays the design of Experiment 1 with the
figures used in the vaccine scenario given as examples of
the question types. The Appendix provides examples of the
questions used.

frequency format was used. However, this effect was
modulated by an interaction between Format and Number of
Exemplars Cued, F (1, 138) = 5.84, p < .05. Simple effects
analysis revealed that the number of exemplars cued only
had an effect on willingness when the frequency format was
used, F (1, 139) = 4.19, p < .05. (Probability format F < 1).
That is, when a frequency format was used, participants
were significantly less willing to participate in the clinical
trials when an integer numerator was used than when a
fractional one was used.

7
Probability Format
6
Willingness
(1=low, 7=High)

Design and Procedure

Frequency Format

5
4
3
2
1
>1 Cued

< 1 Cued

Table 1: Design of Experiment 1

Numbe r of Exe mplars C ue d

Figure 1. Mean willingness ratings collapsed across the two
negative scenarios in Experiment 1

Question Format
No of Exemplars Cued
Probability
Frequency
>1
1%, 2000 (20)
20, 2000 (20)
<1
1%, 20 (0)
0.2, 20 (0)
Note: Number of exemplars cued (according to EC Theory)
for each question type is given in parentheses
After reading the scenario participants made a
“willingness to participate in the trial” response on a 7 point
Likert scale anchored by 1“Not at all willing” and 7 “Very
willing”.

EC theory predicted a main effect of Number of exemplars
cued but this effect was only present in the frequency format
condition. This pattern of results provides support for the
‘numerator’ mechanism of EC theory but not for the
‘multiplicative’ mechanism. The interaction of Question
format with Number of exemplars cued, along with the main
effect showing lower willingness overall in frequency
format conditions cannot be accounted for by EC theory
(Koehler & Macchi, 2004; Macchi, 2000) but supports the
‘vivid imagery’ explanation of the probability/frequency
format distinction offered by Slovic et al., (2000). That is,
frequency formats, which facilitate imagining other
individuals who have been scarred or become ill (e.g. 20 out
of 2000), reduce the willingness to participate in the clinical
trials.

Results and Discussion

Preliminary analysis indicated that the pattern of effects of
the exemplar cuing and format factors was very similar for
each of the scenarios and so the data were collapsed across
the two in all subsequent analyses. Figure 1 displays the
mean willingness ratings collapsed across the flu vaccine
and laser treatment scenarios. A 2 (Number of exemplars
cued: >1, <1) x 2 (Format: probability, frequency) mixed
ANOVA with repeated measures on the second factor
showed no main effect of Number of exemplars cued (F <
1), but a significant main effect of Format, F (1, 138) =
12.57, p < .001. The format effect indicates a lesser
willingness to participate in the clinical trials when a

Experiment 2: Positive Events

1632

Experiment 2 tested the predictions of the two accounts in
scenarios in which the low probability event was a positive
outcome for the participant. Participants were asked to
indicate their willingness to participate in a lottery and to
call a TV station for the chance of participating in a game
show. In the case of the lottery the low probability event
was winning, for the game show it was appearing on the

show. EC theory predicts that participants should be more
willing to buy a ticket in the lottery or call the TV station if
either of the two proposed mechanisms operates to generate
exemplars of other winning lottery tickets or successful
game show entrants. The frequency account predicts that
willingness should increase when frequency formats (which
facilitate imagability) are used.

Method

A 2 (Number of exemplars cued: >1, <1) x 2 (Format:
probability, frequency) mixed ANOVA with repeated
measures on the second factor showed a main effect of
Number of exemplars cued F (1, 78) = 4.21, p < .05, in the
opposite direction to that predicted by the theory. That is,
participants were less willing to engage in the behavior (buy
a lottery ticket or participate in a game show) when
(according to the theory) more than 1 exemplar of the low
probability event occurring was cued. There was also a main
effect of Format, F (1, 78) = 10.05, p = .002, indicating
greater willingness to engage in the behavior when
frequency formats were used. The interaction was not
significant (F< 1).
The results of Experiment 2 provide no support for EC
theory. When, according to the theory, exemplars of other
winning tickets or successful game show entrants were
cued, participants were significantly less willing to buy a
lottery ticket or call the TV station. However, the higher
willingness ratings in the frequency format conditions
strongly supported the idea that frequency formats facilitate
the evocation of other examples of the low probability
events (Slovic et al., 2000).

Participants
Eighty undergraduate students from the University of New
South Wales participated in the experiment.

Design and Procedure
The design of Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1
with the exception that participants were given positive
event scenarios: buying a lottery ticket and entering a TV
game show.
The reference class sizes, incidence rates and numerators
were manipulated in the same way as in Experiment 1. All
numerical values were identical. The 0.2, 20 and 2000
values used for the TV game show and the 0.5, 50 and 5000
for the lottery ticket. In the lottery scenario the reference
class referred to the number of tickets sold in a day (50 or
5000); in the game show scenario the reference class was
the number of people calling the TV station each day.
Examples of the questions used are given in the Appendix.
Participants used a 7-point Likert scale to rate their
willingness to buy a ticket in the lottery and willingness to
call the TV station to enter the game show.

General Discussion

Results and Discussion

Two experiments investigated contrasting accounts of how
the imagability of low probability events is enhanced. EC
theory proposes two specific mechanisms for enhancing
imagability 1) the ‘multiplicative’ – exemplars are cued
only when product of the reference class and incidence rate
is greater than 1 (regardless of format), and 2) the
‘numerator’ - integer rather than fractional numerators
promote exemplar cuing. The frequency account simply
suggests that frequency formats lead to more vivid imagery
than do probability formats.
We found no evidence to support the multiplicative
mechanism of EC theory. In Experiment 1 there was no
difference in the willingness to participate in a clinical trial
between a condition in which the product was more than 1
(20 or 50) and a condition in which it was less than 1 (0.2 or
0.5). In Experiment 2 the opposite of the predicted pattern
was found: participants were more willing when no
exemplars of other ‘winners’ could be generated than when
other winners could be generated.
We found limited support for the ‘numerator’ mechanism.
In Experiment 1 participants were significantly less willing
to participate in clinical trials with low probability negative
outcomes when an integer numerator (20 or 50) was used to
specify the number of those outcomes than when a
fractional (0.2 or 0.5) one was used. This pattern was not
found in Experiment 2: participants were more willing to
engage in behaviors with low probability positive outcomes
when a fractional numerator was used.
In contrast with the failure to find clear support for EC,
results strongly supported the notion that frequency formats
evoke greater imagery and affect than probabilistic formats.
In Experiment 1 when the low probability event was
negative, participants were less willing to engage in the

Consistent with Experiment 1, preliminary analysis
indicated a similar pattern of effects in both scenarios and so
the data were collapsed across the two in all subsequent
analyses. Figure 2 displays the mean willingness ratings
collapsed across the lottery and game show scenarios.

7
Probability Format

Willingness
(1=low, 7=High)

6

Frequency Format

5
4
3
2
1
>1 Cued

< 1 Cued

Numbe r of Exe mplars C ue d

Figure 2. Mean willingness ratings collapsed across the two
positive scenarios in Experiment 2
1633

behavior when frequency formats were used. In Experiment
2 when the low probability event was positive, participants
were more willing to engage in the proposed behavior when
frequency formats were used. The different findings with
the probability and frequency formats lend support to the
claims of Kahneman and Tversky (1982), Gigerenzer and
Hoffrage (1995), Slovic et al. (2000) and others that
thinking about frequencies differs from thinking about
probabilities. (See Sloman, Over, Slovak and Stibel 2003
for an illuminating discussion of the basis for this
difference).
One possible reason for the discrepancies between our
results and those of Koehler and Macchi is that in our tests
of the multiplicative mechanism the product of the reference
class and the incidence rate was not sufficiently small. Note
that in the Koehler and Macchi study the product was 0.005
compared to those of 0.2 or 0.5 in our scenarios. It is
plausible that participants rounded up these larger figures to
1, thus facilitating the production of exemplars in both
conditions. Such an account would explain why we found
no difference between the probability format conditions of
Experiment 1, but it does not explain the reversal of the
exemplar effect in the probability conditions of Experiment
2.
This latter reversal could be explained within the EC
framework by suggesting that participants could be first
estimating the chance that someone else – rather than
themselves - might win the lottery or enter the game show
and then use this estimate to determine their willingness to
participate. Reasoning like this could lead to a decrease in
the willingness to participate as the likelihood of generating
other ‘winners’ increases – as we observed.
The reversal effect was also present in the frequency
format conditions of Experiment 2. Although there was a
main effect of frequency over probability, participants were
more willing to participate in positive events when a
fractional numerator was used than when an integer was
used. One explanation for the reversal in both conditions is
that the reference class is an independent contributor to the
willingness to engage in low probability positive events.
This explanation seems a little ad hoc, but is based on the
very intuitive idea that people are simply more willing to
play in lotteries when the number of other tickets sold is
small. This would explain the observed pattern of greater
willingness when the lottery was described in terms of 50 as
opposed to 5000 other tickets being sold in a day. This
factor appeared to increase willingness over and above
the effect of presenting the data in a frequency format.
These alternative explanations highlight the need to
document the format effect in more detail. It seems that it is
not only the use of frequency formats per se that is
important, but also the aspects of the information that
people focus on, and how imagined outcomes are
subsequently used in reasoning about particular scenarios.
Further experimentation is required to flesh out these
alternative accounts.

In conclusion, our results present some clear challenges
to the specific formulation of EC theory provided in
Koehler and Macchi (2004). In particular we found no
evidence for the multiplicative mechanism that they
propose. However, our findings are consistent with the
general notion that the imagability of outcomes affects how
people think about low probability events and that this
imagability is enhanced by the use of frequency formats.
Further work is required to define the locus of these effects
and determine their implications for the important practical
problems inherent in risk communication.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported a Faculty Research Grant from
the University of New South Wales.

References
Denes-Raj, V. & Epstein, S. (1994). Conflict between
intuitive and rational processing: when people behave
against their better judgment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 66, 819-829.
Epstein, S. (1994). Interaction of the cognitive and
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist, 49,
709-724.
Gigerenzer, G. & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1982). Variants of
uncertainty. In D.Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky
(Eds.) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. (pp. 509-520). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press
Koehler, J.J. (1997). One in millions, billions and trillions:
lessons from People v. Collins (1968) for People v.
Simpson (1995). Journal of Legal Education, 47, 214223.
Koehler, J.J., & Macchi, L. (2004). Thinking about low
probability events: an exemplar cuing theory.
Psychological Science, 15, 540-546.
Macchi, L. (2000). Partitive formulation of information in
probabilistic problems: Beyond heuristics and frequency
format explanations. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 82, 217-236.
Purchase, I.F.H. & Slovic, P. (1999). Quantitative risk
assessment breeds fear. Human and ecological risk
assessment, 5, 445-453.
Sloman, S.A., Over, D., Slovak, L., & Stibel, J.M. (2003).
Frequency illusion and other fallacies. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 91, 296-309.
Slovic, P., Monahan, J., MacGregor, D.G. (2000). Violence
risk assessment and communication: The effects of using
actual cases, providing instruction and employing
probability versus frequency formats. Law and Human
Behavior, 24, 271-296.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207-232.

1634

Appendix

Experiment 1: Laser Treatment Scenario, Frequency
Format, > 1 exemplar cued.

In both experiments participants received two questions
relating to different scenarios. For all participants one
question was in a frequency format and one in a probability
format. For half the participants the questions both cued
exemplars, for the other half they did not cue exemplars.
Below are example questions for both experiments. For
Experiment 1 examples of the questions that cued exemplars
are given, for Experiment 2 the ‘non-cuing’ questions are
provided.

Imagine that you have a large birthmark on your face. A
new laser treatment for removing birthmarks has been
developed and you are offered the chance to participate in a
clinical trial of this new treatment. 5000 people worldwide
will participate in the trial and you are told that based on
previous research with similar treatments it is estimated that
50 out of 5000 people in a trial will be permanently scarred
by the treatment.

Experiment 1: Vaccine Scenario, Probability Format, >1
exemplar cued.

Experiment 2: Lottery Scenario, Probability Format, < 1
exemplar cued.

Imagine that you are very susceptible to catching flu. A new
flu vaccine has been developed which is claimed to guard
against all known strains of flu. You are asked to take part
in a clinical trial of this new vaccine. 2000 people
worldwide will participate in the trial and you are told that
on the basis of previous research with similar vaccines there
is an estimated risk of 1% that the vaccine will cause an
unpleasant allergic reaction.

You are offered the opportunity, today, to buy a ticket in the
new “Sydney Lottery”. 50 tickets are sold each day and it is
estimated you have a 1% chance of buying a winning ticket.

1635

Experiment 2: Game Show Scenario, Frequency Format, <
1 exemplar cued.
You have the opportunity, today, to enter a TV game show
that offers fantastic prizes. 20 people call the TV station
each day to try to get on the show and it is estimated that on
the average 0.2 people in every 20 callers are selected.

