UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Impaired Cognitive Flexibility and Intact Cognitive Control in Autism: A Computational
Cognitive Neuroscience Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0gm2342h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Kulvicki, John

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Impaired Cognitive Flexibility and Intact Cognitive Control in Autism:
A Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Approach
Trenton E. Kriete & David C. Noelle
{TRENT.KRIETE,DAVID.NOELLE}@VANDERBILT.EDU
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Vanderbilt University

Abstract
In people with autism, the ability to enact a behavior in the presence of competing responses appears intact, while the ability to fluently adapt cognitive control in the face of changing task contingencies is impaired. In this paper, the Cross-Task Generalization
model (Rougier et al., 2005), which offers a formal account of the effect of dopamine on frontal cortex function, is used to capture performance of both normally
functioning individuals and people with autism on a
classic test of cognitive control, the Stroop task (Stroop,
1935), and one of cognitive flexibility, the Wisconsin
Card Sort Test (Berg, 1948). By weakening the effect
of the dopamine’s signal on frontal cortex, the model
fits quantitative and qualitative results of autistic performance on these tasks and demonstrates the potential
usefulness of this approach in autism research.

Introduction
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are pervasive developmental disorders with a prevalence estimated at 1 in
166 live births. Autism is characterized by severe social
deficits, problems in both verbal and non-verbal communications, motor skill deficiencies, disruptive stereotypic movements, and occasionally self-injurious behavior. Genetic factors are evident in the disorder, shown
through inheritibility as well as the fact that most people
with autism are male. There has been steady progress
in early identification of the behavioral characteristics
of the disorder, as well as early intervention techniques,
but no consensus has been reached concerning the neural
basis of autism.
People with autism are impaired across a range of cognitive tasks, including planning (Bennetto et al., 1996),
theory of mind tasks (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985), and
tasks requiring spontaneous generation of novel behaviors and ideas (Turner, 1999). Many cognitive faculties
are spared, however, including working memory retention (Ozonoff and Strayer, 2001). One particularly interesting aspect of the cognitive profile demonstrated by
people with autism is that cognitive flexibility has been
shown to be impaired in experimental tasks such as the
Wisconsin Card Sort Test, while cognitive control, as
measured by tests such as the classic Stroop paradigm,
remains robust and relatively unaffected (Ozonoff and
Jensen, 1999). Cognitive control describes our ability to
enact a behavior in the presence of a distracting or more
automatic competing response. Cognitive flexibility can
be described as our ability to fluently adjust cognitive
1190

control as task contingencies change. Capturing this dichotomy is a considerable challenge for any theoretical
account whose goal is explaining autistic behavior.
A potentially valuable and novel approach to autism
research involves leveraging the tools of computational
cognitive neuroscience to help formalize the neural mechanisms responsible for the pattern of behavior found in
people with autism. Computational models of cognition
force researchers to be explicit in their assumptions, as
well as in the mechanisms employed, during scientific
conjecture. The formal nature of these models allow us
to form precise and testable hypotheses concerning the
mechanisms responsible for the phenomena of interest.
The Cross-Task (XT) Generalization model (Rougier
et al., 2005) is a model of cognitive control and flexibility grounded in comptemporary accounts of the role of
dopamine in prefrontal cortex (PFC) function. XT has
been used to capture performance of both normal functioning and frontally damaged individuals on the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (WCST) and the Stroop task. We
have found that, in the context of this model, weakening
the effect of dopamine on frontal functioning is sufficient
to capture autistic performance on both tasks, showing significantly increased perserverative errors during
WCST, signaling impaired flexibility, while leaving cognitive control intact as demonstrated by a lack of effect
on performance of the Stroop task. This observation suggests that “executive dysfunction” symptoms in autism
may be mediated by PFC / dopamine interactions.

Background
Psychological & Neuroscientific Frameworks
Three main cognitive theories have been proposed for
understanding cognitive differences in autism: theory of
mind, weak central coherence, and executive dysfunction. Theory of mind (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985) describes the ability to attribute, evaluate, and manipulate
mental states. This ability is believed to be impaired in
autism, and this impairment is used as a possible explanation for the severe social deficits demonstrated by
people with autism. Weak Central Coherence (WCC)
is described as a difference in cognitive processing style,
rather than a deficit in abilities (Happe, 1999). In WCC,
it is believed that contextual processing of information is
sacrificed in favor of a more focused “piecemeal” processing style. The Executive Dysfunction hypothesis views
autism as emerging from a deficit in executive control

over behavior (Hughes et al., 1994). Executive functioning is used as an umbrella term for processes such as
planning, inhibition, and cognitive flexibility, and is traditionally associated with frontal processes.
The success of these psychological frameworks in explaining many behavioral characteristics of ASD could
be solidified if a formal account of the underlying biological mechanisms which give rise to observed behavior could be provided. Neuroscientific frameworks thus
far have had little success in providing a unified view
of the neural mechanisms responsible in autism. Current conjectures range from observed abnormalities in
the cerebellum (Courchesne, 1987), to dysfunction of the
serotonin system (Chugani, 2004), to specific prefrontal
deficits (Mundy, 2003), to distributed theories implicating multiple brain areas such as widespread dysfunction throughout the hippocampus, the amygdala, the
oxytocin-opiate system, and temporal and parietal association cortices (Waterhouse et al., 1996).
Psychological and neuroscientific theories have the potential to constrain and inform each other, unifying research concerning the neural basis of autism. However,
it is unclear at this point, given the multiplicity of brain
areas implicated in ASD, how best to integrate the cognitive neuroscience and cognitive psychology of autism.

Computational Approaches
The formal and explicit nature of the tools of computational cognitive modeling provide a novel method for
approaching this problem. In order for computational
models to be useful in this endeavor, they must be
constrained by both bottom-up (neurobiological mechanisms) and by top-down (observed behavior) considerations. Most existing models of autism have been fairly
abstract in nature, making little contact with specific
neurobioloical considerations (Cohen, 1994; McClelland,
2000; O’Loughlin and Thagard, 2000). Even those models of autism which have incorporated biology in their
framework have thus far only matched qualitative patterns of behavior in people with ASD, not attempting to
account for any quantitative behavioral data (Gustafsson, 1997). Models more tightly coupled with observed
functional properties of neurobiological systems and constrained by actual behavioral data will be able to more
precisely inform theories of ASD.

Dopamine & Temporal Difference Learning
The precise timing and firing rates of mesolimbic
dopamine (DA) neurons have been demonstrated to
encode a measure of change in future expected reward (Schultz et al., 1997). Linking machine learning
and biology, this same change in expected future reward is also the key variable in a reinforcement learning
paradigm known as Temporal Differences (TD) learning.
This connection has led researchers to formalize the role
of midbrain DA neurons in learning (Barto, 1994; Montague et al., 1996), equating the firing rate of the DA
cells with the amount of change in expected future reward. In TD learning this change in expected reward
across two consecutive time steps is given by:
1191

δ(t) = r(t) + γV (t + 1) − V (t)

(1)

Where r(t) is a continuous reward value which is delivered at each time step based on performance, V(t)
and V(t+1) are the expected future rewards for times t
and t+1, δ(t) is the change in expected future reward,
or TD Error, and γ is a constant scaling factor, where
0 < γ < 1. Adjusting γ changes the amount by which
temporally distant rewards are discounted as compared
to rewards that can be attained in the near future.

Computational Models of PFC
PFC has been broadly implicated as playing a central
role in cognitive control and cognitive flexibility. Under some accounts, the active maintenance of abstract
rule-like representations in PFC is necessary to provide a
task-appropriate processing bias to more posterior brain
areas (Cohen et al., 1990). Our work builds on an existing body of modeling work having strong ties to biology, leveraging an existing formalism connecting phasic
DA and PFC function (Braver and Cohen, 2000). This
formalism states that a change in expected future reward, linked to the firing rate of DA neurons, can be
used as a gating mechanism, informing PFC when to
actively maintain its current control state and when to
gate in a new one. These models have been successful in tying frontal disturbances, such as those found
in schizophrenia, to deficits in cognitive control (Cohen and Servan-Schrieber, 1992) and cognitive flexibility (Braver and Cohen, 1999). A recent elaboration of
this model, XT (Rougier et al, 2005), is the first neuroscientific model able to provide quantitative fits to a
hallmark task of cognitive control, the Stroop task, and
a widely used measure of cognitive flexibility, WCST, in
both neurologically intact and frontally damaged people.

The XT Model
XT is a model of cognitive flexibility and cognitive control built using the biologically inspired Leabra framework (O’Reilly and Munakata, 2000). (See Figure 1.)
The input of XT consists of a layer of units using a localist code to specify stimuli being used in the current task.
We can think of the rows of the input layer representing
different dimensions (e.g. color, shape, texture) and the
columns indexing features across each dimension. (See
Figure 2.) The response layer is analogous in structure to
the input layer, with a winner-take-all mechanism used
to simulate lateral inhibition between the units, facilitating a competition for a single output response. There
is one additional unit—a “No Response” unit—included
in the response layer, which provides the network with
an alternative to the stimuli present in the input layer.
The PFC layer provides top-down cognitive control using abstract rule-like representations. In previous models, the PFC representations were hand coded by the
modeler, with the question of how these representations
develop brushed aside. In contrast, the rule-like PFC
representations in XT are learned through extensive experience with the stimuli. This extended amount of experience provides a reasonable account for the protracted

Figure 2: Stimulus Input Layer: Caricature of input to
the XT model, with rows portraying stimulus dimension
(color, shape, size, etc) and columns indexing feature
values across dimensions (small, medium, large, etc.)
(negative TD Error, δ(t) < 0), the PFC representations are destabilized, allowing a new, possibly more appropriate, PFC representation to be maintained. In the
model, the δ(t) value directly modulates excitatory ionic
maintenance currents (gm below) of units in PFC by:
Figure 1: XT Model Architechture
period of the development of PFC during adolescence, as
well as how control can emerge through experience, supported by biologically based self-organizing mechanisms.
The Dimension Cue layer is used in the model to inform the network of what stimulus dimension (e.g. color)
is relevant. For example, the Dimension Cue layer is used
in the Stroop task to inform the network when it should
prefer color naming to word reading, or vice versa. Each
unit in the Dimension Cue corresponds to a dimension in
the stimulus (input) layer being available. If no Dimension Cue unit is activated, the network is uninformed as
to what dimension is currently relevant, and must rely
on a random search method in order to succeed. This
uninformed search strategy is used during the modeling
of WCST performance.
The Task layer is vital in the training of the XT network, with each unit representing a different task for
the network to perform. Rougier et al (2005), show
that a large breadth of experience is necessary for useful rule-like representations to develop in PFC using the
XT framework, necessitating the exposure of the network
to multiple tasks during training. For our simulations,
the Task layer is held constant after training, always requiring the network to perform the “Naming Feature”
task. “Naming Feature” requires the network to name
one feature of the input stimuli, using feedback to adjust
the dimensional representation in PFC in order to name
the correct feature.
The flexible adaptation of cognitive control is implemented using a DA-based adaptive gating (AG) mechanism, depicted in XT by the AG unit. (See Figure 1.)
The AG mechanism computes the expected future reward based on the TD learning algorithm, with reward
delivered based on the network’s performance. When
the model performs better than expected (positive TD
Error, δ(t) > 0) the PFC representations are strengthened using an intrinsic maintenance current to stabilize
PFC. When the model performs worse than expected

gm (t − 1) = 0 if |δ(t)| > θ

(2)

gm (t) = gm (t − 1) + δ(t)a

(3)

Therefore, a positive δ(t) will result in an increase in
active maintenance of PFC representations, while a negative δ(t) will destabilize PFC. The value θ represents
a threshold value for the ionic currents. If the TD error, δ(t), exceeds this amount (θ = .5 in all simulations),
then the maintenance currents, gm , are effectively reset.
Using this mechanism and a unified computational
framework, XT has been successful in providing strong
quantitative fits to human performance on tasks measuring both cognitive control and flexibility.

Modeling Approach
Dopamine levels have been studied in people with
autism, and a difference in activation in PET studies (Fernell et al., 1997) as well as an overall difference
in HVA (a DA metabolite) (Martineau et al., 1992) have
been observed. In clinical studies, haloperidol, a DA
antagonist, has produced clinical benefits in mitigating
some of the disruptive attributes of autism (Posey and
McDougle, 2000). Given the formalized relationship between the role of DA on PFC functioning and PFC’s
role in cognitive control and the flexible adaptation of
control, we hypothesize a deficit in DA functioning can
account for the impaired cognitive flexibility seen in people with autism, while leaving cognitive control robust
and relatively unaffected. Using the XT framework, we
test this by reducing the effect of the DA analog in the
model by scaling the TD Error, δ(t), by a constant factor, κ, where κ = 1 for normally functioning individuals
and κ < 1 for people with autism1 . The TD Error δ(t)
now becomes:
δ(t) = κ[r(t) + γV (t + 1) − V (t)]

(4)

1
The scaling of δ(t) by κ is the only parameter modified
from the original XT model to capture autistic performance.

1192

. . . where 0 < κ ≤ 1. When modeling autistic performance in both WCST and Stroop, a κ value of 0.53
produced the best results and was used in all simulations. Qualitatively, this reduction of the DA signal can
be seen as decreasing the efficacy of the PFC gating system, resulting in less efficient destabilization of the representations in PFC. It is worth noting that the modeled
DA signal remains agnostic as to the precise quantitative
nature of actual DA levels. It is possible, for instance,
that an optimal firing rate of the midbrain DA neurons
exists for efficient PFC gating. Thus, either too much
or too little DA could have deleterious results on the
effectiveness (a lower κ value) of the DA based PFC gating system. Alternatively, tonic and phasic components
of the DA signal could have differential effects on PFC
gating (Cohen et al., 2002).

Modeling WCST
The WCST consists of a deck of cards, which contain
stimuli varying along three dimensions (e.g. color, shape,
quantity) and across four different features per dimension (e.g. for color dimension: red, blue, green, & yellow). The participants in the study are told to sort the
cards into piles, but are not given any explicit instructions on how to correctly do this. Instead, subjects are
given sparse feedback —“Correct” or “Incorrect”— until the proper sorting strategy is discovered. After the
sorting rule (e.g. sort by color) is learned by the participant, and 10 consecutive correct sorts are accomplished,
the rule is changed without informing the subject. This
procedure continues until either 6 correct categories (sets
of 10 correct consecutive sorts) are achieved, or all 127
cards in the deck are exhausted. Errors are recorded
as incorrect sorts, with perseverative errors scored as an
incorrect sort that used the last correct sorting rule. Success at WCST requires the ability to flexibly change the
dimension being maintained by PFC as the sorting rules
change.
Modeling WCST in the XT framework required using
only three of the five possible input dimensions, facilitating a tighter link to the actual WCST. All of the
rules mentioned above for administrating WCST were
followed in the model’s implementation, recording errors
and perseverative errors as they occur.

Modeling the Stroop Task
The Stroop task is a classic measure of cognitive control and the ability to inhibit a prepotent response. In
Stroop, the stimuli are different color words, presented
in various colored fonts. The participants are asked to
either read the word or to name the color of the font
in which the text is presented. People are faster overall
at reading the word as opposed to naming the color of
the word. Furthermore, when comparing congruent (e.g.
the word “red” in red font) versus the incongruent (the
word “red” written in green font) conditions, people only
show an interference effect when naming the color and
not when reading the word. In other words, there is an
increase in reaction time for color naming, but not for
word reading, when comparing congruent to incongruent
cases.
1193

Cohen and Servan-Schreiber (1990) provide a computational account of the Stroop task, positing that the
greater overall strength of the word reading pathway is
due to greater familiarity with word reading, making this
pathway stronger and more automatic compared to the
color naming pathway. In their model, a PFC-like mechanism provides top-down biasing on the respective pathways based on the current goal (e.g. “read the word”
or “name the color”). The control provided from PFC
is necessary to overcome the pre-potent word reading
pathway in the trials when the network is required to
name the color. This results in an increase in reaction
time in the color naming incongruent condition, but not
in the word reading incongruent condition. This is attributed to the greater overall competition created when
the network needs to overcome the stronger word reading
pathway.
In order to simulate this imbalance of processing
strengths in our model, we manipulated the frequency
in which one dimension was experienced during training, making the dimension relevant only 25% as often
as the other dimensions. The competition between the
color naming and word reading pathways is simulated
by co-activating features in this weaker dimension, corresponding to the color naming pathway, and a strong
dimension, representing the word reading pathway. The
PFC layer provides the crucial top-down biasing mechanism, consistent with the model of Cohen & ServanSchreiber, to help resolve the competition appropriately,
based on the goal of the task. The settling time of the
network resulting from this competition is used as an
analog to reaction time, and is scaled using a single free
parameter allowing us to directly compare model results
to human data.

Results
In order to compare WCST and Stroop performance,
100 networks were fully trained using the XT framework
standard training procedure, stopping after a maximum
100 epochs of training or when the network achieved a
stringent performance criteria. Following this training,
each network was tested under both conditions of DA
modulation, on each of the WCST and the Stroop tasks.
The 100 networks were each treated as individual subjects for data analysis.

WCST Results
Four main measures were used in evaluating the performance on the WCST task:
1. Total Number of Errors
2. Percentage of Total Errors
3. Total Number of Perseverative Errors
4. Percentage of Perseverative Errors
Our simulations of both normally functioning persons
and individuals with autism provide reasonable results
for all measures.
All differences between the simulated performance of
normally functioning individuals and that of people with
autism were statistically reliable (see Table 1), and consistent with previous studies (Prior and Hoffman, 1990).

30

WCST Perseverative Errors

900

Reaction Time (msec)

Number of Errors

Control
Autism

20

10

800

Stroop Reaction Time
Control Network - Word Reading
Autism Network - Word Reading
Human Data - Word Reading
Control Network - Color Naming
Autism Network - Color Naming
Human Data - Color Naming

700

600

500

0

XT Model

neutral

Minshew et al (2002)

conflict

Condition

Control Vs. Autism Performance

Figure 3: Comparing model performance on WCST perseveratitive errors for normally functioning and individuals with autism to a previous study. (Minshew et al.,
2002)

Figure 4: Stroop reaction time plot comparing the simulated autistic and normally functioning network’s performance to human data. Human data from (Dunbar
and Macleod, 1984)

Importantly, the perseverative error measure is significantly higher in the DA modified version of our model
compared to the model of normal function (Figure 3),
matching a pattern of results reported in the literature (Ozonoff and Jensen, 1999).

significant change in performance, matching the cognitive profile of impaired cognitive flexibility and relatively
robust cognitive control found in the performance of people with autism.
It is interesting to note that our model ties a difference
in DA function to frontal lobe dysfunction in people with
autism. This provides a possible bridge to Executive
Dysfunction, traditionally linked to frontal processes, in
people with autism (Hughes et al., 1994).
By reducing the effect of DA modulation only after the
network is completely trained and PFC representations
are fully developed, we limit our model’s ability to capture the time course of autism. Autism is, at its core, a
developmental disorder. A major direction of our future
work will involve observing how DA modulation affects
the developmental trajectory of the model. Specifically,
we will examine how the difference in DA strength affects the learning of PFC representations and how this
subsequently affects performance.
Using computational models inspired and constrained
by our existing knowledge of biology is a relatively untapped resource for exploring the neurological underpinnings of autism. Our initial results using these tools are
encouraging and show a promising future direction for
research on autism spectrum disorders.

Stroop Results
Model performance on the Stroop task is able to qualitatively and quantitatively fit human performance (Figure 4). The model of intact DA function shows the classic
Stroop reaction time results. The pre-potent word reading dimension shows uniform reaction times across both
congruent and conflict conditions, while the weaker color
naming dimension shows a slowing in reaction times
when the stimuli are incongruent. Autistic performance,
obtained by scaling the strength of the DA signal in the
model, showed the same pattern of results with no significant increase in the overall Stroop effect (F(1,198) =
0.62; p > 0.43) consistent with past findings (Ozonoff
and Jensen, 1999).

Discussion & Future Work
Leveraging a formal characterization of the effect of DA
on PFC functioning, we have shown that a single manipulation, reducing the efficacy of the DA signal, is sufficient to capture the performance of people with autism
on basic tests of cognitive flexibility (WCST), and cognitive control (Stroop). In WCST, our models of autistic
performance commit significantly more perseverative errors compared to controls, while in Stroop there is no

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to extend their thanks to the
members of the Computational Cognitive Neuroscience
Laboratory at Vanderbilt University, as well as to three
anonymous reviewers.

References
Table 1: WCST Model Results
WCST Measure
Total Errors
% Total Errors
Total Perseverative Errors
% Perseverative Errors

Normal
34.66
35.80%
13.84
15.07%

Autism
44.95
41.76%
21.40
20.38%

F(1,198)
15.33
13.23
88.13
63.47

Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., and Frith, U. (1985).
Does the autistic child have a theory of mind. Cognition, 21:37–46.
Barto, A. G. (1994). Adaptive critics and the basal
ganglia. In Houk, J. C., Davis, J. L., and Beiser,
D. G., editors, Models of Information Processing in
the Basal Ganglia, pages 215–232. MIT Press, MIT.

p<
.001
.001
.001
.001

1194

Bennetto, L., Pennington, B. F., and Rogers, S. J.
(1996). Intact and impaired memory functions in
autism. Child Development, 67:1816–1835.
Berg, E. A. (1948). A simple objective test for measuring
flexibility in thinking. Journal of General Psychology, 39:15–22.
Braver, T. S. and Cohen, J. D. (1999). Dopamine, cognitive control, and schizophrenia: The gating model.
Progress in Brain Research, 121:327–349.
Braver, T. S. and Cohen, J. D. (2000). On the control of control: The role of dopamine in regulating
prefrontal function and working memory. In Monsell, S. and Driver, J., editors, Control of Cognitive Processes: Attention and Performance XVIII,
chapter 31, pages 713–737. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Chugani, D. C. (2004). Serotonin in autism and pediatric
epilepsies. Mental Retardation and Developmental
Disabilities Research Reviews, 10(2):112–116.
Cohen, I. L. (1994). An artificial neural network analogue of learning in autism. Biological Psychiatry,
36(1):5–20.
Cohen, J. D., Braver, T. S., and Brown, J. W. (2002).
Computational perspectives on dopamine function
in prefrontal cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 12:223–229.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., and L., M. J. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed processing model of the stroop effect. Psychological Review, 97(3):332–361.
Cohen, J. D. and Servan-Schrieber, D. (1992). Context,
cortex, and dopamine: A connectionist approach to
behavior and biology in schizophrenia. Psychological
Review, 99(1):45–77.
Courchesne, E. (1987). A neurophysiological view of
autism. In Schopler, E. and Mesibov, G. B., editors, Neurobiological Issues in Autism, pages 258–
324. Plenum, New York.
Dunbar, K. and Macleod, C. M. (1984). Human perception and performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 10:622.
Fernell, E., Watanabe, Y., Adolfsson, I., Tani, Y.,
Bergstrom, M., Hartvig, P., Lilja, A., von Knorring, A. L., Gillberg, C., and Langstrom, B. (1997).
Possible effects of tetrahydrobiopterin treatment in
six children with autism–clinical and positron emission tomography data: a pilot study. Developmental
Medicine and Child Neurology, 39(5):313–318.
Gustafsson, L. (1997). Inadequate cortical feature maps:
A neural circuit theory of autism. Biological Psychiatry, 42(12):1138–1147.
Happe, . (1999). Autism: Cognitive deficit or cognitive
style? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(6):216–222.
Hughes, C., Russell, J., and Robbins, T. W. (1994). Evidence for executive dysfunction in autism. Neuropsychologia, 32(4):477–492.
Martineau, J., Barthelemy, C., Jouve, J., Muh, J. P.,
and Lelord, G. (1992). Monoamines (serotonin and
catecholamines) and their derivatives in infantile
autism: age-related changes and drug effects. Devel-

opmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 34(7):593–
603.
McClelland, J. L. (2000). The basis of hyperspecificity
in autism: A preliminary suggestion based on properties of neural nets. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30(5):497–502.
Minshew, N. J., Meyer, J., and Goldstein, G. (2002). Abstract reasoning in autism: a dissociation between
concept formation and concept identification. Neuropsychology, 16(3):327–334.
Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1996).
A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems
based on predictive hebbian learning. Journal of
Neuroscience, 16:1936–1947.
Mundy, P. (2003). The neural basis of social impairments
in autism: The role of the dorsal medial-frontal cortex and anterior cingulate system. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 44(6):793–809.
O’Loughlin, C. and Thagard, P. (2000). Autism and
coherence: A computational model. Mind and Language, 15(4):375–392.
O’Reilly, R. C. and Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational Explorations in Cognitive Neuroscience: Understanding the Mind by Simulating the Brain. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Ozonoff, S. and Jensen, J. (1999). Specific executive
function profiles in three neurodevelopmental disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 29(2):171–177.
Ozonoff, S. and Strayer, D. (2001). Further evidence
of intact working memory in autism. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31:257–263.
Posey, D. J. and McDougle, C. J. (2000). The pharmacotherapy of target symptoms associated with autistic disorder and other pervasive developmental disorders. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 8(2):45–63.
Prior, M. R. and Hoffman, W. (1990). Neuropsychological testing of autistic children through an exploration with frontal lobe tests. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 20:581–590.
Rougier, N. P., Noelle, D. C., Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D.,
and O’Reilly, R. C. (2005). Prefrontal cortex and
flexible cognitive control: Rules without symbols.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
102(20):7738–7343.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., and Montague, P. R. (1997). A
neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science,
275:1593–1599.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
28:643–662.
Turner, M. (1999). Generating novel ideas: Fluency performance in high-functioning and learning disabled
individuals with autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 40:189–201.
Waterhouse, L., Fein, D., and Modahl, C. (1996). Neurofunctional mechanisms in autism. Psychological
Review, 103(3):457–489.

1195

