UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences in Rational Thinking Time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2208b8k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
De Neys, Wim
Dieussaert, Kristien

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in Rational Thinking Time
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.be)
Kristien Dieussaert (Kristien.Dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
automatically whereas the operations of the analytic
system would be slow and heavily demanding of our
limited working memory resources. Both systems have
been shown to reside in different brain regions (Goel &
Dolan, 2003).
It is assumed that in most situations the heuristic and
analytic system interact in concert. Hence, most of the
time the heuristic default system will provide us with
fast, frugal, and correct conclusions. However, the
prepotent heuristics may also bias reasoning in situations
that require more elaborate, analytic processing. That is,
both systems will sometimes conflict and cue different
responses. In these cases the analytic system will need to
override the belief-based response generated by the
heuristic system (Stanovich & West, 2000). The
inhibition of the heuristic system and the computations of
the analytic system would draw on limited, executive
working memory resources. Therefore, correct analytic
reasoning in case of a belief-logic conflict would be
characteristic of those highest in working memory span:
The more resources that are available, the more likely
that the analytic system will be successfully engaged and
the correct response calculated.
Individual difference studies on the belief bias effect in
syllogistic reasoning provide paradigmatic support for the
framework. Belief bias refers to the heuristic tendency to
judge the validity of a syllogism by evaluating the
believability of the conclusion (e.g., Klauer, Musch, &
Naumer, 2000; Oakhill, Johnson-Laird, & Garnham,
1989; Newstead, Pollard, Evans, & Allen, 1992). For
some syllogistic problems the logical status of the
conclusion conflicts with background beliefs (i.e.,
conflict items, see Appendix for examples). The
heuristic, belief-based system thus triggers an erroneous
response and consequently many people fail to solve
these problems correctly. For other syllogisms the logical
status of the conclusion is consistent with the
believability of the conclusion (i.e., no-conflict items).
Correct solution rates on these no-conflict items are
uniformly high.
Consistent with the dual process framework it has been
observed (e.g., Kokis et al., 2002; Newstead et al., 2004;
Stanovich & West, 1999, 2000) that individual
differences in cognitive capacity predict performance on
the conflict items but not on the no-conflict items.
Indeed, the heuristic system is assumed to operate
automatically, that is, it should not burden the limited
executive resources. Hence, when the heuristic-belief
based response is consistent with the logical response
even the heuristically reasoning low spans will get the

Abstract
Individual difference studies suggest that reasoners highest in
cognitive capacity favor analytic, normative responses over
fallacious, heuristic responses. The present study complemented
reasoning accuracy with timing data to obtain an indication of
the nature of the reasoning process underlying the response
selection. A total of 199 participants were presented with a
measure of working memory capacity and a syllogistic
reasoning task. As predicted, higher spans were not only more
likely to draw a correct conclusion but also reasoned longer
when believability and logical status of the conclusion
conflicted. Working memory capacity did not predict reasoning
accuracy or time when believability and logic were consistent.
Findings validate basic processing assumptions of a dual
process framework of thinking.

Introduction
In recent years, studies on individual differences in
reasoning performance moved to the center stage of the
cognitive research on human thinking. Over the last
decades an impressive body of research established that
human reasoning frequently violates normative
standards: In a wide range of reasoning tasks the majority
of educated adults fails to give the response that is correct
according to logic or probability theory (Evans, 2002;
Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). The exact nature
and consequences of this “rational thinking failure”
instigated a rife debate (e.g., Stein, 1996). Systematic
research on individual differences in cognitive capacity
(e.g., Kokis, Macpherson, Toplak, West, & Stanovich,
2002; Klaczynski, 2001; Newstead, Handley, Harley,
Wright, Farrelly, 2004; Stanovich & West, 1999, 2000;
Torrens, Thompson, & Cramer, 1999) pointed to the
crucial stipulation that participants highest in cognitive
(working memory) capacity do manage to solve the
problems correctly.
According to influential dual process theories of
thinking, correct normative responding in classic
reasoning tasks requires that an analytic, controlled
reasoning process overrides prepotent heuristics (e.g.,
Epstein, 1994; Evans, 2003; Evans & Over, 1996;
Sloman, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000). Advocates of
the dual process framework have distinguished two types
of reasoning systems. In general, the first, so-called
heuristic system is characterized by a tendency towards
an automatic contextualization of a problem with prior
knowledge and beliefs whereas the second, so-called
analytic system tends to decontextualize a problem and
allows reasoning according to normative standards. The
heuristic default system is assumed to operate fast and
577

reasoning time will be longer on the conflict than on the
no-conflict items.
As many cognitive scientists, Stanovich and West
(2000) and other dual process theorists assume that
executive working memory resources are the
quintessential component of computational cognitive
capacity (e.g., Evans, 2003). However, so far, the
individual difference studies in the dual process field
have always adopted measures of general intelligence
(e.g., SAT-scores). Although variations in working
memory capacity are well captured by these measures the
relation is not perfect (e.g., Engle, Tuholski, Laughlin, &
Conway, 1999). Therefore, the present study adopted a
test that was specifically designed to measure executive
working memory capacity.

right answer. However, on the conflict items only the
higher spans will manage to block the heuristic system
and reason analytically to get the logically correct
answer.
Despite the support from individual difference studies,
dual process theories have been severely criticized (e.g.,
Gigerenzer & Regier, 1996; Stanovich & West, 2000).
One fundamental critique concerns the fact that the
framework has exclusively focused on the accuracy
output (i.e., is a response correct or not) and not on the
underlying cognitive processes. This may result in
dramatic confounds: Even if one gives a correct response
this does not imply that one has reasoned analytically.
After all, you might have been lucky and guessed the
correct answer. Likewise, giving an incorrect response
does not imply that you did not reason analytically.
Indeed, you might have noticed the belief-logic conflict
and actively engaged in analytic processing but simply
failed to complete the process.
The present study starts to address the processing
shortcoming in individual differences studies by
complementing reasoning accuracy data with latency
data. The time needed to draw an inference can be used
as indicator of the nature of a reasoning process: Dual
process theories explicitly assume that the heuristic
system operates much faster than the time-consuming
analytic system. There is abundant evidence that
automatically operating cognitive processes are faster
than working memory resources demanding processes
(e.g., Cowan, 1995; McElree, 2001; Shiffrin &
Schneider, 1977). More specifically, reasoning under
time pressure has been shown to result in increased
heuristic responding (e.g., Roberts & Newton, 2001;
Schroyens, Schaeken, & Handley, 2003). Likewise, De
Neys (in press) established that analytic responses
required more time when the response time for correct,
analytic and incorrect answers was directly compared in a
number of reasoning tasks.
In the present study participants were presented with a
measure of working memory capacity and a syllogistic
reasoning task with conflict and no-conflict problems.
The dual process framework assumes that analytic
reasoning on conflict items is characteristic of those
highest in cognitive capacity. Low spans are expected to
reason heuristically whereas high spans are assumed to
block the heuristic response and reason analytically.
Since the analytic system operates slower than the
heuristic one, a higher span should therefore not only be
associated with higher accuracy but also with longer
response times. On the no-conflict items, the default
heuristic computations will not need to be overridden by
additional analytic computations. Both low and high
spans can rely on the fast and frugal heuristic system to
solve the problem. Therefore, everyone should draw
relatively fast and correct conclusions. Hence, as with
response accuracy, reasoning time should not be
associated with working memory capacity on the noconflict items. Finally, overall, one also predicts that

Experiment
Method
Participants
A total of 199 first-year psychology students from the
University of Leuven, Belgium, participated in return for
psychology course credit.
Material
Working memory measure. Participants’ working
memory capacity was measured using a version of the
Operation Span task (Ospan, La Pointe & Engle, 1990)
adapted for group testing (Gospan, for details see De
Neys, d’Ydewalle, Schaeken, & Vos, 2002). Participants
solve series of simple mathematical operations while
attempting to remember a list of unrelated words. First,
the operation from an operation-word pair is presented on
screen (e.g., ‘IS (4/2) – 1 = 5 ?’). Participants read the
operation silently and press a key to indicate whether the
answer is correct or not. Responses and response
latencies are recorded. After the participant has typed
down the response, the corresponding word (e.g.,
‘BALL’) from the operation-word string is presented for
800 ms. Three sets of each length (from two to six
operation-word pairs) are tested and set size varies in the
same randomly chosen order for each participant. The
Gospan-score is the sum of the recalled words for all sets
recalled completely and in correct order.
Participants who make more than 15% math errors or
whose mean operation response latencies deviate by
more than 2.5 standard deviations of the sample mean are
discarded.
Syllogisms. The syllogistic reasoning task was based on
Sá, West, and Stanovich (1999). Participants evaluated
eight syllogisms (see Appendix) taken from the work of
Markovits and Nantel (1989). Four of the problems had
conclusions whereby logic was in conflict with
believability (i.e., conflict items, two items with an
unbelievable-valid conclusion, and two items with a
believable-invalid conclusion). For the four “no-conflict”
items the believability of the conclusion was consistent
with the logical status (i.e., two items with an
578

unbelievable-invalid conclusion, and two items with a
believable-valid conclusion).
The experiment was run on computer. Items were
presented in the following format:
Premises:

All mammals walk.
Whales are mammals.

Conclusion:

Whales can walk.

Table 1
Mean Reasoning Accuracy, Latency (s), and Correlations
with Working Memory (WM) Capacity in Function of
Belief-Logic Conflict
Problem Type
Conflict
Measure

a. The conclusion follows logically from the premises.
b. The conclusion does not follow logically from the
premises.
Type down the letter that reflects your decision: _

Instructions showed an example item, stressed that the
premises should be assumed to be true, and that a
conclusion should be accepted only if it followed
logically from the premises.

No-Conflict

Accuracy

Latency

Accuracy

Latency

Mean
SD

2.59
1.26

13.29 s
4.25

3.54
.63

12.71 s
4.09

WMcorrelation

.24

.20

.01

.11

As Table 1 shows, the correlations between working
memory capacity and response accuracy replicated
previous findings with general intelligence measures. In
the event of a belief-logic conflict, higher spans were
more likely to solve the problems correctly, r = .24, p <
.005, but there was no association with working memory
capacity for the no-conflict items, r = .01, p = .97. The
correlation of .24 for the conflict items is in the range of
the correlations reported by Newstead et al. (2004, i.e., r
= .18 to .23) albeit somewhat lower than the associations
observed by Stanovich and West (1999, i.e., r = .33 to
.50).
The crucial finding is that, consistent with dual process
predictions, the latency data shows a similar pattern:
Higher spans spend more time solving the conflict items,
r = .20, p < .005, but working memory capacity does not
significantly predict latencies on the no-conflict items, r =
.11, p = .12.

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of 18 to 47.
Participants started with the Gospan task and completed
the syllogistic reasoning task after a short break.
Participants typed the letter reflecting their decision and
pressed the Enter-key when finished. The next item was
presented 750 ms after the Enter-key was pressed. The
instructions made clear that there were no time limits, but
it was stressed that once participants had made their final
decision, they had to press the Enter-key immediately.
The time between the presentation of the item and
pressing the Enter-key was recorded together with the
answer. The eight problems were presented in the same,
randomly determined order to all participants in order to
minimize any measurement error due to a participant by
order interaction.

Table 2
Mean Latency Increase (ms) on Conflict Items
(Compared with Correctly Solved No-Conflict Items) in
Function of WM-Capacity
Span group

Results
Five participants were discarded because they did not
meet the operation correctness or latency requirements of
the working memory measure. Mean Gospan-score of the
remaining 194 participants was 34.11 (SD = 10.80)
words recalled correctly out of 60.
For each participant the accuracy score (i.e., the number
of logically correct responses out of four) and mean
inference latency on the four conflict and four no-conflict
items was calculated. To prevent extreme reasoning
times from unduly influencing the means, any latency
more than 2.5 SD above a person’s mean latency was
replaced with that cutoff value. This procedure affected
approximately 3.5% of all observations.
Table 1 presents the basic findings. Participants erred
less on the no-conflict than on the conflict items, t(193) =
9.99, p < .001. Consistent with the prediction the noconflict items were also solved faster, t(193) = 2.09, p <
.041.

Conflict Response

High span

Low span

Conflict incorrect

2245 (7910)

-185 (3312)

Conflict correct

1079 (4815)

883 (4830)

Note.

Standard deviations in parentheses.

Table 2 presents the results of two enlightening
additional analyses. The analyses focused on the
“reasoning time increase” introduced by the belief-logic
conflict in function of working memory capacity and the
accuracy on the conflict items. A first analysis examined
the “reasoning time increase” in case the conflict item
correct responses were analyzed: No-conflict items, M = 12.46 s
(SD = 4.01), were solved faster than conflict items, M = 13.44 s
(SD = 4.98), t(179) = 2.74, p < .01, and working memory
capacity correlated with reasoning times on the conflict items, r
= .16, p < .03, but not on the no-conflict items, r = .11, p = .14.

1

Reported latencies were collapsed over correct and incorrect
responses. The latency patterns were identical when only
579

was solved erroneously. If participants draw an erroneous
conclusion this does not necessarily imply that they
reasoned purely heuristically. Especially for the higher
spans it is plausible that they did notice the belief-logic
conflict, engaged in analytic reasoning but simply failed
to inhibit the prepotent heuristic response completely. To
test this hypothesis participants’ mean inference time for
correctly solved no-conflict items was subtracted from
their mean inference time for erroneously solved conflict
items2. Correctly solved syllogisms for the no-conflict
items can be assumed to be computed by the heuristic
process. If an erroneous response on the conflict items is
also completely based on similar belief-based, heuristic
reasoning, one would not expect increased latencies.
Results showed that overall there was a marginally
significant 930 ms (SD = 5985) latency increase for the
erroneous conflict items, t(132) = 1.79, p = .076.
However, a correlational analysis indicated that the
latency increase depended on working memory capacity,
r = .25, n = 133, p < .005. To present a more specific
picture the sample was split up in two span groups based
on a working memory capacity median split. Consistent
with the positive correlation, the mean latency increase
for erroneously solved conflict items differed for the two
capacity groups, between-subjects test, t(131) = 2.37, p <
.02. As Table 2 shows, when high spans err on a conflict
syllogism, they nevertheless reason about 2 s longer than
when they correctly solve a no-conflict problem, t(60) =
2.21, p < .03. Low spans’ latencies do not differ in the
two cases, t(71) = -.47, p = .64.
The second analysis examined the “reasoning time
increase” for different working memory capacity groups
in case the conflict item was solved correctly. One could
argue that the few times that lower spans manage to give
a correct answer for a conflict item this is not based on
analytic reasoning but merely results from a guessing
strategy. To test this hypothesis participants’ mean
inference time for correctly solved no-conflict items was
subtracted from the mean inference time for correctly
solved conflict items3. If an erroneous response on the
conflict items would be based on a heuristic guessing
strategy one would not expect a latency increase. Results
showed that overall there was a 984 ms (SD = 4810)
latency increase for the conflict items, t(179) = 2.74, p <
.01. What is crucial is that the increase did not depend on
working memory capacity, r = .07, n = 180, p = .34. As
Table 2 shows, both the top and bottom span group
showed a rather similar latency increase, betweensubjects test, t(178) = .27, p = .79. This contradicts the
guessing hypothesis.

Discussion
The present study examined the impact of individual
differences in working memory capacity on both
reasoning accuracy and time. Given that the analytic
system operates slower than the heuristic system,
inferences that are assumed to be based on analytic
reasoning should be slower than heuristic inferences.
Thereby latency data provides straightforward evidence
concerning the nature of a reasoning process. Results
showed that in case of a belief-logic conflict high spans
were indeed not only more likely to draw a correct
conclusion but also reasoned longer. This supports the
claim that a time and resource demanding process
underlies correct reasoning in case of a belief-logic
conflict. When believability and logical status of the
conclusion were consistent, syllogisms were overall
solved faster and more accurately. As with the accuracy
data, working memory capacity did not predict reasoning
time on the no-conflict items: High and low spans
reasoned equally fast and well. These findings support
the idea that a fast and undemanding process underlies
reasoning when beliefs are not contradicted by logic.
One might claim that an apparent caveat of this study
is that more cognitively gifted reasoners might also be
generally more cautious. High spans could take more
time, for example, because they read the problems more
carefully than low spans. Thus, the longer latencies
would not be associated with a slower operating
reasoning process per se. However, such a “general
cautiousness” should also show-up during the processing
of the no-conflict items. The crucial point is precisely
that the longer latencies (and higher accuracy) for high
spans are specifically tied to the presence of a belief-logic
conflict. This pattern is a priori predicted by the dual
process framework.
The present findings stressed the link between working
memory capacity and analytic reasoning. However, this
does not imply that a large resource pool is all there is to
analytic reasoning. The results clearly indicated that the
relation between working memory capacity and
reasoning performance is not perfect. Some low spans do
manage to solve conflict items and they show the same
latency increase as the high spans when they do so.
Clearly, factors outside the cognitive ability spectrum
will also affect performance (e.g., “epistemic thinking
dispositions”, see Stanovich & West, 1999). Thus, in
pointing out the contribution of executive working
memory resources for correct, analytic reasoning the
present study does not minimize the role of other
mediating factors.
The study also illustrated possible limitations of an
exclusive focus on accuracy data in dual process studies.
Contrary to low spans, high spans who failed to solve a
conflict item nevertheless spent more time drawing the
erroneous conclusion than they spent drawing a correct
conclusion in the absence of a belief-logic conflict.
Hence, despite the belief-dominated response, high

2
Data of participants who solved all conflict items correctly
(n = 61) was not included in the analysis.
3
Data of participants who erred on all conflict items (n = 14)
was not included in the analysis.

580

latent-variable approach. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 128, 309-331.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist,
49, 709-724.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2002). Logic and human reasoning:
An assessment of the deduction paradigm.
Psychological Bulletin, 128, 978-996.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2003). In two minds: Dual-process
accounts of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
7, 454-459.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Goel, V., & Dolan, R. J. (2003). Explaining modulation
of reasoning by belief. Cognition, 87, B11-B22.
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell an
association from a rule?: Comment on Sloman
(1996). Psychological Bulletin, 119, 23-26.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982).
Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Klaczynski, P. A. (2001). Analytic and heuristic
processing influences on adolescent reasoning and
decision making. Child Development, 72, 844-861.
Klauer, K. C., Musch, J., & Naumer, B. (2000). On belief
bias in syllogistic reasoning. Psychological Review,
107, 852-884.
Kokis, J. V., Macpherson, R., Toplak, M. E., West, R. F.,
& Stanovich, K. E. (2002). Heuristic and analytic
processing: Age trends and associations with
cognitive ability and cognitive styles. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 83, 26-52.
La Pointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple and
complex word spans as measures of working memory
capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 1118-1133.
Markovits, H., & Nantel, G. (1989). The belief bias effect
in the production and evaluation of logical
conclusions. Memory & Cognition, 17, 11-17.
McElree, B. (2001). Working memory and focal
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 817-835.
Newstead, S. E., Handley, S. J., Harley, C., Wright, H.,
Farrelly, D. (2004). Individual differences in
deductive reasoning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57A, 33-60.
Newstead, S. E., Pollard, P., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Allen,
J. L. (1992). The source of belief bias effects in
syllogistic reasoning. Cognition, 45, 257-284.
Oakhill, J., Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Garnham, A. (1989).
Believability and syllogistic reasoning. Cognition, 31,
117-140.
Roberts, M. J., & Newton, E. J. (2001). Inspection times,
the change task, and the rapid-response task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A,
1031-1048.
Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., & Handley, S. (2003). In
search of counter examples: Deductive rationality in

spans’ reasoning was affected by the conflict. This
suggests that whereas an erroneous conflict response
might be equated with mere heuristic reasoning for the
low spans, an erroneous response for the high spans
might be better characterized as a failure to complete an
analytic reasoning process. In this case, individual
difference studies that exclusively focus on reasoning
accuracy will underestimate the link between working
memory capacity and analytic reasoning processes: For
the high spans even an erroneous response might have
involved analytic reasoning.
Given that the present study only started
complementing accuracy and latency data it is evident
that the findings will need further refinement. It is
intriguing, for example, that high spans’ latency increase
was more pronounced on the incorrect (2245 ms) than on
the correct (1079 ms, see Table 2) conflict items. Thus,
high spans actually needed about 1 s longer for an
incorrect vs. correct conflict response. One possible
explanation is that for high spans the incorrect conflict
response does not result from an incomplete, unfinished
analytic reasoning process but rather from additional
heuristic considerations that follow a completed analytic
process. Epstein (1994; see also Sloman, 1996) has noted
that participants sometimes report they picked an
erroneous responses although they clearly knew it was
normatively inadequate. Hence, these participants did
calculate the correct response but seemed to discard it
afterwards. Such an “a posteriori” active discarding
would be one explanation for the longer latencies for
incorrect conflict responses. The present findings then
indicate that this type of reasoning would be
characteristic of higher span groups. In this respect, a
combination of latency research with converging
research methods (e.g., thinking-aloud studies) seems
especially promising for the further development of the
dual process framework.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant
from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders (FWO).

References
Cowan. N. (1995). Attention and memory: An integrated
framework. New York: Oxford University Press.
De Neys, W. (in press). Automatic-heuristic and
executive-analytic processing during reasoning:
Chronometric and dual task considerations.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
De Neys, W., d’Ydewalle, G., Schaeken, W., & Vos, G.
(2002). A Dutch, computerized, and group
administrable adaptation of the operation span test.
Psychologica Belgica, 42, 177-190.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., &
Conway, A. R. A. (1999). Working memory, shortterm memory, and general fluid intelligence: A

581

human reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 56A, 1129-1145.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing : II.
Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a
general theory. Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems
of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Sá, W., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (1999). The
domain specificity and generality of belief bias:
Searching for a generalizable critical thinking skill.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 497-510.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998). Individual
differences in rational thought. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 127, 161-188.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23,
645-726.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2003). The rationality
debate as a progressive research program. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 26, 531-534.
Stein, E. (1996). Without good reason: The rationality
debate in philosophy and cognitive science. Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Torrens, D., Thompson, V. A., & Cramer, K. M. (1999).
Individual differences and the belief bias effect:
Mental models, logical necessity, and abstract
reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 5, 1-28.

Appendix
Conflict items:
All things that have a motor need oil.
Automobiles need oil.
Automobiles have motors. (Believable–Invalid)
All unemployed people are poor.
David Beckham is not unemployed.
David Beckham is not poor. (Believable–Invalid)
All mammals can walk.
Whales are mammals.
Whales can walk. (Unbelievable–Valid)
All animals like water.
Cats do not like water.
Cats are not animals. (Unbelievable–Valid)
No-conflict items:
All birds have feathers.
Robins are birds.
Robins have feathers. (Believable–Valid)
All cows have four legs.
Snakes do not have four legs.
Snakes are not cows. (Believable–Valid)
All guns are dangerous.
Swords are dangerous.
Swords are guns. (Unbelievable–Invalid)
All things made of wood can be used as fuel.
Gasoline is not made of wood.
Gasoline cannot be used as fuel. (Unbelievable–Invalid

582

