UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences in Concept Mapping when Learning from Texts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4081p84k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hilbert, Tatjana S.
Renkl, Alexander

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in Concept Mapping
when Learning from Texts
Tatjana S. Hilbert (tatjana.hilbert@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Alexander Renkl (alexander.renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Educational Psychology, Engelbergerstr. 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

the acquisition and retention of macrolevel ideas
(O’Donnell, Dansereau, & Hall, 2002). Learners have to
appraise the importance of concepts in order to decide
whether they should integrate them in their concept map.
Thus, learners concentrate on the most relevant macrostructure information of their learning topic. This is called the
reduction function of maps.
As concept maps require the externalization of knowledge, working memory is offloaded and the construction of
coherence is facilitated (Kintsch, 1998). Spatial arrangements can emphasize that concepts belong together. The use
of similar colors can represent that certain concepts share a
relationship. Additionally, labeling the links connecting the
nodes emphasizes the kind of relationship between concepts. This is called the coherence function of concept maps.
Also, metacognitive processes are supported. Knowledge
and comprehension gaps can become obvious when constructing and explicating relations between concepts, (e.g.,
Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). At best,
learners can overcome these gaps when they are aware of
them. This is what we call the metacognitive effect of mapping.

Abstract
Concept maps consist of nodes representing concepts and
links representing the relationship between the concepts.
Various studies showed that concept mapping fosters meaningful learning. However, little is known about the specific
cognitive processes that are responsible for such mapping effects. A thinking-aloud study was carried out to analyze the
relations between cognitive processes during concept mapping and learning outcomes (38 university students; 17 male,
21 female, mean age 23.8). Additionally, characteristics of the
concept maps the learners produced were included in the
analysis. The results emphasize the importance of explicating
the relationship between the concepts by labeling the links as
well as the importance of content-related planning and controlling of the mapping process. The results provide useful
hints of how to develop a training method for beginners in
concept mapping.
Keywords: Concept Maps, Text Learning, Thinking Aloud.

Introduction
Concept mapping is a method for representing knowledge
graphically. Nodes represent concepts and labeled links represent the relations between the concepts. Based on
Ausubel’s assimilation theory of cognitive learning
(Ausubel, Novak, & Hanesian, 1978), concept maps visualize the hierarchy and relationships of concepts. Through the
construction of a concept map, meaningful learning can be
assisted (Novak, 1990).
Novak (1995) describes a multitude of possible areas of
application, for example, concept maps can assist the preparation of lessons and the sequence of topics presented. They
serve as a basis for discussions and they can be used as a
tool for knowledge evaluation. Furthermore, concept maps
can assist learning from texts. It is this latter application of
mapping that is focused on in this study.

Beginners’ Difficulties in Concept Mapping
A variety of studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of
concept mapping as a learning method, including a metaanalysis of 19 quantitative studies by Horton et al. (1993).
The authors found a generally positive effect on knowledge
acquisition.
Although concept mapping fosters learning and understanding, learners are easily overwhelmed by the demands
of mapping. Participants in a study by Reader and
Hammond (1994) learned from hypertext either by notetaking or by concept mapping. Even though learners in the
concept mapping condition performed better, qualitative
analyses showed that they failed to structure and integrate
the information provided by the hypertext in a favorable
way. The learners were not able to use the advantages of the
method to the expected degree.
Concept mapping without training is very difficult for beginners. As O’Donnell et al. (2002) state, training is a key
factor in producing favorable outcomes. In order to cope
with beginners’ difficulties in using concept maps for learning from texts, a few training studies have been conducted.
For example, Chang, Sung, and Chen (2002) compared the
learning outcomes of students after either correcting
worked-out concept maps with mistakes, constructing their
own concept maps after a training session, or constructing

What makes Concept Mapping so Beneficial?
Due to the affordance of expressing notions in nodes and
relations in links, concept maps foster elaboration processes
(Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). Often learners have to integrate
new information with their prior knowledge in order to determine what concepts are important and whether and how
they interrelate. This is what we call the elaboration function of maps.
Weaver and Kintsch (1991) found that macropropositions
which contain the top-level information of a text is recalled
in more detail in long-term experiments. Maps can enhance
947

concept maps without training. The students learning by
correcting concept maps achieved the best results in a posttest on text comprehension. Students learning by constructing a map without a training session performed the worst.
These results demonstrate that beginners in concept mapping are often overwhelmed with the demands of the mapping. Even after a training session, students still could not
successfully cope with the demands.
Compared to constructing concept maps, the use of
worked-out concept maps did show some positive effects on
the learning outcomes (e.g., Chang et al., 2002). However,
this method of introducing concept mapping is quite laborious for instructors to use. Additionally, in the long term it is
preferable that learners construct their own maps.
Currently, an effective method for training students how
to use concept mapping that is efficient and directed to the
typical needs of beginners in mapping is missing. This is
also due to the fact that there is little empirical evidence
indicating which cognitive processes are crucial for successful mapping and which deficits beginners have in this respect. Most studies just report some anecdotes of the learners’ difficulties during concept mapping (e.g., Jonassen,
Beissner, & Yacci, 1993). Knowing beginners’ specific
deficits is necessary in order to develop effective training.

Materials
Newspaper Articles on Stem Cells The learning contents
were provided in six newspaper articles on stem cells. This
topic was chosen because most students are relatively unfamiliar with the specifics related to this issue. Yet it is a topic
that is very complex (i.e., requires integration of biological
and ethical knowledge) and is widely discussed in Germany.
Providing more than one source increased the motivation
(necessity) to engage in a follow-up activity after reading.
Mapping Software The participants worked with the Easy
Mapping Tool, a software especially developed for concept
mapping (see http://www.cognitive-tools.de for further information). The application of the software was easy to
learn. It provided different forms and colors for nodes.
Links to connect the nodes could be labeled.
Learning Assessments Two tasks measured the learning
outcomes. First, a post-test consisting of seven multiple
choice questions on stem cells provided a measure of the
extent to which the learners integrated the information in the
articles. In order to answer the single integration-test questions, integration of the knowledge of at least two articles
was required.
Second, the students were asked to answer the question
“What are stem cells and what could be done with them?”.
The stem-cell question had to be answered (1) in the pretest
and (2) had to be revised after reading the articles, (3) as
well as after producing the concept map. Comparing the
revisions of the answer before and after concept mapping
provided information on the changes in the participants’
knowledge on stem cells.

Research questions
In order to develop a strategy for teaching concept mapping
that is adapted to the learners’ needs, it is important to first
explore factors that hinder and foster learning by concept
mapping. Thus, the aim of the present study was to analyze
individual differences between learners with respect to factors that can determine learning outcomes. Therefore, data
concerning the cognitive processes elicited by concept mapping have been collected. It is assumed, that especially those
cognitive processes that refer to the elaboration function, the
reduction function, the coherence function, and the metacognitive effect of mapping foster good learning outcomes.
Thus, the cognitive processes elicited by concept mapping
and concept map characteristics were considered as factors
determining learning. Furthermore, it is analyzed whether
concept mapping as a follow-up activity to reading has a
positive effect on learning at all. The following specific research questions were addressed:
1. Does concept mapping have a positive effect on
learning?
2. To what extent are individual characteristics of the
concept maps related to the learning outcomes?
3. Are the learning outcomes associated with the quality of the cognitive processes during the concept
mapping?

Procedure
In the pretest phase, the participants first responded to a
questionnaire about their experiences with concept mapping
and some demographic questions. Afterward, they answered
the stem-cell question to assess their prior knowledge about
the learning topic (i.e., stem cells). Then, they were given
six different newspaper articles dealing with stem cells. Participants were provided enough time to read each article
once. After reading them, they had to revise their answer to
the stem-cell question. Next, the participants produced a
concept map about the topic of stem cells. To this purpose,
they received an introduction into concept mapping. The
terms ‘node’ and ‘link’ were explained and an example of a
concept map was provided. No further hints for producing
the concept maps were given. The maps had to be produced
with the mapping software Easy Mapping Tool and the participants received a brief instruction in how to use the software. Further help with the software was provided on demand. Time for concept mapping was limited to 30 minutes.
The participants were encouraged to use the newspaper articles as a basis for constructing their maps. They were asked
to simultaneously verbalize their thoughts during the construction of the concept map. According to Ericsson and
Simon (1993), participants were just asked to “keep talking”, no further advice was given to avoid reactivity effects.

Method
Participants
Thirty-eight students (17 male, 21 female, mean age 23.8
years) from the University of Freiburg participated in the
experiment. All were native speakers of German. As one
participant did not follow the mapping instructions, he was
excluded from the analysis.
948

(metacognitive function; e.g., “I just don’t get this thing
with the embryonic germ cells. Are they the same as stem
cells, or what’s the difference?”).
(5) Positive Monitoring. The learner states his or her understanding of the contents (metacognitive function; e.g.,
“Yes, now I got it.”).
(6) Planning and Controlling. Verbal units referring to the
progress of the concept map like planning the next steps and
controlling whether contents are missing have been coded
with this category (e.g., “I didn’t really explain the characteristics of stem cells. That’s what I have to do next.”).
(7) False Statements. Incorrect statements of the participants were coded in this category.
(8) Activity Report. This category was coded when the
learner just described what he was doing without referring
to the contents (e.g. “Now I make a node here and connect it
with such an arrow to the other one.”).
(9) Reading Aloud. This category was scored for reading
the articles on the stem-cell topic.
(10) Non-Content Problems. The learner talked about
general problems with the mapping method, the mapping
software, or the demands of thinking aloud (e.g., “I’m not
used to thinking in nodes. If I learned this stuff on my own I
would perhaps make a table.”).
The coding categories were distinct and there were no inclusions of segments. Good interrater-reliability was obtained for the coding of the verbal data (Cohen’s κ = .73).

After 20 seconds of not speaking, they were again reminded
to keep talking. After concept mapping, the participants had
to revise their answer on the stem-cell question again. Finally, they worked on the integration test.

Coding Schemes
Different coding systems were developed for the answers to
the stem-cell question, for the thinking-aloud protocols, and
for the analysis of the maps.
Coding of the Answers to the Stem-Cell Question The
answers to the stem-cell question were segmented into
propositions and classified into three distinct categories.
Interrater-reliability was computed using Cohen’s Kappa, κ
= .78.
(1) Non-text. This category was coded when a statement
was not part of the newspaper articles about stem cells that
the participants read.
(2) Correct. The proposition was coded as correct when it
contained information that was included in the newspaper
articles and was reproduced correctly.
(3) Incorrect. The information was included in the newspaper articles but was reproduced incorrectly.
To obtain a measure of the increase of knowledge and understanding through concept mapping, the difference of correct propositions before and after concept mapping was calculated (increase of correct propositions). Additionally, the
decrease of incorrect propositions was calculated by subtracting the amount of incorrect propositions after concept
mapping from the amount of incorrect propositions before
concept mapping (decrease of incorrect propositions).

Concept Maps Following Rafferty and Fleschner (1993), a
coding system for the participants’ concept maps was developed. Rafferty and Fleschner presented a method to
evaluate concept maps by scoring the number of valid relationships between concept-nodes, and the number of crosslinks between distinct segments. In the present study, the
scoring system was slightly modified. The following concept map characteristics were analyzed:

Thinking-Aloud Protocols The thinking-aloud protocols
were segmented into verbal units. A verbal unit comprised a
segment of thoughts about one specific content, for example, thoughts about a concept or a pair of concepts. A coding
system for the thinking-aloud protocols was developed. The
main categories were as follows:
(1) Elaboration of Concepts. The learner connected his
own knowledge with the learning content by generating
examples or paraphrasing (Weinstein & Mayer, 1986). This
category refers to the elaboration function of concept maps
(e.g., “So, if I took one of my skin cells and put the nucleus
in an ovum, an embryo would grow that is just like me. Its
stem cells would fit me perfectly.”).
(2) Organization. This category was coded when a statement refers to (a) the importance of a concept, or (b) the
hierarchical classification of a concept (Weinstein & Mayer,
1986) (reduction function; e.g., “Embryonic stem cells are
an important sub-category of stem cells. I’m going to make
a node and write embryonic stem cells in it.”).
(3) Relationships. The learner clarifies the relation between concepts by thinking about how to label the links,
using different colors for groups of concepts, and by structuring the concept map in a way that accentuates groups of
concepts belonging together (coherence function; e.g.,
“There’s a connection between stem cells and preimplantation diagnostics. You need stem cells for the PID.
I’m going to label this link with are examined.”).
(4) Negative Monitoring. This category contains utterances about comprehension problems (Chi et al., 1989)

Figure 1: Concept map on stem cells.
(1) Number of concept nodes. All the nodes in the concept
map were counted (see number 1 in Figure 1 for an example).
(2) Number of correctly labeled links. All the links that
were correctly labeled to connect the concept-nodes were
counted (see number 2 in Figure 1).

949

(3) Number of unlabeled links. All the links between concept nodes that were not labeled were counted in this category (see number 3 in Figure 1).
(4) Number of cross-links. Cross-links are links that connect the segments of a map. The cross-links were counted
(see number 4 in Figure 1 for an example).

mapping. Nevertheless, the change of incorrect propositions
ranged from -3 to +2 for different individuals. Obviously,
some learners managed to correct mistakes they made before concept mapping, whereas others made up to two new
mistakes. In the following, we will use the variable ‘decrease of incorrect propositions’ in order to express the extent to which incorrect propositions increased or decreased
in individual learners after mapping.

Results
The majority of participants (63%) did not know what concept maps were prior to the experiment. There were no differences in the learning outcomes between learners who
knew about concept maps and those who had not heard of
this learning strategy before, t(36) = -1.07, ns. Thus, we did
not have to control for prior experience in mapping.

Concept Map Characteristics
The concept maps that the learners produced were analyzed
according to the number of concept nodes, the number of
correctly labeled links, the number of unlabeled links, and
the number of cross-links. Table 1 provides an overview of
the correlations of the concept map characteristics with the
learning outcomes.

Knowledge Acquisition
In order to confirm the benefits of concept mapping for
learning, we analyzed the answer to the stem-cell question.
Participants first revised their answers to the stem-cell question after reading the texts and revised it again after concept
mapping. Figure 2 shows the means of correct and incorrect
propositions at the three different measuring times.

Table 1: Correlations between the concept map characteristics and learning outcomes.
Learning Outcomes
Increase of
Decrease of
correct
incorrect
Integrationtest
propositions propositions
Concept
nodes
Correctly
labeled
links
Unlabeled
links
Cross
links

10
8
6

correct
propositions

4

incorrect
propositions

2

-.33**

-.15**

-.28**

-.53**

-.06

-.45**

-.33**

-.20

-.15**

-.07**

-.07

-.19**

Note. *p < .05; **p < .01.
0
pretest

after reading

The concept maps the learners produced contained on average 18.41 nodes (SD = 4.49). The number of concept
nodes correlated significantly with the participants’ performance on the integration test. No correlation was found
with the increase of correct propositions and with the decrease of incorrect propositions (Table 1).
The mean for correctly labeled links was 11.86 (SD =
6.15). The more correctly labeled links in the maps, the better the participants performed on the integration test (Table
1). Also, the decrease of incorrect propositions was the
greatest, the more correctly labeled links were included in
the map. Although labeling the links was not related to more
correct conclusions in the last revision of the stem-cell question, the participants who focused more on labeling were
likely to correct the mistakes in their answer.
The average number of unlabeled links was M = 4.68 (SD
= 6.06). Participants who were unlikely to label the links
between the nodes performed worse on the integration test.
(Table 1). No correlation was found with the increase of
correct propositions and with the decrease of incorrect
propositions.
Cross-links appeared relatively seldom (M = 1.76, SD =
2.00). As Table 1 shows, the number of cross-links did not
correlate with the learning outcomes.

after concept
mapping

measuring time

Figure 2: Mean (SD) of correct and incorrect
propositions at the three measurement points.
An ANOVA with repeated measurements proved the increase of correct propositions over the three measuring
times significant, F(1.7, 60.2) = 191.46, p < .001, η2 = .84.
The increase of incorrect propositions over the three measuring times was significant too (F(1.6, 59.3) = 51.58, p <
.001, η2 = .59).
Although the participants increased their knowledge of
stem cells through reading, a further increase of M = 3.3
correct propositions after concept mapping was observed
(SD = 2.11). This increase was statistically significant (F(1,
36) = 91.9, p < .001, η2 = .72). This increase of correct
propositions is consistent with the findings that concept
maps foster learning outcomes (e.g. Horton et al., 1993).
The number of incorrect propositions after concept mapping did not significantly change, F(1, 36) = 2.72, ns. Thus,
concept mapping neither helped the learners to reduce the
amount of mistakes they made in their answer to the stemcell question nor did they make new mistakes after concept
950

Thus, the concept map characteristics that related most to
the learning outcomes was the number of correctly labeled
and unlabeled links. Further qualitative analysis showed that
the unlabeled links connected the concept nodes quite adequately. However, the participants just did not seem to reflect on the relation to a sufficient degree. This interpretation is also supported by the results of the thinking-aloud
protocols, as reported in the following.

relationships did not correlate with the increase of correct
propositions or with the decrease of incorrect propositions.
Participants who were more likely to express their comprehension problems (i.e., negative monitoring) achieved
worse results in the integration test (Table 2). This suggests
that learners seemed to have recognized their knowledge
gaps, but were not able to overcome these problems. Negative monitoring was significantly related to the explication
of relationships (r = -.56, p < .001). Possibly, the comprehension problems hindered the learners articulating the relationships between concepts which impaired learning.
Positive monitoring was related to a higher increase of
correct propositions, at least at the 10%-level of significance
(Table 2). Apparently the learners’ self-estimation of their
understanding was strongly associated with the actual increase of correct knowledge.
Planning and controlling the mapping process was significantly correlated to the learning outcomes as measured by
the integration test (Table 2). Planning the next steps and
checking whether there were contents missing or whether
the concept map was complete seemed to be very important
strategies for learning by concept mapping.
False statements correlated with the decrease of incorrect
propositions at the 10%-level of significance (Table 2). This
could be a result of augmented planning and controlling
processes, as there was a positive correlation between the
amount of planning and controlling and false statements (r =
.42, p = .01). The amount of false statements, however, did
not correlate with negative monitoring (r = .07, ns). The
participants were apparently not able to overcome their
comprehension problems when they recognized they had
problems understanding the information presented. Nevertheless, they were able to recognize and overcome their errors when they controlled for the correctness of their concept maps. This result also emphasizes the importance of
planning and controlling for the construction of concept
mapping.
Devoting much attention to what they were doing without
referring to the learning contents on the one hand impaired
the performance in the integration test on stem cells, and on
the other hand prevented learners from detecting and correcting their mistakes (cf. ‘activity report’ in Table 2). This
finding suggests that preoccupation with just the ‘design’ of
the concept map without directing attention to the kind of
information that was displayed in the map should be
avoided in order to ensure favorable learning outcomes.
No correlations were found between the different learning
outcomes on the one hand and reading aloud as well as noncontent statements on the other hand (Table 2). Although
the more the participants read, the more they had the possibility to deepen their knowledge on stem cells without using
concept mapping as a learning strategy, just reading had no
impact on learning (see ‘reading aloud’ in Table 2). Finally,
differences in learning gains were not found when considering participants’ problems in using the mapping software,
the mapping process itself, or the demands of thinking aloud
(see ‘non-content problems’ in Table 2).

Cognitive Processes during Concept Mapping
The thinking-aloud protocols were segmented into verbal
units and coded in ten distinct categories. Table 2 presents
an overview of the results concerning the correlations of the
cognitive processes during concept mapping and the learning outcomes.
Table 2: Correlations between the students’ cognitive processes and their learning outcomes.

Elaboration
Organization
Relationships
Negative
Monitoring
Positive
Monitoring
Planning and
Controlling
False Statements
Activity
Report
Reading
Aloud
Non-content
Problems

Learning Outcomes
Integration Increase of Decrease of
test
correct
incorrect
propositions propositions
-.02**
-.05**
-.42**
-.26**
-.06**
-.05**
-.39**
-.11**
-.03**
-.40**

-.10**

-.05**

-.19+*

-.28**

-.23**

-.58**

-.07**

-.13**

-.04**

-.12**

-.29+*

-.49***

-.05**

-.40**

-.02**

-.13**

-.08**

-.10**

-.01**

-.08**

+

Note. p < .10. *p < .05. **p < .01.

As Table 2 shows, the elaboration of concepts neither correlated with the integration test nor with the increase of correct propositions in students’ answers to the stem-cell question after concept mapping. However, the more elaborations
the participants made, the greater the decrease in incorrect
propositions. By connecting the new information presented
in the newspaper articles with their already existing knowledge, the participants were obviously able to correct mistakes when revising their answers on the stem-cell question.
The organizational activities were not related to learning
outcomes (Table 2).
With respect to the category ‘relationships’, the more the
learners reflected on relationships between the concepts, for
example, by thinking about how to label the links, or using
different colors for groups of concepts, the better they performed on the integration test (Table 2). This is consistent
with the finding that unlabeled links were associated with
poor performance on the integration test. The explication of
951

Discussion

References

The aim of this study was to examine interindividual differences between learners constructing concept maps as a
strategy to learn from texts. To this purpose, cognitive processes elicited by concept mapping were analyzed as well as
concept map characteristics.
The effectiveness of concept mapping for learning was
once more confirmed by the results of this study. As a variety of studies (e.g., Horton et al., 1993), we also found a
substantial increase of knowledge after constructing a concept map. This is particularly interesting as the participants
learned from six separate texts only partially overlapping in
their information. As Britt, Perfetti, Sandak, and Rouet
(1999) showed, learners often cannot integrate information
from multiples texts to a substantial degree. Concept mapping could be a useful tool to foster learning especially from
multiple sources.
One important finding with respect to the factors correlated to learning outcomes is that efforts to figure out the
precise relation between concepts were especially crucial.
This was supported by the analysis of the thinking-aloud
protocols as well as by the concept maps the learners constructed.
In addition, processes of content-related planning and
controlling are associated with preferable learning outcomes. These processes seemed to help learners to recognize the mistakes they made and to overcome their lack of
comprehension. Further in-depth analyses of the present
data will be carried out in order to test this assumption.
Describing the pure technical design of the concept map a
lot without referring to the contents that were represented
was detrimental to learning. Paying attention to the information displayed in the concept map is much more important
than just ‘making nodes’ and ‘connecting nodes’.
Of course, given the correlational character of this study,
it is possible that the differences in the learning outcomes
are not a result of the different concept mapping strategies
but of general abilities. Therefore it is possible that a training in concept mapping cannot overcome the limitations
resulting from restricted abilities. Thus it is important to
conduct a training study that proves the relevance of the
presumably beneficial and hindering factors found in this
study.
So far, the present results lead to the following recommendations:
• Instruct learners to put special attention on carefully
labeling their links.
• Emphasize the relevance of planning the mapping
process and controlling the improvement of the concept map.
• Guide learners to shift their attention from the pure
technical design to the learning contents as far as
possible.
In a next step, a corresponding training for beginners in
concept mapping will be developed. Further studies will test
the effectiveness of such a training.

Ausubel, D. P., Novak, J. D., & Hanesian, H. (1978). Educational Psychology: A cognitive view (2nd Ed.). New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Britt, M. A., Perfetti, C. A., Sandak, R., & Rouet, J.-F.
(1999). Content integration and source separation in
learning from multiple texts. In S. R. Goldman, A. C.
Graesser, & P. van den Broek (Eds.), Narrative Comprehension, Causality, and Coherence. Essays in Honor of
Tom Trabasso. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chang, K., Sung, Y., & Chen, I. (2002). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text comprehension and summarization. The Journal of Experimental Education, 71, 523.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Verbal reports as
data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Horton, P. B., McConney, A. A., Gallo, M., Woods, A. L.,
Senn, G. J., & Hamelin, D. (1993). An investigation of the
effectiveness of concept mapping as an instructional tool.
Science Education, 77, 95-111.
Jonassen, D. H., Beissner, K., & Yacci, M. A. (1993). Structural Knowledge: techniques for conveying, assessing,
and acquiring structural knowledge. Hillsdale: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Novak, J. D. (1990). The effect of concept mapping to enhance text comprehension and summarization. The Journal of Experimental Education, 71, 5-23.
Novak, J. D. (1995). Concept mapping to facilitate teaching
and learning. Prospects, 25, 79-86.
O’Donnell, A. M., Dansereau, D. F., & Hall, R. H. (2002).
Knowledge maps as scaffolds for cognitive processing.
Educational Psychology Review, 14, 71-86.
Rafferty, C., & Fleschner, L. (1993). Concept mapping: A
viable alternative to objective and essay exams. Reading
and Research Instruction, 32, 25-34.
Reader, W., & Hammond, N. (1994). Computer-based tools
to support learning from hypertext: concept mapping tools
and beyond. Computers Education, 22, 99-106.
Weaver III, C. A. & Kintsch, W. (1991). Expository text. In
R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson
(Eds.), Handbook of reading research: Vol. 2. New York:
Longman.
Weinstein, C. E., & Mayer, R. E. (1986). The teaching of
learning strategies. In C. M. Wittrock (Eds.), Handbook
of Research in Teaching. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.

952

