UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Instruction and Experience Based Belief Construction and Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30v3q6ws

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Dieussaert, Kristien
Van Assche, An
Vansteenwegen, Debora

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Instruction and Experience Based Belief Construction and Revision
Kristien Dieussaert (kristien.dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Debora Vansteenwegen (deb.vansteenwegen@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
An Van Assche (an.vanassche@student.kuleuven.ac.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology,
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
role: The lower the initial belief in the conditional rule, the
more revision of the conditional rule takes place (see
Dieussaert, Schaeken, De Neys, & d’Ydewalle, 2000; Politzer
& Carles, 2001; Calvillo & Revlin, 2002; Verhaert, 2004).
Since the reasoning literature has mainly focused on
deductive reasoning, theoretical developments on defeasible
reasoning are rather limited in the reasoning literature. We
would like to mention some notable exceptions, see JohnsonLaird, Girotto and Legrenzi (2004) for a mental model based
approach; .see Oaksford and Chater (1994) for a probabilistic
approach; and see Revlin, Cate, and Rouss (2001) for a modal
logic approach.

Abstract
In this paper we discuss the difference between instruction and
experience induced belief construction and its resistance to
conflicting evidence. Experiment 1 is a succesful replication of
the renewal effect with experience induced belief acquisition. In
Experiment 2, it is shown that the level of belief acquisition that
is obtained through experience is also obtained through
instruction. Nevertheless, the absence of a renewal effect in this
experiment shows that both learning methods differ in their
underlying cognitive structure.
Keywords: reasoning, learning, belief revision

Introduction

Human contingency learning

Since Elio and Pelletier (1997) presented their seminal paper on
belief revision, existing reasoning theories were challenged to adopt
defeasible reasoning in their framework. While the human
contingency literature was previously very behaviourally inspired, a
growing recognition for cognitive processes, among which belief
revision (e.g., Catena, Maldonado, & Cándido, 1998) is observed. A
cross-fertilisation of both research areas seems obvious. However, a
major problem for the transferability of experimental results may be
that the research areas have a different method to (artificially)
construct the belief that is to be revised in a later stage. In this paper,
we test the similarity between instruction and experience induced
belief states. But, before going on to that, we give a brief sketch of
the reasoning and the contingency learning literature.

One of the subdomains of psychology in which particularly
interesting research related to belief revision is conducted, is
that of contingency learning. For a review, see De Houwer
and Beckers (2002).
In most human contingency learning experiments,
participants receive information about a number of situations
in which certain Cues (C) and Outcomes (O) are either
present or absent, and they are asked to judge the extent to
which the presence of a C is related to the presence of O. On
the basis of this information participants will be able to
formulate a rule about the C-O relation.
In reasoning research, the learning part is restricted to the
presentation of the established relationships in the form of
conditional statements (If C, then O) or universal quantifiers
(All C’s are/have/.. O’s). The similarity between the C-O
relations and conditional statements (If C, then O) is obvious.
Knowledge about the principles and circumstances under
which C-O relations are acquired and extinguished can lead
to fruitful insights in how belief states are constructed and
revised and vice versa.
Two dominant classes of models have ruled research on
human contingency learning for a long period: probabilistic
(e.g., Cheng, 1997) and associative models (e.g., Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972). Nowadays, the idea that associative and
probabilistic processes play a role in human contingency
learning gains ground (e.g., Catena, Maldonado, Megias, &
Frese, 2002). Individuals are able to rely upon a probabilistic
calculus when they believe that this is an adaptive way of
behaving within a certain context. In the reasoning literature a
similar view has been developed regarding task dependent
processes (e.g., Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 2002;
Verschueren, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2005).

Reasoning
Research on belief revision has only very recently become a
topic of interest within reasoning research. For a review of the
theories and recent data in a special issue on reasoning from
inconsistency, we refer to Dieussaert and Schaeken (2005).
Generally, participants are given a conditional statement (if
p, then q; e.g., if that bacteria is present in your blood, then
you have the Okro disease) and a categorical statement (p;
e.g., the bacteria is present), and are asked to deduce the
conclusion, or are given the conclusion (q; e.g., you have the
Okro disease). Next, new information that contradicts the
conclusion is given (not-q; e.g., you do not have the Okro
disease) and participants are asked to revise one of the former
statements in order to regain a consistent belief set.
Elio and Pelletier (1997; see also Elio & Pelletier, 1994)
showed that the conditional premise is revised rather than the
categorical premise when an inconsistency arises. Since that
pioneer study, several observations regarding belief revision
have been made. Interesting for this paper is the observation
that the initial belief in the conditional plays an important
595

express a C – not O contingency. In the test phase (1 test
trial), the C-O relation is tested (C- no information available).

Belief construction and revision
As may be clear now, both research areas use a different
experimental paradigm to induce a belief in a C-O relation.
These operationalisations reflect a different view on how
beliefs are constructed: through instruction (if C, then O) or
through experience (several C-O trials). We consider both
forms of belief construction important since people construct
their beliefs in various ways, depending on the situation.
Some beliefs are constructed through communication (e.g., If
you run out of brake oil, your brake will not work) while
others are constructed through experience (e.g., If you eat,
your hunger stops).
The main goal of this study is to find out whether the
methodology of belief construction affects the belief strength
and whether it affects the belief revision process. In other
words, does a theory driven or a data driven belief
construction give rise to a more entrenched belief state? As a
case study, we focused on a rather recent discovery in human
contingency learning, viz. the phenomenon of ‘renewal’ (e.g.,
Garcia-Gutierrez & Rosas, 2003): the return of an
extinguished C-O relation due to context change. Translated
in terms of the reasoning process, renewal refers to a
(renewed) expression of someone’s belief in the conditional
sentence (if C, then O), despite the presence of contradictive
information (C and not-O).
In Experiment 1, we try to replicate the renewal effect in
our experimental set up. We considered this necessary given
the recency of the finding in human contingency learning. In
Experiment 2, we repeat Experiment 1 but with the important
change that the belief is induced through instruction instead
of through experience. We will also make an extensive
comparison of the results of the two experiments.

belief construction
Context A
(10 trials)
Context A
(10 trials)

belief revision
Context A
(10 trials)
Context B
(10 trials)

test
Context A
(1 trial)
Context A
(1 trial)

Figure 1. Course of two levels in Experiment 1.
The between-subjects independent variable is Context. The
belief revision phase is set in the same (Context A) or another
(Context B) context than the belief construction phase. More
specifically, the hospitals from which the patient filing cards
are taken is manipulated.
Material and Procedure
Participants were instructed in written form. They were asked
to imagine being a researcher in a medical research institute,
who collected the filing cards of a lot of patients. A computer
program was developped with ‘AFFECT’1 software. It was
run on standard PCs. Participants were shown jpeg-figures
containing a patient filing card with the following
information:
- the name of the hospital (in a particular color for each
hospital)
- the result of a test on the presence of the yellow bacteria
'Amarillo'
- the result of a test on the presence of the green bacteria
'Verde'
- the result of a test on the presence of the pink bacteria 'Rosa'
If the result is positive, the bacteria are present. If the result
is negative, the bacteria are absent. All figures were equal: the
bacterias Amarillo and Rosa being always absent, the bacteria
Verde being always present.
It is the participant’s task to find out whether one of these
bacteria causes a newly discovered disease, ‘the Okro
disease’.
The participants received several experience and test trials.
They saw a filing card for 7 seconds. Within this period they
were asked to mark the extent to which they believed a
patient has the disease. They did so by pressing a number
from 1 to 9, where 1 indicates ‘certain the patient does not
have the Okro disease’ and 9 indicates ‘certain the patient has
the Okro disease’; 5 indicates ‘the patient may or may not
have the disease’. Once the participant had given the answer,
(s)he received feedback on the condition of the patient. In the
experience trials the feedback was ‘The patient has the Okro
disease’. In the test trials the feedback was ‘No information
available! It is unknown whether the patient has the Okro
disease or not.’

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Forty four participants took part in the experiment. Twenty
first year students at the University of Leuven took part as a
partial fulfilment of a course requirement and 24 high school
students (age: ± 18) took part on a voluntary basis. They were
randomly assigned to the different groups.
Design
The within-subjects independent variable Phase consists of
three levels: belief construction, belief revision and test. A
judgment is given at each trial, followed by feedback. In the
belief construction phase, a C (present bacteria Verde) – O
(Okro disease) relation is taught. This phase consists of 10
trials with the following course: three experience trials (C –
O), one test trial (C – no information), two experience trials
(C – O), one test trial (C – no information), two experience
trials (C-O) and one test trial (C – no information). In the
belief revision phase, participants experience that the O (Okro
disease) does not follow from the C (bacteria Verde). This
phase also consists of 10 trials with the same course as the
belief construction phase, except that the experience trials

1
Hermans, D., Clarysse, J., Baeyens, F., & Spruyt, A. (2002).
Affect (Version 3.0) [Computer software; retrieved from
http://www.psy.kuleuven.ac.be/leerpsy/affect]. University of
Leuven, Belgium.

596

Table 1. The mean score [SD] on the last test trial of the
acquisition, extinction and test phase on a [-1; +1] scale.

In the belief revision phase, all participants received several
experience and test trials. The context in the belief revision
phase was manipulated. For half of the participants the
hospital setting of the filing cards was the same (AAA level),
for the other half it differed (ABA level) from the hospital
setting in the belief revision phase. Only the feedback in the
experience trials differed from the previous phase, it was ‘The
patient does not have the Okro disease’.
Halfway the experiment (after the university students were
tested), an improvement was made: The filing cards were
now shown until the participants had answered, since it was
observed that some participants needed more than 7 seconds
to form their opinion. The scale was also set to a seven point
scale.
At the end of the experiment, participants of the ABA level
were asked if they noticed a context change during the
experiment. This question was added to make sure that only
participants who actually noticed the context-change were
taken into the analysis. The participant’s awareness of the
context change is a minimal requirement for him or her to
take context into account in determining the belief state.
Participants were invited to ask questions if anything was
not clear to them. During the experiment, no questions were
allowed. Once participants started, they worked through the
course of the experiment in a self paced manner.

belief
construction
experienceexperience
AAA
(N=22)
experienceexperience
ABA
(N=20)

belief
revision

test

0.34 [0.71]

-0.62 [0.40]

-0.30 [0.70]

0.57 [0.52]

-0.48 [0.63]

0.30 [0.73]

It is important to notice that a precondition for renewal is
that the acquired belief is generalized over different contexts.
A comparison between the last trial of the belief construction
phase and the first trial of the belief revision phase (ABAlevel) shows no difference (0.57 vs. 0.35; t(19) =1.93, p =
.07). This indicates that participants do not experience a
rupture between the two phases.

Discussion
In the first phase of the experiment, a belief in a predictive CO relation was succesfully acquired through experience.
Subsequently, this belief was succesfully extinguished
through experience in the second trial. The extinction was
conducted in the same context as the acquisition (A) or in a
different context (B). A test of the belief in the C-O relation
in the belief construction context (A) revealed a renewal in
the belief for the ABA level, but not in the AAA level, as
expected from former studies in human contingency learning.
As is commonly found in human contingency experiments,
the renewal is not absolute (e.g., Vadillo, Vegas, & Matute,
2004). This does not fit completely with the theoretical model
proposed by Bouton (1993). He suggests that the context
change has a disambiguating influence on the predictivity of
the Cue

Results
Due to the difference in measurement scales (see procedure)
and to improve readability, a transformation of the data to a [1; +1] scale was performed. A score of -1 indicates that one
strongly believes that the the O (i.e., the disease) does not
follow from the C (Bacteria Verde present). A score of 0
indicates that one is neutral regarding his/her belief on the CO relation. A score of 1 indicates that one strongly believes
that the O follows when the C is present. Since the slight
changes (see procedure) did not affect the results, the data are
collapsed. Two participants did not notice a context change in
the ABA level; they were discarded from further analysis.
An ANOVA shows a main effect of Phase (F(2,80) =
26.06, p <.0001), and a main effect of Context (F(1, 40) =
8.73, p < .01), but no significant interaction between both.
A steadily increase in belief in the C-O relation is shown
when we compare the first three experience trials: -0.40, 0.35,
0.75 (linear trend analysis: F(1,25) = 112.64, p <.0001). The
belief in the C-O relation disappears, and even reverses, when
participants are confronted with contradictive information (C
– not O)(0.46 vs. -0.55; F(1,40) = 50.85, p <.0001). The
belief increases again in the Test Phase (-0.55 vs. 0; F(1,40) =
15.38). However, this increase is only significant for the ABA
level (-0.62 vs. -0.30; F(1,40) = 14.82, p <.0005). A planned
comparison of the interaction between level and the two last
phases (belief revision and test) , does not reach significance
(p =.1).
The two contexts only differ in the Test phase (-0.30 vs.
0.30; F(1,40) = 7.28, p <.05). The change in context has
resulted in a renewal effect.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Fifty two participants took part in the experiment. Twenty
eight first year students at the University of Leuven took part
as a partial fulfilment of a course requirement and 24 high
school students (age: ± 18) took part on a voluntary basis.
They were randomly assigned to the different groups.
Design
See Experiment 1. Experiment 2 differs from Experiment 1 in
that the belief is constructed through instruction instead of
through experience.
Material and Procedure
See Experiment 1. The belief is induced through instruction.
Participants were presented a patient filing card, with the
597

following message underneath the card: ‘if the green bacteria
Verde is present, then the patient has the Okro disease’. Next,
they were given a test trial.

A comparison between Experiment 1 and 2:
Results and Discussion
Figure 1 gives a graphic trial-by-trial overview of both
experiments. Overall, Experiment 1 (Experience) and
Experiment 2 (Instruction) do not differ. There is a small
difference in belief score in the Test Phase (0 vs -0.33;
F(1,72) = 4.00, p < .05). This is due to the difference in the
ABA level: (0.30 vs -0.23; F(1,72) = 4.77, p <.05). For the
AAA level, no difference could be observed. The renewal
effect is only observed with learning through experience, and
could not be observed with learning through instruction;
Although instruction and experience seem to lead to a
comparable belief strength at first sight, this is not reflected in
the renewal effect.

Results
Thirteen participants did not answer the trial of the first phase
(due to which the change in procedure was made).
Additionally two participants did not notice a change in the
ABA level and one participant did not respond on the
question regarding the context change. The data of these
participants were discarded from the analysis. Since the slight
changes in procedure (see procedure) did not affect the
results, the data are collapsed.
Table 2. The mean score [SD] on the last test trial of the
acquisition, extinction and test phase on a [-1; +1] scale
belief
construction
instructionexperience
AAA
(N=19)
instructionexperience
ABA
(N=17)

belief
revision

test

0.44 [0.65]

-0.68 [0.66]

-0.43 [0.76]

0.41 [0.60]

-0.53 [0.64]

-0.23 [0.67]

An ANOVA shows a main effect of Phase (F(2,68) =
33.48, p <.0001), but neither a main effect of Context nor a
significant interaction between both is observed.
The belief in the C-O relation after the instruction trial is
significant (0.43 vs. 0; t(35) = 4.17, p <.0005). The belief in
the C-O relation disappears, and even reverses, when
participants are confronted with contradictive information (C
– not O)(0.43 vs. -0.60; F(1,34) = 59.00, p <.0001). The
belief increases again in the Test Phase (-0.60 vs. -0.33;
F(1,34) = 5.40, p <.05). However, this increase is not
significant for the ABA-level (or the AAA-level) seperately.
In none of the three Phases, the Context manipulation has
resulted in a difference in belief score. A comparison between
the last trial of the belief construction phase and the first trial
of the belief revision phase (ABA-level) shows no significant
decrease due to the context change (0.33 vs. -0.02; t(14) =
2.13, p =.05). This indicates that participants do not
experience a rupture between the two phases.

belief acquisition

belief revision

test

Figure 2. A trial-by-trial overview of the results of
Experiments 1 and 2.

General discussion
Belief revision is a topic of interest in several areas of
cognitive psychology. In this paper we discuss two of these
areas: reasoning and contingency learning. In both areas
artificially constructed beliefs are the topic of research.
However, they both only consider one method of belief
construction. In the reasoning literature a belief is constructed
by instructing participants that ‘If C is the case, then O is the
case’. Participants learn a C-O relation by instruction. In a
second phase, participants are informed that C is the case.
Thus, they expect O to be the case as well. However, at that
point they are told that not-O is the case, which forces them to
revise their belief in the conditional statement ‘if C, then O’
or in the categorical information that C is the case.
In the contingency literature, a belief is constructed by
presenting participants with several trials in which C is the
case, and O follows. Participants learn a C-O relation by
experience. In a second phase, participants are informed that
C is the case. Thus, they expect O to be the case as well.
However, at that point they encounter a trial (or more trials)
in which C is followed by not-O, which forces them to adapt
their belief in the C-O relation unless they assign the failure

Discussion
In the first phase of the experiment the belief in the C-O
relation was acquired through a single belief instruction. In
the second phase the belief was succesfully extinguished
through experience. The extinction was conducted in the
same context as the acquisition (A) or in a different context
(B). A test of the belief in the C-O relation in the belief
construction context (A) revealed no renewal effects.

598

Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., De Neys, W., & d’Ydewalle,
G. (2000). Initial belief state as a predictor of belief
revision. Current Psychology of Cognition, 19 (3), 277288.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1994). The effect of syntactic form
on simple belief revisions and updates. In A. Ram & K.
Eiselt (Eds.) Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (p. 260-266). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21 (4), 419-460.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. (1996). Rationality and
reasoning. Hove: Psychology press.
Garcia-Gutierrez, A. & Rosas, J. M. (2003). Empirical and
theoretical implications of additivity between reinstatement
and renewal after interference in causal learning.
Behavioural Processes, 63 (1): 21-31.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi, P. (2004).
Reasoning
from
inconsistency
to
consistency.
Psychological Review, 111, (3), 640-661.
Matute, H., Vegas, S., De Marez, P.-J. Flexible use of recent
information in causal and predictive judgments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28 (4): 714-725.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection taks as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101 (4), 608-631.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000). Probabilities
and polarity biases in condtional inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 26 (4), 883-899.
Politzer, G., & Carles, L. (2001). Belief revision and
uncertain reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 7 (3), 217234.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning:Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and non reinforcement. In A. H. Black & W.
F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning II: Current
research and theory (pp. 64-99). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Revlin, R., Cate, C. L., & Rouss, T. S. (2001). Reasoning
counterfactually: Combining and rending. Memory and
Cognition, 29 (8), 1196 – 1208.
Revlis, R. (1974). Prevarication: Reasoning from false
assumptions. Memory and Cognition, 2, 87-95.
Sloman, S. (2002) Two systems of reasoning. In Griffin, D.
and Gilovich, T. (Eds.), Heuristics and biases: The
psychology of intuitive judgment. (pp.379-396). New York,
NY, US: Cambridge University Press.
Vadillo, M., Vegas, S., & Matute, H. (2004). Frequency of
judgment as a context-like determinant of predictive
judgments. Memory and Cogntion, 32 (7), 1065-1075.
Verhaert, O. (2004). Belief revision and the elimination of
inconsistencies [geloofsherziening en het elimineren van
inconsistencies]. Master’s thesis, Department of
Psychology, University of Leuven, Belgium:
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G. (2005). A
dual-process theory on causal condtional reasoning.
Thinking and Reasoning, in press.

of the C-O relation to occur to another factor (e.g., context
change, cast doubt on the actual occurrence of C, and so on).
In this study, we manipulated the belief construction
method. It was shown that participants indicate an equal
belief in the C-O relation, but none of the methods is able to
create a belief at full extent. Repeated exposure to
contradictive information decreases the belief in the C-O
relation steadily, in the instruction as well as in the experience
group. However, when participants are able to assign the
contradictive information to another factor, such as context,
the belief in the C-O relation is less affected.
A renewal effect could only be observed with experience
induced belief. It was absent with instruction induced belief.
These findings can be interpreted in various ways. On the one
hand, one could argue that beliefs acquired through
instruction are less stable and more susceptible to negative
experiences than beliefs acquired through experience. On the
other hand, one could also state that instruction based beliefs
are less context sensitive than experience based beliefs since
no difference between the AAA and ABA level is observed.
The experiments presented here are not as far reaching that
they could distinguish between these two explanations. This
should be sought out in further research.

Acknowledgments
This research is carried out with the financial support of the
Fund for Scientific Research – Flanders, Belgium (FWO
grant G.0239.02 for Kristien Dieussaert and FWO
postdoctoral research grant for Debora Vansteenwegen).

References
Bouton, M. E. (1993). Context, time, and memory retrieval in
the interference paradigms of Pavlovian conditioning.
Psychological Bulletin, 114, 80-99.
Calvillo, D. & Revlin, R. (2002). The role of logical structure
and premise believability in belief revision. In W. D. Gray
& C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 993).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Catena, A., Maldonado, A., & Cándido, A. (1998). The effect
of frequency of judgement and the type of trials on
covariation learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 24, 481–495.
Catena, A. Maldonado, A., Megias, J. L., & Frege, B. (2002).
Judgement frequency, belief revision, and serial processing
of causal information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55B (3), 267–281.
Cheng, P. (1997). From covariation to causation: A causal
power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367-405.
De Houwer, J. & Beckers, T. (2002). A review of recent
developments in research and theories on human
contingency learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55B (4), 289-310.
Dieussaert, K., & Schaeken, W. (2005). Reasoning from
inconsistency: a field exploration. Psychologica Belgica, in
press.

599

