UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating Multiple Strategies Efficiently to Solve an Orientation Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rk099qv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Anderson, John R.
Gunzelmann, Glenn

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating Multiple Strategies Efficiently to Solve an Orientation Task
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory
6030 South Kent Street
Mesa, AZ 85212 USA

John R. Anderson (ja+@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Murakoshi & Kawai, 2000). Our study is somewhat different
than those previous studies in that it does not involve moving
through a space, either by real or virtual navigation. Instead,
this research looks at performance on an orientation task
where participants integrate information from different static
representations of a space to make a spatial judgment. In this
case, a visual scene and a map of the space were shown to
participants. One of the objects in the visual scene was
highlighted, and the task was to identify which of the objects
on the map corresponded to that highlighted object. A sample
trial is shown in Figure 1. The task is described in more detail
below.

Abstract
This research compares the general strategy described by
participants doing an orientation task to two strategies described
in past research on a different kind of spatial task, perspectivetaking (array rotation and viewer rotation). This evaluation
indicated that participants were quite flexible and efficient in
their approach to the task. The strategy described in
participants’ verbal reports made use of both of the perspectivetaking strategies within individual trials. In addition, each
alternative was applied in situations where previous research
indicates that it holds an advantage over the other alternative.
This research extends research on strategy use in spatial tasks
by (1) showing how similar strategies can be applied to
different kinds of spatial tasks and (2) illustrating how
alternative strategies can be intermixed within a single task to
produce efficient overall performance.

Introduction
Research on human performance in spatial orientation tasks
has focused on the impact of misalignment on solution
processes (e.g., Hintzman, O’Dell, & Arndt, 1981; Rieser,
1989; Shepard & Hurwitz, 1984). Other research has
examined strategy differences in this area, showing that
strategy variation can have important influences on
performance (e.g., Gunzelmann & Anderson, 2004a;
Huttenlocher & Presson, 1979; Just & Carpenter, 1985;
Presson, 1982; Wraga, Creem, & Proffitt, 2000). This
research typically uses instructional manipulations to
encourage participants to use different strategies. Although
this approach has been useful for uncovering differences in
performance as a function of strategy use, it also leaves open
the question of how strategies are selected by individuals to
arrive at the solution. One motivation for this paper is to
examine verbal reports of strategy use in an attempt to
determine the extent to which efficiency (speed and accuracy)
influences strategy selection in individuals solving spatial
tasks.
Some research in the area of spatial cognition has
attempted to identify the strategies individuals used. In many
cases, this research has explored human performance on
navigation tasks, using map-drawing or other tasks to infer
how participants learn and represent routes through a space
(e.g., Aginsky, Harris, Rensink, & Beusmans, 1997;

Figure 1: Sample trial. Participants click on the object on the
map corresponding to the target.
To better understand human performance on this task,
verbal reports were gathered from participants after they
finished. In previous research, we have used these verbal
reports to infer the general strategy that the participants were
using to solve the task. This strategy is described below. It
provides support for a theoretical explanation for participant
performance on this kind of task (see Gunzelmann &
Anderson, in press). In addition, the predictions of this
strategy for performance have been validated against the
human data using a computational cognitive model developed
in ACT-R (Gunzelmann & Anderson, 2004b).
With a validated strategy for performing orientation tasks,
it is possible to explore the relationship between it and
strategies that have been described for other types of spatial
tasks. This kind of comparison has not been performed in the
past. In the next section, we briefly describe perspectivetaking tasks and two strategies that have been described for
doing them, array rotation and viewer rotation (Huttenlocher

851

array. For instance, the question typically posed in the 3mountain task is an appearance question (e.g., What would
this scene look like from “over there”?). The important
finding from this research for current purposes is that
participants were more accurate on item questions when they
were instructed to use the viewer rotation strategy, and more
accurate on appearance questions when they were asked to
use the array rotation strategy.

& Presson, 1979; Presson, 1982; Wraga, et al., 2000). Then,
after describing our experiment, we compare the perspectivetaking strategies to the general strategies described by
participants in our study for solving the orientation task.
Although there are differences between orientation and
perspective-taking tasks, they share important features as
well. A careful analysis indicates that the strategy reported by
participants for solving the orientation task consists of a
combination of the perspective-taking strategies, executed in
sequence.

Experiment
The experiment described here is presented in more detail in
Gunzelmann and Anderson (2004b; in press). Participants
were asked to solve an orientation task, which involves
integrating an egocentric visual scene with a map of the
space. A target was identified as one of 10 objects in the
visual scene, and participants indicated which of the objects
on a map of the space corresponded to the target. Figure 1
shows a sample trial from this experiment. The exact design
of the experiment is described below. However, an important
feature of the stimuli is that the objects in the space were
arranged in a somewhat irregular manner, making it difficult
to use strategies that are based on regular distributions of
objects in the space (e.g., Gunzelmann & Anderson, 2004a).
Orientation tasks differ in several ways from perspectivetaking tasks. Most importantly, in perspective-taking
participants are asked to imagine that the relationship
between them and the display changes, producing a different
situation. In orientation tasks, the relationship between the
viewer and the space remains constant. However, participants
must take information from one frame of reference and apply
it to a different frame of reference. Despite the differences,
both of these tasks require mental transformations to
determine the appropriate response. Also, the transformations
frequently involve mental rotation. It is this aspect of the
solution process where the closest similarities lie.

Perspective-Taking Tasks
Perspective-taking tasks require the participant to identify
what a display (e.g., an array of objects) would look like from
a different viewpoint, or after it was rotated. The most
recognizable example of such a task in psychological research
is the Piagetian 3-mountains task (e.g., Piaget & Inhelder,
1956). In this task, the participant is asked to select an image
that represents what a display (consisting of 3 mountains with
identifiable characteristics) would look like from the
perspective of another viewer. This requires the viewer to
imagine how the components of the display would be
arranged when viewed from that other perspective. Research
has used a variety of variations of this basic problem to
examine different strategies.
Strategies in Perspective-Taking As noted above, the two
strategies that have received the most research attention in the
perspective-taking literature are array rotation and viewer
rotation (e.g., Huttenlocher & Presson, 1979; Presson, 1982;
Wraga, et al., 2000). In array rotation, the participant makes a
judgment by imagining the objects in the array rotating
relative to its own axis, whereas viewer rotation involves
imagining the rotation of the viewpoint around the array. In
the first case, the question might be, What would this display
look like from where you are now if the display were rotated
by 180 degrees? In the latter case the question becomes, What
would this display look like if you were standing on the
opposite side of it?
Both the array rotation and viewer rotation strategies
involve mental rotation, and should have the same
computational complexity. However, Huttenlocher & Presson
(1979; Presson, 1982) demonstrated that participants do not
treat these two situations equivalently. That is, in some
situations performance was better when participants were
instructed to use the array rotation strategy, whereas in other
cases instructions to use the viewer rotation strategy produced
superior performance.
A key factor that influenced the relative difficulty of the
two strategies was the type of question given to participants.
In some cases, participants were asked item questions. These
questions require participants to indicate the location of one
of the items in the array after the transformation. For instance,
which item is on the left? Or, where is the book? Other times,
participants were asked appearance questions. These are
questions which require knowledge of all of the items in the

Method
In each trial, participants were shown a visual scene and a
map. There were 10 objects in the space on each trial, and all
10 objects were visible in both views. In the visual scene, one
of the objects was highlighted in red to identify it as the target
(it is white in Figure 1). To facilitate performance, the
viewer’s position was indicated on the map as a black dot.
The viewer was always positioned at the edge of the space,
looking toward the center. The task was to identify the target
on the map of the space. Participants made their responses by
clicking on their answer on the map. Response times and
accuracy were recorded. Twenty individuals participated,
ranging in age from 17 to 31 (mean age = 21.9). Each
participant was paid $10, and the experiment lasted no more
than 1.5 hours.
The stimuli were designed by placing the objects into
quadrants in the space. The quadrants were defined relative
to the viewer, using either the main axes (horizontal and
vertical) or the oblique axes (diagonal; this is the case in
Figure 1) to divide them. Objects were placed randomly

852

(r=.83), supporting the conclusion that the outcomes were not
the result of a speed-accuracy trade-off. The response times
presented here include only correct responses. They indicated
that there were several factors that influenced participants’
performance on the task.
ANOVAs indicated that the target’s location, misalignment
between the two views, and the number of other objects in the
quadrant all had significant influences on participants’
response times in this study, F(7,63)=11.39, p<.01
(MSE=4.45sec2), F(3,27)=38.62, p<.001 (MSE=6.47sec2),
and F(3,27)=60.67, p<.001, (MSE=2.41sec2), respectively.
Participants took longer to respond when the target was off to
the side of the viewpoint or farther from the viewer, when
misalignment was greater, and when more objects were
located in the same quadrant as the target. The data are
presented in Table 1 and Figure 2. There was also an
important interaction in the data. The magnitude of the effect
of misalignment was larger when more objects were in the
same quadrant as the target, F(9,81)=8.79, p<.001. This effect
is shown in Figure 2 as well.

around a central point in the quadrants under the constraint
that the four quadrants contain 1, 2, 3, and 4 objects
respectively in each trial. The configuration of those
quadrants relative to each other and relative to the viewer was
counterbalanced (24 different maps).
The target could appear in any of the four quadrants
(among 0, 1, 2, or 3 other objects in the same quadrant), and
the degree of misalignment between the two views was varied
in 90˚ increments (0, 90, 180, and 270; determined by the
viewer’s location, at the bottom, left, top, or right of the map
respectively). The resulting design contained 768 trials (2
quadrant alignment conditions, 24 different maps, 4 target
locations, and 4 misalignments). For the data presented
below, the 8 target locations represent the four quadrants
relative to the viewer, crossed with the two quadrant
alignment conditions.
In this study, participants completed half of the possible
trials. Each participant was assigned to one of the quadrant
alignment conditions and completed all 384 of the trials in
that condition (10 participants were randomly assigned to
each condition). Though it is not critical for this paper, the
participants from the two conditions were ranked based on
their scores on an assessment of spatial ability (Vandenberg
& Kuse, 1978). These rankings were used as the basis for
combining the data from participants in the two groups to
create “meta-participants”. The statistics presented in the
results below are based on these meta-participants
(Gunzelmann & Anderson, in press describes this in more
detail).
Participants completed all 384 trials using a drop-out
procedure. If an error was made on a particular trial, it was
repeated later in the experiment under the constraint that the
same trial was never presented twice in a row. The
experiment was broken into blocks of 20 trials, and
participants were permitted to take a short break between
blocks. Once they finished, participants were questioned
about how they solved the task. As part of this interview, they
were given sample problems, and were asked to describe their
solution process aloud. The experimenter followed up on
vague responses to get a clear sense of the strategy being
used. The verbal report data described here consist of
summaries of participants’ responses during this interview.

Table 1: Mean response times (seconds) as a function of the
location of the target relative to the viewer.
Target Location
Relative to Viewer
Close in front
Close to the side
Middle to the side
Far to the side
Far in front

Mean RT
2.72 sec
3.90 sec
3.90 sec
4.34 sec
3.22 sec

7.00
6.00

Response Time (sec)

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

Viewer at Bottom (0° Misalignment)
Viewer at Side (90° Misalignment)

1.00

Viewer at Top (180° Misalignment)
0.00
Zero

Results

One

Two

Three

Number of Other Objects in Quadrant with Target

Figure 2: Mean response times (seconds) as a function of
misalignment and the number of objects in the same quadrant
as the target.

In this section, the accuracy and response time data are
discussed only briefly (see Gunzelmann & Anderson, in press
for more detailed analyses of these data), focusing instead on
the verbal reports from participants. These data were used to
identify the strategy that participants were using. In
conjunction with previous research on strategies in
perspective-taking tasks, this effort leads to a better
understanding of why participants performed the task in the
manner they did.
Participants generally performed quite well in this
experiment. Overall accuracy was 96%. And, the error data
generally followed the same trends as the response time data

The results just mentioned provide clues as to how
participants were performing the task. The impact of
misalignment indicates that updating the frame of reference
was a significant source of difficulty in this task, just as it is
in perspective-taking. Also, the effect of the number of
objects in the quadrant shows that nearby objects influenced
how easily participants could do the task. The interaction
between these two factors provides details about the

853

that the internal relationships be maintained and updated
during the transformation. Thus, although the details are
somewhat different, the general approach remains consistent.
One of these participants did not specifically mention an
attempt to narrow the search area by focusing on a cluster or
region.
Regardless of the particular methods, the second step
requires that the target’s location be encoded relative to the
other objects in the cluster, and that the information be
transformed so that it can be applied to the representation on
the map. Using either mental rotation or a verbal approach,
successful completion of this step requires that the
participants maintain the internal relationships among the
objects in the cluster as they make the transformation. The
interaction between misalignment and the number of objects
in the quadrant with the target reflects the difficulty of this
process. It shows that this step became increasingly difficult
as information about more objects had to be maintained and
transformed. The consistency of this result indicates that this
was true regardless of the details of how participants reported
executing the second step.
The verbal reports suggest that the general strategy for
solving the task was quite similar across participants, even if
some of the specific methods differed somewhat. Participants
seem to take a hierarchical approach to locating the target, by
finding an area of the map to search and then focusing in on
that area. This is the general strategy that served as the basis
of the model described in Gunzelmann and Anderson (2004).
That model used this strategy to solve the task and produced a
close fit to the human response time data. In addition,
Gunzelmann and Anderson (in press) describe in more detail
the empirical evidence supporting this strategy. The
remainder of this paper considers this general approach to
solving the task further. The solution strategy is compared to
the strategies reported for perspective-taking tasks, to explore
the relationship between the two tasks and how people solve
them.

relationship between the two sources of difficulty. These
findings were very consistent across participants, suggesting
that a common strategy may have been adopted by the
participants. Meanwhile, their verbal reports provided further
support for a common strategy, with additional clues to aid in
the identification of that strategy.
Verbal Reports Participants’ verbal reports indicated that
they performed the task in a hierarchical manner. First, they
identified an area of the space that contained the target, and
then they determined the target’s position within that area.
These two steps can be thought of as (1) identifying the
position of a cluster of objects containing the target relative to
the viewer and (2) determining the position of the target
within the cluster. These steps, and evidence for them from
the verbal reports, are discussed further here. Additional
arguments supporting this strategy can be found in
Gunzelmann and Anderson (2004; in press).
There was, of course, some variability in exactly how
participants reported solving the task. However, there was a
great deal of consistency in the general approach. The most
critical aspect of the verbal reports provides evidence for the
hierarchical decomposition just described. Of the twenty
participants, 17 explicitly mentioned either “splitting” the
view into sub-areas or using “clusters”, “configurations”,
“groups”, or “patterns” of objects to solve the task.
In the hierarchical solution process, the first step was to
find the general area of the map where the target was located.
Participants reported identifying a cluster of objects that
contained the target and finding that cluster on the map of the
space. By focusing in on a subset of the objects in the space,
participants were able to reduce both the amount of area on
the map that they needed to search as well as the number of
objects that they needed to consider. They were able to
accomplish this reduction by locating a single feature from
the visual scene on the map (i.e., the cluster).
Step 2 of the solution strategy involves more detailed
encoding and processing of the area of the space where the
target was located. There was a little more variation in how
participants described completing this step. Eight of the
participants stated that they used mental rotation to line up the
target in the visual scene with the object locations shown on
the map. They did this by rotating the cluster of objects
containing the target so that it lined up with the corresponding
cluster on the map. Two of these participants did not
explicitly mention using the first step. However, research has
shown that rotating displays of greater complexity is more
difficult (Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1988). Thus, it is likely that
these participants found some way to reduce the number of
objects they needed to rotate to solve the problem.
The remaining participants reported a verbal strategy for
the second step, which generally involved identifying the
target’s position in the cluster (e.g., “directly behind the
closest object in the group” for Figure 1). These participants
did not report using a mental image. While this process is
somewhat different from rotating the cluster, it still requires

Comparison of Strategies
There are a number of differences between the perspectivetaking tasks used by Huttenlocher and Presson (1979;
Presson, 1982) and the orientation task used in the experiment
described above. The two most obvious differences between
them are that the perspective-taking tasks require imagining a
scene from a different position in the space, and that the
orientation task requires a transformation of the current point
of view to a different frame of reference.
Despite any differences between the tasks, they have
important features in common. In both tasks, participants are
presented with a representation of an array of objects and they
must perform some transformation that allows them to
identify the location of those objects in a different
representation. In perspective-taking, the different
representation is a new viewpoint relative to the array,
whereas the orientation task used here requires a change from
an egocentric frame of reference to an allocentric frame of

854

cluster, since the spatial relationships among them are critical
in determining which one is the target. Thus, the second step
is an example of an appearance question. Participants’ verbal
reports suggest that they use the array rotation strategy here,
which maintains the locational and relational information.
Huttenlocher and Presson (1979; Presson, 1982) showed that
using array rotation in this kind of situation will lead to
greater accuracy than viewer rotation.
The comparison of the strategies from these different tasks
illustrates ways in which they correspond. This demonstrates
that individuals may have general strategies that they can
apply flexibly in different circumstances. Further, the
examination of when the different perspective-taking
strategies were used here shows that participants were able to
choose strategies that were locally efficient to serve a larger
goal. By approaching the task hierarchically, they were able
to choose a strategy at each step that provided the better
opportunity for success.

reference. The following discussion illustrates how the steps
participants reported for doing the orientation task relate to
the perspective-taking strategies described above.
The verbal reports from participants indicated that they
began each trial by attempting to identify a cluster of objects
containing the target, which they could then locate on the
map. What is crucial is how this step was achieved. Most of
the participants mentioned that they used the left-right axis to
help them divide the space. To find a cluster of objects “on
the left”, though, requires using a frame of reference based
upon the viewer’s location on the map. This process is
analogous to the viewer rotation strategy described in
perspective-taking tasks. Essentially, it involves imagining
oneself on the map, allowing for a determination of which
half of the map corresponds to the left half of the visual
scene.
On the other hand, the second step of participants’
solutions seemed to relate more closely to the array rotation
strategy. Many of the participants reported that they used
mental rotation to complete this step. This involved rotating
the cluster of objects containing the target so that it lined up
with the appropriate cluster on the map. Participants could
then zero in on the correct object to identify the target. This
corresponds exactly to the array rotation strategy described
for perspective-taking. Here, the objects in the cluster are
rotated to the new orientation. Even those participants who
reported using a verbal strategy indicated that they
incorporated information about the other objects in the cluster
into their description. It is the relationships among those
objects that allowed participants to identify the target. Thus,
the transformations must have preserved this information. So,
while the method may have been different, the nature of those
transformations seems to have been the same.
There is overlap in the kinds of transformations that are
required to arrive at the correct solution in orientation tasks
and perspective taking tasks, which allows similar approaches
to apply in both kinds of task. For instance, the first step of
the strategy described here seems to be an example of an item
question, which requires the individual to keep track of only a
single item in the array. In the orientation task, participants
grouped objects into clusters, which could then be treated as
individual items. As a result, the first step requires finding the
answer to an item question such as, Where would the cluster
be if I were at “this location” (i.e., the black dot) on the map?
It is telling that participants answer the question of where
the cluster is located by using viewer rotation. Huttenlocher
and Presson (1979; Presson, 1982) found that participants
were more accurate in their responses to item questions when
they were instructed to use the viewer rotation strategy. In
this case, participants opted to use viewer rotation to locate
the cluster on the map. This provides some evidence that
participants are able to effectively choose an appropriate
strategy to complete this step.
In the second step, participants continue to show efficiency
in their solutions. Identifying the location of the target within
the cluster requires information about all of the objects in the

Conclusion
The correspondence of the strategy for orientation to
strategies from perspective-taking is not entirely surprising.
The two types of tasks share important features, which
require participants to perform analogous transformations to
determine the correct response. What is somewhat surprising
is that participants selected different approaches for
difference steps in each trial. However, what is most
interesting is that participants seem to choose the more
effective strategy at the decision points in the solution process
to efficiently solve the problem.
The efficiency of participants’ strategy choices shows that
they are actually quite sophisticated in how they approach
spatial tasks. One reason for this may be the vast amount of
experience that is gained with such tasks in naturalistic
settings. Maps are common in navigation tasks, and we
frequently have to interpret spatial information from
perspective other than our own (e.g., in giving or following
directions; Taylor & Tversky, 1996). The results described
here indicate that these experiences have allowed us to learn
efficient approaches to different spatial tasks.

Acknowledgments
The experiment described here was conducted as part of the
first author’s dissertation, and was supported by AFOSR
Grant #F49620-99-1-0086 to Dr. John R. Anderson at
Carnegie Mellon University and by NRSA training grant #5T32-MH19983 from NIMH to Dr. Lynne Reder at Carnegie
Mellon University. We would like to thank Don Lyon and
Kevin Gluck for their helpful comments.

References
Aginsky, V., Harris, C., Rensink, R., & Beusmans, J. (1997).
Two strategies for learning a route in a driving simulator.
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 17, 317-331.

855

Murakoshi, S., & Kawai, M. (2000). Use of knowledge and
heuristics for wayfinding in an artificial environment.
Environment and Behavior, 32, 756-774.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1956). The child's conception of
space. London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Presson, C. C. (1982). Strategies in spatial reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 8, 243-251.
Rieser, J. J. (1989). Access to knowledge of spatial structure
at novel points of observation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 11571165.
Shepard, R. N., & Hurwitz, S. (1984). Upward direction,
mental rotation, and discrimination of left and right turns in
maps. Cognition, 18, 161-193.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in spatial
descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 371391.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations, a
group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual & Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
Wraga, M., Creem, S. H., & Proffitt, D. R. (2000). Updating
displays after imagined objects and viewer rotations.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 26, 151-168.

Bethell-Fox, Shepard, R. N. (1988). Mental rotation: Effects
of stimulus complexity and familiarity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 14, 12-23.
Gunzelmann, G., & Anderson, J. R. (in press). Location
Matters: Why Target Location Impacts Performance in
Orientation Tasks. Memory & Cognition.
Gunzelmann, G., & Anderson, J. R. (2004a). Orientation
Tasks Involving Multiple Views of Space: Strategies and
Performance. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 4, 209256.
Gunzelmann, G., & Anderson, J. R. (2004b). Spatial
orientation using map displays: A model of the influence of
target location. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, and T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 517-522). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hintzman, D. L., O’Dell, C. S., & Arndt, D. R. (1981).
Orientation in cognitive maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13,
149-206.
Huttenlocher, J., & Presson, C. C. (1979). The coding and
transformation of spatial information. Cognitive
Psychology, 11, 375-394.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1985). Cognitive coordinate
systems: Accounts of mental rotation and individual
differences in spatial ability. Psychological Review, 92,
137-172.

856

