UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interpretations of Conditional and Causal Statements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tq7s68s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
McLaren, I.P.L.
McLaren, R.P.
Tachi, Mizue

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interpretations of Conditional and Causal Statements
Alice McEleney (alice.mceleney@unn.ac.uk)
Psychology Division, Northumbria University
Northumberland Building, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
Abstract
Two experiments compared people’s interpretations of
indicative conditionals (e.g., if the shape is blue, then it’s a
square), subjunctive conditionals (e.g., if the shape were blue,
then it would be a square), causation statements (e.g., the
shape being blue causes it to be a square) and prevention
statements (e.g., the shape being blue prevents it from being a
square). In the first experiment, participants rated the extent to
which the statements were true of arrays of coloured shapes.
In the second experiment, participants constructed their own
arrays of coloured shapes to show the statements to be true or
false. The results suggest that people tend to interpret all four
statements in the same way and they often interpret them
extensionally rather than probabilistically. The implications of
the findings for theories of conditional and causal thinking are
discussed.
Keywords: conditional; causal; thinking; reasoning

Introduction
People often think about conditional or ‘if…then…’
relations, such as ‘if you eat a lot of fat, then you have high
cholesterol’ (an indicative conditional) or ‘if you were to eat
a lot of fat, then you would have high cholesterol’ (a
subjunctive conditional). Conditionals often express causal
relations, and so they are closely linked to causal statements
such as ‘eating a lot of fat causes high cholesterol’ (a
causation statement) and ‘not eating a lot of fat prevents
high cholesterol’ (a prevention statement). Conditional and
causal thinking are essential to reasoning and decision
making, yet despite centuries of philosophical debate and
decades of psychological research, a very fundamental
question remains controversial: what do ordinary people
take conditional and causal statements to mean? This paper
attempts to shed light on how people interpret indicative
conditionals, subjunctive conditionals, causation statements
and prevention statements.
The widespread unproblematic use of conditional and
causal constructions in everyday conversation shows that
ordinary people share an implicit understanding of their
meanings. The interpretation of particular conditional and
causal assertions depends very much on their content and
context (e.g., Cummins, 1995; Thompson, 1994). However,
people readily understand statements with neutral contents
and contexts, such as If A then B or A causes B, which
suggests that conditional and causal statements have ‘basic’
meanings which allow people to understand them even
when their content and context are impoverished (Goldvarg
& Johnson-Laird, 2001; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
What are the basic meanings of conditional and causal
1455

assertions? Among psychologists there are currently two
main competing views of how people interpret conditional
and causal statements, the extensional view and the
probabilistic view.
According to the extensional view, conditional and causal
statements refer to sets of possibilities, which are
represented as mental models (e.g., Goldvarg & JohnsonLaird, 2001; Girotto & Johnson-Laird, 2004; Johnson-Laird
& Byrne, 2002). On this account, a basic indicative or
subjunctive conditional if A then B or causation statement A
causes B refers to the following set of possibilities:
a b
¬a¬b
¬a b
where each line represents a different possibility, a denotes
that A is satisfied, b denotes that B is satisfied and ¬ denotes
negation (e.g., ¬ a denotes that A is not satisfied). This
implies that if A then B and A causes B both mean that A is
sufficient (but not necessary) for B and B is necessary (but
not sufficient) for A. Similarly, a basic prevention statement
A prevents B would refer to the following set of
possibilities:
a¬b
¬a b
¬a¬b
in which A is sufficient (but not necessary) to prevent B and
¬ B is necessary (but not sufficient) for A. People do not
necessarily represent all of the above possibilities explicitly
when they think about conditional or causal statements. For
example, instead of the fully explicit ‘conditional’
representation shown above, they may construct a
‘biconditional’ representation, which includes just the first
two possibilities explicitly, or a ‘conjunction’
representation, which includes just the first (e.g., Barouillet,
Grosset & Lecas, 2000; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002).
In contrast, theorists who take a probabilistic view argue
that conditional and causal statements refer to probabilistic
relations, rather than sets of possibilities (e.g., Cheng, 1997;
Evans, Handley & Over, 2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm. 2003).
For example, Evans and collaborators argue that a
conditional if A then B is interpreted as meaning that the
conditional probability of B given A is high. On this
account, A is neither sufficient nor necessary for B and B is
neither necessary nor sufficient for A. Instead, B is probable
given A. Similarly, Cheng (1997) argues that A causes B
means that the probability of B given A is noticeably higher
than the probability of B given ¬ A, and A prevents B means
that the probability of B given A is noticeably lower than the
probability of B given ¬ A.

One aim of the experiments reported in this paper is to
contribute to the debate on whether basic conditional and
causal statements are typically interpreted extensionally or
probabilistically. A second aim is to determine whether
indicative and subjunctive conditionals and causation and
prevention statements are interpreted in the same way or in
different ways. According to the extensional account
developed by Johnson-Laird and collaborators, if A then B,
A causes B and A prevents not-B all refer to the same set of
possibilities, as described above. In contrast, probabilistic
accounts suggest that conditional and causal statements
have different meanings (Over, Hadjichristidis, Evans,
Handley & Sloman, 2005). Moreover, recent research on the
meanings of ‘cause’ and ‘prevent’ suggests that A causes B
is not directly equivalent to A prevents not-B (Walsh &
Sloman, 2005). To my knowledge, no previously published
studies have directly compared people’s interpretations of
conditional and causal statements.
A major limitation of previous research on the meaning of
conditionals is that the vast majority of studies have used
some version of one of only three tasks. One of those is the
truth table task, which is based on the notion in
propositional logic that the truth or falsity of a conditional if
p then q depends on the truth or falsity of its component
propositions, p and q, which can be shown in a truth table.
As shown in Table 1, the truth table for the material
conditional shows that if p then q is false if and only if p is
satisfied and q is not. In truth table tasks, participants’
interpretations of conditionals are assessed by requiring
them to classify truth table cases as true, false or irrelevant.
Table 1: Truth table for the material conditional if p then q
Case

measure of the interpretation of conditionals, but it makes
some contentious assumptions. Asking participants to judge
whether each of the four logically possible cases either
confirms or falsifies a conditional assumes that people
interpret conditionals as referring to sets of possible cases
and may bias them towards making this kind of
interpretation. Probabilistic truth table tasks avoid biasing
people towards extensional interpretations, but they may
instead bias them towards a probabilistic interpretation.
The experiments reported in this paper avoid these
problems by using the methods reported by Evans, Ellis and
Newstead (1996). In the first experiment, participants were
presented with statements about the colour and shape of
symbols (e.g., if the shape is blue, then it’s a square) and
asked to rate the extent to which the statements were true of
accompanying arrays of coloured shapes containing varying
ratios of TT (e.g., blue square) to TF (e.g., blue circle)
cases. In the second experiment, participants constructed
their own arrays of coloured shapes to show the statements
to be true or false. The use of these methods was intended to
avoid biasing participants towards any particular kind of
interpretation of the statements.
Evans et al (1996) report that participants did not consider
indicative conditionals to be falsified when a small number
of TF cases was included in an array and they often included
TF cases when constructing arrays to show the statements to
be true. These findings are frequently referred to as
evidence for probabilistic interpretations of conditionals
(e.g., Evans et al, 2003; Evans & Over, 2004). However, as
only the mean responses were reported, it is unclear how
individual participants were typically interpreting the
statements. This paper reports both the mean responses and
patterns of individual responses to these tasks.

Truth value

Experiment 1

TT (pq)
T
F
TF (p¬q)
T
FT (¬pq)
T
FF (¬p¬q)
Note: T = true, F = false

Method

The two other commonly used tasks are Wason’s (1966)
selection task, in which participants have to select the cases
they need to examine in order to test whether a conditional
is true; and inference tasks, in which participants are given a
conditional and a second premise and asked to generate or
evaluate a conclusion. Recently, some researchers have also
used probabilistic truth table tasks, in which participants
judge the probability of conditionals given frequency
information about the truth table cases (see Evans & Over,
2004, for reviews of all of these methods).
All of these methods have their drawbacks. The selection
task and inference task are both very indirect ways of
assessing people’s mental representations of conditionals, as
shown by researchers’ disagreement about how to interpret
people’s responses (e.g., Braine & O’Brien, 1998; Evans &
Over, 1996). The truth table approach offers a more direct
1456

Participants
32 students and members of the general public (17 female,
15 male) aged 18 to 47 (mean age 20) were paid
approximately £5 for their participation. None of the
participants had any training in logic.
Procedure
Participants were tested on computers. They were given
written instructions stating that they were going to be
presented with statements, each accompanied by an array of
coloured shapes, and that their task would be to indicate
how true they felt each statement to be with respect to the
accompanying array. They were instructed that they were to
rate this on a scale of +5 to –5, where +5 is ‘absolutely
true’, -5 is ‘absolutely false’ and 0 is ‘can’t tell’. 11 adjacent
keys on the top row of the keyboard were labeled from +5 to
–5 and participants had to press one of those keys to record
their response.
Participants worked through the trials at their own pace.
For each trial, the computer displayed the statement at the

top of the screen with a 6 by 6 array of 36 coloured shapes
underneath. At the bottom of the screen was a scale from +5
to –5, with +5 marked ‘absolutely true’, -5 marked
‘absolutely false’ and 0 marked ‘can’t tell’. Each participant
completed the trials in a different random order.

Table 2: Distribution of truth table cases in each array in
Experiment 1
Array

TT

TF

FT

FF

18:0
17:1
9:9
1:17
0:18

18
17
9
1
0

0
1
9
17
18

9
9
9
9
9

9
9
9
9
9

Results and Discussion
Are the statements interpreted in the same way or in
different ways?
Figure 1 shows participants’ mean ratings of the truth of the
statements, given the different ratios of TT to TF cases. A
four (statement: indicative vs subjunctive vs causation vs
prevention) by five (TT:TF ratio: 18:0 vs 17:1 vs 9:9 vs
1:17 vs 0:18) ANOVA on participants’ ratings showed that
there was a main effect of ratio, F, 1, 31 = 1230.76, p <
0.01, but no main effect of statement, F, 1, 31 = 0.25, p =
0.62, and no interaction between statement and ratio, F, 1,
31 = 0.13, p , 0.72. The findings suggest that people
interpret all four statements in the same way.

Truth rating

Materials and design
There were four types of statement: indicative conditional
(e.g., if the shape is blue, then it’s a square), subjunctive
conditional (e.g., if the shape were blue, then it would be a
square), causation statement (e.g., the shape being blue
causes it to be square) and prevention statement (e.g., the
shape being blue prevents it from being a square)1. Four
shapes (square, circle, triangle and diamond) and four
colours (blue, yellow, black and white) were used in the
statements. The colours and shapes were randomly assigned
to each trial.
Each of the statements was evaluated with respect to five
different arrays of coloured shapes. All of the arrays
contained 9 FF cases and 9 FT cases, with the frequencies of
TT and TF cases manipulated as shown in Table 2.

different symbols in the array were randomly determined for
each trial.

5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
18:0

17:1

9:9

1:17

0:18

TT:TF ratio

In some cases, more than one symbol could be used to
represent a truth case (e.g., for the statement ‘if the shape is
blue, then it’s a square’, TF cases would include blue
circles, triangles and diamonds). In such cases, the symbols
used were selected randomly from the possible symbols.
Examples of the four cases for the four different statement
types are as follows: for ‘if the shape is blue, then it’s a
square’, ‘if the shape were blue, then it would be a square’
and ‘the shape being blue causes it to be a square’, TT =
blue square, TF = blue circle, FT= yellow square, FF =
yellow circle; for ‘the shape being blue prevents it from
being a square’, TT = blue circle, TF = blue square, FT =
yellow circle, FF = yellow square. The positions of the

1

In addition, the polarity of the antecedents and consequents of the
statements was manipulated so that there were four forms of each
statement type: affirmative-affirmative (e.g., if the shape is blue,
then it’s a square), affirmative-negative (e.g., if the shape is blue,
then it’s not a square), negative-affirmative (e.g., if the shape is not
blue, then it’s a square) and negative-negative (e.g., if the shape is
not blue, then it’s not a square). This resulted in 16 statements in
total. Due to space limitations, the results reported here are for
affirmative-affirmative assertions only (for further details, see
McEleney, 2005).
1457

Indicative

Subjunctive

Causation

Prevention

Figure 1: Mean ratings of statements for different TT:TF
ratios in Experiment 1
Are the statements interpreted extensionally or
probabilistically?
Post-hoc comparisons showed that ratings for the 18:0 ratio
were higher than for any of the other ratios; ratings for the
17:1 ratio were higher than the 9:9, 1:17 and 0:18 ratios; and
ratings for the 9:9 ratio were higher than the 0:18 ratio (all
ps < 0.05). This general pattern of a decrease in mean truth
ratings as the ratio of TT:TF cases decreases is consistent
with the findings of Evans et al. (1996) with indicative
conditionals and seems to support the idea that conditional
and causal statements are interpreted in a probabilistic way.
However, examination of individual participants’
responses suggests that only about half of the participants
interpreted the statements probabilistically, whereas the
other half interpreted them extensionally. As shown in
Figure 2, the overwhelming majority of participants rated all
four statements as ‘absolutely true’ of arrays containing 18
TT cases and no TF cases. For the 18:0 array, the modal

% of responses

response for all four statements was +5 (absolutely true),
which was used for 86% of responses (87% of indicative,
91% of subjunctive, 84% of causation, 81% of prevention).
As shown in Figure 3, approximately half the participants
also rated the statements as true (although not necessarily
‘absolutely true’) of arrays containing 17 TT cases and one
TF case, whereas the other half considered the statements to
be falsified by the presence of just one TF case. For the 17:1
ratio, the modal response for all four statements was -5
(absolutely false), which was used for 39% of responses
(50% of indicative, 41% of subjunctive, 37% of causation
and 28% of prevention). The second most common response
was +5 (absolutely true), which was used for 23% of all
responses (12% of indicative, 16% of subjunctive, 31% of
causation and 31% of prevention) and the third most
common response was +4, which was used for 16% (6%
indicative, 9% of subjunctive, 28% of causation and 22% of
prevention).

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

Subjunctive

5

Causation

% of responses

80
60
40
20
0
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Truth rating
Indicative

Subjunctive

Procedure
Participants were given written instructions stating that they
were going to be presented with statements about the colour
and shape of symbols, each accompanied by an empty 6 by
6 grid and that their task would be to fill the grid with
coloured shapes to show the statement to be either true or
false with respect to the appearance of the grid. The
materials were presented in a booklet with one trial on each
page. For each trial, the statement was displayed at the top
of the page with the empty grid below it. Participants were
provided with a blue pen and a red pen, which they used to
draw coloured shapes in the grid.

Are the statements interpreted in the same way or in
different ways?
Figures 4 and 5 show the mean numbers of TT, TF, FT and
FF cases participants included to verify and falsify the
statements, respectively. Four (statement: indicative vs
subjunctive vs causation vs prevention) by two (task: verify
vs falsify) ANOVAs revealed no effects of statement on the
numbers of TT, TF, FT or FF cases (TT: F, 1, 23 = 3.03, p =
0.09; TF: F, 1, 23 = 0.72, p = 0.54; FT: F, 1, 23 = 0.65, p =
0.58; FF: F, 1, 23 = 0.99, p = 0.76), whereas there were
effects of task on all four measures (TT: F, 1, 23 = 57.31, p
< 0.01; TF: F, 1, 23 = 102.86, p < 0.01; FT: F, 1, 23 = 4.87,
p = 0.04; FF: F, 1, 23 = 13.74, p < 0.01). There were no
interactions between statement and task for TT, TF or FT
cases (TT: F, 1, 23 = 3.24, p = 0.08; TF: F, 1, 23 = 0.7, p =
0.55; FT: F, 1, 23 = 1.85, p = 0.14), but there was an
interaction for FF cases, F, 1, 23 = 8.7, p < 0.01. Post-hoc
tests showed that there were significantly more FF cases for
verification than falsification for causation and prevention

Prevention

100

-4

Participants
24 students and members of the general public (19 female, 5
male) aged 18-47 (mean age 23) were paid approximately
£5 for their participation. None of the participants had any
training in logic.

Results and Discussion

Figure 2: Percentages of each response for the 18:0 arrays in
Experiment 1

-5

Method

Materials and design
The same statements were used as in Experiment 12. For
each of the statements, there was one trial in which it had to
be verified and one in which it had to be falsified. Two
shapes (square, circle) and two colours (blue, red) were
used. The colours and shapes were randomly assigned to
each trial. Each participant completed the trials in a different
random order.

Truth rating
Indicative

Experiment 2

Causation

Prevention

2

As in Experiment 1, there were four versions of each statement,
based on varying the polarity of the antecedent and consequent.
Due to space limitations, only the results for affirmativeaffirmative statements are reported here (see McEleney, 2005, for
further details).

Figure 3: Percentages of each response for the 17:1 arrays in
Experiment 1
1458

statements (both ps < 0.01), whereas this difference was not
significant for indicative or subjunctive conditionals.
Overall, the findings suggest that people tend to interpret all
four statements in the same way.

No. of symbols

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
TT
Indicative

TF
FT
Truth table case
Subjunctive

Causation

FF
Prevention

respectively), which suggests that they were not included in
order to set the probability of the consequent given the
antecedent to be high, but less than 1 (pace Evans et al.,
1996; Evans & Over, 2004). It appears more plausible that
in these three cases, participants misunderstood the task or
misread the statements and included these TF cases by
mistake. The results suggest that the kind of situation people
expect to hold when a conditional or causal statement is true
is one in which TF cases do not occur.
Participants’ patterns of symbol selections in the
verification task were classified into categories based on
whether they included TT cases only (consistent with a
‘conjunction’ interpretation), TT and TF cases only
(consistent with a ‘biconditional’ interpretations), TT, FF
and FT cases only (consistent with a ‘conditional’
interpretation) and other patterns of responses, as shown in
Table 3.
Table 3: Percentages of participants constructing arrays
consistent with ‘conjunction’ (TT), ‘biconditional’ (TT &
FF), ‘conditional’ (TT, FF & FT) and other interpretations
in Experiment 2

Figure 4: Mean numbers of symbols included in the
verification task of Experiment 2

TT

No. of symbols

30
25

Indicative
Subjunctive
Causation
Prevention
Mean

20
15
10
5
TF

FT

FF

Truth table case
Indicative

Subjunctive

Causation

TT, FF
& FT
29
37
33
42
36

Other
4
0
8
8
5

The results show that for all four statements, the
overwhelming majority of participants constructed arrays
that were consistent with either a ‘conjunction’,
‘biconditional’ or ‘conditional’ interpretation, with very few
participants constructing arrays containing other
combinations of truth table cases.

0
TT

37
33
33
21
32

TT &
FF
29
29
25
29
29

Prevention

Figure 5: Mean numbers of symbols included in the
falsification task in Experiment 2

Discussion

Are the statements interpreted extensionally or
probabilistically?
As shown in figure 4, the mean numbers of TF cases
included in the verification task were 1.33 for indicative
conditionals, 0 for subjunctive conditionals, 0.75 for
causation statements and 1 for prevention statements. These
findings are consistent with those of Evans et al. (1996) for
indicative conditionals and suggest that participants may be
interpreting the indicative conditionals, causation statements
and prevention statements in a probabilistic way.
However, as in Experiment 1, examination of
participants’ individual responses suggests a different
interpretation. Only one participant included any TF cases
to verify an indicative conditional, only one included any to
verify a causation statement and only one included any to
verify a prevention statement. The numbers of TF cases
included in these trials were very high (32, 18 and 24
1459

The findings of the two experiments reported here suggest
that people tend to interpret basic indicative conditionals,
subjunctive conditionals, causation statements and
prevention statements in the same way. Participants in the
first experiment made very similar ratings of the extent to
which the different kinds of statements were true of arrays
of coloured shapes. Participants in the second experiment
constructed very similar arrays of coloured shapes to verify
or falsify the different kinds of statement.
The findings also suggest that people often interpret all
four statements in an extensional rather than probabilistic
way (pace Evans et al., 1996; 2003; Evans & Over, 2004).
In the first experiment, as would be expected, the
overwhelming majority of participants rated all four
statements as ‘absolutely true’ of arrays of coloured shapes
containing 18 TT cases and no TF cases. Approximately
half the participants also rated the statements as true
(although not necessarily ‘absolutely true’) of arrays

containing 17 TT cases and one TF case, suggesting a
probabilistic interpretation in which the antecedent increases
the likelihood of the consequent, rather than determining its
occurrence. However, the other half of the participants
considered the statements to be falsified by the presence of
just one TF case, suggesting an extensional interpretation in
which TF cases are impossible rather than just improbable.
The finding of individual differences in participants’
interpretations is consistent with evidence reported by
Evans et al. (2003) and Oberauer and Wilhelm (2003) for
indicative conditionals. However, the results reported here
are not consistent with their argument that probabilistic
interpretations are more common than extensional ones.
The second experiment provided stronger evidence for
extensional interpretations. When constructing their own
arrays to show the statements to be true, participants
extremely rarely included any TF cases. Instead, the vast
majority of participants constructed arrays consistent with
one of three extensional interpretations: conjunction (TT
cases only), biconditional (TT and FF cases only) or
conditional (TT, FF and FT cases only).
Of course, the experiments reported here do not examine
all aspects of people’s interpretations of conditional and
causal statements. For example, although indicative and
subjunctive conditionals may be interpreted as consistent
with the same sets of possibilities, people’s initial mental
models of indicative and subjunctive conditionals may be
different, with the result that people make different
inferences from them (e.g., Thompson & Byrne, 2002).
Similarly, a causation statement may refer to the same set of
possibilities as a conditional, but the causation statement
may also convey that the cause precedes the effect in time,
whereas the conditional may not specify the temporal order
of the antecedent and consequent (Goldvarg & JohnsonLaird, 2001). Another possibility is that the meaning of
causation includes understanding of the mechanisms by
which the cause produces its effect (e.g., Schultz, 1982;
White, 1989).
The experiments reported here only examined ‘basic’
conditional and causal statements, that is, those with
'…neutral content that is as independent as possible from
context and background knowledge...' (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 2002, p. 648). Although it is important to understand
how people interpret such statements, further research is
needed to determine whether the findings also apply to more
realistic statements used in context (see McEleney, 2005).

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Darren Dunning and Benedict Singleton for
assistance with data collection and to John Clibbens, Shira
Elqayam, Jonathan Evans, Simon Handley, Henry
Markovits and Clare Walsh for helpful discussions. The
research was funded by a grant from the School of
Psychology and Sport Sciences at Northumbria University.

1460

References
Barrouillet, P., Grosset, N. & Lecas, J.-F. (2000).
Conditional reasoning by mental models: chronometric
and developmental evidence. Cognition, 75, 237–266.
Braine, M. D. S. & O’Brien, D. P. (Eds.) (1998). Mental
Logic. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naïve theories and causal
deduction. Memory and Cognition, 23 (5),646-658.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Ellis, C. E. & Newstead, S. E. (1996).
On the mental representation of conditional sentences.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 4,
1086-1114.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J. & Over, D. E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 29, 2, 321-335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationality in the
selection task: Epistemic utility versus uncertainty
reduction. Psychological Review, 103, 356-363.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E., (2004). If. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Girotto, V. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2004). The probability
of conditionals. Psychologia, 47, 4, 207-255.
Goldvarg, E. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Naive
causality: a mental model theory of causal meaning and
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25, 4, 565-610.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A Theory of meaning, pragmatics and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 4, 646-678.
McEleney, A. (2005). Mental representations of conditional
and causal statements. Manuscript in preparation.
Oberauer, K. & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models
and personal utilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 29, 4, 680-693.
Over, D. E., Hadjichristidis, C., Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley,
S. J. & Sloman, S. A. (2005). The probability of ordinary
indicative conditionals. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Shultz, T. R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 47, 1-51.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 22 (6), 742758.
Thompson, V. A. & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Reasoning
counterfactually: Making inferences about things that
didn’t happen. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 28,
6, 1154-1170.
Walsh, C. R. & Sloman, S. A. (2005). The meaning of cause
and prevent: the role of causal mechanism. This volume.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. Foss (Ed.), New
horizons in psychology. Harmonsworth, UK: Penguin
Books.
White, P. E. (1989). A theory of causal processing. British
Journal of Psychology, 80, 431-454.

