UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction of Structural and Contextual Constraints During the On-line Generation of Scalar
Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73c75114

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Breheny, Richard
Katsos, Napoleon
Williams, John

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction of Structural and Contextual Constraints
During the On-line Generation of Scalar Inferences
Napoleon Katsos (nk248@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English and Applied Linguistics,
University of Cambridge, 9 West Road, CB3 9DP, UK

Richard Breheny (richardb@linguistics.ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, University College London
Gower Street, WC1E 6BT UK

John Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English and Applied Linguistics,
University of Cambridge, 9 West Road, CB3 9DP, UK
(1)

Abstract
We investigate the interaction of structural and contextual
constraints on the on-line generation of three types of Scalar
Implicature, (a) the disjunction: “A or B” >> “either A or B but
not both”, (b) the partitive NP: “some of the Fs”>> “at least one
but not all of the Fs” and (c) ad hoc context dependent scales. In
theoretical linguistics, according to the structural approach
(Chierchia, 2004; Levinson 2000) Scalar Implicatures (SIs) are
generated whenever certain constraints on the semantic
properties of the linguistic structure are satisfied. According to
the pragmatic approach, structural properties are a necessary
but not sufficient condition, since for SIs to be generated there
ought to be further contextual constraints (Carston, 1998;
Recanati, 2003; Sperber & Wilson, 1995). The linguistic debate
can be addressed experimentally, but studies in this small but
growing area are not reaching a consensus. Single sentence
truth value judgment tasks (Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck &
Posada, 2003) and studies on the visual-world eye-tracking
paradigm (Storto & Tanenhaus, 2005; Huang & Snedeker,
2005) support the pragmatic approach but do not explicitly
manipulate discourse context constraints. Text comprehension
studies that do so (Bezuidenhout & Cutting, 2002;
Bezuidenhout & Morris, 2004, Breheny, Katsos & Williams in
press) have been ambivalent. We present one off-line and three
on-line text comprehension experiments that address the
previous shortcomings and conclude in favor of the pragmatic
approach. The linguistic debate is related to the
psycholinguistic discussion of the factors that constrain
sentence processing. We discuss our findings with regards to
the modular versus interactive nature of the human parser.

Mary: How many students failed the test?
Jane: Some of them did >> Not all of them did

A distinctive property of SIs is defeasibility due to structural
and contextual constraints. Regarding the former, SIs are
dependent on the direction of the entailment of the scale. In
downward entailment structures, e.g. in the antecedent of a
conditional, the direction of entailment in the scale is reversed
(“some” entails “all”) and SIs are not generated:
(2)

If some of the students fail the test, their teacher will
be disappointed.

Here there is no implication that if all the students fail the test
their teacher will not be disappointed.
Moreover, SIs are context dependent. There are three types
of relevant contexts, (a) upper bound, where it is necessary to
generate an SI in order to satisfy a discourse goal like in (1),
(b) neutral contexts, where there is no assumption as to
whether the SI is relevant or not, and (c) lower bound
contexts, where the discourse goal can be satisfied by the
plain meaning of the SI trigger without any need for the SI. It
is assumed that SIs are not generated in lower bound contexts
since the assertion of stronger terms of the scale is irrelevant:
(3)

Mary: Why is the teacher disappointed?
Jane: Some of his students failed the test.

In (3) the discourse goal that is set by Mary’s question is
satisfactorily addressed by the plain meaning of “some”, “at
least one of the students and even all”, so it becomes
irrelevant whether the strengthened alternative “at least one
but not all” is true or not (e.g. Levinson, 2000).

Keywords: pragmatics; scalar implicature; processing.

Introduction
Certain linguistic expressions form entailment scales where
terms on the right of the scale are informationally stronger
than terms on the left (measured by number of entailments,
e.g. <some, most, all>, <or, and>). Scalar expressions may
trigger Scalar Implicatures (SIs) in upward entailing
structures when the assertion of an informationally weaker
term conversationally implies (“>>”) the negation of the
stronger terms in (1).

The linguistic debate
The current linguistic debate is set between the structural
approach (Chierchia, 2004; Levinson, 2000) which posits that
logical properties of the linguistic structure are the necessary
and sufficient conditions for SI generation, and the pragmatic
approach (Carston, 1998; Recanati, 2003; Sperber & Wilson,
1995) that posits an interaction between the three types of

1108

Table (1). Structural & Pragmatic Approaches’ Predictions

context (upper-, lower-bound and neutral) and structural
constraints.

Structural
Approach

The structural approach
According to Chierchia’s version, SIs are generated locally,
below the level of the full sentence, and automatically, as
soon as a scalar term enters the computation. The grammar
assigns two values for the scalar trigger, the plain meaning of
the expression and its scalar alternative which incorporates
the SI. Subsequently, the informationally weaker meaning
will be filtered out. In the case of upward entailing structures
this is the plain meaning of the trigger, but in downward
entailing structures this is the meaning with the SI. Thus,
there are cases where SIs are computed by default and cases
where they are absent by default; in both cases the key factor
is structural properties. At a second stage, the SI is checked
against the background assumptions. If the addition of a
default SI to a given discourse context is infelicitous, (e.g. to
a lower bound context as in 3), the SI will be cancelled; but
this happens only at a later stage after compositional
grammatical processes have been concluded. A corollary of
the structural approach is that SIs are linguistic inferences
generated by a default process that should come for little
processing cost.

The pragmatic approach
According to the pragmatic approach the structural constraint
of upward entailment is indeed a necessary condition for SI
generation and SIs will not be generated in downward
entailing structures. However, for SIs to be generated, besides
being in an upward entailing structure, they must also be
under an upper-bound discourse context, i.e. a discourse goal
which makes the SI relevant (e.g. for the SI trigger “some of
the Fs” this would be a discourse where the quantity of the Fs
involved is important).
The differences between the structural and the pragmatic
approach become evident in upward entailing structures (the
structures that allow for SI generation) in two respects: First,
given lower-bound discourse contexts where the SI is
incompatible with the discourse, the first predicts that SIs will
be generated and subsequently cancelled and the second that
SI will not be generated at all. Moreover, in upward entailing
structures which are discourse neutral (i.e. there are no
contextual assumptions that make the SI relevant), the
structural approach predicts the generation of SIs regardless
of the absence of contextual assumptions whereas the
pragmatic approach predicts that the SI will not be generated.
Table 1 explicates the predictions.

Psycholinguistic investigation
Chierchia (2004), Levinson (2000), Sperber & Wilson (1995)
and other linguists have explicated the need for relevant
psycholinguistic evidence. There is a small but growing
literature employing various methodologies.

(i) SIs generated locally
(ii) SIs are not generated
in downward entailment
structures
(iii) In upward entailing
structures with an upperbound discourse context
(iv) In upward entailing
structures which are
discourse neutral
(v) In upward entailing
structures with a lowerbound discourse context
(vi) In terms of
processing resources

YES

YES

YES

YES

SI generated

SI generated

SI generated

SI NOT
generated

SI generated
& cancelled

SI NOT
generated

generation
costless &
cancellation
costly

generation
costly &
cancellation
never occurs

lower-bound discourse context. Bezuidenhout & Cutting
(hence B&C) test various scales including the numerals and
quantifiers. According to the structural approach, in a lowerbound context the SI has to be cancelled, leading to longer (or
at least equal) reading time than in an upper-bound context
where the SI is allowed to be generated. In a self-paced
reading experiment B&C found that there was a significant
slowdown when reading the SI triggers in lower-bound
contexts compared to upper-bound. They conclude that in
lower-bound contexts SIs are first generated and then
cancelled, supporting the structural approach.
However, we must note that B&C’s experimental items
were not “orthodox” implicatures according to the current
consensus in linguistic theory. The cardinals by which they
exemplify their case are not considered implicatures by most
theorists in either camp of the debate (see Breheny, 2005;
Geurts, 1998 i.a.; Papafragou & Musolino 2003 for
developmental evidence). Other expressions B&C used have
never been considered implicatures. E.g. inferring from
‘everyone is a vegetarian’ that ‘everyone in this group (= not
in the whole universe) is a vegetarian’ is a process of
narrowing down the range of application of the quantifier and
not of implicature generation. All in all, almost half of the
categories B&C tested do not give rise to SIs.
Bezuidenhout & Morris (2004; hence B&M) used an eyetracker to record reading time and gaze fixations on sentences
like (4a) where the ‘not all of the Fs’ SI is explicitly cancelled
in the second sentence by the phrase ‘in fact all of them did’.
Definite expressions were used as controls (4b):
(4)

Text comprehension
The study reported in Bezuidenhout & Cutting (2002)
investigates prediction (v), the case where an SI in an upward
entailing structure is incompatible with a

Pragmatic
Approach

a. Some books had colour pictures. In fact all of them
did, which is why the teachers liked them.
b. The books had colour pictures. In fact all of them
did, which is why the teachers liked them.

According to the structural approach, participants should
generate the SI when ‘some’ is read and will engage in

1109

cancellation and reanalysis at the ‘them did’ region of the
sentence. In contrast, according to B&M, the pragmatic
approach claims that participants do not fully commit to the
‘some but not all’ SI right away. This approach predicts
increased processing time on the word ‘all’ to reflect the fact
that the reader has registered information potentially relevant
to the specification of an underspecified item.
B&M find that there is no reading time slowdown at the
‘them did’ region between (4a) and (4b) but there is a
slowdown on ‘all’ in (4a), which they interpret as evidence in
favor of the pragmatic approach.
There are however a number of objections. Firstly, the
discourses used were not unbiased since a) at the beginning of
the second phrase there always was a discourse marker which
indicated contrast (‘in fact’, ‘actually’ etc) which is not
neutral to the inferences under study and b) their control
example (4b) is an infelicitous discourse and further questions
arise from a follow up study that was designed to control for
this. Second, B&M’s understanding of underspecification is
problematic, implying that interpretations can remain
underspecified indefinitely in case there is no further relevant
information in the discourse. It is our understanding that both
structural and pragmatic approaches clearly ascribe to the
prediction that if an SI is generated then this should occur
immediately once the trigger has been processed. All in all,
the studies by B&C and B&M have marked the beginning of
SI experimental investigation but for different reasons both
studies remain inconclusive.

Single sentence truth value judgment tasks
When presented with an SI trigger and asked to make a
judgment, respondents may answer “false” to a sentence like
(5) if they generate the SI (“at least one but not all”) or
answer “true” if they use the plain meaning (“at least one and
perhaps all”):
(5)

Some elephants have trunks

In a reasoning experiment, Noveck & Posada (2003)
instructed groups of participants to use scalar terms either
with the SI or just with the plain meaning. They timed the
responses in a sentence verification task and found that the
time taken by the participants answering ‘false’ was
significantly longer than those answering ‘true’. That is, when
respondents based their answers on the plain meaning, it was
not the case that the SI was first generated and then cancelled
but rather that the SI was not generated in the first place. This
result supports a model where SIs are costly inferences. In a
similar study Bott & Noveck (2004) replicated these findings
and also excluded the possibility that the difference was due
to the difference in response type (True vs. False) by
including appropriate control conditions. Moreover, in a
second experiment they introduced an additional layer of
narration, where the sentences are attributed to a character.
The stimuli are preceded either by the declaration that “Mary
says the following sentence is true” or that “Mary says the
following sentence is false”. Participants are then asked to
agree or disagree. Bott & Noveck replicated the previous
findings with a design where it is possible for answers based
either on the SI or the plain meaning to have the same

response type. In the third experiment they removed the
instructions to the participants group and still obtained the
same pattern and in the fourth experiment they found that the
number of responses based on the SI increased as permitted
response time increased. Thus, the studies by Noveck and
colleagues have yielded consistent evidence against the
structural approach regarding prediction (v) and prediction
(vi).

Visual-world eye-tracking
Storto & Tanenhaus (2005) investigated the scale <or, and>,
whereby the plain meaning of the disjunction “or”, called the
inclusive interpretation, is “A or B or even both” and the SI
gives rise to the exclusive interpretation “either A or B but not
both”. Storto & Tanenhaus found that the SI was calculated
and integrated very locally to the utterance of the disjunction
and could guide the further processing of the sentence. Thus
they supported prediction (i), which is shared by both the
structural and the pragmatic approach, that the process that
generates SIs operates quickly, below the level of the full
sentence. However, the facilitation from the generation of the
SI was not as local as the facilitation obtained from the
meaning of the stronger term of the relevant scale, ‘and’. It is
possible that the delay in facilitation from an SI relative to
facilitation from semantic meaning may be due to some
shortcoming of the design – and the authors are cautious not
to exclude this possibility. However, taken at face value, this
result suggests that SIs, however local, are not on a par with
semantic meaning.
Huang & Snedeker (2005) compared the processing of the
partitive noun phrase “some of the F” and of number terms
using the visual-world paradigm. Their results suggest that
numerals (whose interpretation is grammar-driven) are
categorically different from scalar terms proper. When
presented with a set of plausible alternatives in the number
condition (one, two or three Fs) participants fixated on the
correct image from the beginning and engaged in very early
disambiguation of the sentence. In contrast, in the scalar
condition, participants were presented with two alternatives
(“some of the Fs” and “all the Fs”), initially looked at both
plausible alternatives, and showed relatively late
disambiguation. These findings suggest again that even
though SIs are generated on-line locally, the time-course of
the process that generates them is different from that of the
process that generates grammar driven interpretations like the
numerals.
Overall, single sentence truth value judgment tasks and
visual-world eye-tracking studies suggest that SIs are local
but not default inferences. However, these studies do not
manipulate discourse context (upper-, lower-bound and
neutral) which would allow for testing the crucial prediction
(v) where the pragmatic and the structural approach make
differential claims.

The present research
We aimed to devise experiments that would put to test all six
predictions of the structural and the pragmatic approach, by
embedding SIs in discourse contexts and manipulating the
interaction with structural properties.

1110

Experiment 1. An off-line study on defeasibility. In our
first experiment, we tested the assumption of both the
structural and the pragmatic approach that SIs do not arise (a)
in upward entailing structures with lower-bound contexts and
(b) in downward entailing structures. Even though this is a
critical assumption, according to our knowledge it has not
been experimentally addressed up to now. We tested the SI
associated with the exclusive interpretation of the disjunction
“A or B” >> “either A or B but not both”. We created pairs of
sentences where the first sentence was either a question which
requires a single entity for an answer, therefore creating an
upper-bound context, or a question which can be answered by
a list of entities, creating a lower-bound context. In the upperand lower-bound condition the second sentence was identical
and contained a disjunction in an upward entailing structure
that answered the preceding question. In the downward
entailing condition the question in the first sentence was
upper-bound, but the second sentence embedded the SI
trigger in the antecedent of a conditional (which is a
downward entailing structure). We ran an off-line sentence
completion task where the final verb of the second sentence
was missing. Participants were asked to fill it in using a
closed class of verbs (is/are, does/do, has/have) all of which
are marked for number in English. Our assumption is that if
participants generate the SI that “not both A or B did so”,
they will use a verb to agree with the noun phrase “A or B” in
singular number. If they do not generate the SI but use the
plain meaning of the disjunction “A or B or even both”, they
will be much more prone to use a verb that will agree with the
disjunction in plural number.
Design and results. We created 18 critical items each in 3
conditions (upper-bound, (UB), lower-bound, (LB), and
downward entailing, (DE), (6)) which were rotated in 3
presentation lists (total n of participants = 45, adult speakers
of British English). 18 fillers were added which had a similar
structure to the critical items, but at the place of the SI trigger
they contained only one name (e.g. “Jones”).
(6)

UB: The manager asked: Who has the report on last
year’s profits? Her secretary replied: Jones or Barnes
from the department of Finance…
LB: The manager asked: Who has a report on last
year’s profits to show me? Her secretary replied: Jones
or Barnes from the department of Finance…
DE: The manager asked: Who has the report on last
year’s profits? Her secretary replied: If Jones or Barnes
… it, I will bring the report on your desk in a few
minutes.

Participants used a verb in singular agreement 82% in
upper-bound, 52% in lower-bound and 51% in downward
entailing. There was a main effect of Condition (F (2, 39)=
52.75, p< 0.001) indicating that participants built an exclusive
interpretation in the first case and an inclusive in the latter
two. It is suggested that indeed SIs are generated in upward
entailing contexts but not generated in downward entailing
structures, as both the structural and the pragmatic approach
assume in predictions (ii) and (iii). SIs are not generated in
lower-bound contexts either (iv). However, from this study

we cannot know whether the end result (no SI) is achieved
through the generation and subsequent cancellation of an SI
or simply without the generation of the SI in the first place.
This issue is raised in prediction (v).
Experiment 2. On-line processing in upper- and lowerbound contexts. To test prediction (v) we ran an on-line
reading time experiment. The structural approach predicts that
the SI trigger will be read faster (or at least as quickly) in the
upper-bound than the lower bound context (where the SI has
to be generated and then cancelled) and the pragmatic
approach predicts that it will be read slower in the upperbound context (because in the lower-bound the SI is not
generated at all).
Design and results. We used the same18 critical items that
we employed in Experiment 1 in two conditions, the upperand lower-bound context. We completed the missing verb in
the second sentence of each item with the appropriate verb in
the singular, which is an acceptable form in either condition
(over 50% in Experiment 1), as in (7). The items were rotated
in 2 presentation lists (total n of participants = 30 adults
speakers of British English). 60 items which were the critical
items of unrelated experiments were added as fillers. Reading
times were recorded in a segment by segment self-paced
reading paradigm whereby the phrase that contained the
disjunction appeared as one segment on the screen.
Comprehension was motivated by questions.
(7)

UB: The manager asked:/ Who has/ the report/ on last
year’s profits?/ Her secretary replied: /Jones or Barnes/
from the department of Finance/ has. Would you like/
to see the report?
LB: The manager asked:/ Who has/ a report/ on last
year’s profits/ to show me?/ Her secretary replied:
/Jones or Barnes/ from the department of Finance/
has./ Would you like/ to see the report?

The critical segment, “Jones or Barnes”, was read in 819ms in
the upper-bound and in 775ms in the lower bound condition.
There was a main effect of Condition, F (1,38)= 5.05, p <
0.03. No other significant differences were recorded. In line
with the results of Noveck and colleagues, it is suggested that
it wasn’t the case that in the upper-bound condition the SI
was first generated and then cancelled, but rather that it
wasn’t generated in the first place. Moreover, SIs are
generated locally, before the end of the sentence (as both
approaches predict, i) in agreement with the findings of Storto
& Tanenhaus (2005) and Huang & Snedeker (2005). It is also
suggested that computing an SI is actually costly, as reflected
in reading time required (prediction vi).
Experiment 3. On-line processing in ad hoc scales. In this
experiment we replicated the finding that SI generation is a
local and a time-consuming process by using non-logical
scales introduced by the discourse context (e.g. <roof,
house>, <father, parents>). We created 12 items in upper-and
lower-bound conditions (8) which were rotated in two
presentation lists (n of participants = 30). Another 50

1111

unrelated items were added as fillers. Comprehension was
motivated by questions.
(8)

UB: George went/ to pick up Mary/ from the station./
He was covered/ in paint./ Mary asked him:/ Were you
painting/ the house?/ George replied:/ I was painting/
the roof/ with an insulating paint.
LB: George went/ to pick up Mary/ from the station./
He was covered/ in paint./ Mary asked him:/ What
were you painting?/ George replied:/ I was painting/
the roof/ with an insulating paint.

In a self-paced reading time paradigm the UB condition was
read in 677ms and the LB in 623ms. There was a main effect
of Condition (F (1, 16)=8.24, p < 0.02) for the critical
segment (and a marginal spillover effect (p < 0.09) in the next
segment), in line with the findings of Experiment 2.
Experiment 4. On-line processing in neutral contexts. In a
previous study, Breheny, Katsos & Williams (in press)
created discourse neutral contexts by presenting pairs of
sentences without preceding context. We manipulated a
discourse constraint, the sentence’s information structure, and
put the SI trigger “some of the Fs” in either Topic or NonTopic position in the first sentence. We thus introduced
implicit assumptions about how relevant the group of Fs is.
The second sentences contained the anaphoric expression “the
rest of the Fs” whose interpretation is facilitated if
participants have inferred that “some of the Fs G-ed” implies
that “not all the Fs G-ed”. We compared reading time in each
condition with a control condition where the SI was made
explicit by the operator “only”, which introduces alternative
sets on-line (Ni, Crain, & Shankweiler 1996).
Design and Results. 24 critical items were created in 4
conditions (Topic, Topic & Only, Non-Topic, Non-Topic &
Only, see 9) and rotated in 4 presentations lists. The
experiment was run in Greek, which has a flexible word order
and the initial position on the sentence is consistently
associated with topicality. 48 participants took part.
Comprehension was motivated by questions.
(9)

T: Some of the consultants/ met the manager./ The
rest/ did not manage/ to attend.
T-Only: Only some of the consultants/ met the
manager./ The rest/ did not manage/ to attend.
Non-T: The manager met/ some of the consultants./
The rest/ did not manage/ to attend.
Non-T-Only: The manager met/ only some of the
consultants./ The rest/ did not manage to attend.

Table (2). Mean reading time and SD of Experiment 4
Topic
Topic & Only
Non-Topic
Non-Topic &Only

Reading time (ms)
613
611
628
586

SD
125
110
138
112

The critical interaction between position (Topic/Non-Topic)
and the presence of “only” was significant, by subjects
Fs(1,44) = 4.24, p < 0.05; and by items Fi(1,19) = 6.93, p <
0.05. Reading times were slower in the Non-Topic than the
Non-Topic & Only condition, but there was no such
difference between the Topic and the Topic & Only
conditions. It is suggested that contrary to the structural
approach (prediction iv), the SI was only generated when the
trigger phrase was in one of the topic conditions, even though
both the topic and the non-topic positions were in structurally
identical sentences (upward entailing).
In this paper, we investigated whether the slow reading
times in the Non-Topic condition obtained by Breheny, et al.
(in press) could be due to a potential topic shift between the
trigger and the target sentence. When participants read the
second sentence they might assume that the topic of the first
sentence, the first NP mentioned, will be the preferred
continuation. The target phrase “the rest” refers to the second
NP, thus violating topic continuity. If this potential topic shift
is avoided in the case of the Non-Topic & Only due to the
presence of “only”, then the slow down in the Non-Topic
condition may not be reflecting SI generation but a topic shift
penalty. We ran an off-line sentence continuation task with
the items used in Experiment 4 with 20 participants. In the
Non-Topic condition the continuations referred to NP1: 30%,
to NP2: 52,5%, and OTHER: 17,5%. In the Non-Topic &
Only to NP1: 24,2%, to NP2: 59,2%, and OTHER: 16,6%.
Crucially, both conditions prefer an NP2 continuation over an
NP1 (Non-Topic: F (1, 16)= 5.01, p < 0.04; Non-Topic &
Only: F (1, 16)= 12.09, p < 0.003); their difference in this
preference is not significant (F (1, 16)= 0.022 n.s.). Therefore
neither condition is paying a topic shift penalty. However, we
also ran a second on-line follow-up study similar to the
original except that the target phrase “the rest” was in nontopic position in the second sentence:
(10)

Non-topic (Only): The manager met/ (only) some of
the consultants./ He will talk/ to the rest/ tomorrow.

The results replicated the original study that SIs are not
generated in the Non-Topic condition even though this
condition is structurally identical to the Topic one.

Discussion
In this paper we presented one off-line and three on-line text
comprehension experiments that tested 6 predictions
concerning the processing of Scalar Implicatures. Experiment
1 provides evidence in support of the fundamental
assumptions shared by both structural and local approaches,
namely that SIs can be defeated by discourse context and
structural properties. Experiments 2, 3 and 4 provide evidence
in favor of the pragmatic approach, which predicts an
interaction between structural properties of the sentence and
discourse context. The conclusion that SIs are pragmatic,
context-dependent inferences is aligned with the work of
Noveck and colleagues on single sentence truth value
judgment task and work on the visual-world eye-tracking
paradigm (Storto & Tanenhaus, 2005; Huang & Snedeker,
2005).

1112

The debate we address is one which will be familiar from
sentence processing concerning whether there is an initial
stage of processing where an encapsulated type of
information (usually structure-based) operates first, and other
types of information are considered later on, potentially
causing back-tracking and re-analysis, a phenomenon known
as Garden Pathing (Ferreira & Clifton, 1986 i.a.). The
alternative view is that different types of information from
syntax, semantics, discourse context, the situation referred to
and statistical frequency of co-occurrence among other,
interact from the earliest possible stage (MacDonald et al
1994; Spivey-Knowlton & Sedivy, 1995 i.a.).
The structural linguistic approach surveyed here is
compatible with a modular and serial parser, whereby SIs are
generated automatically by the encapsulated grammar – and
only subsequently affected by information from other
modules. As we have seen, our results, as well as those of
Noveck and colleagues, are incompatible with such a model,
since no effect of reanalysis was detected.
However, our findings are consistent with two alternatives.
First, it is conceivable that language processing is modular,
however SIs are not derived in the grammatical module, but
in the pragmatics module which would operate on the output
of the grammar. This would explain why there is no
cancellation of SIs in lower-bound contexts, and why SIs are
time-consuming inferences when compared to semantic
inferences. On the other hand, our findings do not exclude the
possibility of an interactive process, where statistical,
contextual and grammatical information coordinates from the
earliest possible stage. Research by Sedivy et al 1999 and
especially Grodner & Sedivy (in press) on reference
resolution indicates that pragmatic constraints that are similar
to the ones we discuss in this paper facilitate disambiguation
from the earliest stages of processing. On this view, one
would have to explain why specifically SIs (as opposed to the
phenomena under investigation in the studies above) are time
consuming and not as local as expected. Further research
could shed more light on this issue.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Anne Bezuidenhout, Robyn Carston,
Gennaro Chierchia, Bart Geurts, Ted Gibson, Stavroula
Kousta, Ira Noveck, Anna Papafragou, Doug Saddy, and
Deirdre Wilson for helpful comments. The first author was
supported by a Gates Cambridge Scholarship and an E.S.R.C.
grant (PTA-030-2002-01744). Many thanks to all the
participants of the experiments.

References
Altmann, G. & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction with context
during human sentence processing. Cognition, 38, 419-439.
Bezuidenhout, A. & Cutting, J.C. (2002). Literal meaning,
minimal propositions, and pragmatic processing. Journal of
Pragmatics, 34, 433-456.

Bezuidenhout, A. & Morris, R. (2004). Implicature,
Relevance and Default Inferences. In Noveck, I. & Sperber,
D. (Eds.), Experimental Pragmatics. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan
Bott, L. & Noveck, I .A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437-457
Breheny, R. (forthcoming). Some Scalar Implications Really
Aren't Quantity Implicatures - But Some Are. Proceedings
of Sinn & Bedeutung 9, University of Nijmegen.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N. & Williams, J. in press) Are
Generalised Scalar Implicatures Generated by Default? An
on-line investigation into the role of context in generating
pragmatic inferences. Cognition
Carston, R. (1998). Informativeness, relevance and scalar
implicature. In R. Carston & S. Uchida (Eds.), Relevance
Theory: Applications and Implications. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity
phenomena and the syntax/pragmatic interface. In A.
Beletti (Ed.), Structures and Beyond. Oxford University
Press.
Ferreira, F. & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of
syntactic processing. Journal of Memory and Language,
25, 348-358.
Geurts, B. (1998). Scalars. In P. Ludewig and B. Geurts
(Eds.), Lexikalische Semantik. Tubingen: Gunter Narr.
Grodner, D. & Sedivy, J. (in press) The effect of speakerspecific information on pragmatic inferences. In N.
Pearlmutter & E. Gibson (Eds.), The Processing and
Acquisition of Reference. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA
Huang, Y.T. & J. Snedeker (2005) What exactly do numerals
mean? Paper presented at Experimental Pragmatics.
Cambridge, UK.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive Meanings. Cambridge,
MA.: MIT Press.
Noveck, I. A. & A. Posada (2003). Characterising the time
course of an implicature. Brain and Language, 85, 203210.
Papafragou, A. & Musolino J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics/pragmatics interface.
Cognition, 86, 253-282.
Recanati, F. (2003). Literal Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press
Sedivy, J., Tanenhaus, M., Chambers, C., & Carlson, G.
(1999). Achieving incremental semantic interpretation
through contextual representation. Cognition, 71, 109-147.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Spivey-Knowlton, M. & Sedivy, J. (1995). Resolving
attachment ambiguities with multiple constraints.
Cognition, 55, 227-267.
Storto, G. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2005) Are scalar implicatures
computed online? Proceedings of SuB 9: 431-445.

1113

