UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Invariant Effects of Working Memory Load in the Face of Competition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9k23f7hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gaukrodger, Stephen J.
Neumann, Ewald

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Invariant Effects of Working Memory Load in the Face of Competition
Ewald Neumann (ewald.neumann@canterbury.ac.nz)
Department of Psychology, University of Canterbury
Christchurch, New Zealand

Stephen J. Gaukrodger (sjg81@student.canterbury.ac.nz)
Department of Psychology, University of Canterbury
Christchurch, New Zealand

Abstract
The influence of working memory load on visual selective
attention was examined using a dual selective attention and
working memory task. This dual task required participants
to ignore distractor faces while categorizing superimposed
celebrity names under low or high memory loads.
Surprisingly, both memory load conditions produced
equivalent interference effects from concurrent famous
(compared to anonymous) distractor faces, and equivalent
subsequent negative priming effects. These findings were
consistent across all four of the present experiments, but
they diverge from the dual-task memory load literature on
interference and negative priming. Implications regarding
the interaction between working memory and attentional
selection are addressed.

Introduction
In a recent article in Science, de Fockert, Rees, Frith, &
Lavie (2001) reported that working memory is crucial for
reducing distraction by maintaining the prioritization of
relevant over irrelevant information. They arrived at this
conclusion by combining two unrelated tasks – one
requiring visual selective attention and the other working
memory – to see if increasing load in the working memory
task would increase the processing of visual distractors in
the selective attention task. Participants were asked to
remember the order of four digits presented either in a
random order (high working memory load) or in a fixed
order (low load), while categorizing famous names
superimposed on irrelevant distractor faces. Significantly
more interference from an irrelevant face in the name
classification (“politician” vs. “pop-star”) task was obtained
in the high memory load condition, compared to the low
memory load condition. High load seemed to reduce the
efficiency of selection and thereby increased the interfering
effects of irrelevant stimuli. Accordingly, de Fockert et al.
concluded that participants were better able to block out the
interfering effects of an incongruent face when concurrent
memory load obligations are low, whereas when memory
load is high, there is more extensive processing of the
distractor face resulting in more interference. The main
goal of the present study was to further examine the notion
that selection is efficient when working memory load is low
and inefficient when memory load is high in this type of
dual-task situation.

The four experiments we report use a similar dual-task
procedure to that used by de Fockert and his colleagues, but
with some methodological modifications. For example,
instead of assessing the extent to which distractor faces are
processed by comparing congruent with incongruent
conditions, we compared the incongruent condition with a
neutral face condition. This allowed us to isolate the
processing cost specifically due to incongruence without the
need to be concerned with the processing benefit due to
congruence. In addition we excluded all congruent (e.g.,
Mick Jagger’s name on his own face) stimuli from our
experiment because it is known that having congruent
stimuli in Stroop-like conflict tasks induces subjects to
maintain less attentional selectivity solely to the target.
That is why, for example, participants consistently show
greater amounts of interference in incongruent trials as a
function of increasing the proportion of congruent trials in
such conflict tasks (e.g., Lindsay & Jacoby, 1994). Since
one of the main objectives in using the present paradigm is
to investigate selective attention, rather than more diffuse or
divided attention, it is important to try to induce maximal
attentional selectivity.
Lastly, we included a negative priming measure to
supplement the interference measure.
Despite being
ignored, unattended visual distractors often produce
traceable priming effects, which can be used to investigate
inhibitory processes in selective attention.
Negative
priming effects are indexed behaviorally as the increased
reaction-time (or reduced accuracy) that occurs in response
to a previously ignored stimulus. Evidence from negative
priming studies shows that visual distractor stimuli may
nonetheless be processed even in the absence of any targetdistractor interference (Driver & Tipper, 1989; Mari-Beffa,
Estevez, & Danziger, 2000). The strong implication from
this work is that in some instances negative priming effects
can provide a more sensitive behavioral index, than
concurrent interference effects, regarding the depth to which
distractors have been processed. Of course, supplementing
concurrent interference data with potential subsequent
priming data can be useful not only for the purposes of
determining the degree to which nontarget distractors have
been processed, but also for providing evidence regarding
the nature of the conflict resolution processes that have
recently transpired (Neumann & DeSchepper, 1992).

1624

Experiment 1
In our selective attention task, observers were asked to
classify famous written names as “musicians”, “politicians”,
or “comedians”, while ignoring distractor faces that
overlapped with the names. The distractor faces were either
anonymous or famous and incongruent with the written
name (e.g., “John Lennon” written across an anonymous
face versus “John Lennon” written across the face of, say,
Bill Clinton). Distractor face processing was evaluated by
comparing classification reaction times between the
anonymous and incongruent conditions to assess
interference, and also by determining if ignoring a particular
famous face would have a negative priming effect on the
subsequent classification of that person’s name.
A working memory task for digit order was performed
simultaneously with the selective attention task. Memory
load was manipulated by requiring participants to remember
either a fixed order of four sequential digits (low memory
load, e.g., 01234), or a random order of these digits (high
memory load, e.g., 03124) for each sequence of two to four
trials. After such a sequence of trials, a single digit from the
set appeared and the participant was required to press a
button consistent with the digit that followed it in the
original set. If limits on face processing do apply in the low
load condition, then both interference and negative priming
effects should be smaller, or nonexistent, compared to the
high load condition.
We tested this hypothesis by combining these two
unrelated tasks – one requiring visual selective attention and
the other working memory – to see if increasing load in the
working memory task would increase the processing of
visual distractors in the selective attention task. If the
conjectures by de Fockert et al. (2001) are correct, then high
memory load should reduce the availability of working
memory for maintaining stimulus priority in the selective
attention task. And because this should lead to more
unwanted intrusion of irrelevant distractors, more
interference and more negative priming should occur when
working memory load is high, compared to low.

Method
We adopted the dual-task methodology used by de Fockert
et al. (2001). In our selective attention task, 30 participants
were asked to classify famous written names as
“musicians,” “politicians,” or “comedians,” while ignoring
distractor faces that overlapped with the names (see Figures
1 and 2). To properly conduct the negative priming
manipulation, it was necessary to add a category to the two

categories used by de Fockert et al. in order to avoid
predictable stimulus contingencies between trials. The
distractor faces were either anonymous or famous and
incongruent with the written name (e.g., “Mick Jagger”
written across an anonymous face versus “Mick Jagger”
written across the face of Bill Murray). Distractor face
processing was assessed by comparing classification
reaction times between the anonymous and incongruent
conditions, and also by determining if ignoring a particular
famous face would have a negative priming effect on the
subsequent classification of that person’s name. There were
sixteen gray-scale faces, with four faces representing each
of the four categories of distractor faces (anonymous,
comedian, musician, and politician). Twelve names
corresponding to the identity of the 12 celebrity faces served
as targets. The stimulus pool for the experiment was created
by superimposing each name on each face (except for
congruent target-distractor stimulus combinations, for the
reasons stated earlier).
The working memory task for digit order was performed
simultaneously with the selective attention task. In this
task, load was manipulated by requiring participants to
remember on each trial of a given block either a fixed order
of four sequential digits (low memory load, e.g., 01234), or
a random order of these digits (high memory load, e.g.,
03124). The memory load conditions were presented in two
counterbalanced blocks, with half of the participants starting
with the high load condition, and the remaining half starting
with the low load condition.
Figure 1 shows a sample of a high memory load trial
sequence involving an incongruent prime trial followed by
an ignored repetition (IR) probe trial. Two to 4 such facename combinations could be sandwiched in between the
memory set and the single digit, and this was determined
randomly, so participants never knew exactly how long the
memory set would need to be maintained for any given
sequence.
Figure 2 shows a sample of all the selective attention
conditions in the experiment. The top row conveys the
prime interference measure which is derived by contrasting
responses to Incongruent versus Neutral displays. The
bottom row conveys the probe priming measure. Note that
although we included an attended repetition (AR)
manipulation in the design of the first two experiments, it is
not relevant for present purposes and will not be discussed
further in this presentation -- except to say that it produced
large facilitatory priming effects under both high and low
memory loads in both of these experiments. The more
important probe negative priming measure is derived by
contrasting responses to IR versus Control displays.

1625

Figure 2:
Sample stimulus displays depicting
possible prime-probe couplets used in the design of
Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The main results are summarized in Table 1. Note that
accuracy data (% errors) will be reported for the present
experiments only when they produced a significant effect
and only when this effect could potentially compromise
interpretation of the reaction-time (RT) results.
Table 1: Interference and identity negative priming in
Experiment 1; * indicates p < .05
Interference
Incongruent (RT)
Neutral (RT)
RT Difference
Negative Priming
Identity IR (RT)
Control (RT)
RT Difference
Identity IR (%Err)
Control (%Err)
%Err Difference

Low Load
586
558
28*

High Load
608
584
24*

581
558
23*

598
587
11n.s.

6.6
6.4
.2n.s.

10.0
6.1
3.9*

The prime (Interference) results indicated that there was a
significant interference effect from incongruent distractors
for both the high and low memory load conditions, with no
difference in the amount of interference between the two
memory load conditions. The probe (Negative Priming)
results indicate that only the low memory load condition
produced a significant negative priming effect in RTs.
However, although the high load condition produced
nonsignificant negative priming for the RTs, it produced
significant negative priming in the % error data. Because
calculations of RT Interference, as well as Negative
Priming, contain only correct RTs, the increase in IR errors
in the high load condition may serve to eliminate those trials
on which participants had the most difficulty, which could
account for the absence of negative priming in the RT
results.

Figure 1: Sample high memory load trial
sequence involving an Incongruent prime,
followed by an Ignored Repetition probe.
Correct answer to the memory load item is 4.

1626

The overall results from Experiment 1 suggest that
distractor faces are processed to the same degree regardless
of the working memory obligations that are imposed. These
findings are thus inconsistent with the hypothesis that low
memory load leads to more efficient filtering of distractors.

Experiment 2
The second experiment was designed to replicate and extend
the results of the first. If the findings are replicable, then
there should be significant and similar amounts of prime
interference and probe negative priming, regardless of
whether the concurrent memory load is low or high. In
addition, it is currently not known whether the negative
priming effects we observed in Experiment 1 were due to
identity negative priming, or to a categorical negative
priming effect. This issue was investigated by replacing the
identity negative priming manipulation by a semantic
negative priming manipulation. For example, instead of
ignoring Mick Jagger’s face and then having to categorize
the name “Mick Jagger” as a musician in an Ignored
Repetition trial, as in the first experiment, this follow-up
involved ignoring a different musician’s face followed by
having to categorize the name “Mick Jagger” as a musician.
As such, the Ignored Repetition trials were all replaced by
“Ignored Semantic” trials. Everything else was held
constant with Experiment 1 – thus enabling us to determine
the specificity (identity versus categorical) of the negative
priming effect in this type of task with a new group of 30
participants.

Overall, these results corroborate the findings from
Experiment 1 and reinforce the suggestion that distractor
faces are processed to the same degree, regardless of
varying working memory load obligations. These findings
are again inconsistent with the hypothesis that low memory
load leads to more efficient blocking, gating, or filtering of
distractors. Finally, the semantic negative priming effect
indicates that the inhibitory processes applied to distractor
faces are not limited to the specific identity of the face, but
actually spreads to the categorical level.

Experiment 3

Results and Discussion

The third experiment was designed to replicate and extend
the results of the first two experiments. Because the findings
of Experiment 1 were somewhat ambiguous in the high
memory load condition (i.e., showing significant negative
priming only for the error data, but not the RT data), we reintroduced the identity ignored repetition manipulation and
tested a new group of 30 participants. There were two other
differences between this experiment and Experiment 1.
First, the attended repetition (AR) manipulation was
removed so that instead of requiring 60-70 minutes to
complete, the present experiment only required about 40-45
minutes. Second, we added a catch trial at the end. The
catch trial was added to determine if participants could
explicitly identify the nontarget face in a forced-choice
recognition task conducted immediately after a final
attention display. The catch trial always involved an
incongruent attention display (i.e., no neutral faces ever
appeared in the catch trial). One-third of the participants
encountered the face of a politician, another 1/3 a comedian,
and the remaining 1/3 a musician.

The main results are summarized in Table 2.

Results and Discussion

Table 2: Interference and semantic negative priming in
Experiment 2; * indicates p < .05
Interference
Incongruent (RT)
Neutral (RT)
RT Difference
Negative Priming
Semantic IR (RT)
Control (RT)
RT Difference

Low Load
573
548
25*
552
525
27*

The main results are summarized in Table 3.

High Load
595
563
32*

Table 3: Interference and identity negative priming in
Experiment 3; ^ p < .06 (one-tailed); * p < .05
Interference
Incongruent (RT)
Neutral (RT)
RT Difference

584
550
34*

As was the case in Experiment 1, the prime (Interference)
results indicated that there was a significant interference
effect from incongruent distractors for both the high and
low memory load conditions, with no difference in the
amount of interference between the two memory load
conditions (F < 1). The probe (Negative Priming) results
indicated that both memory load conditions produced
significant negative priming effects, with no difference in
the amount of negative priming (F < 1).

Negative Priming
Identity IR (RT)
Control (RT)
RT Difference

Low Load
563
526
36*
531
514
17^

High Load
576
542
34*
568
532
36*

1627

As was the case in Experiments 1 and 2, the prime
(Interference) results indicated that there was a significant
interference effect from incongruent distractors for both the
high and low memory load conditions, with no difference in
the amount of interference between the two memory load
conditions (F < 1). The probe (Negative Priming) results
indicated that both memory load conditions produced

Table 4: Interference and identity negative priming in
Experiment 4; * indicates p < .05

significant negative priming effects, with no difference in
the amount of negative priming (F = 1.43, p > .24).
Overall, these results corroborate the findings from
Experiment 1 and reinforce the suggestion that distractor
faces are processed to the same degree, regardless of
varying working memory loads. They are, however, again
inconsistent with the hypothesis that low memory load leads
to more efficient blocking or filtering of distractors. Finally,
for the catch trial, each participant was presented with a
sheet containing all 16 faces, and asked to circle the face
that best matched the face in the immediately preceding
display. Two out of 30 (6.7%) chose the correct face, where
6.3% would be expected by random chance. Six out of 30
(20%) picked the correct category of faces, where 25%
would be expected by random chance. Interestingly, 8 of the
30 participants picked a neutral face. Apparently, subjects
were not explicitly identifying the nontarget face or even
aware that they just encountered an incongruent attention
display. If they had been aware of the latter, they could
have eliminated the neutral faces as an option, but this was
not the case as more than 25% of them chose a neutral face.
The last experiment explored a potential methodological
reason why our results might be inconsistent with earlier
findings in this type of dual-processing task.

Interference
Incongruent (RT)
Neutral (RT)
RT Difference
Negative Priming
Identity IR (RT)
Control (RT)
RT Difference

No Load
531
505
26*
495
482
13*

Experiment 4

However, because the identity negative priming effect
appeared numerically somewhat reduced relative to the
previous experiments, an additional ANOVA was
conducted with “Experiment” (1 vs. 3 vs. 4) as a betweensubjects variable. Based on the outcome – since
“Experiment” did not interact with any other variable –
there is no indication that the negative priming effect was
significantly affected by No, Low, or High memory load
conditions. This is again inconsistent with the idea that
distractors are more efficiently blocked or filtered from
processing under low memory load situations. In a planned
follow-up experiment, congruent stimuli will be
incorporated into our design, to see if the addition of
congruent stimuli can account for the disparities in the
results between the two laboratories.
Overall, Experiment 4 corroborates the findings from
each of the present experiments and reinforces the
suggestion that distractor faces are processed to the same
degree, regardless of varying working memory load
obligations. These findings are thus inconsistent with the
hypothesis that low memory load leads to more efficient
blocking, gating, or filtering of distractors.

One of the main differences in our task is that three, instead
of two, categories of celebrities was used. It is possible that
requiring participants to remember this additional
information (along with its requisite response) imposed
additional memory load. Our “low memory load” condition
may therefore not have been as “low” as de Fockert et al’s.
We thus attempted to reduce memory load in our task by not
requiring subjects to respond to the memory digits. Instead
of a block of Low and a block of High load manipulations,
the present experiment had two blocks of “No Load.” The
digits still appeared just as they did in Experiment 3, but
participants were informed that they were there to signal the
beginning and end of each trial sequence, and that they
should press any button on the button-box to advance to the
next trail whenever a single digit appeared. Otherwise, this
experiment was identical to Experiment 3, but with a new
group of 30 participants.

Conclusions

Results and Discussion

Contrary to the findings and predictions derived from the
work of de Fockert et al. (2001), the magnitude of
interference from the incongruent distractor faces was
invariant across the high, low, and even no working
memory load conditions in the present experiments.
Additional disconfirmations of expected results were
evidenced by the significant and comparable magnitudes of
negative priming obtained under all of the memory load
conditions. Instead, our findings strongly imply that high
load does not reduce the efficiency of attentional selectivity,
nor does low load increase it; instead, working memory load
appears to have no effect on the efficiency of selection in
this type of dual-task paradigm. Our evidence for the
nonselectivity of ‘selective’ seeing, regardless of memory
load, is especially surprising in that it emerged in a task that
was specifically designed to induce relatively greater
attentional selectivity specifically to target stimuli than was
the case in previous work. We hope that these findings will
provide some useful background for developing more
complete and accurate neural and psychological models

The main results are summarized in Table 4. Note that
because there were no interaction effects involving block for
either the prime interference or probe negative priming
measures, these data are collapsed across block.
As was the case in the previous experiments, the
Interference results indicated that there was a significant
interference effect from incongruent distractors, despite
“no” memory load in the present experiment. This is
inconsistent with the idea that distractors are more likely to
be filtered or blocked from processing under low memory
load situations. Significant probe (Negative Priming) was
also observed.
1628

regarding not only the mechanisms underpinning selective
attention, but also how selective attention and working
memory interact. On the basis of the present results, for
example, working memory and attentional selection do not
appear to involve the same executive control system.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jan de Fockert for generously
sharing stimulus materials with us and Mary Bamford for
assistance in data collection.

References
de Fockert, J.W., Rees, G., Frith, C.D., & Lavie, N. (2001).
The role of working memory in visual selective attention.
Science, 291, 1803-06.
Driver, J., & Tipper, S.P. (1988). On the nonselectivity of

‘selective’ seeing: Contrasts between interference and
priming in selective attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 15,
304-314.
Lindsay, D.S., & Jacoby, L.L. (1994). Stroop process
dissociations: The relationship between facilitation and
interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 20, 219-234.
Mari-Beffa, P., Estevez, A.F., & Danziger, S. (2000). Stroop
interference and negative priming: Problems with
inferences from null results. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 7, 499-503.
Neumann E., & DeSchepper, B.G. (1992). An inhibitionbased fan effect: Evidence for an active suppression
mechanism in selective attention. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 46, 1-40.

1629

