UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is a Confirmatory Tendency to Blame for Poor Diagnostic Decisions?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1p10q45g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hoenkamp, Eduardo
van Aarle, Edward

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is a Confirmatory Tendency to Blame for Poor Diagnostic Decisions?
Edward van Aarle (E.vanAarle@pwo.ru.nl)
Behavioral Science Institute (BSI), Montessorilaan 3
6525 HR Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Eduard Hoenkamp (hoenkamp@acm.org)
Nijmegen Institute for Cognition and Information (NICI), Montessorilaan 3
6525 HR Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Abstract
In diagnostic reasoning, especially in a clinical setting,
practitioners often widely disagree about the causal explanation for a given case. Most studies have assumed
that such disagreements result from judgmental mistakes due to biased reasoning, especially the tendency to
seek confirmation for a theory or hypothesis they already
entertain. Alternative explanations for these mistakes
are: confusion about the type of requested diagnosis and
a difference in knowledge available to the practitioner.
The present paper introduces a method to control the
latter two factors, for the first time enabling a study of
the influence of the first factor in isolation. In the experiment, eighteen advanced postgraduate practitioners
made a diagnosis in interaction with a computer program simulating various reading impairments. We found
two surprising results: First, the confirmatory tendency
was not as prevalent as commonly assumed and second,
more important, that where it was employed it was conducive to sound diagnostic decisions.
Keywords
Heuristics, Confirmation Bias, Diagnostic Decision
Making, Reading Problems.

to match the specific task of making a causal diagnosis: the confirmatory strategy (Ben-Shakhar, Bar-Hillel,
Bilu, & Shefler,1998; Garb, 1994; Faust, 1986; Krems
& Zierer, 1994, Skov & Sherman, 1986, and Snyder &
Thomsen, 1987). Gambrill (1992) describes the confirmatory strategy as a collective term for attending to only
some important data and overlooking others, as not attending to data that do not support a hypothesis, as
ignoring negative instances, and as the tendency to selectively search for evidence that supports preconceptions and that encourages a focus on hits. According
to Gambrill, the confirmatory strategy is perhaps the
most common source of error in causal clinical decision
making.
All these studies contend that the use of heuristics
leads to poor causal decisions, but curiously enough,
they offer little evidence to support this claim. In the
present paper we first explain why the empirical evidence remains inconclusive and then report on an empirical study in which we tested the claim in an alternative paradigm. Let us first raise a number of objections
against the methodologies of the heuristics and biases
studies.

Introduction
A cardinal principle in the literature and among practitioners is that treatment must be based on sound diagnostics (Vinsonhaler, Weinshank, Wagner, & Polin,
1983). As a consequence, a substantial part of clinical
activity consists of causal analysis of the client’ s problem, i.e. the finding of underlying causes to be targeted
in subsequent treatment (Gambrill, 1990, p. 234).
Legion empirical studies, however, show that psychoeducational practitioners, when confronted with the
same case, disagree widely about the causal explanations
for it (Bus, 1989; Bus & Kruizenga, 1989; Bus & Van
IJzendoorn, 1992; Jansen & Meijer, 1991; McDermott,
1980; Vinsonhaler, Weinshank, Wagner, & Polin, 1983;
Ysseldyke & Algozinne, 1983). In brief, practitioners’ diagnostic explanations are dismal. Unfortunately, this is
true in other clinical fields as well (e.g. DeWitt, Kaltreider, Weiss, & Horowitz, 1983, 1998). How to account
for this state of affairs is the subject of debate in the
research literature on heuristics and biases (for reviews,
see Davidow & Levinson, 1993, and Garb, 1998). The
poor decisions are allegedly the result of the practitioners’ tendency to apply inappropriate heuristics when performing their task. Among them the availability heuristic, the representativeness heuristic, and the anchoringand-adjustment heuristic. Yet, only one heuristic seems

• The heuristics and biases approach only uses everyday
language for defining the cognitive strategies underlying the heuristics. Gigerenzer (1991) concludes that
the so-called heuristics and biases approach largely is
based on undefined concepts that “can post hoc be
tested to explain almost everything”. The concepts
are not presented in a consistent way either. Virtually
all descriptions of the confirmatory strategy in the literature (e.g., Ben-Shakhar et al., 1998) only talk about
the testing of hypotheses and omit a specification of
the process of generating causal relations.

2242

• The researchers in these studies seem to differ considerably in their conception of what constitutes a
genuine causal diagnosis. McDermott (1980, p. 13),
for example, found his clinicians to vary greatly in
the type of given diagnoses: descriptive diagnoses (describing currently observable or detectable problems),
etiological diagnoses (discovering causes or origins of
the problems), or prognostic judgments (predicting
the future course of the problems or planning preventative or restorative treatment). And Bus (1989)
notes that “diagnoses mainly concerned reading and
spelling; for example: low spelling level, weak word

but avoid the tar pit of confusion about the term ’diagnosis’ or inadequate scientific knowledge. So first, the participating clinicians must know that they are required to
make a causal analysis of the case, and that they have to
find the causes underlying the (psycho-educational) diagnostic task. Differences in the use of explanatory knowledge were avoided by requiring every participant to use
the same theory underlying the given psycho-educational
problems. We could rely on experience from three different areas: (1) Brown and Burtons (1978) computer
simulation for arithmetic, (2) our previous research on
diagnostic reasoning from first principles (Hoenkamp &
Grimbergen, 1997), (3) Barons conceptualization of the
’congruence heuristic’ (Baron, 1994), and in Klayman
and Has characterization of the ’positive testing’- strategy (Klayman & Ha, 1987) and (4) the intensively studied domain of reading problems (e.g. (Spear-Swerling &
Sternberg, 1994)).
Our research question has two parts:

recognition skills, many reading mistakes, reading below grade level (p.57-58)”, showing the author’s tendency to confuse descriptive diagnoses (e.g., “reading below grade level”) and etiological diagnoses (e.g.,
“weak word recognition skill”). Likewise, Vinsonhaler
et al. (1983, p. 144) fail to differentiate between descriptive diagnoses such as “poor oral reading” and
“sight words low”, and etiological diagnoses, such as
“problem with visual memory”.
• An obvious reason for the wide disagreement among
practitioners may be their use of different scientific
explanatory models or theories. For example, Jansen
and Meijer (1991), Weisberg (1984, p. 210), and McDermott (1980, p. 21) all observed that their subjects used very different theories as background to explain the nature and causes of learning problems. Van
Aarle and Van den Bercken (1999) review the area of
reading and spelling impairment, and show that the
scientific knowledge made available to practitioners is
vastly heterogeneous.
Besides these methodological objections there is a
theoretical objection to make. The tendency to seek
a confirmation of one’s theory or position is hardly
disputed in the literature. Possibly the first, but
definitely the most famous experiment in this paradigm
was Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 experiment. Recall that in
this experiment participants were asked to guess the
rule governing triples of numbers, and that they were
told that 2-4-6 conformed to this rule. Their task
was to discover this rule by proposing new number
triples, upon which the experimenter would tell whether
it conformed to the rule. What could have been
the rule the participant had first thought of? If the
participant had thought of the rule ’increasing evens’
(as many did), then she might announce 8-10-12 in
an attempt to confirm this rule. Such an attempt is
called a positive strategy. A negative strategy would
have been to try 6-4-2, expecting this to be refuted by
the experimenter, and therewith confirming the rule.
So a negative strategy can be used to seek confirmation
of the participant’s rule as well. Hence, the term
’confirmatory strategy’ may be misleading, and we will
use ’positive strategy’ instead. The positive strategy,
Wason observed in his experiments, was far more
prevalent than the negative strategy. The vast literature
that followed Wason’s (1960) 2-4-6 experiments, also
found the positive strategy to lead to poor problem
solving strategies. Hoenkamp (1989) however, showed
that a negative strategy is not necessarily better than
a positive one, and he showed under precisely what
conditions one strategy would fare better than the other.
(For example, if you want subjects to perform worse
under a positive strategy, than Wason’s rule follows
from these conditions.) Hence, it could be that the
diagnostic tasks studied in the literature are precisely
those that would favor a negative strategy.

1. Do clinicians tend to use a positive strategy for generating and testing hypotheses?
2. Is the use of such a positive strategy related to poor
diagnostic skill?
The remaining part of the paper will investigate this
question experimentally.

Method
Participants
Eighteen Dutch postgraduate students in educational
psychology, at the end of their practitioner’s phase volunteered. All had at least 9 months of working experience in psycho-educational practice. Thirteen were
trained in educational psychology, three in linguistics
and speech problems, and two in developmental psychology. Their mean age was 24.3 years (SD 4.5).

Materials

Given the objections above, we wanted to study the
influence of the positive strategy on diagnostic decisions,

A computer simulation incorporated as many elements
as possible from current research literature in the field of
normal and deviant reading development (Grimbergen,
1994).
Grimbergen’s (1994) program could perform modelbased diagnosis for reading problems, hence contained an
elaborate component model for reading. The underlying
model mapped written words (or rather letter features)
to a pronounciation. By introducing malfunctions in
the components, reading problems could be simulated.
For the experiment, the program was confined to the
seven components of Figure 1, and each component was
extended with a uniform and consistent set of algoritms.
Component 5, for example, could code for words having
long vs. short vowels. (The words were in Dutch, but
the English speaker can think of the different ways to
pronounce vowels depending on the word in which they
appear.) Next, six copies were made of this perfectly
reading child and each copy was separately impaired to
simulate a child who suffers from one (cases 1 and 3), two
(cases 2, 5 and 6) or three (case 4) deficient components

2243

Table 1: Overview of the six simulated cases of children with reading process deficiencies (component-defects; component number with fault type in parentheses) and an example of reading errors (input-output combinations for
Dutch).
Case
number
1
2
3
4
5
6

Case
defects
5(2)
1 and 2
7(1)
2, 4(1) and 6
4(1 ) and 5(1)
4(2) and 7(2)

Number
of defects
1
2
1
3
2
2

Input
word
hond
baken
krent
baken
aarde
moment

Target
pronunciation
/h//o//n//t/
/b//aa//k//u//n/
/k//r//e//n//t/
/b//aa//k//u//n/
/aa//r//d//u/
/m//oo//m//e//n//t/

Case’s
pronunciation
/h//o//t//n/
/p//aa//k//eu/
/k//r//e//n//t//u/
/d//aa//k//ou/
/o//r//d//e/
/m//oo//m//e//t//n/

(see Table 1). Some of the components (numbers 1, 2,
3, and 6) could be damaged in only one way, the others
(numbers 4, 5 and 7) in two. Case 2, for example, was
damaged in components 1 and 2: component 1 reverts all
vertical letter elements (e.g. b → p and d → q), and component 2 rotates a few letters into other letters (e.g. m
→ w). As a result, case 2 decodes the input word ‘baken’
into /paakeu/, while the correct target pronounciation
would be /baakun/. Together with these computer programs, the participants received a copy of Figure 1, an
introductory text describing the perfect reading theory,
a list of the possible reading defects per reading component (i.e. the theory of disturbed reading), and a list of
input words covered by the perfect reading model (the
so-called List of Target Words). The experimenter used
also material described in the procedure section that follows.

Procedure

Figure 1: The diagram of the simulated reading process
that the participants used when presented with a case.
(The arrow ’− >’ stands for ’transforms into’)

All six tasks were presented in a single session, which
lasted about 8 minutes and the total session lasted about
80 minutes. The general procedure was as follows: (1)
Explanation of the aim of the diagnostic tasks and an
overview of the session, (2) verbal and visual explanation of the theory of perfect reading, and (3) of the constructed theories of disabled reading, (4) practicing with
a computer simulation of a perfectly reading child, and
(5) of a malfunctioning child, (6) answering four standardized comprehension control questions; if the answers
were inadequate, teaching and controlling was repeated
until complete understanding, (7) execution of the six
experimental diagnostic tasks. Materials were always
available. Every task started with the same sample of
three reading behavior instances of the simulated child.
For every case, it consisted of two incorrectly read target words (e.g. for case 2, baken → /p//aa//k//eu/
and nu → /u//n/ for case 2) and of one correctly read
input word (lezer → /l//ee//z//u//r/). Next, the participant was free to choose one of the following activities:
identifying the underlying defect(s), generating a single
hypothesis about one or more defects in one or more
components, generating a set of alternative hypotheses,
simply requesting the (simulated) child to read another
word from the input word list without any hypothesis, or

2244

requesting the (simulated) child to read a further word
from the List of Target Words in order to test a hypothesis that had not been explicitly formulated. Also in the
next step the participant remained free in all choices.
When the participant had decided how to proceed, the
experimenter asked to them verbalize this step, and if
that implied either a specific hypothesis or an input
word, the participant was asked to type it onto the computer screen (producing a log for later analysis). The
participant was instructed to type in every hypothesis
that came to mind on a separate line, and in the form of
the code(s) of the postulated component fault(s) (cf. Table 1). If participants wanted to generate an input word,
they had to check the List of Target Words for membership and spelling. Other words were not accepted by
the program. If the participant had typed in an input
word without prior hypothesis, the experimenter asked
whether a prior hypothesis was generated and asked to
type it in on the next line of the computer screen. In addition, the experimenter kept written and taped records
of all verbal behavior of the participants. No upper or
lower limits were put on the number of activities that
the participant wished to perform before reaching the
diagnostic conclusion. Once the participant had formulated a definitive diagnosis for the case, the experimenter
recorded the required solution time (in a rounded number of minutes) and, finally, the experimenter asked the
participant to indicate on a five-point scale (ranging from
1 = very uncertain to 5 = very certain) how confident
the participant was about the diagnostic conclusion. The
presentation order of cases 1 through 5 was varied across
the participants following the Latin Square Method. An
exception was made for case 6, which was presented as
the final task to all participants, since it was the only case
without a definitive solution. The correct solution was
that the case was unsolvable because two incompatible
hypotheses remained which could not be tested against
each other. Since this task had a high risk of bringing
about pro-active interference with the other tasks, it was
placed at the end of the session.
The two research questions given in the introduction
have been articulated as follows: Concerning research
question 1, the clinician’s examination of a case, was analyzed according to the number of times they followed
exactly a particular sequence of steps. The procedure
may seem tedious, but without very careful observations,
it is impossible to draw conclusions about the relationship between strategy and performance. The steps are
as follows:

2. Select one failure from the set of failures that constitutes H1 , and locate the component responsible for
that failure as the target component to be tested.
That would result in the first Partial Hypothesis P H1
within H1 .
3. Select an S2 for which the expected R2 would provide
affirmative information concerning P H1
4. Input the S2 and inspect if its outcome confirms P H1
5. If R2 comes out, accept P H1 , and include it in the
final diagnosis.

1. Inspect the problem, namely the three behavioral
symptoms that were presented first. A symptom is
a specific response R1 , for example saying the word
/mad/, following S1 , the visual word pattern for
‘map’. After the symptom S1 − R1 the participant
might generate a single hypothesis H1 about some underlying cognitive failure(s) that would explain the
symptom according to the theory. For example the
child may not have detected the difference in spatial orientation between the up and down strokes and
hence confused d and p.
2245

We call any uninterrupted sequence of these five steps
a positive strategy. We defined the main criterion for
diagnostic skill as efficiency as is customary in tests for
abilities (e.g. tests for word identification skill) and intelligence (e.g., the Wechsler Scales). Efficiency refers to
the attained level of accuracy in proportion to the time
needed for that level of accuracy. The level of attained
accuracy has been scored by counting the times that the
diagnosticians actually discovered all programmed defects of the given diagnostic case. The observed scores
(M = 2.6, SD = 1.0), indicate that 43% of all cases were
correctly diagnosed (this is different than the proportion of correctly identified faults, which was considerably
higher [M = 6.8, SD = .33] and indicates a correct fault
identification score of 62%). The subjects were found to
spend 8.5 minutes (SD = 5.0) for diagnosing a case, on
average. From these two basic scores, the efficiency score
was constructed by classifying the subjects according to
their medians. Those with both upper accuracy and upper speed scores were given 4 points, those with upper
accuracy but lower speed 3 points, those with lower accuracy and lower speed 2 points and, finally, those with
lower accuracy and upper speed 1 point. In this scale,
speed has only an advantage if it co-occurs with high
accuracy. In combination with low accuracy it may prevent higher accuracy, and therefore shows less skill than
low speed and low accuracy. A mean efficiency value of
2.72 (SD = 1.1) was found.

Results
Subjects followed a positive strategy in 12% (SD =
13%; SE = 3%) of the cases, which significantly deviates
from zero (p < .01). Separating the cases where subjects
first generated a single hypothesis, the complete subsequent scenario of a positive strategy occurred in 18% of
the cases. Note that the incidence of the strategy was
fairly evenly distributed over the six cases, and over participants (irrespective their educational background).
The separate steps of the positive strategy had the following relative frequencies. Thirty-nine percent of all initially generated hypotheses were single hypotheses, 86%
of which contained at least one consistent component,
79% of which was selected as the first target of testing,
82% of which was followed by testing that consistent
component with a compatible research instrument, 33%
of which was accepted without further testing.
The second research question predicted a negative correlation between the total number of times the subjects

applied a positive strategy and the resulting overall efficiency. A significant positive Pearson product-moment
correlation was found, but in the opposite direction:
r = .53 (p = .012, one-tailed). Replacing efficiency with
mere accuracy, does hardly change the picture (r. = .38;
p = .06, one-tailed).

Discussion and conclusions
The results of our experiment indicate that clinicians do
use a positive strategy. Although this finding confirms
existing consensus, the clinicians did not use it very often. In addition we found that using this strategy benefits rather than harms the diagnostic outcome. This
contradicts the prevailing view in the heuristics and biases literature that a confirmatory tendency is to blame
for poor diagnostic decision.
Recall the three potential explanations for the low
quality of clinical diagnostic decision making distinguished in the introduction: (1) use of a confirmatory
tendency, (2) discrepancies among clinicians about the
aim of diagnostic decision making, and (3) the different
kinds of theoretical knowledge clinicians prefer for explaining a child’s problems. The present study argues
that the first of these must be rejected.
One could object that the present study was too strict
in the formulation of the positive strategy as it required a
large number of consecutive steps. A less demanding definition might still corroborate the dominant view about
the adverse effect of the confirmatory tendency. We actually looked at the various partial positive strategies,
but did not find such an adverse effect: All correlations
of these partial strategies with the diagnostic efficiency
were close to zero, and not significant. This lack of statistical significance is remarkable, as the partial strategies produced more observations than the strategy in our
more strict definition.
One could further object that the findings concerning
the positive strategy do not have implications for the significance of a negative strategy. Indeed, a negative strategy could still be superior. In order to test that possibility, we looked in the present study for sequences of steps
that we could a priori define as apparent attempts to
generate and/or test alternative diagnostic hypotheses.
For example, we inspected how often the diagnosticians
generated a single initial hypothesis that consisted of
component(s) that were neutral to the initial symptoms,
i.e. that could not show any marks of the underlying
deficiency of the child but at the same time could not
yet be disconfirmed by those symptoms either. These
events were observed in about 5% of the initial hypotheses, but that frequency did not significantly deviate from
zero. A second example concerned the number of times
that the clinicians generated a set of at least two initial
diagnostic hypotheses. On the average, this event did
occur in 20% of all initial hypotheses (SD = 8.2%), but
it had no significant positive correlation with diagnostic
efficiency (r = .13; p > .30), let alone a larger correlation
with diagnostic efficiency than the positive strategy. All
further similar analyses showed no significant relations
with diagnostic effciency.

In brief, we found (1) that studies of biases and heuristics in diagnostic reasoning must be crafted much more
carefully and detailed than those reported in the literature, (2) that lack of consensus among clinicians
about diagnostic decisions cannot be simply attributed
to heuristic and biases, and that especially a positive
strategy cannot be blamed for poor diagnostic decisions,
and (3) that contrary to received wisdom, a positive
strategy can actually enhance decisions in the context
of diagnostic causal reasoning.

References
Baron, J. (1994). Thinking and deciding (2nd edition).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ben-Shakhar, G., Bar-Hillel, M., Bilu, Y., & Shefler, G.
(1998). Seek and ye shall find: Test results are what
you hypothesize they are. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 11, 235-249.
Brown, J.S., & Burton, R.R. (1978). Diagnostic models
for procedural bugs in mathematical skills. Cognitive
Science, 2, 155-192.
Bus, A.G. (1989). How are recommendations concerning reading and spelling disabilities arrived at and why
do experts disagree? Psychology in the Schools, 26,
54-61.

2246

Bus, A.G., & Kruizenga, T.H. (1989). Diagnostic
problem-solving behavior of expert practitioners in the
field of learning disabilities. Journal of School Psychology, 27, 305-316.
Bus, A.G., & Van IJzendoorn, W.J.E. (1992). How are
judgments about children with learning problems arrived at by experts? Revue Europénne de Psychologie
Appliquée, 42, 269-275.
DeWitt, K.N., Kaltreider, N.B., Weiss, D.S., &
Horowitz, M.J. (1983). Judging change in psychotherapy. Reliability of clinical formulations. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 40, 1121 1128.
Faust, D. (1986). Research on human judgment and its
application to clinical practice. Professional Psychology Research and Practice, 17, 420-429.
Gambrill, E. (1990). Critical thinking in clinical practice: Improving the accuracy of judgments and decisions about clients. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Garb, H.N. (1994). Cognitive heuristics and biases
in personality assessment. In L. Heath, R. Scott
Tindale, J. Edwards, E. J. Posavac, F. B. Bryant,
E. Henderson-King, Y. Suarez-Balcazar, and J. Myers,(Eds.) Applications of heuristics and biases to social issues (pp. 73-90). New York: Plenum Press
Garb, H.N. (1998). Studying the clinician: judgment
research and psychological assessment. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.

Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions
disappear: Beyond Heuristics and Biases. European
Review of Social Psychology, 2, 83-115.
Grimbergen, E.R.W. (1994). Model-based diagnosis in
the ill-defined domain of beginning reading. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen Institute of Cognition and Information.
Hoenkamp, E. (1989). ‘Confirmation bias’ in rule discovery and the principle of maximum entropy. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 651-658). Hillsdale,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hoenkamp, E., & Grimbergen R. (1997). Advice on reasoning from first principles in a psychodiagnostic domain. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jansen, M.G.H., & Meijer, W. (1991). Gaan psychologen, (ortho)pedagogen en onderwijskundigen in
de leerlingbegeleiding verschillend te werk [Do educational psychologists, orthopedestricians and educational pedagogues operate differently from each other
in individual assessment]? Tijdschrift voor Onderwijsresearch, 16, 160-168.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Krems, J. F., & Zierer, Chr.
(1994).
Sind Experten gegen kognitive Täuschungen gefeit? Zur
Abhängigkeit des confirmation bias von Fachwissen.
Zeitschrift fur experimentelle und angewandte Psychologie, 41, 98-115.
McDermott, P.A., (1980). Congruence and typology of
diagnoses in school psychology: An empirical study.
Psychology in the Schools, 17, 12-24.

2247

Skov, R.B., & Sherman, S.J. (1986).
Information gathering processes: Diagnosticity, hypothesisconfirmatory strategies, and perceived hypothesis confirmation. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
6, 269- 284.
Snyder, M., & Thomsen, C.J. (1987). Interactions between therapists and clients: Hypothesis testing and
behavioral confirmation. In D.C. Turk and P. Salovey
(Eds.), Reasoning, inference and judgment in clinical
psychology (pp. 124-152). New York: The Free Press.
Spear-Swerling, L. & Sternberg, R.L. (1994). The road
not taken: An integrative theoretical model on reading
disability. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27, 91103, 122.
Van Aarle, E.J.M., & Van den Bercken, J.H.L. (1999).
The development of a knowledge-based system for supporting the diagnosis of reading and spelling problems
(II). Computers in Human Behavior, 15, 693- 712.
Vinsonhaler, F.F., Weinshank, A.B., Wagner, C.C., &
Polin, R.M. (1983). Diagnosing children with eduactional problems: Characteristics of reading and
learning disabilities specialists, and classroom teachers. Reading Research Quarterly, 18, 134-164.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Weisberg, R. K. (1984). How consistent is the clinical
diagnosis of reading specialists? The Reading Teacher,
38, 205-212.
Ysseldyke, J.E., & Algozzine, B. (1983). On making
psychoeducational decisions. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 1, 187-195.

