UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Issues in Reasoning about Iffy Propositions: The Initial Representation of Conditionals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/802121st

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Shirouzu, Hajime

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Issues in Reasoning about Iffy Propositions:
The Initial Representation of Conditionals
Walter J. Schroyens (Walter.Schroyens@hec.ca)

HEC Montréal, Université de Montréal.
3000, Chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Quebec, Canada H3T 2A7
Abstract
All accounts of human reasoning (whether presented at the
symbolic or sub-symbolic level) have to reckon with the
temporal organization of the processing systems, and the
ephemeral nature of the representations it uses. We present
new evidence for the thesis that people construct initial,
provisional representations, and that these representations of
conditional assertions of the form if A then C depict the joint
occurrence of the antecedent, A, and consequent, C. We
discuss this evidence in relation to mental model theory and
the alternative conditional probability theory of conditional
reasoning.

2000; Oaksford & Chater, 2003; Schroyens & Schaeken,
2003a, 2004). The present data provide a clear and perhaps
compelling corroboration of the model theory’s assumption
about the initial representation of conditionals. This initialmodel assumption is also subscribed to by SSCEPPTRE
(the Syntactic-Semantic Counter-Example Prompted
Probabilistic Thinking and Reasoning Engine), which is our
own alternative specification and parametric model of the
mental model theory’s general processing principles (see
Schroyens et al., 2001a, 2001b, Schroyens & Schaeken,
2003a, 2004).
The initial-model assumption. "Basic conditionals have
mental models representing the possibilities in which their
antecedents are satisfied, but only implicit mental models
for the possibilities in which their antecedents are not
satisfied" (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002, p. 655). This
hypothesis, which we refer to as the initial-model
assumption, means that a conditional of the form if A then C
is initially represented by an explicit model of the
possibility in which both antecedent, A and the consequent,
C, hold whereas the alternative possibilities remain implicit.
These alternatives are not represented per se, but are
referred to by a model that has no explicit content.

General Introduction

We make inferences from what we believe and what we
perceive. This enables us to comprehend and to predict the
contingent nature of our environment. Reasoning from
conditional assertions (e.g. of the form : if A then C) is a
prime example because they express a contingency between
the antecedent, A, and the consequent, C. Without
conditional relations we would have no way to plan, to
make decisions, or to understand our world.
As Evans, Handley, and Over (2003, p. 324) write: “One
of the most influential theories of
human reasoning is that of mental
Table 1: Formal representation of the four basic conditional inference problems and
models, and this theory has been
the different conclusions derived from these problems.
applied in detail to conditional
reasoning
(Johnson-Laird
&
Problem type
Byrne, 1991, 2002; JohnsonAffirmation
Denial
Laird, Byrne, & Schaeken,
Invalid
Valid
Invalid
Valida
1992).” The mental models theory
MP
AC
MT
DA
conceptualises reasoning as a
Conditional
three-stage process. First, people
Categorical Premise
form an initial representation of
If A then C
A
C
Not C
Not A
the given information: they
construct
models
of
the
Conclusion
possibilities compatible with this
Initial-model Conclusion
C
A
Null
Null
information.
Second,
they
Standard
Conclusion
C
A
Not
A
Not
C
formulate a putative conclusion
that holds in these models. Third,
Note: MP = Affirmation of the Antecedent, i.e., ‘Modus Ponens'; AC =
they may search for alternative
Affirmation of the Consequent, DA = Denial of the Antecedent; MT = Denial of
models of the premises that would
falsify their conclusion. If there is
the Consequent, i.e., ‘Modus Tollens'. The ‘null’ inference refers to the conclusion
no such counterexample, then the
that ‘nothing follows’. a The distinction between valid vs. invalid arguments refers
conclusion follows necessarily.
to the logical validity of the standard determinate inferences.
Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002)
provide a recent account of how
these principles apply to reasoning
Table 1 presents the four basic conditional inference
from conditionals. The present study provides a new test of
problems that can be formed by affirming or denying the
a core assumption of this theory, which has become the
antecedent, A, or consequent, C, of a conditional. The
subject of controversy (see, Oaksford, Chater & Larkin,
initial-model assumption is crucial to explain the robust
1967

finding that affirmation inferences, which the initial model
yields, are more readily endorsed than denial inferences,
which the initial model does not yield. This pattern has been
corroborated in two meta-analytic studies (Schroyens et al.,
2001a, 2001b).
Initial models do not represent the
categorical premise of the denial inferences. Hence, the
premise eliminates the explicit model to leave only the
implicit model from which nothing follows: one draws a
blank. Individuals have to consider models of alternative
possibilities before they can make a denial inference. The
initial model assumption similarly explains the on-line
inferences people tend to draw (and tend not to draw) during
the comprehension of text (Lea, 1995). More direct
evidence for the initial model assumption is provided by
individual responses patterns in which individuals endorse
the affirmation inference but reject the denial inferences.
This pattern forms the explanatory basis for the main effect
of the sort of inference (affirmation versus denial) that is
corroborated by the abovementioned meta-analyses. More
recent meta-analyses on the frequency of individual
inference patterns, however, show that on average only 7%
of the adults exhibit this so-called ‘conjunctive inference’
pattern where they endorse the affirmation inferences but
reject the denial inferences. This is barely above chance
level (1/4² = 6.25%; Schroyens & Schaeken, 2003b).
In the task of evaluating conditional inferences
participants are given a conclusion to evaluate. It is common
practice to call for participants to evaluate the determinate
conclusion shown in Table 1. These conclusions are
logically valid for MP and MT, but they are logically valid
for AC and DA only in a bi-conditional interpretation of the
major premise, i.e., it is taken to mean ‘if and only if A then
C’. Table 1 also shows the inferences that individuals can
make from their initial model of the premises. As readers
will see, there is a conflict between the standard conclusions
and conclusions derived from the initial models in the case
of the two arguments based on denial. Individuals should be
more likely to endorse the standard conclusion in these two
cases than to reject ‘nothing follows’ if this response is
presented for evaluation. In the case of the affirmation
inferences, however, the initial models predict that
individuals should both accept the standard conclusions and
reject the ‘nothing follows’. It follows that there should be
an interaction between the sort of inferences (affirmation or
denial) and the sort of conclusion to be evaluated (standard
versus ‘nothing follows’). The difference between the
acceptance of standard conclusions and the rejection of
nothing follows should be greater for denial inferences than
for affirmation inferences. In order to test this prediction we
carried out an experiment in which we manipulated the sort
of conclusions that participants had to evaluate.
In the general discussion we will consider alternatives to
the mental models theory, and will demonstrate how one
such salient alternative model of human reasoning fails to
make, or explain the central prediction of the present study.
That is, to pre-empt the results of our study, the findings not
only support the explanatory import of representational
assumptions made in the mental models theory, but also
allow us to counter alternative models of conditional
reasoning.

Experiment
Method
Design. All participants evaluated 2 (Validity: Valid vs.
Invalid) by 2 (Type: affirmation vs. denial) by 3
(conclusion: Standard/Opposite/Indeterminate) arguments.
These 12 arguments were presented twice, in a blocked
order.
Materials and Procedure. Each participant participated by
running a custom-made computer program. Participants first
read the instructions, then received two exercise problems
(about 'or else'), and subsequently received two blocks of 12
arguments. Within each block they were randomly given an
MP/DA/AC/MT problem with its three conclusion types.
With each of the four problem types participants were given
the affirmation of the inferential clause, the denial of the
inferential clause, or the nothing follows conclusions; thus
producing the 12 (3x4) arguments. The affirmation of the
inferential clause is the standard for the affirmation
problems (MP/AC); it is the opposite of the standard denial
inferences (MT/DA). The denial of the inferential clause is
the standard denial inference; it is the opposite of the
standard affirmation inference. A standard DA inference
was presented as:
Given: If the letter is a B, then the number is a 2.
Given: The letter is NOT a B.
Walter Concludes: Hence, the number is NOT a 2.
The conclusion of the opposite DA read “Hence, the
number is a 2". Participants had to evaluate whether the
derived conclusion was “logically correct or incorrect”, by
clicking the mouse on a 'correct/incorrect' button
['juist'/'fout' in Dutch].
Participants. Forty-four University of Leuven (Belgium)
students participated (17-23 years of age, Me=18). They
received credit points or were paid for their participation.

Results
Figure 1 presents the acceptance rates of the standard
arguments and rejection rates of the null inferences. Unity
minus the acceptance rates of the nothing follows inference
corresponds, in principle, to the acceptance rates of the
standard inferences. The results clearly show that though
this equivalence is true in principle, in practice there is a
clear discrepancy between the two arguments. The overall
standard acceptance rates amount to .747, whereas the
overall nothing follows rejection rates amount to .614
(Wilcoxon T = 48.0, N = 30, Z = 3.794, p < .001). Most
importantly, the difference depends on the type of problem
(Affirmation vs. Denial: d = -.028 vs. d = .295; T = 28.0, N
= 32, Z = 4.413, p < .001). People are as likely to accept the
standard affirmation arguments (MP/AC) as they are likely
to reject the conclusion that nothing follows from the same
premises (.784 vs. .812).1 Phrased otherwise, the likelihood
1

An anonymous reviewer suggested that under some conditions
one might expect an increase of ‘correct’ responding to AC, that is,
an increase of nothing follows acceptance rates. We agree. The

1968

Acceptance rates of Standard Conclusion
Rejection rates of Nothing Follows Conclusion

accepts this type of conclusions
(acceptance rates on MP, AC, MT,
DA are respectively: 0.00, 0.00, 0.02
1.0
Standard Arguments
and 0.01). That is, as assumed in
Nothing Follows Arguments
mental models theory, responses fall
0.9
into two classes. People infer the
0.8
default standard conclusion, or infer
that nothing conclusive can be
0.7
inferred from the premises (see
Schroyens, Handley, Evans, &
0.6
Schaeken,
2002,
for
further
discussion
and
experiments
about
0.5
opposite
conclusion
effects).
Virtually nobody endorses the
0.4
opposite conclusions. These are
0.3
supported neither by the initial
models, nor by a fully explicated
0.2
representation of all possibilities
(i.e., models) that would be
0.1
consistent with the premises. This
finding strengthens our argument
0.0
MP
AC
MT
DA
and analysis of the difference
between the acceptance rates of the
standard conclusions and the
Figure 1: Acceptance rates of Standard Arguments and Rejection Rates of Nothing rejection rates of the nothing follows
inferences: Our finding fail to
Follows Arguments
disrepute, that is, they support the
of accepting the standard affirmation inferences and
initial-model assumption in mental models theory.
accepting the nothing follows inference sums up nicely to
unity. In case of denial (MT/DA), people are much more
General Discussion
likely to accept the standard denial argument than they are
Our findings provide clear support for the initial-model
likely to reject the nothing follows conclusion for the denial
assumption in mental-models theory, and its import in
problems (.710 vs. .415; T = 11.0, N = 27, Z = 4.276, p <
explaining one of the most robust findings in the literature
.001).
on conditional reasoning. People are generally much less
In summary, people are more likely to accept the initialcertain about the standard denial (vs. affirmation)
model conclusion (i.e., ‘nothing follows’) when this
arguments. This is presumably due, in part, to the temporal
conclusion is given for evaluation. The fact that the
layout of the human processing system which within the
conclusion type (standard vs. nothing follows) interacts with
scope of its bounded rationality ensures that people initially
the type of problem shows that people are not simply more
represent as little information as possible explicitly and ab
likely to accept the conclusion that is given for evaluation.
initio only represent what is explicitly narrated with the
Our argument hinges on the observed difference between
sentential information they are confronted with. The
accepting the standard inferences and rejecting the nothing
sentence ‘if it rains, then the streets get wet’, is about it
follows inferences. One might argue that an equivalence
raining and the streets getting wet. People would
between the standard acceptance rates and the nothing
accordingly first consider this contingency.2 The initialfollows rejection rates would not be expected in the first
model assumption implies that alternative possibilities need
place, because people might endorse the opposite of the
to be considered, if people are to infer anything specific
standard conclusion. Those people who do not endorse the
from an additional bit of information that alludes to a
standard inferences, would accept ‘nothing follows’ or
possibility that is not represented in the initial representation
would accept the opposite conclusion. The results on the
(i.e., as is the case in a denial problem). We have shown that
opposite-conclusion problems show that virtually nobody
conditions of the present experiment, however, are not conducive
to observing such an effect. “Nothing follows” would need to be
elaborated and explicated as the logically valid argument “[if A
then C]; [C]; hence [A or not-A]”. That is, “nothing follows”
would need to be interpreted as “nothing follows necessarily” (as
indeed, [A] does follow possibly from AC). This requires that one
explains to participants that a logical conclusion is a conclusion
that follows necessarily, and not just possibly. (See, Schroyens et
al., 2003, Experiment 2, for a demonstration and discussion of
stressing the logical necessity instructions).

2
Note that it is theoretically false and hence misleading to state
that mental-models theory considers the contingency between ‘it
raining’ and ‘streets getting wet’ a simple conjunctive
juxtaposition of the two events concerned (see, Evans et al., 2003;
Grosset & Barrouillet, 2003). The abstract of Johnson-Laird and
Byrne (2002) already proofs such claims wrong: “The 2 sorts of
conditional have separate core meanings that refer to sets of
possibilities. Knowledge, pragmatics, and semantics can modulate
these meanings. Modulation can add information about temporal
and other relations between antecedent and consequent” (p.646,
italics added).

1969

when we give people the initial-model conclusion for
evaluation, the classic difference between the affirmation
problems and the denial problems becomes even larger.
This is clear evidence in favour of the initial-model
assumption, and its import in explaining thinking and
reasoning about conditional relation, as expressed in for
instance conditional ‘if …then ...’ utterances.
The initial-model assumption constitutes part of the
model-based theory of interpretation, which is to be
distinguished from a theory of meaning (Gilbert, 1991).
Given that the meaning of a sentence can be captured by
means of the possibilities it allows for, the core meaning of
[if A then C] and its contra-positive [if not-C then not-A] is
the same.3 Both conditionals are falsified only by the joint
contingency of [A] and [not-C]. There is abundant evidence
that shows that a conditional is judged false when there are
situations wherein the antecedent is satisfied, while the
consequent is not (see, e.g., Evans, Ellis, & Newstead,
1996). However, this does not mean that [if A then C] and
[if not-C then not-A] are interpreted in the same way, or that
the logical equivalence corresponds to a psychological
equivalence. A straightforward application of the initialmodel
principle
shows
that
the
initial
interpretations/representations are fundamentally different.
They represent the contingency between respectively [A]
and [C], and [not-C] and [not-A]: quite something different.
The difference between meaning and interpretation is far
from trivial. Indeed, it seems to be tempting to sacrifice
faithfulness to the complexities of the phenomena for the
sake of clarity of an (often polemic) exposition. Evans et al.
(2003), for instance, argued against mental models theory in
the process of proffering their own ‘theory’. As exposed by
Schroyens and Schaeken (2004), they formed a misleading
argument on the basis of the logical equivalence between
the conditional and its contra-positive. This attests to a
failure to distinguish logic from psychology and reflects a
gross neglect of the intricate details of mental-models theory
(i.e., the crucial initial-model assumption). Advances in the
field are in part formed by critical analyses of extant models
and theories. However, when a critique is based on an oversimplified misrepresentation of the theoretical advances in
the field, we are setting a step backwards, not forwards.
The present set of findings also provides further evidence
against the so-called conditional probability (CP) model of
conditional reasoning (Oaksford et al, 2000). The CP model
has already shown to be deficient for abstract reasoning
about the type of standard inference evaluation problems
3
The core-meaning assumption in mental-models theory is part of
its theory of meaning, whereas the initial-model assumption is part
of the theory of interpretation. The theory of meaning reflects an
idealisation wherein abstraction is made of the pragmatics of the
context we live in, and the content we live with. Johnson-Laird and
Byrne (2002) speak of the core-meaning of basic conditionals,
which have “a neutral content that is as independent as possible
from context and background knowledge, and which have an
antecedent and consequent that are semantically independent apart
from their occurrence in the same conditional” (p. 649). Basic
conditional are, thus, not ordinary conditionals, which are
dependent from content and context. As such one cannot speak of
“the core meaning of ordinary conditionals” (Evans et al., 2002).

used in the present study (see, Schroyens & Schaeken,
2003a; also see Oaksford & Chater, 2003). Our findings
obtained by providing a “nothing follows” inference for
evaluation, demarcate further problematical findings for CP
model, which as such is discredited and due for a serious
maintenance job if it is to be reckoned with as an alternative
theory of human reasoning. The CP model is very
simplistic. The probability of the standard MP, AC, DA,
MT arguments is supposed to equal the conditional
probability of the conclusion, given the categorical premise:
P(MP) = P(q|p); P(AC) = P(p|q); P(MT) = P(not-p|not-q);
P(DA) = P(not-q|not-p). Using basic probability calculus,
i.e., Bayes Theorem, these probabilities can be reformulated
into a set four equations with three parameters: P(p), P(q)
and P(not-q|p). We do not need to use these more complex
formulae. Our critical demonstration is independent of such
mathematical reformulations of the model. Oaksford et al.
(2000) assume that the probability of the opposite
conclusion endorsements is analogously equal to the
conditional probability of the opposite conclusion, given the
categorical premise: P(MP’) = P(not-q|p); P(AC’) = P(notp|q); P(MT’) = P(p|not-q); P(DA’) = P(q|not-p). That is, the
opposite conclusion endorsements are the simple
complements of the standard conclusion acceptance rates:
P(MP) = 1-P(MP’); P(AC) = 1-P(AC’); P(MT) = 1-P(MT’);
P(DA) = 1-P(DA’).
Our results show that the opposite conclusions were
rejected throughout, whereas the standard conclusions were
not. That is, the probability of, for instance, AC (“q,
therefore p”: .57) is not complementary to the endorsement
rate of its opposite (AC’: “q, therefore not-p”: .02). This
means that the opposite-conclusion effects counter the CP
model, at least as it is presented by Oaksford et al. (2000).
This is too simple though and would no advance our
theoretical knowledge very much. A basic principle in the
advancement of science and theories (as well as a basic
ethical principle in inter-personal conduct), is the principle
of charity: one gives the benefit of the doubt, and makes the
best possible interpretation of a theory (or person;
Davidson, 2001). As argued by Schroyens et al. (2002), the
CP model needs to be extended by a decision-mechanism
that maps a probabilistic evaluation of a conclusion onto a
binary decision to accept or reject a conclusion that is only
probabilistically truthful.
The CP model is not salvaged by extending it with a
function that maps subjective probabilities onto decisions to
accept/reject conclusions. Such a function expresses the idea
that a decision to accept a conclusion is done above a
particular threshold. The results on the “nothing follows”
problems show that even the extended CP model is in
trouble. First, consider though that one could make another
simple argument against the CP model by pointing out that
Oaksford et al. do not consider “nothing follows”
inferences, and only talk about standard and opposite
conclusions. This issue is remedied by taking up the in the
literature commonly considered idea that the “nothing
follows” conclusion reflects uncertainty about a determinate
conclusion: both the standard and the opposite conclusions
have a particular likelihood of being true. That is, “nothing
follows”, vis-à-vis, e.g. AC, captures the maximally

1970

p) on MT.4 The acceptance rate of “nothing follows” in the
extended CP model equals the acceptance rates of opposite
conclusions in the simple CP model.) This is clearly
countered by the data: the nothing follows endorsement
rates actually amount to .71. No statistics are needed to see
that this is quite a stretch away from a .27 endorsement rate.
A similar problem for the CP model is observed on DA (1.68 = .32. vs. .57 nothing follows endorsement rates). Only
the results on the affirmation problems are in line with the
extended CP model (MP: 1- 1 = 0 vs. 0; AC: 1-.57 = .43 vs.
.38). This need not surprise us. Indeed, the discrepancy
between standard acceptance
rates and the nothing follows
0.60
Reject
Accept
rejection rates – or formally
equivalent: the discrepancy
between the standard rejection
rates and the nothing follows
0.45
Opposite Conclusions
Standard Conclusions
acceptance rates, as formulated
(e.g., MT' = P = 1- [Not-P])
(e.g. MT: Not-P)
above – is exactly what we
predicted on the basis of the
initial-model assumption in
mental models theory. The CP
0.30
model does not subscribe to this
principle,
or
any
other
representational principle that
has the same import. As such it
0.15
fails to account for our findings.
In summary, we extended the
conclusion evaluation paradigm
by changing the type of
0.00
conclusion
provided.
The
.50
standard conclusions are the
Subjective probability of Conclusion
ones by which a determinate
conclusion is inferred from the
premises. A theoretical analysis
Figure 2: Example of two distribution functions corresponding to the probability of
of this task shows a confound as
standard conclusions and their opposites, and a decision threshold that leads to
regards the status of the
accepting/rejecting these conclusions.
standard conclusions vis-à-vis
the processes of reasoning by
have to assume such a distribution (i.e. range limit) for all
constructing and manipulating mental models. The standard
four subjective probability functions because, the results
conclusions for affirmation problems can be drawn from the
showed a uniform rejection of all opposite conclusions.
supposed initial representation of the premises, whereas the
Otherwise some opposite conclusions would be endorsed.
standard denial inferences cannot. This explains the robust
Figure 2 illustrates two such complementary probability
difference between the acceptance rates of standard
distributions, and provides an acceptance threshold such that
affirmation and denial inferences (see, Schroyens et al.,
the likelihood of accepting the standard conclusion amounts
2001; Schroyens & Schaeken, 2003a, for a meta-analysis).
to .73 (i.e. the surface below the curve, to the right of the
By providing the initial model conclusion for the denial
threshold is 73% of the total surface). This is the standard
problems (“nothing follows”) we provided new, additional
MT endorsement rate observed in the present study. As
evidence for the initial model assumption. The difference
Figure 2 shows, the opposite MT endorsement rates would
between the affirmation and denial problems (.78 vs. .71)
be zero. This is exactly what we observed. The probability
becomes even bigger when one considers the initial model
of the standard conclusion (not-p) is not high enough to
conclusions (respectively the determinate affirmation
endorse the standard conclusion and neither is it high
inference for the affirmation problems and the indeterminate
enough to endorse the opposite conclusion (p), whose
probability ex hypothesis equals unity minus the probability
4
of the standard conclusion.
Changing the shape of the density function does not change
The extended CP model, however, expects to observe a
expectations. One could increase the expected rate of null
.27 (1-.73) acceptance rates of “nothing follows” (p or notresponses [p or not-p] by increasing the overlap between the
P(accept(Not-P)) = P(MT) = .73

P(P or not-P) = P(Null) = .27

P(reject(P)) = 1- P(MT') = 1.00

uninformative (but logically valid) conclusion that “p or
not-p” might be the case. Under these (charitable)
assumptions, the extended CP model still remains deficient.
Let us assume a conclusion acceptance threshold at
certainty level X. This implies that the distribution of
subjective probabilities of the standard conclusions lies
completely to the right of 1-X. Since the subjective
probabilities of the standard and opposite conclusions are
complementary this means that there is no point under the
distribution of the subjective probabilities of the opposite
conclusions that lies beyond the acceptance threshold. We

distributions of [p] and [not-p]. This however would be in direct
conflict with what Oaksford et al. (2000) proffered: The
probabilities of the standard and opposite conclusions (though not
necessarily their categorical acceptance rates) are complementary.
1971

nothing follows inference for the denial problems: .78 vs.
.59). We have illustrated how an alternative theory that does
not support the initial-representation assumption, remains
unsupported (i.e., is countered) by the present findings.
First, the finding that opposite conclusion are not endorsed
shows that the Conditional Probability model needs to be
extended to capture the idea that conclusion are only
accepted when they their likelihood is beyond a decision
threshold. Second, the CP must also be extended so that it
allows to account for nothing follows conclusions, which it
can be adopting the thesis that “nothing follows (with
certainty”) reflects the idea that both the standard
conclusion and its opposite are possible. The nothing
follows rejection rates show that the extended CP remains
problematical: it continues to underestimate nothing follows
inferences on the denial problems. The CP model needs to
follow mental models theory and subscribe to the initialrepresentation principle to account for the findings that we
predicted on the basis of the general mechanisms of
reasoning by constructing and manipulating mental models.

Acknowledgments
The present research was funded in part with the support of
the Flanders (Belgium) Fund for Scientific Research
(G.0320.05) and the Canadian Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC 297517). I also like
to extent my grateful acknowledgments to Walter Schaeken,
Kristien Dieussaert, Niki Verscheuren, Wim De Neys and
all other members of the R.A.T. research group at the
University of Leuven, Belgium.

References

Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109(4), 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W.
(1992). Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological
Review, 99, 418-439.
Lea, B. E. (1995). On-line evidence for elaborative logical
inferences in text. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(6), 1469-1482.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2003). Computational levels
and conditional inference: Reply to Schroyens and
Schaeken (2003). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 150-156.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000). Probabilities
and polarity biases in conditional inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26(4), 883-899.
Schroyens, W., Handley, S., Evans, J. St. B. T., &
Schaeken, W. (2002). Evaluating conditional arguments:
Opposites do not attract. Technical Report (No. 292).
Leuven: University of Leuven, Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology,
http://www.psy.kuleuven.ac.be/reason/report292.pdf.
Schroyens, W., & Schaeken, W. (2003a). A critique of
Oaksford, Chater and Larkin's (2000) conditional
probability model of conditional reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 140-149.
Schroyens, W., & Schaeken, W. (2003b). Essays in
reasoning by model: Individual differences in/and
models of conditional reasoning. Internal Technical
Report (Report No. 302). Leuven: Laboratory of
Experimental psychology, University of Leuven,
http://www.psy.kuleuven.ac.be/reason/report302.pdf.

Davidson, D. (2001), Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Ellis, C. E., & Newstead, S. E. (1996).
On the mental representation of conditional sentences.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A,
1086-1114.

Schroyens, W., & Schaeken, W. (2004). Guilt by
association: On iffy propositions and the proper
treatment of mental-models theory. Current Psychology
Letters: Behaviour, Brain & Cognition, 12(1),
http://cpl.revues.org/document404.html.

Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition., 29(2), 321-335.

Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2001a). A
meta-analytic review of conditional reasoning by model
and/or rule: Mental models theory revised. Internal
Technical Report (No. 278). Leuven: University of
Leuven, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology,
http://www.psy.kuleuven.ac.be/~walters/report278.pdf.

Gilbert, D. (1991). How mental systems believe. American
Psychologist, 46(2), 107-119.
Grosset, N., & Barrouillet, P. (2003). On the nature of
mental models of conditional: The case of If, If then, and
Only if. Thinking & Reasoning, 9(4), 289-306.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., & d'Ydewalle, G. (2001b).
The processing of negations in conditional reasoning: A
meta-analytic study in mental model and/or mental logic
theory. Thinking and Reasoning, 7(2), 121-172.

1972

