UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Levels of Representation in Language Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6d386703

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Chater, Nick
Hulme, Charles
Monaghan, Padraic

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Levels of Representation in Language Development
Padraic Monaghan (pjm21@york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York
York, YO10 5DD, UK

Nick Chater (N.Chater@warwick.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

Charles Hulme (ch1@york.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of York
York, YO10 5DD, UK
Abstract
In this paper we provide a computational exploration of
changes in levels of representation in children’s language
development. Children demonstrate a progression from
awareness of larger units in their language, such as words or
syllables, and only later do they develop the ability to
manipulate phoneme level representations. We employed a
minimum description length approach to encode a corpus of
child-directed speech. The analysis indicated that, for early
stages of language learning, a word level representation was
most efficient, whereas after extended exposure, a phoneme
level representation was more efficient. The analysis also
accurately predicted which phonemes children would be able
to distinguish from syllables at different stages of
development.

Introduction
Language contains structure at several different levels of
representation, from such large units as discourses, to
subphonemic features at the other end of the scale. The child
learning her first language will become adept at processing
language at each of these structural levels, but how does this
knowledge of the units and the relations between them
develop?
The child’s awareness of structure at a particular level can
be assessed by requesting the child to tap out the number of
units present in the language stimulus. So, for the word
“penguin”, the child with awareness of the syllable level of
representation would be able to tap twice, to indicate two
syllables. For the same stimulus, the child must tap six times
when the task is to mark the number of phonemes in the
word (/
). Alternative methods for determining a
child’s awareness of structure at the phoneme level are tasks
where the child must delete a phoneme from the word (e.g.,
say “scow” without the “s”), or produce the first sound in
the word (so respond /s/ to “scow”).
Longitudinal studies suggest that children develop from
awareness of larger units to smaller units (Ziegler &
Goswami, 2005). Anthony, Lonigan, Driscoll, Phillips, and
Burgess (2003) found that, in a study of 1000 children
between the ages 2 and 6, there was a developmental
progression from word-level representations, to the syllable
level, then the onset/rime level, and finally to the phoneme
level. Similarly, Liberman, Shankweiler, Fischer, and Carter

(1974) found that 4 year old children could tap out the
number of syllables but could not tap out the number of
phonemes within a word, but 70% of 6 year olds could
manage the phoneme tapping task. In terms of segmenting
continuous speech into units, Juscyk, Cutler, and Redanz
(1993) proposed that children learn to segment language
into successively smaller units. So, at one stage in language
development, children learn to segment utterances into
words, and at later stages, they learn to segment into subword units. Brent and Cartwright (1996) provided a
computational model of segmentation that showed a similar
progression from larger units to smaller, word-like units of
representation.
Awareness of structure at the phoneme level has attracted
considerable interest because this ability is a strong
predictor of reading success (Hulme, 2002; Muter, Hulme,
Snowling & Stevenson, 2004,). Indeed, it has sometimes
been suggested that phoneme awareness may be a
consequence of learning to read (Bruce, 1964; Ehri &
Wilce, 1980; Goswami & Bryant, 1990; Seymour & Evans,
1994; Treiman, 1983; Tunmer & Nesdale, 1985). In adults,
too, phoneme awareness was much poorer in illiterates than
a literate control group (Morais, Cary, Alegria, & Bertelson,
1979).
Yet, there is evidence to suggest that phoneme awareness,
though a reduced ability, is present in children and adults
who have not yet learned to read. The illiterate adults in
Morais et al.’s (1979) study were poorer but could still
perform the task to a certain degree. Hulme, Caravolas,
Málková, and Brigstocke (in press) showed that the child’s
awareness of a particular phoneme did not depend on
knowing the letter corresponding to that sound, as the child
could isolate /p/ from the spoken nonword “pag”, without
being able to identify and name the letter “p”. Also, some of
the children in the study could not name any letters and yet
could isolate some of the phonemes from spoken words.
Durgunoglu and Oney (1999) found that pre-literate Turkish
children could tap out the phonemes in a word to a high
degree of accuracy. So, it seems that, while learning to read
may speed up and motivate phoneme awareness, some
ability to manipulate phonemes is present in pre-literate
children and adults (Hulme et al., in press).
So, why is there this progression from large to small units
in the child’s development? Turkish children develop

1531

phoneme awareness relatively earlier than children learning
some other languages, and Durgunuglu and Oney (2002)
suggest this is because morphological properties of the
language are realized at the phoneme level, such as vowel
harmony for pluralisation, thus requiring a phoneme level
representation. Similarly, Caravolas and Bruck (1993)
discovered that Czech children found isolating phonemes in
consonant clusters easier than English children. They
suggested this was due to Czech children being more aware
of phonemes within consonant clusters due to the greater
number of consonant clusters in Czech.
Ziegler and Goswami (2005) performed a corpus study of
English, German, French, and Dutch, all languages where
the onset/rime distinction can be made by children. They
found that there were more neighbours for syllables (“cow”)
when the onset and rime were distinguished (“c”, “ow”)
than when neighbours for the onset-vowel and coda were
determined (“co”, “w”). They suggested that this
neighbourhood property would encourage representation at
the onset/rime division, in contrast to an onset-vowel/coda
division.
An alternative view is that as the child’s vocabulary
grows, the distinctions the child must make between words
in the lexicon are more fine-grained as the neighbourhood of
a particular word becomes more dense. So, the child must
learn to represent subsyllabic properties of the word in order
to identify it correctly (Charles-Luce & Luce, 1995; Walley,
1993).
In this paper we take a rational analysis approach to the
development of levels of language representation, and
provide a complementary explanation for the development
of levels of language processing. We assume that an
efficient representation of the language is one that is most
likely to be used by the child. We employ a minimum
description length (MDL) approach to determine the level of
representation that is most efficient for encoding the
language after different quantities of exposure to the
language.
We focus on levels of language representation
determinable in a corpus of child-directed speech, with the
utterance as the largest unit, then the word, the syllable, and
then sub-syllabic levels of onset/rhyme, and the phoneme as
the smallest unit we consider here. We provide three tests of
the model. First, we explore which level of language
representation is most efficient for different exposure to the
language. Second, we report the efficiency of encoding new
syllables after different exposure to the language. Third, we
test the model’s predictions for the ease with which certain
phonemes can be isolated from syllables.
We next describe the MDL method as a means for
assessing efficient encoding at different levels of language
representation.

Minimum Description Length
We selected MDL as a method for reflecting the efficiency
of encoding language at different levels of granularity. The
MDL approach contends that the best theory to explain a set

of data is the one that minimizes the sum of (a) the length in
bits of the description of the theory; and (b) the length in
bits of the data when encoded with the theory (Rissanen,
1982). In the case of encoding a language, the MDL
approach measures the amount of information in bits
required to describe the language, given a particular level of
representation. For an inefficient level of representation for
the language, the amount of information required to describe
the language will be high, whereas for a more optimal level
of representation for the language, the number of bits in the
description will be lower.
As mentioned above there are two parts to the MDL
encoding. First, the theory of the language is implemented
as a list of the units used in the encoding. So, for a
phoneme-level encoding of the language corpus, all the
phoneme types that occur in the corpus are listed. For a
word-level encoding, the list comprises all the words in the
corpus. The cost in bits of describing each element is related
to the frequency of each element in the list. This provides a
lower-bound for the cost of encoding the list of units,
because the learner does not know the frequencies in
advance and hence cannot optimize the code to those
frequencies. Items in the list that occur very frequently can
be encoded more efficiently than items that occur
infrequently. For this measure, we used Shannon’s noiseless
coding theorem, where bi = log2(1/pi), where bi is cost in bits
for describing unit i, and pi is the probability of occurrence
of unit i. If the unit has high probability of occurrence, the
length in bits is short, but length is long if the probability of
a unit occurring is very low. Rare events have low
expectancy and so encoding of them cannot be as efficient
as common events.
The second part of the MDL encoding is the description
of the corpus. The cost in bits of this encoding is the number
of units in the corpus at the chosen level of representation.
So, for a phoneme-level description, it is the number of
phonemes in the corpus and for a word-level description, it
is the number of words in the corpus.
Encoding the language using large units, such as
utterances, results in a large cost for describing the list, as
each distinct utterance has to be encoded separately, and the
probability of occurrence of each utterance is low as there
are many unique utterances in a language corpus. However,
the cost for encoding the corpus is then very low, as the unit
size is large. Encoding using smaller units, such as
phonemes, results in a short list of high-frequency units, but
a larger cost in encoding the corpus as each utterance
contains several phonemes. An efficient level of description
therefore entails finding the optimal trade-off between
encoding both the list and the corpus.
MDL approaches have been widely used in language
processing research. Ellison (1992), for example, illustrated
how a MDL approach could result in the discovery of
phonotactic constraints in Turkish, Goldsmith (2001)
provided a MDL algorithm for discovering morphology, and
Grünwald (1994) showed how aspects of grammar could be
successfully inferred using a MDL algorithm. We assume

1532

Study 1: Encoding the whole language
Method
Corpus preparation All the sentences spoken by adults in
the English component of the CHILDES (MacWhinney,
2000) database were selected for the analysis. Sentences
were cross-classified with CELEX (Baayen, Pipenbrock, &
Gulikers, 1995) to gain phonological transcriptions for each
word. Several words were not found in the CELEX
database, and utterances containing these words were
omitted. This resulted in approximately 14.8 million
phonemes, in 5.6 million words, in 1.2 million utterances.
For the following analyses we used only the first 1 million
utterances from the corpus.
Corpus analysis We encoded the corpus at 5 levels of
representation: (1) the utterance level, where each utterance
was coded as one unit; (2) the word-level, where words
were separately coded; (3) the syllable-level, where
syllables were coded as separate units; (4) the onset/rimelevel, where the onset of each syllable was encoded
separately from the rime; and (5) the phoneme-level.
In order to test at different stages of language exposure,
we selected the first n utterances from the corpus and

Description Length (log)

that the child attempts to derive an encoding of the language
that is as efficient as possible, and will have available a
level of representation that minimizes the code length of the
description.
We made three predictions about the MDL approach.
First, we hypothesized that early in development, i.e., for a
small language corpus, larger units will be more efficient for
encoding the language than smaller units. This is because
the length of encoding the list of units will be small for both
utterance-level encoding as well as a phoneme-level
encoding as the diversity of utterances will not be very
great. However, the cost of encoding the language will be
smaller for the utterance-level as the number of units in the
corpus will be much smaller. Later in development, i.e., for
a large language corpus, representing the language in terms
of smaller units may be more efficient. This is because the
size of the list encoding will be substantially greater for
larger unit encoding because there will be many different
utterance types each with low probability of occurrence,
sufficient to counteract the smaller description length of the
corpus when using larger units. This hypothesis was tested
in Study 1. The second hypothesis was that encoding new
information at the syllable level would be most efficient
after small language exposure, whereas encoding at the
phoneme level would be more efficient after more exposure.
We tested this in Study 2. Finally, we hypothesized that
phoneme awareness would be easier for certain phonemes
and harder for others, and that the model’s predictions
should match a developmental profile. We tested the extent
to which the model could reflect this detailed data in Study
3.

Corpus Size (Utterances)

Figure 1. MDL of unigram encoding at 5 different
levels of granularity, for increasing corpus size.
assessed the description length of this fragment of the
corpus for each of the 5 levels of representation.

Results and discussion
The results for corpus sizes 1000, 10000, 100000, and 1
million utterances are shown in Figure 1. For the smallest
corpus, describing the language at the word level is most
efficient, with decreasing efficiency as unit size becomes
smaller. The word level is also more efficient than the
utterance level, which had approximately the same
efficiency as the syllable level encoding. As corpus size
increases, the word level representation remains the most
efficient encoding, and the same ordering of efficiency is
found for decreasing unit sizes: syllables are more efficient
than onset/rime which is more efficient than phoneme level
representations. However, the largest unit size considered –
that of the utterance – becomes less efficient as the corpus
increases, until at 1 million utterances, it is less efficient
than both the syllable and the onset/rime encodings.
The results did not support our hypotheses about levels of
encoding and length of exposure to the language. We did
find that large units were more efficient for smaller corpora,
but, with the exception of the utterance level, this pattern
did not alter as corpus size increased. The benefit of
describing a small list of distinct phonemes did not override
the extra length required to describe the corpus at the
phoneme level.
Yet, describing the whole language may not be the most
important task facing the child learning the language.
Instead, efficiently encoding novel language information
may be a processing priority. The next Study explores
which level of encoding is most efficient for adding new
words to the language.

Study 2: Encoding new language information
Method
Corpus preparation We used the same corpus as for Study
1.

1533

Materials We took 20 single-syllable nonwords used in
Study 2 of Hulme et al. (in press), used to test phoneme
awareness in children. There were 10 sets of 2 syllables
beginning with each of the phonemes /p/, /b/, /d/, /f/, /l/, /m/,
/n/, /p/, /t/, /v/, and /z/.

Description Length (log)

Corpus analysis We encoded the language at each of the
five levels of representation as in Study 1, for varying
corpus sizes. After encoding the language corpus, we
measured the efficiency of encoding each of the 20
nonwords given the encoding at each level of representation.

low expectancy in the utterance, word and syllable level
representations, as it is an entirely novel item. For the
onset/rime and phoneme level representations, however, the
encoding can exploit the prior occurrence of tokens of
elements of the word in the corpus. So, for the word “pag”,
/p/ and / / have occurred as onsets and rimes in the corpus
many times, so do not need to be added to the description of
the onset/rime encoding. Similarly, /p/, / /, and / / occur in
the phoneme level description so require no additional
description length in the theory.
The MDL approach to reflecting efficiency of language
encoding at different levels of representation raises specific
hypotheses about which phonemes children should find
easiest and hardest to extract from syllables. Phonemes that
are more frequent, and syllables that are less frequent,
should provide the best chance for a phoneme level
representation to be optimal. Phonemes that are less
frequent, and syllables that are highly frequent will reduce
the effectiveness of smaller unit size encoding. The next
Study tests this prediction.

Study 3: Phoneme awareness for different
phonemes
Method

Corpus Size (Utterances)

Corpus analysis We used the same corpus as for Study 1.

Figure 2. Cost of encoding new words (nonwords) after
different exposure to the language at 5 different levels of
granularity.

Materials We used the 20 single-syllable nonwords from
Hulme et al. (in press).

Results and discussion
The results for 1000, 10000, 100000, and 1 million
utterances taken from the corpus are shown in Figure 2. For
the smallest corpus size, encoding the new information at
the utterance level is most efficient, followed by the word
level, then the syllable level, and then the phoneme level.
Surprisingly, the onset/rime encoding is least efficient for
this corpus size. The results support the hypothesis that,
when exposure to the language is limited, encoding at a
large unit size is most efficient.
As the corpus size increases, the efficiency of encoding
new information at larger unit sizes becomes less efficient.
After 10000 utterances, the word and syllable levels are
equivalent to the phoneme level representation for
efficiency, though the utterance level is most efficient. For
the 100000 utterance corpus, the phoneme level becomes
the most efficient, with the onset/rime level also more
efficient than the word and syllable level representations.
For the largest corpus, the phoneme level representation is
the most efficient encoding.
The results fit the hypothesis extremely closely. For a
small corpus, the small list of the large unit encoding meant
that a new word added to the language presents only a small
cost for encoding the new information at the same level.
However, for a large corpus, the novel stimulus has very

Procedure We reanalyzed the child data from Hulme et al.
to determine the order in which children could isolate
particular phonemes from syllables. So, if the child could
isolate only one phoneme then this was recorded as the first
phoneme learned. If the child could isolate two phonemes
then these were recorded as the first two phonemes. Across
the 77 children from the study, we determined whether there
was a consistent order of isolating phonemes.
For the model data, we rated which syllables were most
efficiently encoded at the phoneme level, and produced a
rank to predict the order in which phonemes would be
isolated, assuming that the phonemes learned earliest would
be those that were most efficiently encoded at the phoneme
level.

Results and discussion
We generated an order of acquisition of phoneme awareness
for the phonemes. This was achieved by assessing for each
child the phonemes that they managed to produce and those
that they did not. We found that this was consistent for
every child, and an order of acquisition was determined:
/b/ /d/ < /n/ < /l/ /t/ < /f/ /p/ < /m/ /v/ < /z/
where “x < y” indicates that for every child phoneme
awareness for phoneme x is acquired before phoneme y.

1534

When two phonemes occur together, as for /b/ and /d/ this
means that the data did not determine for which of these
phonemes was phoneme awareness prior: all children either
isolated both /b/ and /d/, or neither phoneme.
For the MDL data the likelihood of phoneme awareness
for a particular phoneme was taken to be the advantage for
an encoding at the onset/rime level or the phoneme level
over the syllable level of analysis. The predicted order from
the onset/rime level encoding was:
/l/ < /n/ < /d/ < /b/ < /m/ < /f/ < /p/ < /v/ < /z/ < /t/
For the phoneme level encoding the predicted order was:
/n/ < /z/ < /d/ < /b/ < /l/ < /t/ < /m/ < /f/ < /v/ < /p/
The correlation between the order predicted by the
onset/rime level encoding and the children’s data was rho
=.417, p = .230. For the phoneme level encoding the
correlation was rho = .772, p = .021. For the syllable level,
each phoneme had equal cost of encoding as it comprised
part of an undivided syllable each of which had equal
probability of occurrence, and so equal code length. This
was also true for the word and utterance level
representations.
We also tested whether order of awareness of individual
phonemes was related purely to the frequency of phonemes.
This differed from the MDL phoneme level approach in
that, in the latter analysis, all phonemes in the nonword are
considered. For the phoneme frequency count, the predicted
order did not result in a significant correlation with the
children’s order, rho = .460, p = .181. The MDL phoneme
level encoding therefore provided the best fit to the
children’s data, accounting for 51% of the variance in
response.

General Discussion
Children develop awareness of the structure of their
language starting with larger units, such as words or
syllables, and gradually define smaller unit representations,
such as onsets/rimes and finally phonemes. There is
evidence that some phoneme awareness may occur prior to
literacy, and hence the child’s ability to manipulate
phonemes within words is not entirely due to learning to
read. This paper attempted to address the issue of why the
development occurs from large to small representational
units. We have shown that a model that takes into account
the efficiency of encoding at different levels of
representation mimics this development for the learning of
new material. This developmental pattern in the MDL
analyses was due to the length of exposure to the language.
For small corpora, larger chunks are more efficient, whereas
for large corpora, finer-grained distinctions begin to pay off,
despite the cost of counting several elements within a single
syllable.
The MDL analyses are not inconsistent with other
theories about why phoneme awareness develops later in
children, and why it may occur at different times for
different languages (Caravolas & Bruck, 1993; Ziegler &
Goswami, 2005). Our analyses provide a mechanism for

determining the efficiency of encoding at different levels,
and consequently provide predictions for the ease of
processing of different speech stimuli for children.
In particular, the MDL analyses generated the prediction
that certain phonemes would be more easily isolable from
syllables than others, and that this depended not only on the
frequency of the phoneme to be isolated but also the
frequency of the other phonemes within the syllable. The
reanalysis of 77 children’s data indicated that there was a
clear pattern of development for which phonemes could be
isolated, and that this pattern was best accounted for by the
MDL analysis with encoding at the phoneme level.
There were points where our hypotheses were not
supported. Our first hypothesis was that encoding the whole
language that the child experiences is most efficiently
accomplished by small unit representations after extended
exposure. This was not found to be the case in the results of
Study 1, where the phoneme level representation was the
least efficient, due to the length of the entire corpus when
encoded as a list of phoneme tokens. Encoding this list at a
word level provided the most efficient and effective, which
is consonant with Zipf’s assessments of natural language
(Zipf, 1935).
The current analyses treat each unit size as equal in terms
of its cost for encoding. A more realistic assumption is that
larger units require more bits for encoding. An analysis that
takes this differential cost related to unit size may produce
results that more closely map onto the child’s development.
Another improvement to the MDL analyses we have
presented would be to take account of multiple,
simultaneous levels of representation of language that the
child presumably possesses. Discovering structure at the
phoneme level does not preclude using structure at other
levels of description, and combining levels is likely to
provide the most efficient encoding. Certain words are
therefore better encoded as words, but others, particularly
novel words as seen in Study 2, are better encoded at a
subsyllabic level. Gobet, Lane, Croker, Cheng, Jones,
Oliver, and Pine (2001) have undertaken modeling using
such principles of multiple representational levels in
language acquisition.
In addition, we have ignored the possibility that each
level of language representation is equally available as a
possible level of encoding of the language. Yet, variation in
the acoustic-phonetic realization of individual phonemes
may make an important contribution to the availability of
this level (McClelland, 2004), and contribute to the
development of phoneme-awareness skills. The results of
the analyses are an indication of how much specific child
development data can be modeled without referring to such
additional factors.
We have provided a first attempt at a computational
account of development of awareness of structure at
different levels of granularity of representation. The
progression from large units to small units in the child’s
awareness of their language is mirrored in the MDL
approach. Critical in the account of this progression is that

1535

the levels of representation available to the child are a
consequence of whether the level provides an efficient level
of encoding of the language. The MDL analyses we
performed were on up to 1 million words, which is an
underestimate of the quantity of language a child may hear –
the MDL approach operates in a noise-free environment and
is an optimal learner which is likely not the case for the
child. It is the general pattern of development, and not
precisely when it occurs, that is important. However, the
model we have presented predicts that limited exposure to
speech will result in poorer phoneme awareness skills – a
potential contributory factor to phonological ability, and
hence reading ability, in children.

References
Anthony, J.L., Lonigan, C.J., Driscoll, K., Phillips, B.M., &
Burgess, S.R. (2003). Phonological sensitivity: A quasiparallel progression of word structure units and cognitive
operations. Reading Research Quarterly, 38, 470-487.
Baayen, R.H., Pipenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.
Brent, M.R. & Cartwright, T.A. (1996). Distributional
regularity and phonotactic constraints are useful for
segmentation. Cognition, 61, 93-125.
Bruce, D.J. (1964). The analysis of word sounds. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 34, 158-170.
Caravolas, M. & Bruck, M. (1993). The effect of oral and
written language input on children’s phonological
awareness: A cross-linguistic study. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 55, 1-30.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P.A. (1995). An examination of
similarity neighbourhoods in young children'
s receptive
vocabularies. Journal of Child Language, 22, 727-735.
Durgunoglu, A.Y. & Oney, B. (1999). A cross-linguistic
comparison of phonological awareness and word
recognition. Reading and Writing, 11, 281-299.
Durgunoglu, A.Y. & Oney, B. (2002). Phonological
awareness in literacy development: It’s not only for
children. Scientific Studies of Reading, 6, 245-266.
Ehri, L.C. & Wilce, L.S. (1980). The influence of
orthograph on readers’ conceptualization of the

Ellison, T.M. (1992). The Machine Learning of
Phonological Structure. Unpublished PhD thesis,
University of Western Australia.
Gobet, F., Lane, P.C.R., Croker, S., Cheng, P.C-H., Jones,
G., Oliver, I., & Pine, J.M. (2001). Chunking mechanisms
in human learning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 236243.
Goldsmith, J. (2001). Unsupervised learning of the
morphology of a natural language. Computational
Linguistics, 27, 153-189.
Goswami, U. and Bryant, P. (1990). Phonological Skills and
Learning to Read. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Grünwald, P. (1994). A minimum description length
approach to grammar inference. In G. Scheler, S.
Wermter, & E. Riloff (Eds.), Connectionist, Statistical and
Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language,
pp. 203-216. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Hulme, C. (2002). Phonemes, rimes and the mechanisms of
early reading development. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 82, 58-64.
Hulme, C., Caravolas, M., Málková, G., & Brigstocke, S.
(in press). Phoneme isolation ability is not simply a
consequence of letter-sound knowledge. Cognition.
Jusczyk, P.W., Cutler, A., & Redanz, N. (1993). Preference
for the predominant stress patterns of English words.
Child Development, 64, 675-687.
Liberman, I., Shankweiler, D., Fischer, F.W. and Carter, B.
(1974). Explicit syllable and phoneme segmentation in the
young child. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
18, 201-212.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
Analyzing Talk ,Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McClelland, J.L. (2004). Phonology without phonemes.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, p.29. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Morais, J., Cary, L., Alegria, J., & Bertelson, P. (1979).
Does awareness of speech as a sequence of phones arise
spontaneously? Cognition, 7, 323-331.
Muter, V., Hulme, C., Snowling, M.J., & Stevenson, J.
(2004).
Phonemes, rimes and language skills as
foundations of early reading development: Evidence from
a longitudinal study.
Developmental Psychology, 40,
665-681.
Rissanen, J. (1982). A universal prior for integers and
estimation by minimum description length. Annals of
Statistics, 11, 416-431.
Seymour, P.H.K. & Evans, H. (1994) Sources of constraint
and
individual
variations
in
normal
and
impaired spelling. In: G.D.A. Brown and N.C. Ellis (eds.),
Handbook of Spelling: Theory, Process and Intervention,
pp. 129-154. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical
Theory of Communication. Urbana IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Treiman, R. (1983). The structure of spoken syllables:
Evidence from novel word games. Cognition, 15, 49-74.
Tunmer, W.E. & Nesdale, A.R. (1985). Phonemic
segmentation skill and beginning reading. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 77, 417-427.
Walley, A. (1993). The role of vocabulary development in
children'
s spoken word recognition and segmentation
abilities. Developmental Review, 13, 286-350.
Ziegler, J.C. & Goswami, U.C. (2005). Reading acquisition,
developmental dyslexia and skilled reading across
languages: A psycholinguistic grain size theory.
Psychological Bulletin, in press.
Zipf, G.K. (1935). Psycho-Biology of Languages.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1536

