UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lexical Stress Effects in Italian Spoken Word Recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jq085s7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Tabossi, Patrizia
Tagliapietra, Lara

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lexical Stress Effects In Italian Spoken Word Recognition
Lara Tagliapietra (tagliapi@psico.units.it)
Department of Psychology, Via S. Anastasio 12
Trieste, Italy

Patrizia Tabossi (tabossi@units.it)
Department of Psychology, Via S. Anastasio 12
Trieste, Italy
Abstract

presented with a visual target (e.g., MUSIC) after a one
syllable long fragment. Responses were faster when the
prime’s stress matched the target word (e.g., mu from
music) than when it did not (e.g., mu from museum).
However, the mismatching prime produced faster responses
than the control prime. Facilitation in the mismatching
condition disappeared only when one-syllable long priming
fragments were replaced by two-syllable long fragments. In
Dutch, facilitation for a visual target (e.g., OKTOBER,
October) after one syllable long fragment was observed only
with a matching prime (e.g, ok from ok’tober, October), but
not after a mismatching one (e.g, ‘oc from ‘octopus,
octopus). Furthermore, after disyllabic fragments facilitation
in the matching condition as well as inhibition in the
mismatching condition have been recently reported (Van
Donselaar et. al., 2005). The only evidence in a Romance
language replicates the Dutch results with disyllabic primes
(Soto-Faraco, Sebastian-Galles & Cutler, 2001).
Somewhat less clear are results of associative priming
studies. Cutler (1986) reported that in English minimal pairs
such as forebear (N) and forbear (V) behave as
homophones, both facilitating the recognition of targets
associated to either meaning (e.g., ANCESTOR and
TOLERATE). On the contrary, in Dutch Donselaar et al.
(2005) obtained lexical stress effects using associative
priming. In this study, responses to a visual target (e.g.,
HEMEL, heaven) were facilitated, respect to the control,
when preceded by a fragment prime corresponding to the
initial part of an associate word (para from para’dijs,
paradise). Differently, responses were not facilitated when
the fragment was the initial part of a word differently
stressed (pa’ra from pa’rade, parade). However, facilitation
was clearly observed only when priming fragments (e.g.
kas’ta) uniquely identified a word (e.g., kastanjie).
Altogether, these findings suggest that English and Dutch
speakers are sensitive to lexical stress information from the
early stages of word recognition and are consistent with the
view that spoken word recognition involves competition
between the phonological representations of multiple
activated candidates. Phonological representations wholly or
partially matching the input are initially activated and
compete for recognition inhibiting each other. The
inhibitory process depends on the level of activation of the
phonological representation, which varies with the degree of
correspondence between the input and the phonological
representation and the number of the competing candidates.

Two cross-modal priming experiments tested whether Italian
listeners rely on lexical stress information in spoken word
recognition. In both experiments participants performed a
lexical decision task on visual targets; however in the trials
where there was a relation between prime and target, the
relation was one of identity in Experiment 1, whereas it was a
semantic association in Experiment 2. In Experiment 1, the
match condition (e.g., the prime ['go.mi] from gomito, elbow,
for the target GOMITO), produced facilitation relative to the
control condition, and the mismatch condition (e.g., the prime
[go.’mi] from gomitolo, clew, for the target GOMITO)
produced inhibition. In Experiment 2, responses were faster
in the related (e.g, the prime ['go.mi] from gomito, elbow, for
the target BRACCIO, arm) than in the control condition. This,
however, did not differ from the unrelated condition (e.g,
[go.’mi] from gomitolo, clew, for the target BRACCIO, arm).
The methodological and theoretical implications of the results
are discussed.

Introduction
In this study we investigated the role of lexical stress during
spoken word recognition in Italian. The paradigm typically
used in this line of work is the cross-modal priming
paradigm, which is assumed to tap the early phases of
lexical processing: participants have to perform a lexical
decision or naming task on a visual target that is preceded
by a spoken prime. Response times to the same target as a
function of the tests or the unrelated control primes are
measured (Swinney, Onifer, Prather, & Hirshkowitz, 1979).
In the spoken language literature, this paradigm is normally
associated with the lexical decision task that occurs in two
versions, depending upon the nature of the relation between
the test prime and the target: the identity and the associative
priming (Van Donselaar, Koster & Cutler, 2005). In the
former, the relation is one of identity (e.g., elbow and
ELBOW) 1, whereas in the latter it is a semantic association
(e.g., elbow and ARM).
Both techniques are employed in current research on the
effects of lexical stress in spoken language processing.
Identity priming studies showed that the paradigm is
sensitive to lexical stress effects. Cooper, Cutler and Wales
(2002) conducted a study in English. Participants were
1

Spoken primes are in italics, whereas visual targets are in capital
letters.

2140

One syllable fragments initially activate compatible lexical
candidates and stress information is used to advantage and
disadvantage candidates; however, only when the
competitor set is reduced candidates are activated enough to
exert a detectable inhibitory effect. Afterwards, only
strongly supported or winning candidates can activate and
facilitate the corresponding and associate conceptual
representations.
The available evidence also suggests that lexical stress
effects are modulated by listeners' sensitivity to this
information: English speakers showed weaker effects than
Dutch and Spanish speakers. As Cutler, Dahan and Van
Donselaar (1997) argued, the use of prosodic information in
speech processing can depend on how relevant a type of
information is in a given language. The presence of
segmental correlates to lexical stress can influence the
relevance of suprasegmental information for the listeners of
a language, decreasing the number of cases in which
listeners must rely on suprasegmental information to
discriminate words. Thus in English, where the opposition
between strong and weak syllables is reflected in the
opposition between full and reduced vowels, lexical effects
are weak. Dutch is prosodically similar to English, but differ
from it as long as unstressed syllables quite often contain a
full vowel; accordingly, in Dutch lexical stress effects are
stronger than in English. Contrary to English and Dutch,
Spanish does not show any interdependence between lexical
stress and segmental variations: there are 5 full vowels that
can occur both stressed and unstressed. Indeed, in Spanish
suprasegmental and segmental information showed similar
effects during spoken word recognition.
According to this interpretation, suprasegmental
information should be maximally exploited by listeners of
languages in which segmental information do not vary with
lexical stress and lexical stress effects should be quickly
reflected at the semantic level. So far, however, there is no
evidence for lexical stress effects with associative priming
in this kind of languages. We explored this hypothesis in
Italian. This, like Spanish, is a free-stress language and does
not show vowel reduction in unstressed syllables. Therefore,
Italian listeners are likely to rely on lexical stress
information to recognize words.
In Experiment 1 we used the cross-modal identity
priming, aiming at replicating in Italian evidence available
from Spanish. In Experiment 2 we tested whether stress
effects can obtain in Italian using the associative priming
paradigm.

stressed (e.g., [go.'mi] from gomitolo, clew). Finally, in the
control condition the bysillabic prime was the initial part of
a word with no relation with the target. If Italian listeners,
like Spanish listeners, rely on lexical stress information,
responses should be fastest in the match condition, next
faster in the control condition, and slowest in the mismatch
condition.

Method
Participants
Thirty native speakers of Italian either volunteered or
received credit course for their participation. All had normal
hearing and normal or correct-to-normal vision. None had
known language disorders.
Materials
Eighteen pairs of test words were selected. Words of a pair
were segmentally and structurally identical up to the first
phoneme of the third syllable, but differed for the position
of the lexical stress (e.g., gomito, ['go.mi.to] --elbow-- and
gomitolo [go.'mi.to.lo] --clew). Three pairs had one member
with the first syllable stressed and the other with the second
syllable stressed (e.g., gomito and gomitolo), whereas the
remaining 15 pairs had one member with the second
syllable stressed and the other with the third syllable
stressed (e.g., reciproco [re.'ci.pro.co] -- mutual -- and
recipiente [re.ci.'pien.te] -- container). Members of a pair
had neither morphological nor semantic relation. None of
the test words either was a compound or have a prefix;
moreover, their first two syllables never corresponded to an
Italian word. Test words were three or four syllable long
and their mean frequency was 20,83 (SD = 31,32; Istituto di
Linguistica Computazionale, 1988). All the test words were
employed both as primes and as targets. For example, for
the visual target GOMITO the prime in the match condition
was gomi ['go.mi] extracted from gomito and in the
mismatching condition was [go.'mi] extracted from
gomitolo, whereas for the target GOMITOLO primes in the
match and mismatch condition were inverted.
For each test pair a control word was also selected.
Controls had no phonological overlap with the members of
the corresponding pair; they were balanced for syllable
length, lexical stress and frequency (on average 15.33, SD =
22.41).
For each of the resulting eighteen triplets a semantically
and syntactically no constraining sentence was constructed
(e.g., la nipotina scrisse la parola…, the little nice wrote the
word…). Members of the triplets always appeared at the end
of the sentence.
Further 60 words were selected to use as prime fillers.
They were balanced to the experimental words for lexical
stress position and syllabic structure and length. Twelve
were coupled to target words that had no segmental overlap
with them. For each of the other 48 prime fillers a
phonotactically legal pseudo-word was constructed to
appear as visual target; half of them had a phonological

Experiment 1
Listeners were asked to perform a lexical decision task on a
visual target (e.g., GOMITO, elbow) immediately preceded
by a bisyllabic spoken prime. In the match condition, the
fragment prime was the first two syllable of the same word
(e.g., ['go.mi] from gomito, elbow). In the mismatch
condition, the prime was segmentally identical; however the
two syllables were the initial part of a word differently
2141

overlap with the coupled prime, whereas the other 24 did
not.
Finally 12 practice sentences were created with the same
criteria of experimental materials.
Sentences were recorded directly onto the hard disk of a
Macintosh Computer by a female native speaker of Italian.
Recordings were digitized at 22.05 kHz and each sentence
was saved in an individual audio file. Sentences were cut at
the end of the second syllable of the prime using the
SoundEdit 16 v2.0.7 software.
Three experimental lists were compiled; all contained all
the test and the filler words. However, if a target occurred in
the related condition in one list, it occurred in the unrelated
condition in the second list and in the control condition in
the third. Each list was divided into two blocks of 48
sentences each. Between blocks, number of fillers and
experimental sentences in each condition were balanced.
Trials were presented in a semi-randomized order with the
constraint that there were at least 3 fillers at the beginning
of each block and there were no more than 3 equal correct
responses in a line.

control (F1(1, 29) = 65.86, p < .001; F2(1, 33) = 45.99, p <
.001) condition. Responses in the mismatch condition were
slower than in the match condition (F1(1, 29) = 71.46, p <
.001; F2(1, 33) = 71.86, p < .001), but they did not
statistically differed from those of the control condition (p
=.33).
Responses were reliably faster in the match than in the
mismatch condition, suggesting that Italian listeners employ
lexical stress information during spoken word recognition.
However, the data failed to replicate the inhibitory effect
observed in Spanish in the mismatch condition (Soto-Faraco
et al., 2001).
Perhaps inhibitory effects can be observed only when the
lexical candidates compatible with the fragment prime are
few, and hence activated enough to exert a detectable effect.
To test this hypothesis we re-analyzed the data taking into
account the presence of a competitor set in the mismatching
condition. Competitor set was added as a within factor in
the participants' analysis, and a between factor in the item
analysis. The mean latencies of correct responses in the
experimental conditions are shown in Figure 1.
In the latencies analyses both the main effect of prime
type (F1(2, 58) = 31.59, p < .001; F2(2, 64) = 29.23, p <
.001) and the interaction (F1(2, 58) = 3.21, p < .05; F2(2, 64)
= 3.09, p = .05) were significant. The main effect of
competitor set was significant only in the analysis by
participant (F1(1, 29) = 5.36, p < .03). Planned comparisons
revealed that in the absence of a set of competitor responses
were faster in the match than in the control condition (F1(1,
29) = 25.72, p < .001; F2(1, 32) = 25.42, p < .001), which in
turn were faster than in the mismatching condition (F1(1,
29) = 6.06, p < .02; F2(1, 32) = 4.53, p < .05). In contrast,
in the presence of a set of competitor, responses were faster
in the match than in both the control (F1(1, 29) = 20.65, p <
.001; F2(1, 32) = 21.20, p < .001) and the mismatch (F1(1,
29) = 21.92, p < .001; F2(1, 32) = 12.47, p < .001)
conditions, which did not differ from each other.
We detected an inhibitory effect when the mismatching
prime uniquely identified a word.

Procedure and Design
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room.
Psyscope 1.2 experiment control software performed
stimulus presentation, timing and data collection. Sentences
were presented with an inter-trial interval of 1.5 s. Visual
targets were presented at the offset of the prime and last
either for 1.5 s or till participants press a key of the buttonbox. The timer recording reaction times started at target
onset and either stopped when participants pressed a key of
the button box or reset automatically after 1.5 s.
Participants were instructed to listen to the sentences and
to decide whether the target was an Italian word or not.
After receiving the practice trials, each participant was
presented with one list. Overall, the experiment lasted about
20 minutes. An equal number of participants were randomly
assigned to one of the lists. Block order was balanced across
participants. There was one independent variable: the
relation between priming fragment and target (match,
mismatch and control).

Results and Discussion
Two items – colombiano, columbian, and matriciana,
amatriciana -- had an error rate higher than 50% and were
discarded from all the following analyses. Response times
over or below two standard deviations from participants’
mean response latencies were treated as errors and also
excluded from analyses. The overall percentage of errors,
including wrong responses, misses and outliers, was 4.32%.
Response times and errors were submitted to ANOVAs
by participants (F1) and items (F2), where the main within
factor was prime type. Latencies analysis showed a
significant main effect of prime type (F1(2, 58) = 43.45, p <
.001; F2(2, 66) = 33.16, p < .001). Planned contrast showed
that participants responded faster in the match respect to the

Figure 1: Experiment 1 participants’ mean latencies (ms)
and Standard Errors in different experimental conditions.
2142

Results and Discussion

Italian listeners showed to rely on lexical stress
information during spoken word recognition. Results from
the identity priming replicated those obtained in Spanish
and Dutch. Experiment 2 was devised to investigate whether
in Italian lexical stress effects can be detected with the
associative priming.

Mean latencies of correct responses in the experimental
conditions are displayed in Figure 2.
Three items – cappuccio, hood, cappuccino, cappuccino,
matriciana, amatriciana - and RTs above and below two
standard deviations from participants' means were excluded
from analyses. The overall percentage of errors (including
false alarms, misses, and outliers) was 2.11%.
Response times and errors were submitted to ANOVAs
by participants (F1) and items (F2), where the main within
factor was prime type. The main effect of prime type was
reliable (F1(2, 52) = 4.09, p < .03; F2(2, 64) = 3.16, p < .05).
Planned comparisons showed faster responses in the related
than in the unrelated (F1(1, 52) = 4.08, p < .05; F2(1, 64) =
3.61, p = .06) and the control (F1(1, 52) = 7.66, p < .01;
F2(1, 64) = 5.64, p < .03) condition. These did not differ
from each other.

Experiment 2
Listeners were asked to perform a lexical decision task on a
visual target (e.g., BRACCIO, arm) immediately preceded
by a bisyllabic spoken prime. In the related condition, the
fragment prime was the first two syllable of a word
associatively related to the target (e.g., ['go.mi] from
gomito, elbow). In the unrelated condition, the prime was
segmentally identical, however the two syllables were the
initial part of a word differently stressed (e.g., [go.'mi] from
gomitolo, clew). Finally, in the control condition the
bysillabic prime was the initial part of words with no
relation to the target. If Italian listeners rely on lexical stress
information we expect faster responses in the related
condition than in the unrelated or the control condition. As
neither the unrelated nor the control primes have any
semantic relation with the target, we expect no difference
between them, and no inhibitory effect is predicted.

Method
Participants
Twenty-seven Italian native speakers, from the University
of Trieste either volunteered or received credit course for
their participation. They all had normal hearing and normal
or corrected-to-normal vision; none had known language
disorders. Finally, none had participated in the previous
experiment.

Figure 2: Experiment 2 participants’ mean latencies (ms)
and Standard Errors in different experimental conditions.
As predicted, Italian listeners rely on lexical stress to
constrain lexical hypotheses during spoken word
recognition, and associative priming is as sensitive to this
effects as identity priming.

Materials
We employed the same pairs of test and control words as in
the previous experiment.
For each test word an associate was selected to appear as
visual target. Targets' frequency was 229 (SD = 862) on
average (Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, 1988). The
appropriateness of targets was tested in an intra-visual
priming experiment (t1(11)= -4.02 , p < .01; t2(35)= -3.22 , p
< .01).
Filler materials and practice were modified in agreement
with the experimental materials. The same recordings of
Experiment 1 were used.
Three lists were created, divided in two blocks and semirandomized as in the previous experiment.

General Discussion
Two cross-modal priming experiments tested whether
Italian listeners rely on lexical stress during spoken word
recognition. Experiment 1 showed both the facilitatory
effects of matching information and the inhibitory effects of
mismatching information. In Experiment 2, prime fragments
facilitated responses only insofar as they matched both
segmentally and supra-segmentally the beginnings of the
words associated to the targets.
Theoretically, the findings are compatible with
competition-based models of spoken word recognition.
Initially many compatible candidates are activated and
compete with each other for recognition. Among many
competitors none can effectively inhibit the others. When
the fragment drastically restricts the set of candidates, these
can produce detectable inhibitory effects (Van Donselaar et
al., 2005). Lexical candidates feed activation to the

Procedure and Design
Procedure was the same as in experiment 1. There was one
independent variable: prime type (related, unrelated and
control).

2143

corresponding (and then facilitate the associated)
representations at the conceptual level.
Altogether, the findings indicate that Italian listeners
profitably rely on lexical stress during spoken word
recognition and both identity and associative priming show
these effects. Associative priming captures selective
activation at the conceptual level regardless to whether the
information that constraint the process of lexical activation
is contextual, lexical, segmental or prosodic in nature
(Tabossi, 1996). As in the present study, the fragment
version of this technique (Zwitserlood, 1898) showed to be
sensitive to segmental as well as prosodic information
(Tabossi, Collina, Mazzetti & Zoppello, 2000; Zwitserlood
& Schriefers, 1995). Evidently, the failure to observe stress
effects with the associative priming in English and Dutch
does not reflect so much the lack of sensitivity of the
paradigm to stress effects as the relatively little use of stress
information made by listeners of those languages compared
to speakers of Italian, and presumably other similar
languages.
In conclusion, lexical stress is a useful source of
information in spoken word recognition. However, listeners
of different languages take advantage of this information to
different degrees. Italian listeners exploit it quickly to
discern both the form and the meaning of the incoming
speech.

References
Cooper, N., Cutler, A., & Wales, R. (2002). Constraints of
lexical stress on lexical access in English: Evidence from
native and non-native listeners. Language and Speech, 45
(3), 207-228.
Cutler, A., (1986). Forbear is a homophone: Lexical
prosody does not constrain lexical access. Language and
Speech, 29, 201-220.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & Donselaar W., Van (1997).
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language: A
literature review. Language and Speech, 40, 141-201.
Donselaar, W., Van, Koster, M., & Cutler, A. (2005, in
press). Exploring the role of lexical stress in lexical
recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale (1988). Corpus di
Italiano Contemporaneo [Corpus of Contemporary
Italian]. Unpublished manuscript.
Soto-Faraco, S., Sebastian-Galles, N., & Cutler, A. (2001).
Segmental and suprasegmental mismatch in lexical
access. Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 412-432.
Swinney, D.A., Onifer, M., Prather, P., & Hirshkowitz, M.
(1979). Semantic facilitation across sensory modalities:
Evidence for strategic and automatic factors. Memory and
Cognition, 7, 159-165.
Tabossi, P. (1996). Cross-modal semantic priming.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 11, 569–576.
Tabossi, P., Collina, S., Mazzetti, M., & Zoppello, M.
(2000). Syllables in the processing of spoken Italian.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception
and Performance, 26, 758-775.
Zwitserlood, P. (1989). The locus of the effects of
sentential-semantic context in spoken-word processing.
Cognition, 32, 25–64.
Zwitserlood, P., & Schriefers, H. (1995). Effects of sensory
information and processing time in spoken-word
recognition. Language and Cognitive Processes, 10, 121–
136.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grants Ministero
dell’Università e della Ricerca Scientifica ex 40% and
Fondo Regione Friuli Venezia-Giulia.

2144

