UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Simulation in Spatial Language Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fn5t33s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Bergen, Benjamin K.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Simulation in Spatial Language Processing
Benjamin Bergen (Bergen@Hawaii.Edu)
Department of Linguistics, 569 Moore Hall, 1890 East-West Rd.
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA

Recently, imagery has begun to surface in the study of
how meaning is accessed during language processing. If
imagery is of critical importance in other cognitive
operations that involve conceptual categories and
performing inferences about them, then there's good reason
to think, as suggested by a number of researchers (Lakoff
1987, Langacker 1987), that it may well play a part in
linguistic communication as well.
Indeed, three scholarly traditions have recently converged
on the notion that language understanding critically engages
mental imagery, or mental simulation. Theoretical work in
the cognitive linguistics tradition has long emphasized the
importance of access to embodied representations of the
world in the use and representation of language (e.g. Lakoff
1987). Research in cognitive psychology from an embodied
perspective has similarly repeatedly pointed out the
importance of low-level perceptual and motor processes in
higher level cognitive functions like language (Barsalou
1999a, Glenberg & Robertson 2000). And research on
mental models in narrative comprehension have emphasized
the role of detailed perceptual and motor knowledge in the
construction of mental representations of scenes described
through language (Zwaan 1999). The product of this
convergence of views is a number of lines of empirical and
theoretical work arguing that understanding language leads
to the automatic and unconscious activation of mental
imagery corresponding to the content of the utterance. This
imagery may be motor or perceptual in nature, and may lead
to interference with actually performing actions or
perceiving percepts in the world simultaneously in some
experimental setups, or may lead to the facilitatory priming
of such behaviors in others, as discussed below.
This paper focuses on visual imagery, providing empirical
evidence that language processing drives detailed perceptual
images of described entities and their attributes. It advances
the study of language-induced mental simulation in three
ways. First, it demonstrates that mental imagery can be
evoked by either subject nouns or main verbs in sentence
stimuli. Second, it shows that while literal language about
motion results in spatial imagery, the same is not true for
metaphorical language, which implies that it isn't just lexical
associations but rather the construction of a model of the
whole sentence's meaning that drives simulation. And third,
it shows that spatial imagery is specific to the direction of
motion - up or down - and not just the axis of motion, as
previously demonstrated (Richardson et al. 2003). On the
basis of these results, it argues for a view of lexical and
sentential meaning in which words pair phonological form
with specifications for imagery to be performed, and larger

Abstract
There is mounting evidence that language comprehension
involves the activation of mental simulations (Barsalou
1999a) of the content of utterances (Barsalou 1999b, Stanfield
and Zwaan 2001, Zwaan et al. 2002, Richardson et al. 2003,
Bergen et al. 2003, Narayanan et al. 2004, Bergen et al.
2004). These simulations can have motor or perceptual
content. Three main questions about the process remain
unexplored, however. First, are lexical associations with
perception or motion sufficient to yield mental simulation, or
is the integration of lexical semantics into larger structures,
like sentences, necessary? Second, what linguistic elements,
e.g. verbs, nouns, etc., can trigger mental simulations? And
third, how detailed are the visual simulations being
performed? This paper presents findings pertaining to each of
these questions, using a visual object categorization task that
investigated whether up- or down-related language selectively
interferes with visual processing in the same part of the visual
field (following Richardson et al 2003). Specifically, it finds
that either subject nouns or main verbs can trigger visual
imagery, but only when used in literal sentences about real
space - metaphorical language does not yield significant
effects. This imagery is detailed as to the part of the visual
field where the described scene would take place.
Keywords: Mental simulation, visual imagery, sentence
processing, embodiment, metaphor

Introduction
"thought is impossible without an image."
-Aristotle, On Memory and Recollection
From the earliest records forward, and with few exceptions,
western reflections on the mind have assigned a critical
place to imagery, the internally driven mental creation or
recreation of world experiences. While certain paradigms of
the second half of the twentieth century, notably symbolic
cognitive science and artificial intelligence, have deemphasized mental imagery, the past several decades have
seen a steady increase in both the intensity of scientific
investigation on imagery and the range of cognitive
phenomena it has been shown to take part in. The recurrent
finding from empirical studies using a variety of methods is
that humans automatically and unconsciously engage
perceptual and motor imagery when performing a broad
range of cognitive tasks, like recall (Nyberg 2001) and
categorization (Barsalou 1999a). The benefit of conscripting
imagery for these tasks is clear - imagery provides a
modality-specific, continuous representation, well suited for
comparing with perceptual input or performing inference.

232

utterances compose these imagery specifications to drive a
mental simulation of the content of the utterance.

predicted effect is interference between language-induced
imagery and visual perception in the same place in the
visual field, while in other methods (e.g. Glenberg &
Kaschak 2002, Zwaan et al. 2002), facilitation is used to
argue for mental simulation. The main difference, as argued
by Kaschak et al (To Appear), is that interference occurs
when the two tasks require simultaneous use of the same
motor or perceptual resources, but when they are used with
a sufficient intervening temporal interval, facilitation is
observed (though see a critical discussion in Bergen 2005).
Subjects were presented with sentences that denoted
upwards or downwards movement (2) - no English verbs
denote uniquely rightwards or leftwards motion. In order to
reduce the range of possible linguistic factors on the
resulting imagery, only intransitive sentences (sentences
with just a subject noun phrase and a main verb) were used.
In constructing these sentences all the subject nouns in the
two types of sentence (up and down) were normed to be
equally unassociated with up or down locations, to be
equally meaningful, and to have as equal reading times as
possible.

Experiment 1: Verbs
When processing language, understanders activate imagery
pertaining to the direction of motion (Glenberg & Kaschak
2002, Kaschak et al. To Appear), shape (Stanfield & Zwaan
2001), and orientation (Zwaan et al. 2002) of described
objects, the rate of (fictive) motion (Matlock In Press), the
effector (Bergen et al. 2003, 2004) and handshape (Bergen
& Wheeler 2005) used to perform an action, and the axis
(horizontal vs. vertical) along which action takes place
(Richardson et al. 2003, Lindsay 2003).
We take up this last element of mental simulation in this
study. In seminal work, Richardson et al (2003) took verbs,
associated with verticality or horizontality that were
concrete or abstract, and placed them in sentences (as in 1).
These were presented to subjects in the interest of
ascertaining whether they would induce interference effects
on the categorization of visual objects (shapes) that were
presented on the screen in locations that overlapped with the
sentences' implied orientation. After seeing a fixation cross
for 1 second, subjects heard a sentence, then, after a brief
pause (randomly selected for each trial from among 50, 100,
150, or 200ms), they saw a visual object that was either a
circle or a square, positioned in one of the four quadrants of
the screen (right, left, top, or bottom). Their task was to
press a button indicating the identity of the object ('circle'
and 'square') as quickly as possible.
(1)

a.
b.
c.
d.

(2)

a. UP: The mule climbed
b. DOWN: The chair toppled

65 native speakers of English participated in exchange for
course credit in an introductory linguistics class at the
University of Hawaii. Each trial began with a fixation cross
for 1000msec. The subject then heard a sentence over
headphones. After an ISI of 150ms from the end of the
sentence, a circle or a square appeared in the top, bottom,
left or right quadrant of the screen for 200msec. All objects
appeared the same distance from the fixation cross at the
center of the screen, along a central axis (e.g. objects in the
upper quadrant appeared directly over the fixation cross).
Subjects identified the shape as quickly as possible with a
button press - 'z' indicated circle and 'x' indicated square.
Their reaction time was the dependent variable. To ensure
that subjects attended to the meaning of the sentences, filler
sentences followed by a short yes/no comprehension
question were randomly interspersed. In critical trials, the
object appeared in the upper or lower quadrant. As many
up- and down-related sentences were followed by an object
on left or right - these were taken from the sentences
discarded through the norming study.
English has a very small number of intransitive verbs of
upwards or downwards motion, and the norming study
determined that only five verbs in each condition were
viable. As a result, the entire list of sentences was presented
twice to each subject, making the object location (up or
down) a within-items factor.
This study thus differed in design from that of Richardson
et al (2003) in two critical ways. First, only intransitive
sentences were used, rather than a combination of sentenecs
with varied postverbal objects. This allows us to more
tightly determine what the linguistic sources of imagery are.
Second, the upwards and downwards directions are pulled

CONCRETE HORIZ: The miner pushes the cart.
CONCRETE VERT: The plane bombs the city.
ABSTR HORIZ: The husband argues with the wife.
ABSTR VERT: The storeowner increases the price.

The results were indicative of a clear interference effect subjects took longer to categorize objects on the vertical
axis when they followed vertical sentences than horizontal
sentences, and vice versa for objects on the horizontal axis.
Three relevant questions present themselves on the basis
of this work. First, how detailed are the visual simulations
being performed? Second, what linguistic elements, e.g.
verbs, nouns, etc., can trigger mental simulations? And
third, are mental simulations performed during
comprehension of language that does not have strict
perceptual or motor content, like metaphorical language?
This first experiment addresses the first of these questions.

Method
In order to test the detail with which language understanders
automatically perform visual imagery when processing
sentences about up or down motion, we built on the
methodology pioneered by Richardson et al. (2003). This
work is based on the very old observation (Perky 1910) that
visual imagery can interfere with simultaneous visual
perception, presumably because the two activities make use
of overlapping neural resources. The reasoning goes that if
spatial language results in visual imagery, then it, too,
should interfere with visual perception. Notice that the
233

apart in this study, rather than being conflated as in the
previous work. This will tell us whether visual imagery in
fact includes more spatial detail than just the axis of motion.

The second pertains to how specific the imagery
associated with these sentences is. While it is known
(Richardson et al. 2003) that the axis of motion of a
sentence is accessed during language processing, the current
study provides the first evidence that the spatial grain of
visual imagery is in fact finer than this. Sentences denoting
upwards and downwards motion selectively interfered with
categorizing objects in the same part of the visual field,
which indicates that motion imagery in response to these
sentences is specific to the quadrant in which the content of
the utterance would take place, not just the axis.
The effect we observed here was especially strong for
sentences denoting upwards motion. Why might it be up
sentences and not down sentences that show this effect? One
plausible explanation relies on the differences in likelihood
of the two types of events described. Because we live in a
gravitic environment, objects tend to move downwards
when there is no force observed to act on then. By contrast,
fewer objects move upwards without force overtly exerted
on them. Since external-agentless upwards motion events
are less common in the world than equivalent downwards
events, individuals might have a need for greater simulation
in the case of upwards motion. This would result in greater
interference with visually categorizing objects in the upper
quadrant of the visual field.
Regardless of the details of this effect, the crucial
manipulation that yielded it was the use of verbs that were
strongly associated with upwards or downwards motion.
From the simulation-based perspective, this is not
particularly surprising, since verbs of motion are supposed
to indicate processes and relations holding of referents.
What would happen, though, if nouns were manipulated
while verbs were held constant? Do nouns that denote
objects that are canoncally associated with the upper or
lower part of the visual field yield the same sort of
interference? This is the topic of the next study.

Results
If subjects perform visual imagery in processing these
sentences, then we should observe interference when
sentence direction coincides with the object location. For
example, hearing a sentence denoting upwards motion
should make it harder to immediately thereafter categorize
an object appearing in the upper part of the visual field, as
opposed to the lower part.
One subject was eliminated for answering the sentence
comprehension questions with less than 85% accuracy.
Another was excluded for answering the object
categorization questions with only 79% accuracy.
Responses more than 3sd above or below the mean for each
subject were removed and replaced these with values 3sd
above or below the mean for that subject. This resulted in
changes in less than 1% of the data.
The mean reaction times for the literal sentences
displayed in Figure 1 below display a clear interaction effect
of the predicted kind - objects in the upper part of the visual
field are categorized faster following literal down sentences
than following literal up sentences, and the reverse is true
for visual objects in the lower part of the visual field.
610
590
570
550
530
510
490

Down

Up

Object Location
Verb Down

551

542

Verb Up

526

603

Experiment 2: Nouns
Motion verbs very obviously can encode direction of
motion, so it is not surprising that, when placed in
sentences, they yield visual imagery in language
understanders. But nouns are somewhat trickier. While
deverbal nouns like a climb or a drop might be predicted to
show similar effects, it is less clear what to make of nouns
that are simply canonically associated with a particular
region in space, like ground or ceiling. Do sentences
describing events involving such objects yield selective
imagery in the given parts of the visual field?
Recent work on visual imagery during language
understanding has demonstrated that mentioned objects are
represented with a good deal of visual detail. For instance,
Stanfield & Zwaan (2001) and Zwaan et al. (2002), had
subjects read sentences, then name or make a judgment
about an image of an object that had been mentioned in the
sentence. They found that implied orientation of objects in
sentences (like The man hammered the nail into the floor
versus The man hammered the nail into the wall) affected

Figure 1: Mean RT for object categorization in upper and
lower quadrants of the screen for up and down sentences
A 2 (sentence direction) X 2 (object location) repeated
measures ANOVA showed a significant interaction between
sentence direction (literal up versus literal down) and object
location (up or down): F(1,63)=5.028; p<0.05, but no
significant main effects of sentence type or object location.

Discussion
There are two observations to make from the significant
interaction effect seen here with sentences denoting upwards
or downwards motion. First, this finding is squarely in line
with what is predicted by theories of perceptual simulation
in language understanding - that literal language about space
should be processed using those neuro-cognitive systems
responsible for perceiving the same aspects of space.

234

how long it took subjects to perform the object task - it took
longer to respond to an image that was incompatible with
the implied orientation or shape of a mentioned object. For
example, reading a sentence about a nail hammered into a
wall primed the horizontal nail image, as contrasted with a
sentence about a nail hammered into the floor. Similar
results were found for shape of objects, such as a whole egg
versus an egg in a pan. These results imply that shape and
orientation of objects, are represented in mental simulations
during language understanding. But we don't yet know
about locations in space - is the location where an object is
canonically found represented as part of the mental
simulation evoked by an utterance?

interaction between object location and sentence direction
(F(1,58)=5.756; p<0.05). There were no significant main
effects of object location or sentence direction.

Discussion
The striking finding here is that sentences with subject
nouns that are canonically associated with upness or
downness selectively interfere with the visual processing of
objects in the same parts of the visual field. This
complements other work on visual imagery associated with
objects in sentence understanding, which shows that both
the shape (Stanfield & Zwaan 2001) and orientation (Zwaan
et al. 2002) of objects are primed by sentences that imply
those particular shapes or orientations for objects.
Despite the significance of the interference effect shown
in these first two studies, they do not conclusively shown
that subjects in fact perform mental imagery of sentence
meaning. The observed effects could in principle result from
some sort of strictly lexical process. Perhaps the lexical
representations for words like ceiling and rise share a
common feature [+UP], and it is this feature, rather than a
dynamic simulation of the utterance's content that's causing
the interference effects we observed. Granted, one would be
more likely to anticipate facilitatory priming on this
account, but in order to eliminate the possibility that the
effect is simply lexical, we ran another experiment, using
the same set of verbs described in the first study above, but
with subject nouns that could not literally move up or down.
This would tell us if the interference was a result of sentence
interpretation or simply lexical semantics.

Method
63 subjects from the same population described in section 3
above participated in this study. The method was globally
identical to that in the first experiment, with the exception of
the critical sentences. In this experiment, instead of
sentences with a verb denoting upwards or downwards
motion, as above, in critical trials subjects saw sentences
with vertically neutral verbs paired with nouns that were
canonically associated with upness or downness (3),
selected as described above from the norming study. The Up
and Down Noun sentences showed no significant difference
in reaction time: or meaningfulness.
(3)

a. DOWN: The cellar flooded.
b. UP: The ceiling cracked.

Results

Experiment 3: Metaphorical Language

Two subjects with mean response times more than 2s.d.
from the grand mean were removed. Two additional
subjects were removed for lower than 80% accuracy on the
comprehension questions. Responses more than 3s.d.
greater or smaller than the subject's mean RT were replaced
with values 3s.d. greater or less than their mean. This
resulted in the modification of less than 1% of the data.

So far, we have seen that the direction of spatial imagery a
language understander performs can be manipulated by updown associations of a verb or subject noun. A first-pass
account of how this would work could take the function of
content words to be to pair phonological form with detailed
imagistic content. On this view, there is a direct path once a
word has been identified in the input stream, leading
directly to evocation of appropriate imagery. In the case of
words with up or down associations, this includes spatial
imagery using the appropriate part of the visual field.
But words denoting spatially and visually concrete
entities and events display rampant polysemy - many or
most can also be used to describe aspects of abstract
domains. In the case of verbs denoting movement along the
vertical axis, this includes changes in quantity, in happiness,
in status, and so on (Lakoff & Johnson 1980). This leads to
two possible accounts. The first maintains that words
directly activate imagery. As a result, sentences that include
verbs denoting up or down motion should drive visual
imagery even when they do not denote actual physical
motion. But a second possibility also presents itself. It could
alternatively be that the contributions words make to the
construction of a simulation is mediated by an interpretation
of larger linguistic structures in which it is embedded, like

610
590
570
550
530
510
490

Down

Up

Object Location
Noun Down
Noun Up

550

506.24

507.58

526

Figure 2: Mean RT for object categorization in upper and
lower quadrants for up and down noun sentences
Considering only correct responses, the means were as
shown in Figure 2. As in Experiment 1, there is interference
between sentence direction and object location. Indeed, a
repeated measure subjects ANOVA showed a significant
235

Discussion

the clause. When the sentence does not denote physical
motion, visual imagery does not follow in the same way it
does in response to language about physical motion. Rather,
on this alternative account, lexical items contribute to the
construction of a simulation plan for larger linguistic
structures they belong to, where the actual details of the
imagery to be performed is composed from a combination
of constraints imposed by linguistic constituents.
In order to determine whether lexical space associations
suffice to predict the directionality of internally recreated
visual scenes, we performed another experiment, using the
very same motion verbs from the first study above. The
critical difference in these studies was that in this follow-up,
the subject nouns denoted entities that could not physically
move up or down, yielding sentences that made
metaphorical, rather than literal use of the motion verbs.
This allowed us to test whether it was simply the verb by
itself or a global interpretation of the sentence that was
producing the directional visual imagery.

By comparison with the earlier study, where visual imagery
in particular parts of the visual field resulted from the use of
verbs denoting upwards or downwards motion, this followup study found no such effect. From this, we can conclude
that these metaphorical sentences to not drive imagery in the
same way that their literal counterparts in the first study did.
Several possible explanations present themselves for this
result. First, it could be that the metaphorical sentences
about changes in quantity simply did not selectively drive
visual imagery in the given parts of the visual field. Instead,
on this account, imagery in metaphorical sentence
processing could focus on concrete scenes that might
correspond to the described event. For instance, The prices
rose could trigger imagery of happy storeowners or price
tags on merchandise being replaced. A second possibility is
that while visual imagery was triggered with the
metaphorical sentences subjects, it was less vivid and
therefore less detectible through the experimental
instrument we were using than was the imagery resulting
from literal sentences. Third, it could be that visual imagery
was indeed performed, just on a different time-scale than the
interference-producing imagery evoked by literal language.
Note that these explanations are not mutually exclusive given the inter-individual variability that imagery can be
expected to exhibit, it would not be surprising if across
different types of language, imagery differed radically.
A final possibility is that the metaphorical sentences in
fact yielded no imagery of any type. This possibility is not
entailed by the results shown above, which only show that
the metaphorical and literal sentences do not display the
same sort of visual imagery at the same point in sentence
processing. Moreover, this position runs into the difficulty
of having to explain how exactly the abstract language
would be deeply understood, and how inferences would be
generated and propagated, without using any imagery at all.
Regardless of exactly why we found no visual imagery
effect in the metaphorical sentences, the basic finding, that
words with visually imageable senses do not consistently
produce the same sort of imagery is in line with other
findings of a similar nature (Stanfield and Zwaan 2001,
Zwaan et al. 2002).

Method
All the motion verbs used in the first study on literal
sentences above (Experiment 1) can also describe changes
in quantity or value of entities that do not have physical
height, like oil prices or mortgage rates (4). Thus, to create
metaphorical sentences, we used subjects like "rates" and
"prices" along with the same motion verbs used in the first
experiment. The sentences were normed as above. The up
and down metaphorical sentences showed no significant
difference in reaction time or in meaningfulness rating.. In
all respects other than the critical stimuli, the experiment
was exactly as described above, and was in fact run together
with the noun experiment described as Experiment 2, above.
(4)

a. DOWN: The rates toppled.
b. UP: The prices rose.

Results
By contrast with the literal verb and noun sentences, there
was no significant interaction between sentence direction
and object location with the metaphorical sentences:
F(1,58)=0.425; p=.0.517. Nor were there significant main
effects of object location or sentence direction.
610

General Discussion

590

Processing sentences that denote events that would tend to
take place in a particular part of the visual field yields
interference on actually using the same part of the real
visual field, as measured by decreased performance in an
object categorization task. This is true whether the location
of the event is indicated by a verb (Experiment 1) or a
sentential subject (Experiment 2). However, having an upor down-associated lexical item in a sentence does not
suffice to produce interference. The sentence must literally
encode a scene involving the relevant location in the visual
field, as metaphorical uses of motion verbs (Experiment 3).
We can conclude from this that it is not lexical priming that

570
550
530
510
490

Down

Up

Object Location
Met Down

516

532

Met Up

535

531

Figure 3: Mean RT for object categorization in upper and
lower quadrants for metaphorical up and down sentences
236

Amy Schafer, Larry Barsalou, and Art Glenberg for insights
on methodology and analysis.

yields the interference but rather the performance of mental
imagery corresponding to the meaning of an utterance.
What purpose would such automatic and generally
unconscious imagery serve? Several authors have suggested
different functions for the construction of a mental
simulation on the basis of language using detailed modal
knowledge. One critical role of imagery is to produce
detailed inferences (Narayanan 1997), which can both allow
an understander to gain a rich notion of the utterance's
content - such as a situation model of the described scene
(Zwaan 1999), and also to prepare the understander to
understand future utterances, or to respond relevantly.
Second, the construction of a mental simulation prepares the
understander for situated action (Bailey 1997, Barsalou
1999b, Glenberg & Kaschak 2002). Finally, some language
may be disambiguated only through the performance of
imagery (Bergen & Chang 2005).
Indeed, various models of language rely heavily on
perceptually and motorically grounded representations as
the backbone for the language understanding process. Of
particular note, Kaschak and Glenberg (2002) argue that
language understanding proceeds through the meshing of
simulation constraints from language, and the subsequent
mental simulation of afforded actions, to prepare for situated
responses. Zwaan (1999, 2004) has argued similarly that
language comprehension proceeds through the construction
of modal mental models, and Barsalou (1999) has suggested
that language hooks into simulators - systematic patterns of
reactivation of representations of perceptual and motor
experiences. Finally, Embodied Construction Grammar
(Bergen & Chang 2005) bases language understanding on
mental simulation, but differs in that it is a procedural model
of how the individual linguistic items making up an
utterance produce a mental simulation.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Bergen, B. (2005). Experimental methods for simulation
semantics. In M. Gonzalez-Marquez, I. Mittleberg, S.
Coulson, and M Spivey (eds.) Methods in Cognitive
Linguistics: Ithaca. John Benjamins.
Bergen, B., S. Narayan, & J. Feldman (2003). Embodied
verbal semantics: evidence from an image-verb matching
task. Proc. Cog. Sci 25.
Bergen, B., N. Chang, & S. Narayan (2004). Simulated
Action in an Embodied Construction Grammar. Proc.
Cognitive Science Society 25.
Bergen, B. & N. Chang. (2005). Embodied Construction
Grammar in Simulation-Based Language Understanding.
In J.-O. Östman & M. Fried (Eds.), Construction
Grammars: Cognitive grounding and theoretical
extensions. John Benjamins.
Bergen, B. & K. Wheeler. (2005) Sentence understanding
engages motor processes. Proc. Cog. Sci. 27.
Ehrsson, H.H., S. Geyer, & E. Naito (2003). Imagery of
voluntary movement of fingers, toes, and tongue activates
corresponding body-part specific motor representations.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 90, 3304–3316.
Glenberg, A. & M. Kaschak (2002). Grounding language in
action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558-565.
Glenberg, A. & D. Robertson (2000). Symbol Grounding
and Meaning: A Comparison of High-Dimensional and
Embodied Theories of Meaning. JML, 43, 379-401.
Kaschak, M. & A. Glenberg (2000). Constructing Meaning:
The Role of Affordances and Grammatical. Constructions
in Sentence Comprehension. JML 43, 508–529.
Kosslyn, S., G. Ganis, & W. Thompson (2001). Neural
foundations of imagery. Nature Rev Neurosci 2, 635 -642.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lindsay, S. (2003). Visual priming of language
comprehension. Unpublished U. Sussex Master's Thesis.
Matlock, T. (in press). Fictive motion as cognitive
simulation. Memory & Cognition.
Narayan, S., B. Bergen, & Z. Weinberg (2004). Embodied
Verbal Semantics: Evidence from a Lexical Matching
Task. Proc. 30th Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Nyberg, L., K.-M. Petersson, L.-G. Nilsson, J. Sandblom, C.
Åberg, & M. Ingvar, M. (2001). Reactivation of motor
brain areas during explicit memory for actions.
NeuroImage, 14, 521-528.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., McRae, K., & Barsalou,
L. W. (2003). Spatial representations activated during
real-time comprehension of verbs. Cog. Sci, 27, 767-780.
Stanfield, R.A. & Zwaan, R.A. (2001). The effect of implied
orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153-156.
Zwaan, R.A., Stanfield, R.A., Yaxley, R.H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

Conclusion
Visual interference effects produced by linguistic input are
reliable and replicable, in a number of methodological
permutations. These findings as a whole can be taken as
evidence that perceptual systems - in particular the visual
system - are unconsciously and automatically engaged in the
process of natural language understanding. Given that
spatial imagery is automatically engaged during language
use, it seems that a complete account of how words and
utterances are understood requires knowing how they drive
imagery. The same may hold of grammatical markers and
sentence patterns (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002, Bergen &
Chang 2005). More broadly, the observation of language
driving imagery suggests yet another way that embodied
human experience shapes language processing. Our similar
bodies and experiences, yield shared imagery, a common
currency that facilitates effective communication

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Teenie Matlock, Srini Narayanan, Susanne Gahl,
and Terry Regier for their useful design suggestions, and to

237

