UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Microgenetic Changes in Representations of Numerical Magnitude

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cw3m5k4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Opfer, John E.
Thompson, Clarissa

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Microgenetic Changes in Representations of Numerical Magnitude
John E. Opfer (opfer.7@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, 214 Townshend Hall, 1885 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210

Robert S. Siegler (rs7k@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, 331 Baker Hall, 5000 Forbes Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract
We examined short-term changes in children’s numerical
estimation, the representational changes that gave rise to
improved estimates, and the hypothesis that experiences that
highlight discrepancies between logarithmic and linear
representations of numerical magnitude result in the greatest
changes in estimation accuracy.
Keywords:
Number representation; microgenetic studies;
cognitive development

Introduction
Numerical estimation is a pervasive process, both in school and
in everyday life, but also a process that children find difficult.
Whether estimating distance (Cohen et al., 1979), number of
objects (Hecox & Hagen, 1971), answers to arithmetic
problems (LeFevre, Greenham, & Naheed, 1993), or locations
of numbers on number lines (Siegler & Opfer, 2003), 5- to 10year-olds’ estimation is highly inaccurate. The poor quality of
children’s performance, and the positive relation between
estimation proficiency and math achievement (Dowker, 2003;
Siegler & Booth, 2004), have led educators to assign a high
priority to improving estimation for many years (e.g., NCTM,
1980, 2001). Despite this prolonged effort, most children’s
estimation skills continue to be poor (Siegler & Booth, 2005).
One likely reason for failures to help children estimate more
accurately is that little is known about the representations and
processes that underlie estimation, much less about how they
develop or what types of experiences produce improvement in
them. To help address these limitations of current
understanding, we examine in this study how children’s choice
of representations contributes to their difficulties with
estimation. We also propose and test the log discrepancy
hypothesis, which predicts the relative effectiveness of different
types of experiences for improving children’s estimates.
Our account of the development of estimation begins with
the assumption that 5- to 10-year-olds’ difficulties are due in
large measure to inappropriate choices of numerical
representation. Specifically, although children in this age range
appear to possess multiple representations of numerical
magnitudes, they often use an early-developing logarithmic
representation (a representation within which the magnitudes
denoted by numbers increase logarithmically) in situations
where accurate estimation requires use of a linear
representation (a representation within which the magnitudes
associated with numbers increase linearly).

1684

This analysis raises the issue of how children come to
change their representations of numerical magnitude and to use
linear representations in situations in which they once used
logarithmic ones. It seems likely that over the course of
development, children encounter information that does not
match their logarithmic representation of numerical
magnitudes. If children already know and use linear
representations in some numerical contexts, such experiences
may lead them to extend the linear representation to numerical
ranges where they previously used logarithmic representations.
This logic suggests the log discrepancy hypothesis:
Experiences should promote extensions of linear
representations to new numerical contexts to the extent that the
experiences highlight discrepancies between logarithmic and
linear representations of numerical magnitudes and clarify the
appropriateness of the linear representation. The discrepancy
between logarithmic and linear representations of values on a
0-1,000 number line (with both functions constrained to pass
through 0 and 1000) is illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Discrepancy between a logarithmic and linear
representation of numeric values on a 0-1,000 number line is
greatest at 150; the discrepancies for 5 and 725 are equal to
each other and about half as great as that at 150.

If this hypothesis is correct, and improvements in estimation
stem from a switch in representations, then changes in patterns
of estimates may occur abruptly rather than gradually, and
across a broad range of numerical values rather than being local
to the numerical range on which feedback is given.
The present study was designed to test the log discrepancy
hypothesis regarding how children acquire more advanced
representations of numerical magnitudes. The experimental
design did this by examining changes in children’s number line
estimates in response to feedback on numbers around 150, 5, or
725, or in response to answering the same problems without
feedback. These experimental conditions allowed tests of the
predictions that feedback on numbers around 150 would elicit
the largest and quickest change (because it is the area of
maximum discrepancy between logarithmic and linear
representations), that the change would involve a broad range
of numbers and would occur abruptly rather than gradually
(because the change involved a choice of a different
representation, rather than a local repair to the original
representation), and that regardless of the feedback condition,
the greatest change would occur on the numbers where
logarithmic and linear functions differed by the greatest
amount, rather than on the numbers around which children
received feedback (again because change was hypothesized to
involve substituting linear representations for logarithmic
ones).
The design of the current study also allowed us to learn
about five key dimensions of cognitive change: the source, rate,
path, breadth, and variability of change. These dimensions have
proved useful in describing cognitive change in a number of
previous contexts (Siegler, 1996). To test the effects of
different sources of change, we compared the amount of
improvement elicited by the four experimental groups. To
examine the rate of change, we measured how many feedback
problems children required in each condition before they
adopted a linear representation. To learn about the path of
change, we tested whether children showed an abrupt shift
from a logarithmic pattern to a linear pattern of estimates or
whether they progressed from a clear logarithmic pattern to a
pattern intermediate between the two functions to a clear linear
pattern. To investigate the breadth of change, we tested
whether amount of change in children’s estimates for particular
numbers was best predicted by proximity of those numbers to
the feedback set or whether the greatest change occurred on the
numbers where the discrepancy between the logarithmic and
linear representations was greatest, regardless of the feedback
set that children received. Finally, to enhance understanding of
the variability of change, we tested the prediction that children
whose pretest estimates adhered most closely to a logarithmic
function would learn more than other children and would
adhere more closely to the linear function on the posttest.

Method
Participants
Participants included 61 second graders (mean age = 8.2, SD =
0.6) whose estimates in a screening task indicated a better

1685

fitting logarithmic than linear function. A female research
assistant served as experimenter.

Task
Each problem consisted of a 25 cm line, with the left end
labeled “0,” the right end labeled “1,000,”and the number to be
estimated appearing 2 cm above the center of the line. The
numbers presented were 2, 5, 11, 18, 27, 34, 42, 56, 67, 78, 89,
100, 111, 122, 133, 147, 150, 156, 163, 172, 179, 187, 246,
306, 366, 426, 486, 546, 606, 666, 722, 725, 731, 738, 747,
754, 762, 818, 878, and 938. These numbers included 7 that
were between 3 below and 37 above the focal number for each
feedback condition (5, 150, and 725); the purpose was to
include enough values for the seven feedback problems that
children received in each feedback condition.

Design and Procedure
Children were randomly assigned to four experimental
conditions: 150-feedback, 5-feedback, 725-feedback, or nofeedback. Children in all four groups completed the numberline estimation task for three trial blocks and a posttest. For
children in the three feedback groups, each trial block included
a feedback phase and a test phase. The feedback phase included
one or three items on which children received feedback; the test
phase included 10 items on which children did not receive
feedback. Children in the no-feedback group received the same
number of estimation trials but always with no feedback. On
the posttest, children in all four groups were presented the same
22 problems without feedback as in screening. The children’s
estimates in screening provided pretest data, which was used as
a point of comparison for their subsequent performance.
The only way in which the treatment of children in the three
feedback groups differed was in the numbers whose positions
they were asked to estimate during the feedback phases.
Participants in the 150-feedback group were asked to mark the
position of 150 on the first trial block, to mark the positions of
3 numbers from 147–187 on the second trial block, and to mark
the positions of a different 3 numbers from 147–187 on the
third trial block. Participants in the 5-feedback group were
asked to mark the position of 5 on the first trial block, of 3
numbers from 2 – 42 on the second trial block, and of a
different 3 numbers from 2 – 42 on the third trial block.
Participants in the 725-feedback group were asked to mark the
position of 725 on the first trial block, of 3 numbers from 722–
762 on the second trial block, and of a different 3 numbers
from 722-762 on the third trial block. One-third of the children
in the no-feedback group were presented the same problems as
the children in the 150-feedback group, one-third were
presented the same problems as the children in the 5-feedback
group, and one-third were presented the same problems as the
children in the 725-feedback group.
The feedback procedure was as follows. On the first
feedback problem, children were told, “After you mark where
you think the number goes, I’ll show you where it really goes,
so you can see how close you were.” After the child answered,
the experimenter took the page from the child and
superimposed on the number line a 25 cm ruler (hidden from

the child) that indicated the location of every 10th number from
0-1,000. Then the experimenter wrote the number
corresponding to the child’s mark (Nestimate) above the mark,
and indicated the correct location of the number that had been
presented (N) with a hatch mark. After this, the experimenter
showed the corrected number line to the child. Pointing to the
child’s mark, she said, “You told me that N would go here.
Actually, this is where N goes (pointing). The line that you
marked is where Nestimate actually goes.” When children’s
answers deviated from the correct answer by no more than
10%, the experimenter said, “You can see these two lines are
really quite close. How did you know to put it there?” When
children’s answers deviated from the correct answer by more
than 10%, the experimenter said, “That’s quite a bit too
high/too low. You can see these two lines [the child’s and
experimenter’s hatch marks] are really quite far from each
other. Why do you think that this is too high/low for N?”

Results and Discussion
Source of change
We first examined the source of change, the experiences that
set the change in motion. To determine whether the particular
experience that children received during the feedback phase
influenced the degree to which their estimates came to follow a
linear function, we compared pretest and posttest performance
for the four experimental conditions. In particular, we
performed regression analyses on the fit between the children’s
median estimates for each number and the best fitting
logarithmic and linear functions on the pretest and on the
posttest.
As shown in Figure 2, on the pretest, all four groups of
second graders’ median estimates for each number were better
fit by the logarithmic function than by the linear one. The
precision of the fit of the logarithmic function, and the degree
of superiority to the linear function, was similar across the four
conditions (5-feedback: log R2 = .95, lin R2 = .71, t [21] = 2.71,
p < .05; 150-feedback: log R2 = .95, lin R2 = .72, t [21] = 2.46,
p < .05; 725-feedback: log R2 = .93, lin R2 = .68, t [21] = 2.54,
p < .05; no-feedback: log R2 = .94, lin R2 = .64, t [21] = 2.39, p
< .05).
In contrast, the four groups differed considerably in their
posttest estimation patterns. Children in the no-feedback group
continued to generate estimates that fit the logarithmic function
better than the linear one (log R2 = .90, lin R2= .61, t [21] =
2.78, p < .05). Children in the 5- and 725-feedback groups
generated posttest estimates for which the fit of the linear
function was somewhat, but not significantly, greater than that
of the logarithmic function (5-feedback: lin R2= .92, log R2 =
.80, t [21] = 1.87, ns; 725-feedback: lin R2= .91, log R2 = .84, t
[21] = 1.18, ns). Finally, children in the 150-feedback group
generated estimates that fit the linear function significantly and
substantially better than the logarithmic one (lin R2= .95, log R2
= .74, t [21] = 2.40, p < .05). This pattern of changes was
consistent with the prediction of the log discrepancy
hypothesis; the largest change came in response to feedback on
problems where the logarithmic and linear functions were most
discrepant.

1686

Figure 2: Best fitting functions for pretest (light colored) and
posttest (dark colored) median estimates.
A comparison of pretest-posttest improvements in percent
absolute error also revealed differences in improvements
among the four conditions, F(3, 87) = 2.82, p< . 05. On this
measure, performance of children in all three feedback
conditions improved more than performance of children in the
no-feedback control, with no significant differences among the
feedback groups.

Rate of change
To examine the rate of change under the four experimental
conditions, we compared pretest estimates to estimates given
during the no-feedback portion of each trial block during
training. We assigned a 1 to the trial blocks of each child that
were best fit by the linear function and a 0 to the trial blocks
that were best fit by the logarithmic function. The key
prediction was that training group and trial block would
interact, with the interaction due to children learning fastest in
the 150-feedback group and slowest in the no-feedback group.
A 4 (training group: 5-feedback, 150-feedback, 725feedback, or no-feedback) X 4 (trial block: pretest, 1, 2, 3)
repeated-measures ANOVA indicated effects for training
group, F (3, 57) = 13.50, p < .001, for trial block, F (3, 171) =
26.36, p < .001, and for the interaction between the two
variables, F (9, 171) = 3.83, p < .001. The linear function more
frequently fit the estimates of children in the 150-feedback
group (60% of trial blocks) than the estimates of children in the
no-feedback group (3% of trial blocks, p < .001), 5-feedback
group (29% of trial blocks, p < .001) or 725-feedback group
(37% of trial blocks, p < .05). The linear function was also the
better fitting equation more often for the 5- and 725-feedback
groups than for the no-feedback group (p’s < .01). The effect of
trial block was due to the linear function providing the better fit

more often on trial blocks 1, 2, and 3 (38%, 39%, and 48%,
respectively) than on the pretest (0%, p’s < .001).
The interaction between training group and trial block
(Figure 3) reflected different rates of learning in the four
groups. On the pretest, there were no differences among groups
in the percentage of children for whom the linear function
provided the better fit (it was 0% in all cases). On trial block 1,
the linear function fit more children’s estimates in the 150feedback group than in the no-feedback group (p < .001), 5feedback group (p < .005), or 725-feedback group (all p’s <
.05). What this meant was that the superiority of the 150condition for promoting learning manifested itself after
feedback on a single estimate. Feedback on this one trial
increased the percentage of children for whom the linear
function provided the better fit from 0% on the pretest to 85%
on the test phase of trial block 1. The linear model also fit more
children’s estimates in the test phase of trial block 1 among
children in the 5- and 725-feedback groups than among
children in the no-feedback group (33% and 40% versus 0%,
p’s < .05).

group (53%), and 5-feedback group (56%), though all three
percentages were higher than that in the no-feedback group
(7%, all p’s < .005).
Another way of testing whether children in the four
experimental conditions differed in how quickly they adopted
the linear representation was to compare the number of trial
blocks before the linear function first provided the better fit to
each child’s estimates. For this analysis, we excluded children
whose estimates were never better fit by the linear function and
children in the no-feedback condition, where only one child
ever met that criterion on even a single trial block. The fastest
learners, children whose estimates were better fit by the linear
model on trial block 1, were assigned a score of 1; the slowest
learners, children whose estimates were better fit by the linear
model for the first time on the posttest, were assigned a score of
4. An ANOVA indicated a trend toward differences among the
three feedback groups in the rate of learning, F (2, 37) = 2.51, p
< .10. The first trial block on which the linear function
provided a better fit occurred earlier in the 150-feedback group
than in the 5-feedback group ( (M = 1.23 trial blocks versus
2.07, t (25) = 2.37, p < .05). The first trial block on which the
estimates of children in the 725-feedback group were better fit
by the linear function (M = 1.72) did not differ from that in
either of the other two feedback groups.
Once a child’s estimates were better fit by the linear function
on one trial block, the child’s estimates generally continued to
be better fit by it on subsequent blocks. This was true in all
three feedback conditions: 73% of trial blocks for children in
the 5-feedback condition, 82% of blocks for children in the
150-feedback condition, and 91% of blocks for children in the
725-feedback condition. Thus, once children adopted the linear
representation, they generally continued to use it, regardless of
the feedback problems that led to its adoption.

Breadth of change.
To examine the breadth of change in children’s estimates,
we first examined the percentage of the 22 items on which
children in the four groups showed pretest-posttest
improvements. Children in the no-feedback condition
generated more accurate posttest estimates on only 36% of
items (8 of 22.) In contrast, the estimation accuracy of
children in the three feedback groups improved on an
average of 70% of items, with similar percentages (64%77%) in the three groups. Thus, feedback produced
improvement on a broader range of items than simply
performing the estimation task.
The next goal was to identify the range of numbers on which
the greatest improvement in estimation accuracy occurred. In
particular, we wanted to examine whether improvements in
accuracy followed a standard generalization gradient, in which
learning decreases with distance from feedback items, or
whether the discrepancy between logarithmic and linear
representations for each number was the key determinant of
improvement, regardless of the particular feedback problems.
We first tested the generalization gradient hypothesis. To do
this, we regressed pretest-posttest change in absolute error for
each number against the distance between that number and the
focal number for each feedback group (5, 150, or 725). Results

Figure 3: Trial block-to-trial block changes in percentage of
children in each condition whose estimates were best fit by the
linear function.
On trial block 2, children in the 150-feedback group
continued to generate linear patterns of estimates more
frequently than children in the 5-feedback and no-feedback
groups (77% versus 28% and 7%, p’s < .01). The percentage of
children in the 725-feedback group who generated linear
estimation patterns also was higher than the percentage who
did in the no-feedback group (53% versus 7%, p < .01).
By trial block 3, the differences diminished among the three
groups that received feedback. The percentage of children
whose estimates were better fit by the linear function did not
differ among the 150-feedback group (77%), 725-feedback

1687

of this analysis presented a puzzling pattern. Results for two of
the three feedback conditions were consistent with the
generalization gradient hypothesis. Percent variance in pretestposttest improvement accounted for by distance between the
feedback and test items was R2 = .72 in the 5-feedback group
(F(1,21) = 50.52, p < .001), and R2 = .82 in the 150-feedback
group (F(1,21) = 91.79, p < .001). However, the relation in the
725-feedback condition was not only much weaker (R2 = .33,
F(1, 21) = 9.87, p < .01) -- it was actually in the opposite
direction of that predicted by the generalization gradient
hypothesis. That is, in the 725-feedback group, the
improvement following feedback was greater for test items that
were further from the feedback items.
Fortunately, there was a straightforward explanation for this
seemingly odd pattern: Improvement in estimation was not a
function of distance from the feedback problems but rather of
the discrepancy between the logarithmic and linear
representations. In all three feedback conditions, the largest
improvements occurred for numbers where the discrepancies
between the logarithmic and linear representations were
greatest (numbers around 150), regardless of how far those
numbers were from the numbers on which children received
feedback. This pattern emerged most dramatically in
comparisons between amount of pretest-posttest improvement
on the exact items on which children received feedback and
amount of pretest-posttest improvement on the numbers around
150. In the 5-feedback group, pretest-posttest improvements for
the numbers on which children had received feedback and that
were also on the pretest and posttest (2, 5, and 18) were quite
modest (4%, 9%, and 18% of the possible improvement,
respectively). The improvements for the numbers around 150
(147, 150, and 163) were noticeably larger (36%, 31%, and
25% of the possible improvement), despite these numbers
being further away from the numbers on which feedback had
been given. A similar pattern was evident for the 725-feedback
group, where improvements for the three values near 150
(16%, 13%, and 17% of the possible improvement) were
among the greatest in the group, whereas accuracy on the
numbers on which feedback had been given actually showed
small decreases (-4%, -1%, and -4%). No comparable
comparison for the 150-feedback condition was possible,
because in it, the generalization gradient and log discrepancy
hypotheses led to identical predictions that numbers around 150
should show especially large improvements (which they did,
21%, 30%, and 25% of the possible improvement.)
To examine the breadth of change in a way that would
include all 22 numbers on the pretest and posttest and would
also allow tests for all three feedback conditions, we regressed
pretest-to-posttest change in accuracy against the discrepancy
between logarithmic and linear representations for the to-beestimated number. To compute the discrepancies between the
linear and logarithmic functions, we used the formula y=x for
the linear function and y = 144.761(ln(x), the same equations
used in Siegler and Opfer (2003). These equations were chosen
so that both functions would pass through 1 and 1,000.
The discrepancy between the logarithmic and linear
functions provided an excellent fit to the improvement in all
three feedback conditions, and the effect was in the predicted

1688

direction in all conditions: in the 5-feedback group, R2 = .76, F
(1, 21) = 64.37, p < .001; in the 725-feedback group, R2 = .62,
F (1, 21) = 32.67, p < .001; and in the 150-feedback group, R2
= .73, F (1, 21) = 52.69, p < .001. The findings were not
attributable to regression to the mean being greatest at the
points where the pretest estimates were most discrepant; the
parallel analysis for children in the no-feedback group did not
show any relation between log-linear discrepancy and pretestposttest improvement, R2 = .12, F (1, 21) = 2.84, ns.
To appreciate just how powerful this relationship was,
consider the subset of 9 numbers on which the discrepancy
between the logarithmic and linear functions was above 500.
These 9 numbers, which ranged from 56 to 246, were the items
on which the log discrepancy hypothesis predicted the greatest
improvement regardless of experimental condition. In both the
5-feedback condition and the 725-feedback condition, all 9
numbers were among the 11 on which children showed the
greatest improvement; in the 150-feedback condition, the 9
numbers were exactly the 9 numbers on which improvement
was greatest. Again, this was not attributable to regression to
the mean. In the no-feedback condition, only 3 of the 11
numbers on which change was most positive (or least negative)
were in this range. Particularly striking, children who received
feedback on numbers from 722-762, like the other children,
showed the greatest improvement on numbers from 56 to 246.
These results suggested two conclusions regarding the
breadth of change. First, the change was more than a local
repair to children’s estimation procedures; improvements in
posttest accuracy were not limited to, or even greatest at, the
areas of the number line on which children received feedback.
Second, the change seemed to entail substitution of a linear
representation for a logarithmic one, as indicated by the
improvements in estimates being greatest for numbers where
the two representations differed by the greatest amount.
Analyses of children’s path of change lent additional support to
these conclusions, as described in the next section.

Path of change.
Children could have moved from a logarithmic to a linear
representation via several paths. To examine which path(s)
they actually took, we examined trial-block-to-trial-block
changes in individual children’s estimates. In particular, we
identified the first trial block on which the linear function
provided a better fit than did the logarithmic function to a
given child’s estimates on the 10 no-feedback test items,
and we labeled it “trial block 0.” The trial block
immediately before each child’s trial block 0 was that
child’s trial block –1”, the trial block before that was the
child’s “trial block -2” and so on.
These assessments of the trial block on which children’s
estimates first fit the linear function made possible a backwardtrials analysis that allowed us to test alternative hypotheses
about the path of change from a logarithmic to a linear
representation. One hypothesis was that the path of change
entailed gradual, incremental improvements in the linearity of
estimates. According to this hypothesis, the fit of the linear
model would have gradually increased, and the fit of
logarithmic model would have gradually decreased, from Trial

Block -3 to Trial Block +3. In this scenario, Trial Block 0 —
the first trial block in which the linear model provided the
better fit — would mark an arbitrary point along a continuum
of gradual improvement, rather than a point at which children
switched from one representation to another.
A second hypothesis was that the path of change involved
initial reliance on a logarithmic representation, followed by a
period of disequilibrium or confusion, followed by reliance on
a linear representation. According to this Piagetian-inspired
hypothesis, the fit of the logarithmic model would have been
very good initially (e.g., in Trial Blocks -3 and -2). However,
feedback would then have confused the child and led to a poor
fit of both linear and logarithmic models immediately before
the change (i.e., in Trial Block -1). Then the child would
resolve the conflict by adopting the linear representation (on
Trial Block 0 and thereafter).
A third hypothesis was that the path of change involved a
discontinuous switch from a logarithmic to a linear
representation, with no intermediate state. This would have
entailed no change in the fit of the linear model from Trial
Block –3 to –1, a large change from Trial Block -1 to Trial
Block 0, and no further change after Trial Block 0.
This third hypothesis fit the data. From Trial Block -3 to -1,
there was no change in the fit to children’s estimates of either
the linear function or the logarithmic function (F’s< 1). There
also was no change from Trial Block 0 to Trial Block 3 in the
fit to children’s data of either the linear or the logarithmic
function (F’s< 1). However, from Trial Block –1 to Trial
Block 0, there was a large increase in the fit of the linear
function to individual children’s estimates, from an average R2
= .57 to an average R2 = .80, F (1, 75) = 25.67, p < .001.
Complementarily, there was a decrease from Trial Block –1 to
Trial Block 0 in the fit of the logarithmic function to children’s
estimates, from an average R2 = .74 to an average R2 = .64, F
(1, 75) = 4.95, p < .05. Thus, rather than Trial Block 0
reflecting an arbitrary point along a continuous path of
improvement, or reflecting the end of a period of
disequilibrium, it seemed to mark the point at which children
switched from a logarithmic representation to a linear one.

pretest estimates, the better the linear model fit their posttest
estimates. This correlation was chiefly evident among children
whose posttest estimates were better fit by the linear function (r
= .42, F [1, 29] = 6.02, p < .05); it was not found among
children whose posttest estimates were not better fit by the
linear function (r = .08, ns). In contrast, the fit of the linear
function to children’s pretest estimates did not predict the fit of
the linear function to their posttest estimates among either
children who adopted the linear model (r = .19, ns) or those
who did not (r = .32, ns). Thus, the log discrepancy hypothesis
yielded counterintuitive but accurate predictions regarding
individual differences in learning, as well as the types of
feedback that would trigger the largest changes and the types of
numbers on which improvements in estimation would be
greatest.

References
Cohen, Weatherford, D. L., Lomenick, T., & Koeller, K.
(1979). Development of spatial representations: Role of task
demands and familiarity with the environment. Child
Development, 50, 1257-1260.
Dowker, A. (2003). Young children’s estimates for addition:
The zone of partial knowledge and understanding. In
Baroody, A. J., Dowker, A. (Eds.), The development of
arithmetic concepts and skills: Constructing adaptive
expertise (pp. 243-265). Mahwah, NJ: USum Associates,
Publishers.
Hecox, K. E.,& Hagen, J. W. (1971). Estimates and estimatebased inferences in young children. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 11, 106-123.
LeFevre, J.A., Greenham, S.L., & Naheed, N. (1993). The
development of procedural and conceptual knowledge in
computational estimation. Cognition and Instruction, 11, 95132.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1980). An
agenda for action: Recommendations for school
mathematics of the 1980s. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (2000).
Principles and standards for school mathematics: Higher
standards for our students . . . Higher standards for
ourselves. Washington, DC: National Council of Teachers
of Mathematics.

Variability of change
The log discrepancy hypothesis suggested that children
whose initial representations were consistently logarithmic
might respond to feedback by adopting representations that
were more consistently linear than would children whose
initial representations were less consistently logarithmic.
The reason is that the difference between the children’s
estimates and the feedback they received would be more
dramatic, and thus more likely to motivate a shift to the
alternative (linear) representation, among children whose
initial estimates were most strongly logarithmic.
To test this hypothesis, we correlated percent variance
accounted for by the logarithmic function on the pretest with
percent variance accounted for by the linear function on the
posttest. As hypothesized, the fit of the logarithmic model to
each child’s pretest estimates predicted the fit of the linear
model to the child’s posttest estimates (r= .36, F (1, 45) = 6.75,
p < .05). The better the logarithmic model fit the children’s

Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of change
in children’s thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegler, R.S., & Booth, J.L. (2004). Development of numerical
estimation in young children. Child Development, 75, 428444.
Siegler, R. S. & Booth, J. L. (2005). Development of
numerical estimation: A review. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp 197-212). Boca
Ratan, FL: CRC Press.
Siegler, R.S., & Opfer, J.E. (2003). The development of
numerical estimation: Evidence for multiple representations
of numerical quantity. Psychological Science, 14, 237-243.

1689

