UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mirror Symmetry Perception: The Effect of Proximity to the Central Axis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2v10x624

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Dry, Matthew

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mirror Symmetry Perception: The Effect of Proximity to the Central Axis
Matthew Dry (matthew.dry@psychology.adelaide.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA 5005 Australia.

very brief presentation times employed in the majority of
studies. For example Tyler, Hardage and Miller (1995)
compared detection across presentation times ranging from
20 milliseconds to 2 seconds and found that as stimulus
presentation time increased, observers were able to detect
symmetry over increasingly larger separation distances.
Although Tyler et al found evidence of long-range
detection for presentation durations greater than 300ms, the
data still indicated greater sensitivity for symmetrical
information located close to the central axis. However, it is
unclear whether this increased sensitivity bias would remain
if the presentation times were increased beyond 2 seconds.
If observers were allowed unlimited viewing time it is
possible that the advantage conveyed by proximity to the
axis would disappear indicating that the advantage is a
temporal artefact. If a proximity advantage persisted,
regardless of presentation time, this would suggest that it is
a feature of the spatial rather than the temporal properties of
the stimulus.

Abstract
The detection of environmental regularity is a fundamental
process in visual perception. One way of increasing our
understanding of the visual system is by modelling the
performance of human observers on tasks in which they are
required to detect visual regularities such as bilateral
symmetry. Past research has indicated that there is a
perceptual advantage for symmetry information located
immediately adjacent to the central axis (Barlow & Reeves,
1979; Rainville & Kingdom, 2002), but it has been unclear
whether this was due to the temporal or spatial properties of
the stimulus. Three potential outcomes were hypothesised in
relation to a symmetry detection task and Bayesian model
selection was used to determine which outcome best
accounted for the empirical data. Results indicate that when
temporal limitations are removed the perceptual advantage
remains, suggesting that it is due (at least in part) to the spatial
properties of symmetrical stimuli. The research reported in
this paper was conducted at the University of Adelaide.

Introduction
The visual system is extremely efficient at detecting
environmental regularity and it has been argued that
regularities play a crucial role in our understanding of the
visual world (Barlow, 2001). The perception of bilateral (or
mirror) symmetry is one example of this regularity
detection. Specifically, the visual system can be considered
as performing a kind of spatial correspondence calculation
whereby it employs the inherent statistical information
about the positions of pattern elements to establish which of
the elements belong or are grouped together.
Interestingly, it has been demonstrated that observers
either fail to make use of, or disregard, a high proportion of
the information that is available to them when making
psychophysical judgements of symmetry. For example, a
number of studies have demonstrated that observers are only
able to detect symmetry (or deviations from symmetry) if it
is located within a spatially limited region directly adjacent
to the axis of symmetry (Barlow & Reeves, 1979; Rainville
& Kingdom, 2002). This area has been labelled the
Integration Region and it is hypothesised that the visual
system is unable to make the correspondence calculations
necessary for symmetry detection if signal information is
located outside of this region.
It has been noted that symmetry in real-world stimuli can
be detected over separation distances much greater than
those reported in the majority of psychophysical studies
(Labonte, Shapira, Cohen, & Faubert, 1995; Tyler, Hardage,
& Miller, 1995). The reason for this discrepancy between
real-world and laboratory stimuli appears to be related to the

Figure 1: Examples of experimental stimuli and the signal
information contained therein.
1a) Signal window
containing 100% symmetry and zero separation. 1b) The
signal window in 1a embedded in random noise. 1c) Signal
window containing 100% symmetry and 1.5 deg separation.
1d) The signal window in 1c embedded in random noise.
Experimental stimuli resembled 1b and 1d.
612

advantage might be expected to decline gradually as the
symmetry separation distance is increased. In this case
detection would be a linear function of distance from the
axis and would result in three linear functions. This
situation we call the “Linear Proximity Advantage” model
and its predictions are shown graphically in Figure 2b.
Third, it is possible that there would be an advantage
conveyed by proximity, but this advantage would be
confined to a limited region. This would result in a series of
three two-limbed functions in which discriminability is high
when symmetry pairings directly span the axis, but
uniformly poor across all other separation distances. This
situation we call the “Short-Range Proximity Advantage”
model and its predictions are shown graphically in Figure
2c.

Current Study
The present study sought to determine if there is increased
sensitivity for symmetrical information located near the axis
when observers have unlimited viewing time. The design of
the experimental stimuli was similar to that employed in a
number of previous studies (e.g. Rainville & Kingdom,
2002). Observers were required to discriminate between
random dot ‘noise’ stimuli, and stimuli that contained a
proportion of symmetrical pairings embedded in noise. The
symmetrical information was confined to two equally sized
areas, or ‘signal windows’, situated on either side of the axis
of symmetry. In order to determine the relationship
between discriminability of symmetrical pairings and the
proximity of these pairings to the axis of symmetry, the
distance between the two areas containing symmetrical
information was manipulated, and the resulting gap filled
with random noise. Figure 1 provides examples of the types
of test stimuli used in the experiment. Furthermore, in order
to demonstrate the effect of varying the signal-to-noise ratio
of the stimulus upon discriminability, three levels of signalto-noise ratio were employed.
In light of the above, a number of predictions about
experimental outcomes follow.
First, if there is no
relationship between discriminability and the proximity of
symmetrical pairings to the axis we could expect the results
to resemble three flat functions layered in order of their
respective signal-to-noise ratios. This situation we call the
“No Proximity Advantage” model and its predictions are
shown graphically in Figure 2a. Second, if an advantage is
associated with proximity to the axis even when the
observers are allowed unlimited viewing time then this

Methods
Apparatus and Stimuli
All stimuli were presented on a Hitachi CM721F colour
computer monitor with a refresh rate of 85 Hz and a pixel
resolution of 1280 x 1024. Pixel width was 0.2644 mm.
Viewing distance was set at 57 cm, such that 1 cm was
equal to 1 degree of visual angle.
The stimuli were comprised of black dots with a diameter
of 0.04 deg presented on a 5x5 deg white field located at the
centre of the monitor. Dot density was 12 points per degree
of visual angle squared (300 points in total). In order to
prevent individual points from touching or overlapping a
minimum separation distance of 0.099 deg was imposed.

Figure 2: Idealised representation of three potential experimental outcomes. 2a) there is no relationship between
discrimination and proximity to the axis of symmetry, 2b) there is a linearly decreasing relationship between discrimination
and proximity to the axis, 2c) there is heightened discrimination conveyed by proximity to the axis over a spatially limited
region.
613

a d’ greater than 2 regardless of the degree of spatial
separation between the signal windows. Even when the
proportion of signal pairs was reduced to 80%, d’ was above
or close to 1.
Qualitatively, the results appear to indicate that
discriminability is high when symmetry pairings directly
straddle the axis, but is uniformly degraded across all other
separation distances. The obvious exception to this pattern
is the increased discriminability for stimuli with a separation
of 2 deg and 100% symmetry in the signal window. The 2
deg separation places the outside edge of the signal window
within .25 deg of the stimulus boundary. It should be noted
that Barlow and Reeves (1979) found a similar U-shaped
relationship, with detection being best for symmetrical
structure positioned at the axis, middling for structure
positioned at the stimulus boundary, and worst for structure
flanked on both sides by noise.
Bayesian statistical inference (Kass & Raftery, 1995) was
employed to determine which of the three predicted
outcomes summarised in Figure 2 best accounted for the
empirical data, largely following the approach adopted by
Vickers, Lee, Dry and Hughes (2003). Using this method
the three outcomes become competing models that make
different assumptions about the relationship between
discriminability and proximity to the central axis. Figure 4
shows the maximum likelihood fits to d’ under each of the
three models, assuming a Gaussian likelihood function.

The signal pairings within each symmetrical stimulus
were confined to two regions or ‘signal windows’ 1.25 deg
wide and 4 deg high. The separation distance between the
two signal windows ranged from 0 to 2 deg in four 0.5 deg
steps. The symmetrical regions contained 100%, 80% or
60% symmetrical pairings. Given that 40% of all points
within a given stimulus were located within the signal
windows, this brought the overall percentage of signal
pairings within the symmetrical stimuli to 40%, 32% and
24% respectively. Hereafter, however, the three levels of
signal to noise ratio will be referred to in terms of the
proportion of symmetrical pairings within the two 1.25 x 4
deg windows. The signal pairs were always vertical
bilateral (mirror) symmetry pairs with an axis centered in
the middle of the stimulus.

Design and Procedure
Observers attended a single test session in which 150
stimulus arrays were presented, half of which were random
‘noise’ arrays and half ‘symmetry and noise’ arrays. Of the
75 symmetrical arrays 25 had signal windows containing
100% symmetrical pairings, 25 had signal windows
containing 80% signal pairings and 25 had signal windows
contained 60% signal pairings. The three signal levels
(100%, 80% and 60% signal pairings) contained 5 stimuli at
each of the 5 signal window separation distances. The
arrays in each test session were presented in a random order.
Each test session was preceded by a practice session.
Each array was presented until the observer made a
decision and they were free to actively search each pattern.
The observer was required to discriminate between the
stimuli comprised entirely of noise and stimuli that
contained a proportion of symmetrical pairings embedded in
noise. They indicated their decision via a mouse click on
one of two buttons labelled “Random” and “Symmetrical”
that were located below the presentation window.

Observers
There were five observers (two male, three female), with a
mean age of 25.4 years. All were studying at tertiary level.
The subjects all had either normal or corrected to normal
vision. All observers were naïve with respect to the
hypothesised outcomes.

Results
Overall performance was high with observers responding
correctly to 71.6% of the 150 test stimuli. Figure 3 shows
the mean discriminability of symmetrical stimuli measured
as d’ for all five observers across the three signal levels and
five separation distances. Values of d’ were calculated
following Green and Swets (1974). Although there is a
small degree of overlap, there is a clear ordering of
discriminability in terms of the overall level of symmetrical
pairings. Additionally, the results suggest that when the
proportion of symmetrical pairings within the signal
windows was at its highest (100%), the observers were able
to discriminate between symmetrical and noise stimuli with

FIGURE 3. Mean discriminability of symmetrical stimuli
measured as d’ for all five observers across the three signal
levels and five separation distances. Circles denote 100%
symmetry in signal window, squares denote 80% symmetry
in signal window, and triangles denote 60% symmetry in
signal window. The numbers on the x-axis indicate the
distance in deg between the two signal windows (areas
containing symmetrical pairings). Errorbars represent the
standard error of observer d’.
614

Figure 4: Summary of fit to empirical data for the three models, and the associated BIC. Circles denote 100% symmetry in
signal window, squares denote 80% symmetry in signal window, and triangles denote 60% symmetry in signal window. The
x-axis indicates the minimum separation distance between symmetrical pairings. Error bars represent the standard error of d’
across the five observers.
Table 1: The Maximum Likelihood Fit, Parametric Complexity, Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) Value, and Bayes
Factors for Each of the Models in Relation to d’.
Model
1. No Advantage

Maximum
Likelihood Fit

Parametric
Complexity

BIC Value

Bayes Factor

81.3977

3

89.52

8x1013

2. Linear Advantage
38.2941
6
54.54
2x106
3. Short-Range Advantage
9.0398
6
25.28
1.00
Note- The Bayes Factors are taken in relation to the most likely model, which in this case is the ShortRange Proximity Advantage model.
615

detectability and point-pair separation. However, the
analysis of model fit to empirical data suggests it is unlikely
that a detection rule based on proximity alone can account
for the observer responses: The Linear Proximity Advantage
model, in which detectability declines as a function of
distance from axis was found to be far less likely than the
Short-Range Proximity Advantage model. Furthermore,
there is evidence suggesting that the size of the region of
increased sensitivity scales inversely with stimulus density
(Rainville & Kingdom, 2002). This would rule out the
possibility of a detection heuristic based on heightened
sensitivity for signal pairs separated by a fixed or absolute
distance. It is suggested that a more likely candidate
explanation is a detection heuristic based on relative
distances.
A number of attempts have been made to quantify the
gestalt principles of form perception using clustering
algorithms such as minimal spanning trees, relative
neighborhood graphs, and Voronoi tessellation (Ahuja,
1982). Although there are key differences between these
approaches, a common feature is that they are able to define
the relationship between each point within a stimulus and
every other point within that stimulus in terms of relative
distances (for example, in a stimulus containing k points
each point in that stimulus will have k-1 neighbors: the
nearest neighbor, second nearest neighbor, third nearest
neighbor etc). Research has found that the perception of
structure within a wide range of dot pattern stimulus classes
appears to be highly dependant upon the clusters formed
between point pairs with low-level neighbor relations (Dry,
Vickers, Lee, & Hughes, submitted; Pomerantz, 1981;
Vickers et al., 2003), and there is evidence to suggest that
symmetry detection is also preceded by some form of
localized clustering or grouping of stimulus elements
(Labonte et al., 1995; Wagemans, Van Gool, Swinnen, &
Van Horebeek, 1993).
The results of the present study are plausibly attributed to
a difference between the visual system’s ability to detect
signal point pairs that are low-order neighbors, and its
ability to detect signal point pairs that are separated by noise
or interference points. Figure 5 illustrates this difference.
Figure 5b shows the clusters formed by joining each point in
Figure 5a to its nearest neighbor. A high proportion of the
neighbor clusters span the axis of symmetry and join signal
pairs. Figure 5c shows a stimulus with a 0.5 deg signal
window separation, and Figure 5d the clusters formed by
joining each point in 5c to its nearest neighbor. As can be
seen, none of the signal pairs in 5d form a nearest neighbor
cluster. Symmetrical structure is still detectable, but only
via long-range comparisons of the clusters.
A similar process appears to be at work during the
perception of structure in Glass patterns (Glass, 1969).
Glass patterns are produced by subjecting an array of
random dots to a uniform geometric transformation and
superimposing the transformed array on the original. A
distinction has been made between the high detectability of
Glass pattern point-pairs that are low-order neighbors, and

Given these data fits and the known parametric complexity
of the models, it is possible to calculate the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) for each model (Schwarz,
1978). The relative likelihood of each model can then be
determined by calculating Bayes Factors (Kass & Raftery,
1995). Table 1 summarizes the results of the analyses,
showing the maximum likelihood fit of the three series
predicted by each model, the number of model parameters,
and the BIC and Bayes factors. The Bayesian analyses
indicate that the data provide the most evidence for the
Short-Range Proximity Advantage model, with the Linear
Proximity Advantage model being about 2x106 times less
likely, and the No Proximity Advantage model being about
8x1013 times less likely. It should be remembered that this
does not suggest that the Short-Range Proximity model
provides the sole plausible explanation for the data, but
merely indicates that of the three models tested, the No
Proximity Advantage and Linear Proximity Advantage
models can be discounted as less likely explanations than
the Short-Range Proximity Advantage model.

Discussion
The structure in symmetrical dot stimuli can be described as
a distribution of uniformly oriented pairs of points with
collinear midpoints, and it has been suggested that it is these
first-order regularities that the visual system is perceiving
during symmetry detection tasks (Jenkins, 1983). However,
the results of this study suggest that not all point-pairs
contribute equally to the perception of structure or order;
therefore a model of symmetry perception based on
orientation and collinearity information alone is not
sufficient to explain the pattern of observer responses
typically found in symmetry detection tasks.
Past research has indicated that there is a perceptual
advantage for symmetry information located immediately
adjacent to the central axis but it has been unclear whether
this was due to the temporal or spatial properties of the
stimulus. The present study has demonstrated that when
temporal limitations are removed the perceptual advantage
remains. This indicates that the advantage is due, at least in
part, to the spatial properties of symmetrical stimuli.
A distinction between the present study and the majority
of previous research is the finding that, when the proportion
of symmetrical information within the signal windows was
high, observers are able to make correspondences between
symmetrical point pairs regardless of their spatial
separation. Given that the task conditions allowed both
unlimited viewing time and free visual search it is hardly
surprising that the observers were able to detect symmetry
pairings located outside of the strictly delimited region
implicated in previous research. Nevertheless, it is not
immediately obvious why point-pairs located directly
adjacent to the axis should appear more salient than all other
signal pairings.
Wertheimer (1938) recognized the role of proximity as a
primary organizing principle in visual perception, and the
data appear to indicate some form of relationship between
616

the less easily detected ‘striation’ caused by increasing interpoint distance such that there are a number of interference
points that lie between the two points in a signal pair
(Stevens, 1978). Nearest neighbour relations have been
used to model structure detection and discrimination in
Glass patterns (Dry et al., submitted), and a similar model
should be able to account for the perception of structure in
symmetrical stimuli.
It is recognized that the research presented in this paper is
preliminary and more data is needed before firm conclusions
can be made about the nature of the spatial features
exploited by the visual system when detecting structure in
symmetrical stimuli. However, the data provided by this
study, in conjunction with the results of a number of
previous studies (Labonte et al., 1995; Tyler et al., 1995),
have important implications for the future development of
models of symmetry detection. Recent models of symmetry
detection have tended to focus solely upon detecting
structure located at the axis of symmetry. This paper adds
to the body of research suggesting that a plausible model of
symmetry detection must be capable of detecting structure
across a wide range of separation distances.

Acknowledgements
I thank Douglas Vickers and Nick Burns for their advice,
and Michael Lee for his invaluable programming assistance
and advice concerning the analyses.

References
Ahuja, N. (1982). Dot Pattern Processing Using Voronoi
Neighborhoods. Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 4(3), 336-343.
Barlow, H. (2001). The exploitation of regularities in the
environment by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24(4), 602-607.
Barlow, H. B., & Reeves, B. C. (1979). The versatility and
absolute efficiency of detecting mirror symmetry in
random dot displays. Vision Research, 19, 783-793.
Dry, M. J., Vickers, D., Lee, M. D., & Hughes, P.
(submitted). The role of nearest neighbors in the
perception of Glass patterns.
Glass, L. (1969). Moiré Effect from Random Dots. Nature,
223, 578-580.
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1974). Signal Detection
Theory and Psychophysics. New York: Krieger.
Jenkins, B. (1983). Component processes in the perception
of bilaterally symmetric dot textures. Perception &
Psychophysics, 34(5), 433-440.
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 90(430), 773-796.
Labonte, F., Shapira, Y., Cohen, P., & Faubert, J. (1995). A
Model for Global Symmetry Detection in Dense Images.
Spatial Vision, 9(1), 33-55.
Pomerantz, J. R. (1981). Perceptual Organization in
Information Processing. In M. Kubovy & J. R. Pomerantz
(Eds.), Perceptual Organization. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rainville, S. J. M., & Kingdom, F. A. A. (2002). Scale
invariance is driven by stimulus density. Vision Research,
42, 351-367.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model.
Annals of Statistics, 6, 461-464.
Stevens, K. A. (1978). Computation of Locally Parallel
Structure. Biological Cybernetics, 29, 19-28.
Tyler, C. W., Hardage, L., & Miller, R. T. (1995). Multiple
Mechanisms for the Detection of Mirror Symmetry.
Spatial Vision, 9(1), 79-100.
Vickers, D., Lee, M. D., Dry, M. J., & Hughes, P. (2003).
The roles of the convex hull and the number of potential
intersections in performance on visually presented
traveling salesperson problems. Memory & Cognition,
31(7), 1094-1104.
Wagemans, J., Van Gool, L., Swinnen, V., & Van
Horebeek, J. (1993). Higher-Order Structure in Regularity
Detection. Vision Research, 33(8), 1067-1088.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A Source Book of Gestalt
Psychology. New York: Harcourt.

Figure 5: Examples clustering formed by joining nearest
neighbors. 5a) Stimulus with a signal window containing
100% symmetry and zero separation. 5b) Clusters formed
by joining each point in 5a to its nearest neighbor. 5c)
Stimulus with a signal window containing 100% symmetry
and 0.5 deg separation. 5d) Clusters formed by joining each
point in 5c to its nearest neighbor.

617

