UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mitigation Theory: An Integrated Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15r5s96s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gratch, Jonathan
Mao, Wenji
Marsella, Stacy
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mitigation Theory: An Integrated Approach
Bilyana Martinovski (martinovski@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
13274 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292

Wenji Mao (mao@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
13274 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292

Jonathan Gratch (gratch@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
13274 Fiji Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292

Stacy Marsella (marsella@isi.edu)
Information Science Institute, University of Southern California
4676 Admiralty Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292

The paper starts with a description of background studies such as Shaver’s model of blame assignment, Lazarus’
coping strategies, and linguistic approaches to mitigation.
We then proceed with an integrating description of mitigation theory, analysis of data, and a conclusion.

Abstract
The purpose of this paper is to develop a theoretical model
of mitigation by integrating cognitive and discourse approaches to appraisal and coping. Mitigation involves strategic, emotional, linguistic, and Theory of Mind processes
on different levels of consciousness. We emphasize that
discourse analysis can assist our understanding of these
processes.

Approaches to Mitigation
Mitigation is a cognitive but also a linguistic and a social
phenomenon. It is applied to describe both expressions of
politeness and reactions to stressors, such as blame. Below we describe relevant approaches to it, which independently arrive at compatible observations.

Keywords: Mitigation; Discourse analysis; Attribution;
Appraisal; Coping; Cognition.

Introduction

Psychological Studies on Blame Attribution

Social judgment processes such as blame and mitigation
involve human abilities to perceive and appraise one’s
own cognitive states and processes as well as the cognitive states and processes of others (Mead, 1993). Mitigation is of particular interest because it is a form of coping
with stress and is typically realized in discourse. Spoken
language discourse integrates different levels of consciousness (Allwood, 1996; Chafe, 1995) and is one of
our few empirical entries to cognition (Edwards, 1997).
Mitigation involves argumentation (Toulmin, 1958; van
Eemeren and Grootendorst, 2004) thus it is also a way we
practice and learn social judgment, which is involved in
the creation, maintenance and change of social institutions
including the concept of self.
In this paper we develop a theory of mitigation by integrating psychological, cognitive and discourse approaches
to responsibility, blame (Shaver, 1985), and coping (Lazarus, 1999). We explore how judgments of blame and defense are realized in institutional discourse such as court
trials and what is the relation between the mitigation and
the discourse structure. We identify linguistic features,
which can be used to recognize mitigation reasoning in
discourse.

Attribution theory has explored people’s assessments of
the accountability of social behavior for decades. The
attribution approach focuses on the descriptive features of
behavior explanation by identifying the broad features
people use in determining cause, responsibility and
blameworthiness. Among them, the models of Shaver
(1985) and Weiner (1995) are the most influential. The
judgment process underlying their models relies on several conceptual variables. Take Shaver’s model as an example. First one assesses causality, distinguishing between personal causality (i.e., human agency) versus impersonal causality (i.e., situational factor). If human
agency is involved, the judgment proceeds by assessing
whether the actor possessed the foreknowledge about the
action and its consequence; whether the actor intended to
produce the action consequence; whether the actor had
choices or acted under coercion? Causality and coercion
determine who is responsible for the outcome, while intention and foreknowledge determine the degree of responsibility assigned. Finally, one takes mitigating circumstances into account. Two kinds of mitigating factors
come into play in the judgment process. Excuse seeks to
1407

Shaver’s general psychological variables related to blame
(see previous sections).
Mitigation involves argumentation, which is a more
general strategy for practice and change of social judgment (Eemeren and Grootendorst, 2004). Both in mitigation and in argumentation, the speaker aims at choosing
arguments to alter the hearer’s standpoint, but argumentation focuses on the themes of proving the correctness of
the conclusion and the logical forms. Argumentation
techniques can help mitigating, but in general, the mitigation process is driven by the internal motive of the
speaker in avoiding being held blameworthy/guilty for the
wrongdoing, rather than the truth of arguments (Goldman,
1997; Martinovski, 2000).
How do we describe the relationship between the concrete linguistic expression in interaction and the cognitive
level of appraisal? This is what the next two sections are
about.

change the variable values in order to effect a judgment
result. It is given when one admits to having caused the
negative event, but does not accept (or fully accept) responsibility for it. Justification, on the other hand, seeks
to change the beliefs and values of the accuser. It is offered when one accepts responsibility, but refuses that it
was a bad thing to have done, so as to avoid blame, and
perhaps gain credit.

Coping
Mitigation can be described in the light of coping (Martinovski and Marsella, 2003, 2005). Appraisal theory (e.g.
Scherer et al., 2001) has argued that emotions arise from a
person’s appraisal of the event. To deal with the resulting
emotions, particularly dysphoric emotions, people employ
in turn a wide range of coping strategies (Lazarus, 1999).
These various strategies can be characterized into several
broad classes. Lazarus mentions and elaborates the idea of
two main coping strategies in psychological research:
problem-focused coping and emotion-focused coping.
Problem-focused strategies include taking action (actively
addressing the stressor), planning and seeking instrumental support. Emotion-focused coping strategies include
suppression, seeking emotional support, restraint, acceptance, turn to religion, denial, and disengagement.
These strategies raise questions on the Theory of Mind
processes involved in coping: coping with own emotions/attitudes and coping with other’s emotions/attitudes.
Martinovski and Marsella’s (2003) analysis suggests that
the coping process as such is two directional: when faced
with stress such as blame people work simultaneously on
changing other’s mental models of them and on maintaining their own mental model of their own selves.

Integration into a Theory of Mitigation
In order to give a holistic view of the social judgment
process, the theoretical model presented here integrates a
number of components and distinctions involved in the
cognitive process of mitigation1 such as politeness/defense, potentiality/actuality, Theory of Mind processes, attribution/appraisal, coping/mitigation, cognitive/pragmatic patterns, and social judgment as learning.
To begin with, we need to integrate the two main pragmatic aspects of mitigation: one related to saving face and
politeness and the other related to defensive reaction to
accusations. We capture these by distinguishing between
acceptability (primarily related to face work) and responsibility (primarily related to defense and accusation) (see
Figure 1 below), on one hand and between potential and
actual triggers of mitigation, on the other.
Mitigation prior to the triggering event can be described
as a result of a mentally simulated appraisal processes,
which foresees a dis-preferred outcome/s of a future action and offers a mitigated version of that action before it
happens. Another way of integrating potentiality and actuality is the distinction between preventive and active
coping strategies/discourse moves (see below).
The arguments and coping strategies available might be
the same when saving own face and saving other’s face
but the procedures arriving at such mitigations require
different Theory of Mind inferences or simulation processes. When saving face of other one must first establish a
model of the other’s mind, both actual state and desired
state and then relate to that desired state, where the relation will be determined by a number of factors such as
relevant memory, emotion, future goals, biological state,
and situation. Saving own face involves mental simulation
of or inferences about the models others have of one,
which is then matched to desired model of self as well as

Linguistic Studies on Mitigation
Within the study of discourse, mitigation has been defined
broadly as weakening or downgrading of interactional
parameters, which affects allocation and shuffling of
rights and obligations (Caffi, 1999), as a way “to ease the
anticipated unwelcome effect” (Fraser, 1999, pp. 342) or
as the “reduction of vulnerability” (Martinovski, 2000).
Discourse mitigation is also distinguished from legal mitigation. In the first case, mitigation is mainly directed to
face-work (Brown and Levinson, 1987), whereas in the
legal context mitigation is related mainly to defense,
credibility and guilt issues.
An attempt to relate concrete verbal behavior, cognition
and argumentation in courts is Martinovski’s (ibid.)
framework for analysis of mitigation. Within this framework there are three main reactions to allegation called
defense moves: admission, avoidance (prolepsis), and
denial (including counter-attack). These realize different
mitigation arguments, such as lack of intention, lack of
agency, shared agency (or responsibility), common
knowledge, authority, and credibility. In fact, Martinovski’s analysis of mitigation in courts is based only on
discourse analysis but arrives at categories similar to

1

Here we will just touch on each component respecting the
space restrictions.

1408

Self

Actual/
Potential
Event

Appraisal

Responsibility
Attribution
Process
Acceptability

Mitigation
Cognitive
Process

Allegation
or
Threat

Coping Strategies
-----------------------Discourse Moves

Mental Operators
-----------------------Arguments+Acts

Changed
Variable
values

Linguistic
patterns

Reappraisal

Other

Figure 1 Mitigation Processes

or allegations. One may prevent by accepting, avoiding or
by attacking.
The relation between cognitive and discourse processes is described as a mapping of cognitive and linguistic
patterns. The analogy between the discourse moves of
mitigation and the psychological strategies for dealing
with a stressor helps us to trace the discursive realization
of the involved cognitive processes in interaction (see
Martinovski and Marsella, 2005). Mental operators are
the cognitive correspondents to arguments and communicative acts. Discourse moves correspond to coping strategies, employ much larger context and realize across larger
amounts of talk or reasoning whereas communicative acts
realize as utterances or as few adjacent utterances. Arguments are linguistic formulations, which use attribution
variables for the purpose of mitigation. Besides the acceptability and responsibility attribution variables listed
earlier there are also other mitigating arguments such as
reference to commonsense (or shared knowledge) and
authority. These are used to support reasoning towards
the acceptability of consequence or action and to support
credibility (see next section). If there is no memory or no
trust in the speaker it is unlikely that his/her excuses or
justifications will be acceptable no matter what variables
they concern.
Communicative acts, mitigation moves and arguments
are expressed into concrete linguistic patterns. On the
discourse surface we may find recognizable combinations
of communication features, such as elliptic clauses, cutoff words, self-repetitions, pauses, lower voice, gestures,
modal expressions, etc., which seem to be independent of
language, culture and legal system (Martinovski, 2000).
For instance, denials tend to be formulated as correction.
In contrast, admissions typically consist of confirmations
followed by accounts.
Finally, the outcome of the mitigation process consists
of changed variables (i.e. change in degree and/or relevance) and these new values/variables go through a reappraisal process, which also influences the emotional
coloring of the experience. The whole procedure may be
repeated number of times before final consensus, personal

matching of own model of present and historical self with
own model of desired self. These cognitive procedures
apply also to mitigation as reaction to accusation. As
mentioned earlier, they appear to be realized simultaneously on discourse level. These complex relations between self and other are schematically represented in Figure 1, as all-influencing ‘self’ and ‘other’ categories.
Furthermore, we need to elaborate on the relationship
between attribution theory and the process of appraisal. In
our framework, the initial appraisal consists of the cognitive attribution process involved in assignment of blame.
It consists of two main criteria, acceptability and responsibility. Acceptability of consequence and action refers to
local or universal values such as right or wrong, good or
bad and thus involve the face work functions of mitigation. Responsibility involves attribution variables such as
cause, sharedness, intention, foreseeability, volition, coercion, and capacity (Shaver, 1985; Martinovski, 2000;
Martinovski and Marsella, 2003). These are then used in
mitigating arguments expressed by justifications and excuses, where justifications concern wrongdoing and excuses concern responsibility. These variables are related
to each other, which can be seen even in discourse (see
Example E2 in next section).
The outcome of the initial appraisal is a predicted/expected threat (which one thinks other/s might
direct to one or other) or an actual allegation (which self
or other’s direct to one). The appraisal process generates
emotions related to it, which influence the outcome
(Scherer et al., 2001). Together they contribute to the conscious or not so conscious choice of coping strategy. The
classification of coping strategies, such as in Lazarus
(1999), corresponds roughly to Martinovski’s mitigation
moves. We may distinguish between coping by facing the
stressor and dealing with it, coping by avoidance
of/preventing the stressor, and coping by acceptance of
stressor. These categories are not exclusive i.e. some coping strategies (see section ‘coping’ above) such as ‘focusing on and venting’ can be seen as a combination of both
active coping and acceptance of stressor. Prevention is a
strategy, which deals with expected or anticipated threats
1409

or interpersonal, is reached. The reversibility of the procedure reflects also the learning character of the process.
In the next section, we will illustrate the categories referred to in the theoretical exposition with a few short and
representative examples. The multilingual corpus used
here consists of trial data and thus deals with already
stated allegations2. The fact that similar patterns appear in
different languages, legal systems and cultures inspires us
to think that the mitigation theory we present here is not a
local phenomenon.

2. D: < (yes) beer I mostly run on beer> <quiet>
The evasive answer on the second line3 above refers to
a general state of affairs thus display desire to avoid acceptance of guilt but at the same time providing generally
but not necessarily specific truthful information. The
mitigation argument is commonsense or common knowledge i.e. speaker displays or signals that what he is speaking about is a principle fact or a matter-of-fact or a belief
shared by the members of the socio-cultural community to
which he belongs and is thus understandable to ‘everyone’, including the participants in the discursive activity.
It is presented by the idiomatic metaphorical expression
‘run on’ (i.e. he runs on beer as cars run on gas) and formulated as a correction with topicalization of the mitigating evidence, i.e. he drank beer not harder alcohol. The
entire speech act of admission is uttered in a very low
voice and the initial confirmation ‘yes’ is almost inaudiable, which indicates the desire to avoid the admission of blame. Line two above realizes the coping strategies of avoidance, acceptance, and countering at the same
time where acceptance is most prominently expressed
although mitigated. Of course, there are complex Theory
of Mind processes involved too (see Martinovski and
Marsella, 2003 for detail).

Discussion and Analysis of Data
Allwood (1976) suggests that mental acts (or operators)
are directed at different kinds of objects of consciousness,
which in our case are concepts such as intention, agency,
cause etc. These objects may be accompanied by different
attitudes or emotions, which can be reflected in the information structure of e.g. an utterance or in the voice or
gesture. The background of these acts may consist of different degrees of Theory of Mind models of self and
other. There can be different levels of consciousness,
which can also be reflected in the linguistic realization of
discourse, in the speech order, the tone, the gesture. Spoken language discourse is multimodal and thus invite realization on different levels of awareness or intentionality,
which is reflected in Allwood’s distinction between indication (when we convey information without intending to
do so), display (when we intend to show something to
somebody) and signal (when we signal that we are displaying something). These levels of consciousness can be
traced in discourse (Edwards, 1997). Allwood distinguishes also between different types of agent of consciousness, namely individual or collective. In that sense,
dialogue can be seen as a tool for collective thinking and
focus.
Mitigation in courts is, in this context, a process of collective re-evaluation and re-appraisal. In interaction all
the coping strategies and the mental operators can be realized simultaneously. Lets look at some examples.

Countering, no-agency/no-intention, and correction
In the next example we have the discourse move of countering realized with no-agency and no-intention arguments presented as a correction (as a speech act). The noagency mitigation accepts action but denies or silences
agency. It is typically realized by topicalization and emphatics (indicated below with capitals). In the example
below the defense counsel (DC) puts an inference-based
declarative question, which indicates agency on the behalf
of the witness. In his answer the witness rebuts this inference by topicalizing and emphasizing the lack of agency.
Example E2:
1. DC: so you moved towards Nilsson then
2. Pl: THE DOOR moved towards Nilsson I moved inside
inside the car /

Avoidance, common knowledge, and admission
In the following example the Prosecutor (P) tries to establish if the Defendant (D) has been drinking the night of
the crime; in case he has the final sentence increases in
severity (J stands for judge, Pl – for plaintiff, DC – defense counsel, / stands for pause, <> defines the scope of
the described feature, (…) stands for inaudiable speech,
capital letters for emphatics, + for cut-offs, : stands for
prolonged speech).

This example shows the close relation between noagency and no-intention mitigations: correcting the ascription of agency he distances himself from the ascription of intention of hitting ‘Nilsson’ with the door of the
car. Intentionality is understood differently in different
cultures and legal systems. Having no intentions to do
wrong is an acceptable justification in Roman law.
On discourse level, no-agency arguments are typically
formulated as corrections and counters i.e. as mitigated
forms of denial, which corresponds to Shaver’s analysis
of justification. In contrast, no-intention mitigations are
introduced suggestively after the admission of the alleged

Example E1:
1. P: but that particular evening afternoon evening you
had you been drinking alcohol then /
2

Here we will use only few examples from the Swedish data.
Martinovski (2000, 2003, 2005) uses also Bulgarian and English
data.

3

This is the last instance of a long sequence of evasive answers
by the same witness on the topic of his drinking ‘that night’.

1410

action, which corresponds to Shaver's analysis of excuses
i.e. even on the linguistic surface the responsibility/causality is dealt first with.

the pressure of accusations with regard to his sobriety
during the actual day of the crime. He has already used
number of mitigating strategies but the examiner still
formulates his inferential declarative question (a very
suggestive formulation, thus we are not surprised he talks
to his own client) on line one in a way, which implies that
the witness is often drunk or drinking.

Acceptance, shared responsibility/no-intention
and admission
In the next example we have mitigation through reference
to shared responsibility (i.e. Shaver’s multiple causality)
or partial shift of blame, which is also a coping strategy
associated more with active dealing with stressor than
with acceptance or avoidance of stressor. After the acceptance of wrongdoing follows mitigation by contesting
aspects and degrees of responsibility using the attribution
variables. That is, we have two coping strategies realized
in the same turn. The judge (J) is explicitly requesting the
defendant’s consent or admission (line 1).

Example E5:
1. P: so you were after all in somewhat good CONDITION you mean
2. Pl: YES: / I was of course // after all the police
THOUGHT so when i was at the police station
The defendant is eager to be believed which he displayed, indicated and probably even signaled by the emphatic initial confirmation, modal expression of known
states-of-affairs ‘of course’ (Swedish ‘ju’) and after a
pause a reference to the indisputable statement of the authority. All these features realize his desire to mitigate the
perceived accusation of non-credibility, which he infers
from the formulation of the previous inference.
In short, admission in courts have the following reoccurring pattern: confirmation item (e.g. ‘yes’) + account
(justification, excuse, narrative) + mitigation items (e.g.,
voice, hesitation, self-repetition, pauses) + admission. The
general preferred pattern realizing coping dominated by
avoidance and acceptance is:

Example E3:
1. J: alright what is it said / there than
2. D: yes it is like this of course that Bengt felt he he was
with me when I made the deal so then he <pay+> paid too
a certain amount of <mon+> money didn’t he / and then it
was this that we we register the car on me eh eh what it
<de+> depended on other circumstances / and eh / that I
made myself guilty of this is is OK I think I I have made a
mistake then
The elicited admission starts with a positive feedback
item, which serves as a receiver of the given turn. This
item is followed by a narrative, which ends with an explicit declaration of the speaker’s understanding of the
wrongdoing and approval of the accusation. However, the
narrative refers to co-authors of the crime and by the use
of the modal expression ‘of course’ the defendant signals
the self-given or known character of the information he
gives. The defendant minimizes his own guilt before presenting the admission in this way initiating negotiation of
guilt and at the same time acting cooperatively.
See a similar pattern in another extract:

confirmation + account [arguments:
commonsense
authority
shared responsibility…]
A preferred pattern for actively dealing with stressor or
countering is:
No confirmation, direct correction with emphasis or
topicalization [argument: no intention
no agency…]

Example E4:
1. DC: against / Nilsson then
2. Pl: <yes exactly> he WAS STANDING in front of the
door of the car <quiet>

The data analysis suggests that the procedural cognitive
strategies and arguments are realized in dialogue simultaneously in the same utterance and/or turn, which indicates
that cognitive processes are either not organized linearily
and/or that the speed of processing is high in comparison
to speed of speech.

Here the defense counsel alleges on line one that the
plaintiff has hit intentionally the defendant by opening
aggressively the door of a car. On line two the plaintiff
responds with the same pattern but uses a different argument, namely no-intention and instead of topicalization
we have emphatics.

Conclusion
The integrated theory of mitigation presented here described mitigation as a dynamic appraisal process, in
which cognitive and linguistic procedures and variables
are mapped into each other. The dialogue functions as a
tool for collective thinking, re-evaluation, and focus.
Mitigation involves both face saving and reaction accusation processes. The predicted or real result of appraisal
activates coping strategies, which are influenced by self
and other models and goals. These coping strategies in-

Credibility
Credibility and certainty are two variables, which are not
listed in Shaver but are very productive value shifters in
mitigation. They are often associated with arguments such
as reference to authority, references to memory and common knowledge. The witness in the next example has felt
1411

Fraser, B. (1999). Mitigation. Journal of Pragmatics, 31.

volve a set of attribution variables such as cause, intention, credibility etc. which are then realized in recognizable patterns of discursive moves, arguments and communicative acts. The model describes how the meaning of
these concepts and the institutions that sustain them is
publicly negotiated.
In the future, we intend to analyze more data from different social contexts and explore further discourse patterns. One area of application for the theory is to inform
the formal modeling and simulation of human behavior in
agent-based systems, where it would mediate agent interactions. Specifically, it could be incorporated within virtual humans, software agents that look like, act like and
interact with humans within a virtual world (Rickel et al.,
2002). Such incorporation will create a bridge between
natural language/dialogue module and task planning/emotion module (Gratch & Marsella, 2004; Mao &
Gratch, 2004).

Goldman, A. I. (1997). Argumentation and Impersonal
Justification. Argumentation, 11, 155-164.
Gratch, J. and Marsella, S. (2004). A DomainIndependent Framework for Modeling Emotion. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 5(4), 269-306.
Lazarus, R. S. (1999). Stress and Emotion. New York:
Springer Publishing Company, Inc.
Mao, W. and J. Gratch (2004). Social Judgment in Multiagent Interactions. Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems.
Martinovski, B. (2000). The Role of Repetitions and Reformulations in Court Proceedings: A Comparison between Sweden and Bulgaria. Ph. D. Thesis. Goteborg
University Press.

Acknowledgment

Martinovski, B. and Marsella, S. (2003). Coping processes in discourse: dynamic reconstruction of selfhood.
Proceeding of the 4th International Conference on Cognitive Science, Sydney, Australia.

We are grateful to Dr. David Traum for his support.
The project described here has been sponsored by the
U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering
Command (RDECOM). Statements and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the United States Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred.

Martinovski, B. and Marsella, S. (2005). Theory of Mind
and Coping in Discourse. Artificial Intelligence and the
Simulation of Behavior (AISB) 2005 Symposia on
Mind-Minding Agents.
Mead, G.H. (1993). Mind, self, and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

References
Allwood, J. (1976). Linguistic Communication as Action
and Cooperation. Gothenburg Monographs in Linguistics 2, University of Goteborg, Department of Linguistics.

Rickel, S. Marsella, J. Gratch, R. Hill, D. Traum, and W.
Swartout. (2002). Toward a New Generation of Virtual
Humans for Interactive Experiences. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 17(4), 32-38.

Allwood, J. (1996). Some comments on Wallace Chafe’s
“How Consciousness Shapes Language”. Pragmatics
and Cognition, 4(1).

Scherer, K. R., Schorr, A., and Johnstone, T. (2001). Appraisal Processes in Emotion. Oxford University Press.

Brown, P. and Levison, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some
Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge University
Press.

Shaver, K. G. (1985). The Attribution of Blame: Causality, Responsibility and Blameworthiness. SpringerVerlag.

Caffi, C. (1999). On Mitigation. Journal of Pragmatics,
31.

Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge
University press.

Edwards, D. (1997). Discourse and Cognition. London:
SAGE Publications.

Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of Responsibility: A Foundation for a Theory of Social Conduct. The Guilford
Press.

van Eemeren, F.H. and Grootendorst, R. (2004). A Systematic Theory of Argumentation: The PragmaDialected Approach. Cambridge University Press.

1412

