UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mixed Effects of Training on Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8tt6q06x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cousineau, Denis
Helie, Sebastien

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mixed Effects of Training on Transfer
Sébastien Hélie (helie.sebastien@courrier.uqam.ca)

Department of Computer Science, C.P. 8888 Succ. Centre-Ville
Montréal, PQ H3C 3P8 (CANADA)

Denis Cousineau (denis.cousineau@umontreal.ca)
Department of Psychology, C.P. 6128 Succ. Centre-Ville
Montréal, PQ H3C 3J7 (CANADA)

search task and transferred to the visual and memory search
task while the other half did the opposite. The results
showed that training in visual and memory search fully
transferred to memory search. On the other hand, training in
memory search transferred only partially to the visual and
memory search task. Hillstrom and Logan concluded that
there is a global component, common to both tasks, and a
private component, present only in visual and memory
search. Moreover, results from their Experiment 3 suggested
that the private component was closely related to the stimuli
used. However, in Hillstrom and Logan’s experiments, the
memory search condition was entirely embedded in the
visual and memory search condition. Therefore, the
observed transfer is not a surprise.
Another task in which learning transfer was found is the
string verification task (Haider & Frensch, 1996; 1999;
2002). In Haider and Frensch’s experiments, participants
were asked to verify the validity of letter strings of the kind
“A [4] F G H”. The task was to determine if the letters were
an ordered segment from the alphabet. In the second
position, a number always appeared in brackets. It indicated
the number of letters skipped between the first and third
positions. The string length varied between three and seven.
The important points are that the number was always four, it
was always in the second position and, if the string was not
an ordered segment of the alphabet, the problem was always
at the third position.
Haider and Frensch (1996; 1999) postulated that
participants would notice the consistency of the error
position and ignore the remaining of the string (the
reduction of information theory). Results supported their
hypothesis: After extensive training, participants were
presented with new strings and the ability to ignore useless
information transferred to these new strings. Nevertheless,
response times of the new strings were still slower then
those of the original (training) strings. They concluded that
these slower response times revealed the presence of
another component, specific to the stimuli, which did not
transfer.
Haider and Frensch’s decomposition of skills (1996) was
further studied in a perceptual learning setting (Goldstone,
1998, Doane et al., 1996). Doane and her colleagues
independently tested stimulus-related and task-related
knowledge in same-different tasks (Bamber, 1969)
involving abstract polygons. Specifically, the discrimination
difficulty in the learning phase was varied in order to
measure its effect on transfer. Results showed that a harder
learning phase lead to better performance on novel stimuli.

Abstract
The study of learning transfer yields conflicting patterns of
results. While some research shows strong effects of previous
learning, others show no such effects. This is a consequence
of the absence of consensus on what parts of a skill is
transferred. In the present paper, we suggest that learning can
be divided into general task-related components and specific
stimulus-related ones. In one condition, participants were
transferred to a new set of stimuli while continuing to perform
the same task. Results show an absence of benefit right after
the transfer and the presence of long-lasting interference. In
the opposite condition, the results show no effects of previous
training. These diverging results are best explained by a
model of higher-level skill acquisition: knowledge
partitioning.

Introduction
The decomposition of performance has a long history in
psychology. It was first proposed by Donder (1868), who
proposed the subtractive method to measure the speed of
“psychological acts”. This method was further developed by
Sternberg in the late sixties (Sternberg, 1969) and more
recently using the mean interaction contrast model (Thomas,
2000). In all these models, the decomposition occurs at the
level of a single response and the goal is to identify the
sequence of operations between the stimulation and the
response (e.g. encoding, decision, response selection, etc.).
More recently, other researchers have proposed another
way of decomposing cognitive processes. In this approach,
the performance is decomposed by whether improvement
results from repeated exposure to the stimuli or repeated
exposure to the task (Haider & Frensch, 1996, 1999).
Therefore, it does not aim at identifying the stimulusresponse chain of processing. However, this level of
analysis is particularly interesting in the study of learning
transfer because, during transfer, either the stimuli or the
task are changed in part or in whole.
Hillstrom and Logan (1998) have tested this approach
using memory search vs. visual and memory search. In the
two conditions of their Experiment 1, participants first had
to memorize a set of letters prior to a block of trials. On
each trial, participants saw letters in the test display and had
to decide whether there was an element from the memorized
set or not. The only difference between the two conditions
was the test display. In the memory search condition, a
single letter appeared in the display. In the visual and
memory search condition, an array of letters appeared in the
display. Half of the participants were trained in the memory

929

Experiment

In all studies mentioned (Doane et al., 1996; Haider &
Frensch, 1996; Hillstrom & Logan, 1998), skills were
decomposed in general proficiencies, which are transferable
to new situations, and specific proficiencies, unique to each
experimental condition. Accordingly, the aspects
manipulated in this paper are task-related and stimulusrelated. Task-related aspects are everything held constant
from trial to trial (tempo, responses keys, etc.) while
stimulus-related aspects are everything that may change
from one trial to the next (here, the stimulus shown).
The studies just described had shortcomings related to
these particular aspects. First, in the study by Hillstrom and
Logan (1998), one task was embedded into the other: we
avoided this problem by using two different tasks: visual
search and categorization. Second, in Haider and Frensch’s
study (1996), the stimuli used (the letter strings) remained
of the same nature during training and transfer; the same
was true of Doane et al.’s (1996) study. It is therefore
difficult to distinguish general stimulus-related knowledge
from task-related knowledge (Doane et al., 1996). In the
present work, we avoided this problem by using two
different sets of stimuli: radial stimuli and Gabor patches.
Two additional issues were explored. The first one bears
directly on the following primary question: What underlies
the improvement in performance? Several studies have
shown that mean response times tend to diminish with
practice (Cousineau & Larochelle, 2004; Shiffrin &
Schneider, 1977). But, how is this measure getting smaller?
Is it because the fastest times get faster or is it because the
slower response times become less frequent? One way of
addressing this issue is by examining response time
distributions. The Weibull distribution is likely to resolve
this issue because it separates changes in spread from
changes in position (Cousineau, Goodman & Shiffrin, 2002;
Weibull, 1951). The probability density function (PDF) of a
response time t is given by:
−γ

f (t ) = β γ (t − α )

γ −1

e

−(

t −α

β

An experimental design, where some participants could use
previously acquired knowledge of the stimuli during transfer
while others could use previously acquired knowledge of
the task, was used. Two tasks and two stimulus sets were
required to achieve this. The two tasks were visual search
and categorization. The two stimulus sets were composed of
radial stimuli and Gabor patches. Each task was performed
with each stimulus set, resulting in four conditions: (1)
visual search with Gabor patches (VS × Gabor), (2) visual
search with radial stimuli (VS × radials), (3) categorization
with Gabor patches (Cat × Gabor) and (4) categorization
with radial stimuli (Cat × radials).
The participants were trained in one of these four
conditions for four sessions. After training, all participants
transferred to the same Cat × Gabor condition for four
additional sessions. Therefore, one group changed task
while keeping the same stimuli (VS × Gabor), another kept
doing the same task with new stimuli (Cat × radials) and the
other two were controls. One of them changed both task and
stimuli (VS × radials) and the other kept doing the same task
using the same stimuli (Cat × Gabor).
The perceptual learning literature (Goldstone, 1998)
predicts a training effect specific to both the task and the
stimuli used. Therefore, no transfer should occur
whatsoever. However, Doane et al. (1996) have shown that
learning a task which requires finer-grain discrimination
should lead to better transfer. Therefore, the VS × Gabor
condition should transfer well to the Cat × Gabor task. The
former requires the participants to discriminate between
every single stimulus whereas the latter only needs category
boundaries. However, one might argue that the
categorization task requires a more complex decision
procedure than visual search: the exclusive-OR (XOR).
Therefore, the discrimination skills acquired during training
in the VS × Gabor condition do not fully prepare
participants for the categorization task. As will be shown,
none of these predictions were correct.

)γ

(1)

where α is the position parameter and represents the
minimum RT, β is the spread parameter and γ is the shape
parameter.
The second issue considered is the duration of the transfer
phase. Although previous studies (Doane et al., 1996;
Haider & Frensch, 1996; Hillstrom & Logan, 1998)
included extensive training, they all used a short transfer
period1. This issue might be critical because the effects of an
extensive period of transfer are unknown. As Haider and
Frensch (2002) pointed out, strategic changes might happen
at any time during training or transfer. In the present,
transfer was studied for as long as training, revealing the
long-term impact of previous training.

Participants
Twenty-four undergraduates from the Université de
Montréal participated in this experiment. Two participants
quitted and were replaced to keep groups of equal size. All
participants were paid for their participation.

Apparatus and Stimuli
Two stimulus sets were used, each covered by Gaussian
envelops. The first set was composed of sixteen Gabor
patches. Two dimensions were varied to individually define
the patches: frequency and orientation. The second set was
also composed of sixteen stimuli, each created by applying a
sine-wave function on a radial space. These radial stimuli
were individually created by varying their curvature and
their frequency. The two stimulus sets are shown in Figure
1.
Each stimulus occupied 3.7 × 3.7 degrees of visual angle.
They were presented on a 17-inches SVGA monitor. The
Experiment was conducted on Pentium-III PCs.

1

The exception is Hillstrom and Logan’s (1998) Experiment 1, in
which the transfer phase lasted as long as training. However,
transfer duration was not the focus of their paper.
930

Hence, the context varied as well as the task2.

Results
Three sessions from three different participants are missing
due to computer problems. A training Task × training
Stimuli × Session ANOVA was performed on the
participants’ accuracy at transfer. This analysis confirmed
an improvement with practice (F(3, 51) = 51.13, p < .01).
Mean accuracy was 67% in the first transfer session and
82% in the last. Because error rates were similar across
conditions (all other Fs < 0.99), the following analysis
concentrates on responses times.

Figure 1: Stimuli used in the Experiment. The left
panel shows Gabor patches while the right panel
shows radial stimuli.

Response Times
The following response time analyses included only hits. In
the visual search task, hits were correct responses in which
the target was present. In the categorization task, hits were
defined as “A” trials in which participants answered
correctly3. Two participants failed to significantly improve
their response times and were eliminated from further
analyses 4 . Figure 2 shows the learning curves for each
group. A Task × Stimuli × Session ANOVA was performed
on the training phase. First, all groups improved their
response times (F(3, 51) = 16, p < .01). Mean response time
on Session 1 was 762 ms. Second, the interaction Task ×
Session was significant (F(3, 51) = 3.07, p < .05). Response
times in both tasks were similar in the first three sessions of
training (all Fs < 2.24) but the visual search task was
performed significantly faster (568 ms) in the fourth session
than the categorization task (720 ms, F(1, 17) = 9.38, p <
.01). Other main effects and interactions were not
significant (all Fs < 3.11).
The switch to the transfer phase generated a discontinuity
in the learning curves clearly seen between session four and
five. The exception is the control group Cat × Gabor, for
which the Experiment continued unchanged. Further, Figure
2 shows that all performances were equally degraded (mean
response times of 905 ms in the first block of transfer).
Therefore, prior knowledge of the task or the stimulus set
did not provide any short term advantage in the new settings
(performing a categorization task with Gabor patches). In
order to better visualize the effect of previous learning on
transfer, the transferring groups must be compared with the
first four sessions of the control group which categorized
Gabor patches as a first task (Cat × Gabor). This comparison
is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3 highlights what Figure 2 hinted: there was no
effect of previous learning during the first block of transfer.
This result was confirmed by the absence of a significant

Procedure
Visual Search: In the visual search task, participants were
asked to detect the presence or absence of a target stimulus
as fast as possible. A trial went as follow: First, a black
foreground occupying 12.55 × 12.55 degrees of visual angle
appeared in the center of the display. Second, the target
stimulus appeared in the center of the foreground for 500 ms
and disappeared for 500 ms. Third, three stimuli appeared at
random locations in the foreground. Participants had to
press “y” if the target was present and “n” if it was absent.
Finally, a feedback was displayed, informing participants
about their accuracy and their response time. The target was
present on 50% of the trials. Each session contained four
blocks of 128 trials. At the end of each block, the mean
response time and mean response accuracy of the last block
was displayed and participants were invited to take a break.
Participants were asked to answer as fast as possible without
sacrificing accuracy.
Categorization: In the categorization task, participants had
to classify the stimuli in two groups using the exclusive-OR
logical rule: A Gabor patch was an “A” if it had a near
vertical orientation or high frequency but not both. For
radial stimuli, an “A” had small curvatures or high
frequency but not both. A trial went as follow: A stimulus
appeared in the center of the display. The participant
classified the stimulus either as an “A” or a “B”, by pressing
“a” or “b” accordingly. A feedback similar to the one
described in the visual search task was displayed after each
answer. Half of the trials were “A”s and half were “B”s.
Each session was composed of four blocks of 128 trials. At
the end of each block, a recapitulative feedback was given
(mean response time and accuracy) and the participant was
invited to take a break. Participants were asked to answer as
fast as possible without sacrificing accuracy.
The sessions were completed on consecutive working
days but the transfer could not occur after a week-end. The
participants were told that they were enrolled for two
distinct experiments and two distinct experimenters briefed
them prior to training and prior to transfer. Further, training
and transfer were completed in two different laboratories.

2

These precautions were taken in order to prevent participants
from anticipating the link between both conditions, which might
have artificially elicited transfer.
3
The “A” responses were defined as hits because the categorization
rule given to the participants stated what an A was. The B category
was defined as its complement.
4
One of the excluded participants was from the VS × Gabor
condition and the other was from the control group Cat × Gabor.
931

difference between transferring groups and the control
group Cat × Gabor (t(21) = 0.85, p > .05). A training Task ×
training Stimuli × Session ANOVA was performed on the
response times. The interaction training Task × training
Stimuli × Session was significant (F(3, 51) = 3.68, p < .05).
Therefore, we proceeded to decompositions within each
session. The training Task × training Stimuli interaction
failed to be significant in both Session 1 (F(1, 17) = 0.44, p
> .05) and Session 2 (F(1, 17) = 1.94, p > .05). These results
show that performance was similar for all groups early in
transfer. However, divergences become significant later, as
seen next.

>

900

*
D

Groups

*

VS x radials
VS x Gabor
Cat x radials
Cat x Gabor

>
*
$

$
>
*

900

D

Groups
VS x radials
VS x Gabor
Cat x radials
Cat x Gabor
>
*

Mean response times

$

learning when categorizing Gabor patches. Second, and
more importantly, there is interference of previous taskrelated knowledge on the learning of new stimuli and this
interference is only visible after an extended period of
transfer.

*

Mean response times

800

>

800

D

>

>
>
$

*
$
D

$

700

$

$

*
*
D
D

D

D

>

D

700

*

>
*

*

$

>
D
*
$

*

$
D

D

1

$

$

2

3

4

Sessions

D
D

>

600

$

Figure 3: Learning curves at transfer. The four
transfer sessions are shown for every group
except Cat × Gabor, for which the four training
sessions are shown.

>

>

500
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Sessions

Distributions Analysis

Figure 2: Learning curves averaged by session.

So far, a differential effect of previous training on transfer
has been shown. However, by simply looking at the mean
response times, it is difficult to assess responsibility for
these changes. In this section, we examine whether
improvements happened because slow responses no longer
occurred or because fast responses became faster.
Table 1 shows the parameters of the best fitting Weibull
distributions estimated for each session of transfer using
PASTIS (Cousineau, Brown and Heathcote, 2004;
Cousineau & Larochelle, 1997). A training Task × training
Stimuli × Session ANOVA was performed on each
estimated parameter.
Analysis on the position parameter (α) yielded no
significant effect of the factors (mean α = 371 ms, all Fs <
1.63) as well as no interaction. Therefore, minimum
response times were not affected by the previous phase or
by retraining within the transfer phase.
Analysis on the spread parameter (β ) showed some
effects. First, it diminished with practice (F(3, 51) = 4.61, p
< .01). Mean β was 540 ms in the first session and 418 ms
in the last. Because the position α did not change, the
improvement in means must be related to a smaller number
of longer response times. Second, the training Task ×
training Stimuli interaction reached significance (F(1, 17) =
9.1, p < .01). Decomposition of the effect showed that, for
participants trained in the VS conditions, training stimuli did
not affect the spread of response times (F(1, 17) = 2.31, p >
.05). However, the spread of the response times of
participants trained in the categorization task was affected

In the third and fourth sessions, the training Task ×
training Stimuli interaction were significant (both F(1, 17) >
9.18, p < .01). They were further decomposed. In the third
session of transfer, response times of participants trained in
the visual search task were not affected by their training
stimuli (F(1, 17) = 2.05, p > .05). However, response times
in the control group (Cat × Gabor) were significantly faster
(671 ms) than those of participants trained in the
categorization task using radial stimuli (923 ms, F(1, 17) =
7.97, p < .05). The same pattern of results was found in the
fourth session: Response times of participants trained in the
visual search task were not affected by their training stimuli
(F(1, 17) = 2.12, p > .05) whereas response times of the
control group (Cat × Gabor) were significantly faster than
response times of the group trained in categorization with
radial stimuli (F(1, 17) = 8.02, p < .05).
Post hoc comparisons showed that the two control groups,
Cat × Gabor (during the first 4 sessions) and VS × radials
(when transferred to categorization with Gabor patches) had
identical performance. This result was expected on logical
grounds since both groups had no prior knowledge of the
task and the stimulus set. It indicates that when both task
and stimuli were changed, nothing was left to be transferred.
Retrospectively, it also indicates that our manipulations
were performed correctly.
In sum, analysis of response times suggests two important
results. First, there is no short term benefit of previous

932

by their training stimuli (F(1, 17) = 8.25, p < .05). Response
times of participants trained to categorize radial stimuli
were more sparse (β = 581 ms) than those of participants
trained to categorize Gabor patches (β = 418 ms). The
interference previously detected in mean response times for
the Cat × radials condition is thus explained by a failure to
eliminate longer response times.

responses became faster) or by a change in scale (slow
responses were eliminated)? To be certain that the effects
would be visible, the transfer phase lasted for as long as the
training phase.
The functional decomposition revealed some interesting
effects that would not have been predicted by standard
models of perceptual learning (Goldstone, 1998) or transfer
(Doane et al., 1996; Haider & Frensch, 1996). First,
contrary to the analysis performed by Doane and her
colleagues, the finer-grain discrimination training in the VS
× Gabor condition did not give any short or long term
advantage in the transfer phase (Cat × Gabor). However,
this finding is consistent with previous research, which
found no effect of the specific stimulus-related component
in the learning of a new task (Haider & Frensch, 1996;
Hillstrom & Logan, 1998). In fact, participants trained in the
visual search task using Gabor patches did not differ from
the control groups in learning to categorize Gabor patches.
Therefore, prior knowledge of the stimuli does not provide
any short-term or long-term advantage in learning a new
task.
Findings concerning the general task-related component
did show a surprising effect. Training on the categorization
task with different stimuli did not seem to have any effect
on subsequent learning at first. However, after a few hours
of practice, previous knowledge impaired the learning of
new stimuli in this same task. Similar results were
previously found in A-B / A-Br transfer situations (Rehder,
2001). However, this pattern of results is counterintuitive in
the present experiment for several reasons: First, learning of
the decision process (the categorization rule) did not transfer
to new stimuli. Second, the stimuli in the Cat × radials
condition were changed: Therefore, the stimuli could not
wrongfully be used as retrieval cues (as is the case in the AB / A-Br transfer paradigm). Therefore, task-related latent
interference affected performances when learning a new
class of stimuli in an already practiced task. This framework
suggests that stimulus-related knowledge is encapsulated
within the general task-related knowledge (Hillstrom et
Logan, 1998). Furthermore, our results suggest that each
task can hold a single class of stimuli at any given time.
Therefore, when learning a new class of stimuli in an
already practiced task, one must unlearn the previously
stored stimuli before learning the new ones. This extra work
explains the lack of improvement in the Cat × radial
condition. However, when learning already known stimuli
in a new task (VS × Gabor), no advantage of previous
learning is present because every tasks are independent.
Surprisingly, our results, found in a perceptual learning
(Goldstone, 1996) setting, are best explained by a higherlevel skill learning theory: knowledge partitioning
(Lewandowsky, Kalish & Ngang, 2002). According to this
theory, the association between a stimulus and the desired
response is learned according to a particular context.
Moreover, these parcels of knowledge are independents and
different responses can be associated to a single stimulus in
different contexts. This emphasis on the role of the context
in learning a task was anticipated by Tulving and Thompson
(1971). In the present work, the task constituted a constant
context that can easily be used by participants.

Table 1: Estimated parameters of the best fitting Weibull
distributions

α

β

γ

Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
Session 1
VS × radials
VS × Gabor
Cat × radials
Cat × Gabor
Session 2
VS × radials
VS × Gabor
Cat × radials
Cat × Gabor
Session 3
VS × radials
VS × Gabor
Cat × radials
Cat × Gabor
Session 4
VS × radials
VS × Gabor
Cat × radials
Cat × Gabor

401
335
347
317

97
181
166
175

479
598
564
517

82
136
133
123

1.92
1.93
2.49
2.16

415
362
243
335

38
192
206
153

393
471
656
391

162 1.92 0.22
140 1.6 0.2
243 2.36 0.45
94 2.06 0.51

387
426
407
337

104
151
212
182

349
456
576
373

125 1.98 0.52
83 1.93 0.58
230 2.2 0.92
81 1.89 0.41

387
444
447
350

67
53
73
156

342
410
529
391

94
106
89
98

1.89
1.62
2.02
1.91

0.23
0.14
0.34
0.25

0.32
0.18
0.33
0.44

Finally, analysis on the shape parameter (γ) revealed a
main effect of training task (F(1, 17) = 4.73, p < .05). On a
Weibull distribution, a γ parameter approaching the value 3
reveals a symmetric distribution and a γ < 3 means a
positive asymmetry. In the present case, mean γ was 1.85
for participants trained in the VS task and 2.14 for those
trained in the categorization task. Thus, participants trained
in the VS conditions had more positively skewed response
times than participants trained in the categorization
conditions. This difference in skew suggests that the
processes being used to solve the transfer task were different
(Haider & Frensch, 2002), generating qualitatively different
shapes of response time distributions.

Discussion
In this paper, two types of decomposition were performed:
The first was functional and examined the cognitive
processes to partition their inputs as whether it was taskbased or stimulus-based. The goal of this decomposition
was to test whether these processes transferred differently.
The second type of decomposition was simply descriptive:
was the improvement caused by a change in position (fast

933

The second finding of this study is a better description of
the improvement in response times. A diminution in the
spread (variance) of the response times is responsible for the
smaller means. Such a diminution with training had already
been observed by Logan (1988) and by Cousineau and
Larochelle (2004). Moreover, the distribution analyses
showed no improvement for the position (the minimum
response times).
To conclude, it is worth mentioning that all our findings
would not have been visible if the transfer phase had lasted
a single session5. An absence of transfer on the first session
does not mean that the manipulation did not affect
performances, as was clearly the case in this experiment.
Similarly, the presence of transfer on the first session does
not imply a stable effect through time. Therefore, transfer
must be studied for as long as training in order to reveal its
full impact (Haider & Frensch, 2002). It is our hope that
longer examination of skill transfer will resolve some of the
inconsistencies found in the past literature.

Donders, F.C. (1868). La vitesse des actes psychiques.
Archives Néerlandaises des Sciences Exactes et
Naturelles, 3, 296-317.
Goldstone, R.L. (1998). Perceptual learning. Annual Review
of Psychology, 49, 585-612.
Haider, H. & Frensch, P.A. (1996). The role of information
reduction in skill acquisition. Cognitive Psychology, 30,
304-337.
Haider, H. & Frensch, P. A. (1999). Eye movement during
skill acquisition: more evidence for the informationreduction hypothesis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 172190.
Haider, H. & Frensch, P.A. (2002). Why aggregated
learning follows the power law of practice when
individual learning does not: Comment on Rickard (1997,
1999), Delanay et al. (1998), and Palmeri (1999). Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28, 392-406.
Hillstrom, A.P. & Logan, G.D. (1998). Decomposing visual
search: evidence of multiple item-specific skills. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24, 1385-1398.
Lewandowsky, S., Kalish, M. & Ngang, S.K. (2002).
Simplified learning in complex situations: Knowledge
partitionning in function learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 163-193.
Logan, G.D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
Rehder, B. (2001). Interference between cognitive skills.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 27, 451-469.
Shiffrin, R.M., Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending, and a general theory.
Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages:
Extensions of Donder’s method. Acta Psychologica, 30,
276-315.
Thomas, R.D. (2000, august). Analysis of factorial response
time patterns predicted by current models of perception.
33rd annual meeting of the Society for Mathematical
Psychology. Kingston, ON.
Tulving, E. & Thomson, D.M. (1971). Retrieval processes
in recognition memory: Effects of associative context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 87, 116-124.
Weibull, W. (1951). A statistical distribution function of
wide applicability. Journal of Applied Mechanic, 18, 292297.

Acknowledgment
This research was part of the Master thesis of the first author
and was supported by the Fonds pour la formation de
chercheurs et l’aide à la recherche, Établissement de
nouveaux chercheurs.

References
Bamber, D. (1969). Reaction times and error rates for
“same”-“different” judgments of multidimensional
stimuli. Perception and Psychophysics, 6, 169-174.
Cousineau, D, Brown, S. & Heathcote, A. (2004). Fitting
distributions using Maximum Likelihood: Methods and
packages. Behavior Research, Methods, Instruments &
Computer, 36, 742-756.
Cousineau, D., Goodman, V.W. & Shiffrin, R.M. (2002).
Extending statistics of extremes to distributions varying in
position and scale and the implications for race models.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46, 431-454.
Cousineau, D. & Larochelle, S. (1997). PASTIS: A
Program for Curve and Distribution Analyses. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 29, 542548.
Cousineau, D. & Larochelle, S. (2004). Visual-Memory
search: An integrative perspective. Psychological
Research, 69, 77-105.
Doane, S.M., Alderton, D.L., Sohn, Y.W., Pellegrino, J.W.
(1996). Acquisition and transfer of skilled performance:
Are visual discrimination skills stimulus specific? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 22, 1218-1248.

5

It is important to note that, although many studies have used
more than one transfer session, the number of transfer trials was
never greater than one session of our experiment. Again, Hillstrom
and Logan’s Experiment 1 is the exception, with the equivalent of
five of our sessions of transfer (Hillstrom and Logan, 1998).
934

