UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Other-race Advantage with PCA

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2r66x5sq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cottrell, Garrison W.
Haque, AfmZakaria

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Other-race Advantage with PCA
AfmZakaria Haque (ahaque@cs.ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA, 92093

Garrison W. Cottrell (gary@ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA, 92093

still leaves the question that how the need for individuation
can cause the ORE.
In this section we will discuss two dominant hypotheses
of the ORE. Both of them concentrate on the feature
selection scheme humans use for processing faces of same
and different races.

Abstract
The Other-race effect (ORE) refers to the well-known
phenomenon of people being less accurate in recognizing
faces of a different race. One popular hypothesis is that we
learn to use face-features that are optimal for individuating
faces of our own race; thus reducing the recognition accuracy
for faces of a different race. However this hypothesis has not
been able to explain some advantages other-race faces have in
certain tasks. For example, some recent experiments showed
that in a visual search task other-race faces are found faster
than same race faces when the subjects show the ORE. A race
based feature selection hypothesis where deviation from the
familiar race is treated as an explicit part of the encoding has
been proposed to explain this other-race advantage. In this
paper, we argue that the other-race advantage can be
explained without this assumption. We present the results
from our simulations that suggest that the other-race
advantage is an inherent characteristic of an optimal feature
selection model.

Optimal Feature Selection
Optimal feature selection treats the ORE as people’s
inability to generalize their feature selection from the same
race faces to the other-race faces. People select face-features
that are optimal for identifying each individual. Since
generally people are most exposed to faces of their own
race, their feature selection is biased towards optimizing the
recognition of this class of faces. Assuming faces of
different races vary along different dimensions, their feature
selection does not capture the variations of other-race faces
well, reducing their accuracy in other-race face recognition.
In some ways this hypothesis is a closely related with
perceptual expertise. The hypothesis can be interpreted as an
effect of specialization for same race faces within the
domain of face expertise (Tanaka et al., in press).
Several studies (O'Toole et al., 1991, 1994) have used
Principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 1986) to model
optimal feature selection. PCA finds a linear transformation
to a new set of dimensions that maximizes the variance of
the data. Linearity might be an undesirable constraint, but
the simplified computation is well worth the compromise.
Moreover PCA is a neurobiologically plausible means of
feature selection since simple networks employing hebbian
learning can learn to extract equivalent features (Sanger,
1989). In our simulation we modeled optimal feature
selection with PCA.

Introduction
It has long been known that people recognize faces from
their own racial group with greater accuracy than faces from
another racial group. This is known as the other-race effect
(ORE), cross-race effect or own-race bias. Several metaanalyses of large number of studies in face recognition have
found a strong ORE (Bothwell, Brigham, & Malpass, 1989;
Shapiro & Penod, 1986).
There is naturally a strong agreement that the ORE is
somehow caused by the learning history of each individual.
Chance et al (1982) found that six year old children did not
show a significant other-race effect; but for older
participants the degree of the ORE increased with age.
Although there is no conclusive answer to the question of
how experience with faces can cause the ORE, there are two
dominant hypotheses.

Race Dependent Feature Selection
The race dependent feature selection hypothesis assumes an
asymmetric feature selection scheme for faces. Levin (2000)
proposed that for other-race faces race specifying
information is encoded at the expense of individuating
information. Loss of individuating information reduces
recognition accuracy for other-race faces, causing the ORE.
In this hypothesis, for other-race faces, feature selection is
optimal for classification by race and not for identity. Race
specifying information, which can be treated as the

What Causes the ORE
Feingold (1914) suggested that other things being equal, the
other-race effect depends on the contact with people of the
other race. However, several studies (Shepard, 1981;
Valentine, Chiroro, & Dixon, 1995) argued against this
contact hypothesis. They suggested that contact for
individuation could be more significant than mere contact. It

899

Figure 1: Stimuli. Visual search task [7] on left, our sample stimuli in the middle, our average faces on right.
deviation from the own race is treated as an explicitly
encoded feature.
Although a race dependent feature selection scheme may
seem to be less intuitive, it can explain the other-race
advantage we discuss in the next section.

describe this idea further in our second simulation. Targets
with higher information content will provide more clues to
the visual system for search while distracters with higher
information content would hide the target in noise. In next
two sections we describe our simulations.

Visual Search Asymmetry Favoring Otherrace Faces

Simulation 1: the Other-race Effect
Background

Levin (2000, 1996) found that people who show the ORE
are significantly faster in searching for an other-race face
among same-race faces than the reverse. The stimuli (Figure
1) consisted of one White average and one Black average
face. The faces were processed to have identical skin
shading, hair, ears and jaw lines and differed only in internal
features.
Triesman & Gormican (1988) showed that visual search
for feature positive target among feature-negative distracters
is faster than the reverse. This effect, called the visual
search asymmetry, was assumed to occur since the featurepositive target stands out among the feature negative
distracters. But feature positive distracters effectively hide
the feature negative target in noise, making it harder to
detect.
Levin (2000) applied Triesman & Gormican's feature
positive idea by suggesting that the search asymmetry
favoring other-race face can be explained if other-race faces
are more feature-positive. In race dependent feature
selection, other-race faces are encoded with race specifying
information, which naturally makes them feature positive.
Thus, this hypothesis fits well with the search asymmetry.
The possibility of other-race faces being more featurepositive in an expertise model has never been explored. If
we use PCA for feature selection, an analogous idea of
feature positiveness is the amount of “surprise” that the
encoding of a face induces. We can think of this as a
measure of the mismatch between the face and the internal
representational space of the model. We will use the
information content of a random variable to model this. We

A typical human experiment demonstrating the ORE is
designed as a standard recognition task. Participants see a
study set S of faces where half of the faces are from their
own race and half from a different race. Then they are
shown another set N of faces, half of which are from the
previous set. For each face, the participants have to say if it
is from the study set. From their response, the
discriminability score d’ is computed. A significantly
greater d’ for same race faces reflects the other-race effect
(O'Toole et al., 1994).
The concept of “own race” can be modeled with a
training set containing a large proportion of faces of one
race. O'Toole et al. (1991) used Principal Component
Analysis on a dataset with 95% Caucasian and 5% Japanese
faces. They defined features as a subset of the principal
components on the training set and the probability of
recognizing a novel face as the cosine between a face and its
reconstruction from the representation space. They found
that novel other-race faces had a higher d' than novel samerace faces.
In this experiment we extended the O’Toole et al. (1991)
work by adding a recognition memory component to the
model. In particular, we used the Generalized Context
Model (Nosofsky, 1986, 1988) in the representation space to
model recognition memory. We simulated a typical human
experiment with our model and found a significantly strong
ORE.

900

Table 1: The other-race effect simulation results
Majority
pmean(hit) pmean(FACaucasian) pmean(FAAsian) Δd'mean=
significance
racial group
d'mean,Caucasian- d'mean, (p-value)
of Δd'
Asian
Caucasian
.69
.21
.42
.58
<< .05
Asian
.70
.22
.50
-.73
<< .05
None
.73
.30
.32
.3
~.37

eigenvalues. A set, S containing 10 Caucasian and 10 Asian
face images (randomly chosen and different from T) was
used as the study set. N, a set of 20 Caucasian and 20 Asian
face images (different from T and superset of S) was used as
test set. The same simulation was done 50 times with
randomly chosen datasets.
2. We ran the same experiment by switching the majority
and minority race. In this experiment, T contained 44 Asian
and 4 Caucasian faces images.
3. As a control group we ran the same experiment with
unbiased learning history. In this experiment, T contained
24 Caucasian and 24 Asian face images.

Model
Similar to O'Toole et al (1991, 1994) we used PCA on a
training dataset to model the learning of feature selection by
long-term experience. A subset of the eigenvectors with the
largest eigenvalues was used as features (Turk & Pentland,
1991). The recognition memory was modeled with a version
of GCM (Nosofsky, 1986, 1988; Dailey, Cottrell, & Busey,
1999) where, given the representation of a face x and a set S
of already seen faces, the probability of recognition is

p(x " S) = # $ e

%d x,y /&

y "S

Results & Discussion

Here β linearly normalizes the summed similarity to a
probability. dx,y is the Euclidian distance between the
principal component representation vector of x and y . σ
determines how much a learned representation contributes
!
to recognition. σ should be of the order of d to keep the
exponential term in a reasonable range. In this paper we
report the results obtained by setting σ to twice the
minimum d between study faces.
A forced choice yes/no recognition procedure can be
modeled by responding yes if p exceeds a criterion γ. The
optimal criterion would be the mean of the distribution of p
for new and old faces. Signal detection methodology maps
easily onto this Yes/No task since the distribution of p for
old faces can be thought of as the signal distribution and the
distribution of p for new faces as the noise. Old faces with p
greater than γ are considered hits and new faces with p
greater than γ are considered false alarms. A d' score can be
computed in the standard way. A significantly lower d' for
other-race faces will show the other-race effect.

As Table 1 shows, in first two experiments we found a
strong and significant (p << .05) bias (∆d') favoring otherrace face recognition. In the third experiment, where the
learning history was not biased towards any race, there was
no significant difference in the discriminability score of any
one race. This is essentially the classic other race effect.
Figure 2 shows the ROC curve for the Caucasian majority
and the control group experiment.

Simulation 2: Visual Search Asymmetry
Motivation
In this experiment we explore the feature positiveness of
faces in our optimal feature selection model. In the previous
experiment we found that when the learning history has a
large proportion of faces from one race, our PCA-based
model shows the other-race effect. In this experiment we
found that under such biased learning history the other-race
faces are more feature positive than the same race faces.

Stimuli

Model

Our stimuli consisted of 64 Caucasian and 64 Asian 128 x
192 gray scale face images extracted from FERET database
(Phillips, et al., 1997) release 2. The face images were
cropped and linearly warped so that the eye and mouth
positions line up across images. They were also normalized
for brightness and contrast. Some sample stimuli are shown
in Figure 1.

Shannon Entropy, -∫ px log(px)dx of a random variable x is
often treated as the expected information content of x
(Shannon, 1948; MacKay, 2003). Information content, log(px), in some sense measures how much of an outlier a
given value of a random variable is. Feature positiveness
essentially says how much activation a stimuli causes in the
feature detectors. If the distribution in representation space
is zero-mean unimodal, then feature positiveness is similar
to how much of an outlier a stimulus is in representation
space. A probabilistic interpretation of PCA assumes a
Gaussian distribution for the latent variables (Tipping &
Bishop, 1999) and PCA by definition zero-means the data.

Method
1. In the first experiment, our training set for PCA, T
contained 44 Caucasian and 4 Asian randomly chosen face
images. We kept 20 of the eigenvectors with largest
901

Figure 2: ROC curve. On left Caucasian majority simulation; on right control group simulation

Stimuli

The representation of a face in our model can thus be
thought of as a multidimensional continuous random
variable with a Gaussian distribution. If we use PCA for
feature selection, a natural analogy for feature positiveness
would be the information content of the representation of
the face measured against this distribution.
For a face x and its d dimensional representation y, the
information content h(x) is,

We used the same stimuli as the previous experiment. To
generate prototypical stimuli for each race, we averaged
same number of Caucasian and Asian faces not used for
PCA. Two sample average faces are shown in Figure 1.

Method
1. We used the same stimuli as the previous experiment.
Similar to the previous experiment, we use PCA on 44
Caucasian and 4 Asian face images and kept 20
eigenvectors with largest eigenvalues to develop the
representation space. 40 new Caucasian and Asian face
images (20 each) were projected to the representation space.
The total information content of each face, h was computed.
The experiment was run 50 times with randomly chosen
face images.
2. We ran the same experiment by switching the majority
and minority race. In this case, 44 Asian and 4 Caucasian
face images were used for PCA.
3. As a control group, we used 24 Caucasian and 24 Asian
face images for PCA and ran the same experiment 50 times.
4. The human experiment showing the visual search
asymmetry (Levin, 2000) used average faces. Therefore we
repeated the above three experiments with the test set
containing one Caucasian average and one Asian average
face.

h(x) = "log( p(y))
Here p(y) is the distribution of the faces people are
familiar with, i.e., the faces used for PCA. Our limited data
is an obstacle in estimating p(y). However, the distribution
!
can be simplified under the Gaussian assumption. Since
PCA decorrelates the latent variables and uncorrelated
Gaussians are statistically independent, we can decompose
p(y) as,

p(y) = " p(y d )
d

Therefore,

!

h(x) = "# log( pd (y d ))
d

Since the Gaussian assumption was crucial in estimating
p(y) we used Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (Chakravarti, Laha,
& Roy, 1967) for goodness of fit to test if the face images
used for PCA in fact have a Gaussian distribution in
!
representation space. We dropped from consideration any
simulation where the test failed at 5% significance level
(which occurred in 6% experiments). For the valid
experiments, we approximated p(y) with a Gaussian
distribution and computed the information content of novel
faces. Our prediction was that in this model, minority faces
would have significantly more information content than
majority faces.

Results
In the first experiment, the average information content of
faces of each race from the 50 runs were used in a t test with
Caucasian faces having the same information as the
alternate hypothesis. The average information for Asian
faces was significantly (p ~ 10-6) higher than that of
Caucasian faces. We found similar results for Asian
majority experiment where Caucasian faces contained
significantly more information (p << .05). For the control
group, the t test accepted the null hypothesis that both races
have the same amount of information with p ~ .26.
We found similar results with the average faces. The
average minority face contained significantly more
902

References

information when the learning history was biased towards
one race. For the control group, the difference between
information content of the average faces was not statistically
significant (p ~ .19)

Bothwell, R. K., Brigham, J. C., & Malpass, R. S. (1989).
Cross-racial Identification. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 15.
Chakravarti, Laha, and Roy, (1967). Handbook of Methods
of Applied Statistics, Volume I, John Wiley and Sons.
Chance, J. E., Turner, A. L., Goldstein, A. G. (1982).
Development of differential recognition for own and
other-race faces. The Journal of Psychology.
Dailey, M. N., Cottrell, G. W. and Busey, T. A. (1999)
Facial memory is kernel density estimation (almost).
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 11,
pp. 24-30. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Feingold, C. A. (1914).The influence on environment on
identification for persons and things, Journal of Criminal
Law and Police Science, 5, 39-51.
Jolliffe. I. T. (1986). Principal Component Analysis.
Springer-Verlag.
Levin D. T. (1996). Classifying faces by race: The structure
of face categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 22.
Levin, D. T. (2000). Race as a visual feature: using visual
search and perceptual discrimination asks to understand
face categories and the cross-race recognition deficit,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 2000 vol.
129, No. 4.
MacKay, D (2003). Information Theory, Inference, and
Learning Algorithms.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accounts of
relations between classification, recognition, and
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 14.
O’Toole, A. J.; Deffenbacher, K. A.; Abdi, H.; Bartlett, J. C.
(1991) Simulation of ‘other-race effect’ as a problem in
perceptual learning, Connection Science vol. 3, No. 2.
O'Toole, A. J., Deffenbacher, K. A., Valentin, D., Abdi, H.
(1994). Structural Aspects Of Face Recognition and the
Other-race Effect, Memory & Cognition, 22(2).
Phillips, P., Moon, H., Rauss, P., Rizvi S. (1997).
Proceedings of the IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition.
Sanger, T. (1989). An optimality principle for unsupervised
learning. In Touretzky, D., editor, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 1, San Mateo.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Shannon, C. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of
Communication, Bell System Technical Journal, Vol. 27.
Shepard, J. (1981). Social factors in face recognition. In G.
Davies, H. Ellis, & J. Sbepard (Eds.), Perceiving and
remembering faces. London: Academic Press.
Shapiro, P. N. & Penod, S. D. (1986). Meta-analysis of face
identification studies. Psychological Bulletin, 100.
Tipping, M. E.; Bishop, C. M.(1999) Probabilistic Principal
Component Analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society.

Discussion
In this experiment we showed that in the expertise based
hypothesis, in the presence of the ORE, the other-race faces
are encoded with more information than same-race faces.
This is equivalent to other-race faces being more feature
positive. Using the argument developed in previous studies
(Levin, 2000), as mentioned above, this explains the visual
search asymmetry.
Although we tested our Gaussian assumption with
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, assuming a functional form for
the density may be too restrictive. We found qualitatively
similar results using kernel density estimation. However, the
small number of number of data points compared to the
dimensionality of the representation space makes the
nonparametric estimation less reliable.
A natural question is why other-race faces contain more
information in our model. Since the dataset used for PCA
had a large number of majority-race faces and PCA zeromeans the data, the new minority-race faces ended up
further away from the majority faces in representation
space. This effectively lowered their probability and
increased information content.
Other-race faces containing more information and being
less discriminable may seem paradoxical. Although otherace faces contain more information in the representation
space, as we showed in first simulation, the representation
space is not optimal for recognizing them, making them less
discriminable.

Future work
There are other instances of the other-race advantage
(Levin, 2000) that we are not addressing in this paper.
However, preliminary work shows that our model should
explain those effects as well. We will be applying our model
to those effects in near future.

Conclusion
In this work, we showed that our simple expertise-based
model could explain some seemingly paradoxical human
data. While, we are far from providing a conclusive
framework for visual features people use for facerecognition, we hope this will help our understanding of this
interesting domain.

Acknowledgement
We thank Daniel Levin for providing us with his stimuli.
We also thank Carrie Joyce, Eric Wiewiora and other
members of Gary's Unbelievable Research Unit (GURU) for
earlier comments on this work. This research was supported
by NIH grant MH57075 to GWC.

903

Triesman A., Gormican S. (1988). Feature analysis in early
vision: evidence from search asymmetries. Psychological
Review 95.
Turk, M. A. & Pentland, A. P. (1991). Eigenfaces for
recognition. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3(1).
Valentine, T., Chiroro, P., & Dixon, R. (1995). An account
of the own-race bias and the contact hypothesis based on
a "face space" model of face recognition. In T. Valentine,
Cognitive and Computational Aspects
of Face
Recognition: Explorations of Face Space. London:
Routledge.

904

