UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modelling the Similarity of Discourse Connectives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/264976h8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Hutchinson, Ben

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modelling the similarity of discourse connectives
Ben Hutchinson (B.Hutchinson@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK

tivation is that knowledge of which connectives are similar can complement theoretical linguistic analysis and
so inform theories of discourse coherence. Eliciting similarity ratings for all pairings of discourse connectives is
infeasible, however. We therefore explore the hypothesis that the semantic similarity of discourse connectives
correlates with their distributional similarity.

Abstract
Discourse connectives enable discourse coherence relations to be studies empirically. This paper presents two
experiments on the semantic similarity of discourse connectives. Subjects are found to agree significantly on
the similarity of pairs of connectives, and their similarity
judgements are related to the ability of the connectives
to be used to paraphrase each other. Subjects’ similarity judgements are also found to correlate positively
with the distributional similarity of the connectives.

Discourse connectives

Introduction
This paper contributes to the empirical study of discourse connectives by considering the problems of measuring and modelling the similarity of discourse connectives. The concept of semantic similarity occupies an
important role in psychology, artificial intelligence, and
computational linguistics. However its applicability to
discourse connectives has not been previously studied.
If two discourse connectives are found to be similar, this
may have implications for theories of the coherence relations that they signal.
Discourse coherence relations contribute to the
meaning of texts by specifying relationships between semantic objects such as events and propositions. They
also assist in the interpretation of anaphora, verb phrase
ellipsis and lexical ambiguities (Hobbs, 1985; Kehler,
2002; Asher & Lascarides, 2003). Som of the many theories of discourse coherence, have been motivated on cognitive grounds. For example, Sanders, Spooren, and Noordman (1992) propose that coherence relations be decomposed into cognitive primitives such as polarity and
source of coherence. It is argued that this approach is
more likely to be psychologically real than theories which
posit relations as indecomposable complex objects.
Knott (1996) argues for the empirical study of the discourse connectives (e.g. because) that explicitly signal
coherence relations, on the basis that relationships between discourse connectives correspond to relationships
between discourse coherence relations. Knott argues
that if people really do use coherence relations when processing texts, then it is likely that languages will develop
ways of signalling these relations explicitly. Discourse
connectives thus provide a means of studying coherence
relations empirically.
This paper investigates the application of the concept
of semantic similarity to discourseconnectives. Our mo-

This section discusses the relationship between discourse
connectives and coherence relations. It also introduces
Knott’s substitution methodology for studying discourse
connectives.
Two distinct functions of discourse connectives have
been distinguished by Cohen (1984): (1) enabling the
faster recognition of coherence relations by the reader,
and (2) allowing the recognition of coherence relations
which could not be inferred in the absence of a connective. This implies that in some situations the use of a
connective by the writer is optional, whereas in others it
is required. Moser and Moore (1995) point out that the
writer has to decide which connective to use to signal a
given coherence relation, as the correspondence between
connectives and relations is not one-to-one. For example,
both because and seeing as can be used in (1).
(1) Seeing as/because we’ve got nothing but
circumstantial evidence, it’s going to be difficult to
get a conviction. (Knott, 1996, p. 177)
This question of whether two discourse connectives
can be used to signal the same relation is explored by
Knott (1996), who proposes a Test for Substitutability
for connectives. The test can be summarised as follows:
1. Take an instance of a discourse connective in a corpus.
Imagine you are the writer who produced this text, but
that you need to choose an alternative connective.
2. Remove the connective from the text, and insert another connective in its place.
3. If the new connective achieves the same discourse goals
as the original one, it is considered substitutable in
this context.

1012

For example, because is substitutable for seeing as in
(1), but not in (2).

Something happened
Something happened
(least similar)

0

despite the fact that
even though
1

2

3

something else happened.
something else happened.
4

5

(most similar)

Figure 1: Example experimental item

Methodology

(2) It’s a fairly good piece of work, seeing
as/#because you have been under a lot of pressure
recently. (Knott, p. 177)
By generalising over all the contexts that a connective
appears in, Knott defines four possible substitutability
relationships that can hold between a pair of connectives X and Y .

Materials and design We limit our experiment to
discourse connectives which syntactically conjoin clauses
or take clausal complements, since adverbial discourse
connective have anaphoric properties that complicate interpreting them out of context (Webber, Stone, Joshi,
& Knott, 2003). We randomly selected 48 pairs of discourse connectives such that there were 12 pairs standing
in each of the four substitutability relationships. To do
this, we used substitutability judgements made by Knott
(1996), supplemented with judgements of our own. Each
experimental item consisted of the two discourse connectives along with the dummy clauses Something happened
and something else happened. An example stimulus item
is shown in Figure 1, and the full list of materials is given
in the Appendix.
The format of the experimental items was intended
to balance two conflicting pressures. Firstly, if discourse
connectives are presented on their own, without any sentential context, then it may not always be clear how the
item can be used to relate clauses. For example, connectives like now and so have common uses that are not
discourse connectives, and for a connective like the moment it may not be obvious to a naive subject that this
can connect clauses at all. However, if real example sentences are given to illustrate the connective’s use, then
the subject’s judgement may be biased by factors present
in those particular example sentences. As a result, the
subject may be less likely to consider the full range of
situations in which the connective can be used.
We opted for a compromise. We present clausal arguments to each connective, to illustrate how it can be used
to relate one clause to another. However the semantic
contents of the clauses are left grossly underspecified, so
that the subject must imagine for themselves what kind
of clauses can be connected in this way. This solution
is not perfect, since both clauses are always declarative,
and the verb happen implies the connective relates events
rather than states. Nevertheless, it avoids the problems
associated with presenting either a bare lexical item on
its own or a completely specified context.
Each subject saw each of the 48 pairs of connectives.
The items were presented in a different random order for
each subject, and the ordering of the connectives within
each item was also randomised.

• X is a synonym of Y if X can always be substituted
for Y , and vice versa.
• X and Y are exclusive if neither can ever be substituted for the other.
• X is a hyponym of Y if Y can always be substituted
for X, but not vice versa.
• X and Y are contingently substitutable if each
can sometimes, but not always, be substituted for the
other.
Examples of each relationship are given by Knott: given
that and seeing as are synonyms, because and seeing
as are contingently substitutable, on the grounds
that is a hyponym of because, and because and now that
are exclusive.

Experiment 1:
Eliciting similarity judgements
Semantic similarity is an important concept in cognitive
science, but its application to discourse connectives has
not previously been studied. Our first hypothesis is that
subjects agree on the similarity of connectives.
Hypothesis 1 Judgements of the similarity of pairs of
discourse connectives show significant agreement.
In semantics, synonymy of nouns or verbs is often defined in terms of the ability to substitute one lexical item
for another without affecting the truth of the sentence.
Knott’s definition of synonymy is closely related to this
definition. Based on this relationship between similarity
and substitutability, we also make the following two hypotheses.
Hypothesis 2 Subjects rate pairs of synonymous
connectives as more similar than other pairs of connectives.
Hypothesis 3 Subjects rate pairs of exclusive connectives as less similar than other pairs of connectives.
Because the substitutability relationships hyponymy
and contingently exclusive both predict partial
inter-substitutability, we do not make predictions regarding the relative similarity of pairs of connectives in
these relationships.

Procedure Each experiment took approximately 20
minutes. The experiment was conducted remotely over
the Internet, with subjects accessing the experiment using their web browser. Data obtained over the web have
previously been found to give similar results to data obtained in a laboratory (Keller, 2000).

1013

Relationship
synonymy
hyponymy
cont. subs.
exclusive

Mean
3.97
3.43
1.79
1.08

StdDev
1.33
1.51
1.52
1.23

Max
4.82
4.56
3.10
2.31

Min
3.05
1.51
0.62
0.55

Table 1: Similarity by substitutability relationship

Instructions Before participating in the experiment,
subjects were presented with a set of instructions. The
instructions began by explaining that there are words
and phrases that can connect sentences, and a number of
examples of discourse connectives in context were given.
Subjects were then told they would be asked to rate the
“similarity in meaning” of pairs of connectives. Three
example pairs, illustrating high, medium, and low similarity were given. These were when–while, after–before
and because–whereas, respectively. None of these pairs
were also used in the experiment. Subjects were explicitly warned that orthographic similarity should not be
taken as implying semantic similarity.
After the instructions, subjects completed a short
questionnaire. Subjects were asked to provide their
name, email, age, sex, handedness and the region where
they grew up. Subjects were told if they did not wish to
complete the experiment they could submit their partial
responses at any time.
Subjects Forty native speakers of English participated
in the experiment. Participation was voluntary and unpaid. Of the subjects, 34 were right-handed, 6 lefthanded; 15 were female, 25 male. The age of subjects
ranged from 21 to 56; the mean was 36 years.

Results and discussion
One subject completed only 16 of the 48 items. Their
data are excluded from the calculations of inter-subject
agreement, although it is used in the other calculations.
To calculate inter-subject agreement, we used leaveone-out resampling, which is a special case of n-fold
cross validation. The average inter-subject correlation
was 0.75 (Min = 0.49, Max = 0.86, StdDev = 0.09). A
gap could be observed in the mean subjects’ judgements:
none of the experimental stimuli had a mean score between 2.37 and 2.84. Instead, the subjects in effect partitioned the pairs of connectives into two bands, representing high and low similarity. These partitions contain 26
and 22 pairs respectively. Average inter-subject correlation within the high similarity partition was 0.42; within
the low similarity partition it was 0.45. This shows that
the partitioning has a major effect on the overall agreement. Indeed, in only 18% of cases did an individual
differ from their peers as to whether a pair of connectives belonged in the high similarity partition or the low
similarity partition.
Mean similarity ratings for pairs in each of Knott’s
four substitutability relationships are shown in Table 1.

An analysis of variance was conducted, with similarity
ratings as the dependent variable. The design had repeated measures of each experimental item, with the
human subject (Subj) as a between subject variable,
and substitutability relationship (Rel) a within subject
variable. Main effects were found for Rel (F (3, 44) =
40.057, p < 0.001) and Subj (F (38, 1672) = 4.767, p <
0.001). In addition, a crossed effect was found for
Subj×Rel (F (114, 1672) = 1.963, p < 0.001), indicating
that substitutability affected different subjects’ ratings
in different ways. Post-hoc Tukey tests revealed all differences between substitutability relationships to be significant (in each case p < 0.01), supporting Hypotheses
2 and 3.

Experiment 2:
Modelling similarity judgements
Given two words, it has been suggested that the more
different their contextual distributions are, then also the
more semantically different the words will be (Harris,
1970). Conversely, if two words have the same meaning, then they can be expected to have the same contextual distributions. In this experiment we aim to determine whether the distributional similarity of pairs of discourse connectives correlates with the similarity ratings
obtained in the previous experiment. To investigate this,
we use a lexical co-occurrence model of distributions. In
this model, lexical items are treated as co-occurring with
a discourse connective if and only if they occur in one of
the two clauses related by the connective.
The main verb of a clause introduces the primary predicate, and as such has an important role in determining
what coherence relations that clause may be involved
in. If a clause contains discourse markers signalling
coherence relations (by “discourse markers” we include
both structural discourse connectives and discourse adverbials), this can also be expected to contribute to the
appropriateness of using a given discourse connective to
relate that clause to another. We therefore hypothesise
that these features can also be used to predict similarity
judgements.
Hypothesis 4 Discourse connectives with similar verb
co-occurrence distributions are rated more similar by
subjects than those with dissimilar distributions.
Hypothesis 5 Discourse connectives with similar discourse marker co-occurrence distributions are rated more
similar by subjects than those with dissimilar distributions.

Methodology
The subjects’ similarity ratings from the previous experiment were re-used in this experiment. The verb and
discourse marker co-occurrences were obtained automatically from a corpus that combined sentences from the
British National Corpus with sentences from the internet. One difficulty is that many connectives also have
uses where they do not conjoin clauses (e.g. for often
takes an noun phrase complement). To identify discourse connectives, we first applied an automatic syntac-

1014

Divergence of DM co-occurrences

2.5

best fit
SYNONYM
HYPONYM
CONT SUBS
EXCLUSIVE

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

0

1

2
3
4
Similarity judgements

5

Figure 2: Similarity versus distributional divergence

tic parser (Charniak, 2000) to sentences containing substrings of words matching some connective (and thus potentially contained a connective). The parse trees were
then analysed automatically, and if a potential discourse
connective occurred in the correct syntactic context then
it was positively identified (for details, see (Hutchinson,
2004)). The parse trees enabled us to extract the sets of
words occurring in the clauses conjoined by the connective, and provided part of speech information.

Results and discussion
A smoothed variant of the Kullback-Leibler divergence
function was used to compare co-occurrence distributions (Lee, 2001). (This function is asymmetric; we
applied it with the connectives in alphabetical order.) Spearman’s correlation coefficient for ranked data
showed a significant correlation (r = −0.52, p < 0.001)
when context is represented using co-occurrences with
discourse markers, but not when context is represented
using co-occurrences with verbs. Thus Hypothesis 5 is
supported, but Hypothesis 4 is not. This may be because the main predicate of a sentence does not sufficiently constrain what discourse relations a sentence can
be an argument of. Conversely, the presence of nearby
discourse markers are indicative of a discourse context
that the discourse connective must be consistent with.
Figure 2 plots the mean similarity judgements against
the distributional divergence obtained using discourse
markers, and also shows the substitutability relationship
for each item. Two outliers can be observed in the upper left corner; when these are excluded, the magnitude
of the correlation drops slightly (r = −0.51). The average inter-subject correlation of 0.75 can be considered
an upper bound for the task. Recall also that the human subjects effectively partitioned the pairs of connectives into high and low similarity groups. The correlation
between distributional divergence (measured using discourse markers) and human judgements within each of
these groups is not significant, however.
We also tested whether distributional divergence could

be used to classify pairs of connectives as belonging to
the high or low similarity partitions. We divided the
pairs of connectives into two groups: those with lower
distributional similarity (i.e. high divergence), and those
with higher distributional similarity (i.e. low divergence).
The boundary between the groups was a KL divergence
of 0.6275. This number was chosen so that the group
with high distributional similarity had 26 members (the
same size as the group which received high mean similarity judgements). Distributional similarity was found
to distinguish high vs low similarity judgements with an
accuracy of 0.75. Since subjects agreed with their peers
82% of the time as to whether two connectives had a
high or low degree of similarity, 0.82 can be considered
an upper bound for this task.
Many theories of discourse coherence partition the
set of coherence relations through explicit groupings.
The fact that distributional similarity correlates with semantic similarity raises the possibility of its informing
such groupings. To illustrate how this might be done,
Kullback-Leibler divergence scores were calculated between all pairings of the 48 connectives from the previous experiment. These scores were then used to perform agglomerative hierarchical clustering (Manning &
Schütze, 1999) of the connectives, and some of the subclusters obtained are shown in Figure 3. Numbers indicate the order in which clusters were created, so lower
numbers indicate greater similarity. Many of the subclusters are linguistically plausible, for example CLUSTER25 and subclusters C8, C12, C16, C11 and C23. The
subcluster C7 indicates that and and but tend to cooccur with the same discourse markers, presumably because each co-occurs with such a wide range of discourse
markers.

Related work
Previous studies have shown that subjects show significant agreement when rating the semantic similarity of
pairs of nouns or verbs. Rubenstein and Goodenough
(1965) presented subjects with 65 pairs of nouns such as
cord–smile and gem–jewel and elicited semantic similarity judgements on a scale of 0–4. The subjects repeated
the experiment two weeks later, and the average correlation of each subject’s scores from both sessions was
r = 0.85. Miller and Charles (1991) elicited similarity
judgements for a subset of 30 pairs from Rubenstein and
Goodenough’s stimuli. The mean scores they obtained
had a correlation of 0.97 with the original mean scores.
Resnik (1999) repeated Miller and Charles’ experiment,
and calculated an inter-rater agreement of 0.90 by using
leave-one-out resampling to compare each subject’s rating with the mean of those of their peers’. Although it
has not before been noted, the partitioning effects into
high and low similarity groups that we found can also
be observed in each of Rubenstein and Goodenough’s,
Miller and Charles’ and Resnik’s results. This suggests
that this could be a product of the experimental method.
Resnik and Diab (2000) performed a similar experiment with 27 verb pairs (e.g. bathe–kneel ). In this case,
two versions of the stimuli were given: one with the verbs

1015

CLUSTER25
!```

!
C13

 XXX

CLUSTER29
a
if ever

a
C26
!!PP

lest for fear that

CLUSTER21
hhh

a
C17


CLUSTER35
hhh

h
C12
(((((hhhhh

h
C30
````
!
!
if only
C19
(
((( PP
C11
hhwhether
hhh or not

on condition that

C15
PP

C9 the way
b
now 
C6
 H
H
until

`

C14
XXX

supposing that
notwithstanding that regardless of whether

now that as soon as
CLUSTER45
``

`

on the assumption that assuming that

except since but not when

C5
P

P

C3 if
PP
C2 so that
PP
C1

CLUSTER28
hhhh

`
C18
C16 insofar as !
! PP
PP
whereas
in that
seeing as((
C10
XXX
((

C8
hhh




as for

hh
C22
XXX

C27
```

because

except when

C23

only after only when

C20
a just as
in case

CLUSTER31
```

`

only if

hh

despite the fact that 
C4
 ```
even though although given that considering that

CLUSTER38




or 
C37
 PP
C24 but then




yet

C7
but and

Figure 3: Example clusters of connectives created automatically using distributional similarity

Nouns
Verbs
Discourse
Connectives

Inter-subject
agreement
0.90
0.76

Correlation with
distributional similarity
0.67
0.43

0.75

0.51

Table 2: Comparison with related work (Resnik, 1999;
Resnik & Diab, 2000)

given in a sentential context, the other without context.
When context was provided, subjects showed a strong
tendency to assign lower similarity ratings in general. In
both conditions the level inter-rater agreement was less
than that found for nouns: r = 0.79 when context was
provided; r = 0.76 when it wasn’t. The difference between conditions may be due to sense disambiguation
effects of the contexts.
The studies listed above have also found evidence that
similarity ratings correlate positively with the contextual
similarity of the lexical items. However the studies differ in how they measure contextual similarity. Miller
and Charles use a measure based on sentence completion data, while the other two studies use distributional
representations based on lexical co-occurrences. Rubenstein and Goodenough compare the utility of different
subsets of co-occurrences for predicting similarity ratings. They find that high frequency content words are
much less useful than low frequency content words, while
co-occurrences with function words are less useful again.
Resnik and Diab use a lexical co-occurrence model that
also takes syntactic functions into account.

General Discussion
The experiments extend previous results on the similarity of nouns and verbs. The two main findings are: (1)
that humans agree on the similarity of discourse connectives almost as well as they agree on the similarity
of nouns, and (2) that human ratings of similarity correlate with the predictions of a distributional model. These
findings are remarkable given the complex and abstract
nature of the semantics of discourse connectives. Discourse connectives do not have concrete referents, and
identifying the relations they signal, let alone defining
these relations, can be challenging even for trained analysts. In contrast, for example, almost all the nouns
used in previous related studies refer to concrete objects
that people are familiar with. People could reasonably
be expected to be able to identify the objects that these
nouns denote, and even give definitions for them.
Knott (1996) has argued that empirical data on discourse connectives can be used to motivate theories of
discourse coherence relations. If we accept this premise,
then the similarity of discourse connectives could also be
useful in this respect. For example, a theory of coherence which could predict similarity judgements might be
considered superior to one that could not. Such an application of gradient linguistic data would have parallels
in recent experimental work on grammaticality judgements (Keller, 2000; Sorace & Keller, 2005). Alternatively, distributional similarity might be used to predict
substitutability of connectives (Hutchinson, 2005).
Further investigation is required to relate similarity
to systems of cognitive primitives proposed to account
for coherence relations, such as (Sanders et al., 1992). If
two coherence relations have similar decompositions into
primitives, then we might expect the discourse connectives that signal those relations (a) to be rated similar
by human judges, and (b) to have similar distributions.

1016

References
Asher, N., & Lascarides, A. (2003). Logics of conversation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Charniak, E. (2000). A maximum-entropy-inspired
parser. In Proceedings of the first conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL-2000). Seattle, Washington, USA.
Cohen, R. (1984). A computational theory of the function of clue words in argument understanding. In
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on
computational linguistics (pp. 251–258).
Grosz, B. J., & Sidner, C. J. (1986). Attention, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 12 (3), 175–203.
Harris, Z. S. (1970). Papers in structural and transformational linguistics. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Hobbs, J. A. (1985). On the coherence and structure of
discourse (Tech. Rep. No. CSLI-85-37). Center for
the Study of Language and Information, Stanford
University.
Hutchinson, B. (2004). Mining the web for discourse
markers. In Proceedings of the fourth international
conference on language resources and evaluation
(lrec 2004) (pp. 407–410). Lisbon, Portugal.
Hutchinson, B. (2005). Modelling the substitutability of
discourse connectives. In Proceedings of the 43rd
annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Ann Arbor, USA.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, reference and the theory
of grammar. Stanford: CSLI publications.
Keller, F. (2000). Gradience in grammar: Experimental
and computational aspects of degrees of grammaticality. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Edinburgh.
Knott, A. (1996). A data-driven methodology for motivating a set of coherence relations. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Edinburgh.
Lee, L. (2001). On the effectiveness of the skew divergence for statistical language analysis. Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, 65–72.
Manning, C. D., & Schütze, H. (1999). Foundations of
statistical natural language processing. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT.
Miller, G. A., & Charles, W. G. (1991). Contextual correlates of semantic similarity. Language and Cognitive Processes, 6 (1), 1–28.
Moser, M., & Moore, J. (1995). Using discourse analysis
and automatic text generation to study discourse
cue usage. In Proceedings of the aaai 1995 spring
symposium on empirical methods in discourse interpretation and generation (pp. 92–98).
Resnik, P. (1999). Semantic similarity in a taxonomy: An information-based measure and its application to problems of ambiguity in natural lan-

guage. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
11, 95–130.
Resnik, P., & Diab, M. (2000, August). Measuring
verb similarity. In Proceedings of the twenty second annual meeting of the cognitive science society
(COGSCI2000). Philadelphia, US.
Rubenstein, H., & Goodenough, J. B. (1965). Contextual correlates of synonymy. Computational Linguistics, 8, 627–633.
Sanders, T. J. M., Spooren, W. P. M., & Noordman, L.
G. M. (1992). Towards a taxonomy of coherence
relations. Discourse Processes, 15, 1–35.
Sorace, A., & Keller, F. (2005). Gradience in linguistic
data. Lingua, 115 (11), 1497–1524.
Webber, B., Stone, M., Joshi, A., & Knott, A. (2003).
Anaphora and discourse structure. Computational
Linguistics, 29 (4), 545–588.

Appendix: Materials and mean ratings
synonym pairs
although–despite the fact that
now–now that (3.13)
(4.13)
but–yet (3.90)
considering that–given that (3.88)
despite the fact that–even though
or else–or (3.15)
(4.68)
just as–the way (3.05)
considering that–seeing as (4.30)
although–even though regardless of whether–whether or
(4.15)
not (4.82)
seeing as–given that on the assumption that–assuming
(3.95)
that (4.46)
hyponym pairs
if–if only (2.93)
if–on condition that (4.46)
notwithstanding
that–even
lest–in case (3.93)
though (3.90)
if–if ever (3.18)
as soon as–the moment (4.56)
and–whereas (1.51)
supposing that–if ever (2.85)
although–notwithstanding that
for–because (3.26)
(3.38)
if–assuming that (3.64)
if–on the assumption that (3.60)
contingently substitutable pairs
much as† –yet (0.79)
but then–much as† – (0.74)
given that–in that (3.10) but–despite the fact that (1.80)
in that–seeing as (2.98)
but not when–by the time (1.15)
but not when–except since
if–only if (3.15)
(2.18)
for fear that–regardless of
‡
as –in that (2.21)
whether (0.77)
and–or (0.62)
for–insofar as (1.92)
exclusive pairs
but–only if (0.78)
for fear that–seeing as (0.95)
but–now that (0.95)
just as–supposing that (0.85)
for fear that–until (0.56)
although–except when (1.15)
and–assuming that (0.62)
the way–as‡ (2.31)
only after–whether or not
just as–now that (1.67)
(0.55)
considering that–in order that
only when–so that (1.31)
(1.33)
† much as cannot easily connect events, which may have
caused subjects difficulties in rating these items.
‡ as is polysemous (Knott (1996) claims it has three distinct
senses). How polysemy affects similarity ratings remains to
be explored.

1017

