UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Neuropsychological Evidence for Linguistic and Extralinguistic Paths in Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0x57q7ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Cutica, Ilaria

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Neuropsychological Evidence for Linguistic and
Extralinguistic Paths in Communication
Ilaria Cutica (cutica@psych.unito.it)
Center for Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, via Po 14
Turin, 10123 ITALY
Abstract

facial expressions. The actor might be more or less aware of
his spontaneous gesticulation, which is not always
intentionally chosen or performed. Spontaneous gesticulation
is strictly coupled with the corresponding verbal
expression(s), so that the two series of expressive acts
contribute to determine the same communicative meaning.
Consequently, when we refer to linguistic pragmatics, we
intend pragmatics as performed through both language and its
accompanying gesticulations. Instead, when we refer to
extralinguistic communication, we refer to gestures, most of
the time symbolic, intentionally used by an actor to convey
information in absence of language (see Section 2). In
extralinguistic communication, meaning is realized
exclusively through intentionally performed gestures.
We follow the tenets of Cognitive Pragmatics Theory
(Airenti et al., 1993), within which the analysis of
communication is viewed on two levels: one behavioral and
one conversational. When the actor communicates, he
executes a social action plan, called behavioral game, whose
knowledge is shared between himself and his partner, with
the aim of achieving a certain effect on the latter (namely, to
change his mental states and possibly to induce him to
perform some action). The actor’s aim is to share with his
partner a certain meaning. The partner’s task is to fully
understand the actor’s communicative intention through the
recognition of the behavioral game. The choice of a
communicative way to perform the behavioral game
constrains the actor to follow a series of conversational rules:
this is the conversational level.
The process of comprehending a communicative act
consists in drawing inferences from the recognition of the
communicative act (i.e. the overt attempt to perform a
communicative act) to the communicative intention of the
actor, i.e. the actor’s meaning. The actor’s communicative
intention is fully understood only when it is clear to his
partner which move of a behavioral game it realizes. From
the partner’s viewpoint, the behavioral game currently bid
provides the background against which he draws inferences.
In comprehending the actor’s communicative intention, the
partner uses default rules of inference, i.e. rules which are
always valid unless their consequent is explicitly denied
(Reiter & Raymond, 1980). When the partner infers the
actor’s meaning through default inference rules, he goes
down a standard path of communication. On the contrary, if
the default inference rules are blocked, then the partner
follows a non-standard path of communication. In a nonstandard path an inferential meta-level rejects the consequent
of the standard inferences when it is inappropriate to the

Aim of the present study is the validation of a series of
predictions concerning the ability to comprehend different
pragmatic phenomena expressed through linguistic or gestural
means. According to the Cognitive Pragmatics Theory, it exists
a gradation of difficulty in the comprehension of different
pragmatic phenomena, depending upon the complexity of the
mental representations involved; furthermore, the construction
of the meaning of a communicative act is relatively
independent by the input modality. Thus, we predict that the
same gradient of difficulty in the comprehension of different
pragmatic phenomena should be detected in both the linguistic
and the extralinguistic communication. As right hemisphere
injured patients are well known for having pragmatic deficit,
also when tested through extralinguistic communication, we
aim at comparing their performance on linguistic versus
extralinguistic pragmatic ability. An experiment conducted
with 11 healthy individuals and 11 right hemisphere damaged
patients, tested on two experimental protocols designed to
investigate the same sorts of pragmatic phenomena, confirmed
our expectations.

Communication Comprehension:
Understanding the Actor’s Communicative
Intention
Communication is a form of social activity, and it can be seen
as an agent’s intentional and overt attempt to affect a
partner’s mental states. Cognitive pragmatics is the study of
the mental events that are involved in intentional
communication (Airenti, Bara & Colombetti, 1993).
Pragmatic competence requires the ability to perceive the
communicative intentions of others, as well as the personal
decisions about what to communicate in relation to the
individual’s own intentions, beliefs and desires. Individuals
can express their communicative intentions not only with
language, but also through extralinguistic means, that is any
hand gesture, body movement or facial expression that is
intentionally used to share a communicative meaning. A main
theoretical claim of our research is that linguistic and
extralinguistic forms of communication are merely superficial
manifestations of a single communicative competence whose
nature is neither linguistic nor extralinguistic, but mental
(Bara & Tirassa, 2000; Bucciarelli, Colle & Bara, 2003).
Authors claims the existence of a unitarian “core pragmatic
ability” (Bara & Tirassa, 1999) that is independent of the
different expressive means that could be used to
communicate (namely the linguistic and the extralinguistic
one).
Everyday linguistic communication is usually coupled with
spontaneous gesticulation, body movements, postures, and

518

As we assumed that different pragmatic phenomena (in
particular simple standard acts, complex standard acts, deceits
and ironies) requires, to be understood, mental
representations of different degrees of complexity, we predict
that the degree of difficulty that people encounter in
comprehending a pragmatic phenomenon (that we
hypothesize depends on the type of mental representations
involved), should hold for both linguistic and extralinguistic
communication. With the experiment described in Section 4
we aim at verifying this prediction.

context (e.g. because it contrasts with another piece of
knowledge or evidence), and triggers a new inferential chain.
The difference between standard and non-standard
communication can be expressed in terms of the mental
representations involved (Bucciarelli et al., 2003): in case of
no conflict between what it is communicated and what it is
privately entertained by the actor, the communication is
called standard; in case of conflict between what it is
communicated and what it is privately entertained by the
actor, the communication is called non-standard.
Standard communication comprises simple (directs and
conventional indirects) and complex (non-conventional
indirects) standard acts, and it involves an actor whose beliefs
and communicative purposes are in line with what he
communicates.
Non-standard communication comprises figurative
language, deceits and ironies, and involves more complex
mental representations. It follows the prediction that standard
phenomena are easier to deal with than non-standard
phenomena. Such a prediction is confirmed in the literature
on normal (Bucciarelli et al., 2003) and abnormal (Bara,
Bosco & Bucciarelli, 1999) development, on closed-headinjured patients (Bara, Tirassa & Zettin 1997; Bara, Cutica &
Tirassa, 2002), and on Alzheimer patients (Bara, Bucciarelli
& Geminiani, 2000).

Pragmatic Ability in Right Hemisphere
Damaged Patients
Most studies concerning right hemisphere damaged (RHD)
patients reveal their difficulties in linguistic pragmatics. In
particular, RHD patients have difficulties in comprehending
indirect requests (Weylman, et al., 1989; Stemmer, Giroux &
Joanette, 1994), sarcasm and deceit (Tompkins & Mateer,
1985), metaphors and idiomatic sentences (Myers &
Linebaugh, 1981; Schmitzer, Strauss & DeMarco, 1997;
Winner & Gardner, 1977). More in general, RHD patients
seem to be impaired in using context to interpret speech acts
(Kaplan, et al., 1990; Richards & Chiarello, 1997), and they
seem to “miss the point” of complex discourse, particularly
oral conversation (Gardner, et al, 1983; Hough, 1990).
Briefly, all the evidence found in literature supports the
idea that the RH is heavily involved in pragmatic ability, i.e.
the ability to properly use language in a social context. If this
is the case, then there is a main reason for investigating
pragmatic ability in RHD patients. Indeed, we know from
literature that RHD patients are preserved in their ability to
manage the syntactic aspects of sentences, and they largely
rely on their intact syntactic ability in processing the
discourse (Brownell, et al., 1992). Therefore, it is possible
that syntax facilitate patients’ comprehension of an actor’s
communicative intention, when that intention is expressed
linguistically. Thus, patients can partially counterbalance their
pragmatic deficit by using linguistic ability. If this is true,
then patients should find it easier to comprehend linguistic
than extralinguistic communication.
Cutica, Bara & Bucciarelli (2003) find that RHD patients
are
impaired
in
comprehending
extralinguistic
communication, but they do not compare the patients’
performance on linguistic versus extralinguistic tasks. Indeed,
authors tested only the extralinguistic pragmatic ability of 13
RHD patients and 13 control subjects, finding that patients
were impaired with respect to controls in each pragmatic task
(the tasks require to understand an actor’s communicative
intention toward a partner). The pragmatic phenomena
examined were direct communicative acts, non-conventional
indirect communicative acts, deceits, ironies, and failures of
communication.
The present study is designed to compare RHD patients’
and controls’ performance on linguistic versus extralinguistic
tasks, using two pragmatic protocols, designed to be
comparable.

Linguistic and Extralinguistic Communication

The analysis of the processes of comprehension of a
communicative act briefly sketched above is cast in terms of
the mental representations involved in the process itself; thus
what we stated above should be valid for the understanding of
both the actor’s communicative intentions expressed through
language, and those expressed through extralinguistic means.
An actor who uses extralinguistic communication (just like
one who uses linguistic communication) aims at sharing a
communicative meaning with a partner, and does this through
the intentional use of facial expressions, hand gestures, and
body movements. Any communicative meaning begins and
ends in a mental representation: the understanding of an
actor’s communicative intention consists of representational
processes whose input data can be either linguistic or
gestural. Also, the output of the process of comprehension is
always a mental representation: thus, we assume that the form
of the data in input does not affect the representational and
inferential processes involved in comprehending a
phenomenon (see also Bucciarelli et al., 2003). A research
stream whose data seems to support this assumption is the
one that studies the American Sign Language (ASL)
processing. Indeed, several researches show that some
cerebral regions process language independently of the
modality of presentation of language (see for instance Neville
et al., 1998). Thus, apart from the fact that language is
presented linguistically, for instance, to an English native
speaker, or visually to an ASL native speaker, the language
processes took mainly place in the same classical language
areas of the left hemisphere. This can support the assumption
that, in language comprehension, the input format is little
relevant at the representational and inferential levels.

519

Experiment

were admitted to the experimental sessions. Anyway, none of
the patients was excluded, because all of them succeeded in
each test. Then, half of the patients dealt with the linguistic
protocol in the second session, and with the extralinguistic
protocol in the third session. The order was reversed for the
remaining patients. As regards the healthy subjects, they dealt
only with the two pragmatic protocols in two experimental
sessions; the order of presentation of the two protocols was
balanced for them, too. Each session lasted about 50 minutes
for patients, and about 35 minutes for controls.
The linguistic protocol (originally devised by Bara et al.,
1997) comprised 12 videotaped fictions: 3 directs, 3 nonconventional indirects, 3 deceits, and 3 ironies. An example
of a videotaped scene of the linguistic protocol is the
following irony:
[1] The run. Children A and B are racing in a yard. Child A
wins; Child B arrives with a remarkable delay and puffing.
Child A says: "You run real fast".
The prosody and the facial expressions of the actors are
coherent with their communicative intentions.
The extralinguistic protocol was originally devised by Bara
and colleagues (2000). It comprises 3 directs, 3 nonconventional indirects, 3 deceits, and 3 ironies. An example
of extralinguistic irony is the following:
[2] Lego. Two children are building a high Lego tower.
One of them, with a sudden movement, knocks it down.
The other child claps his hands looking at him.
Each videotaped fiction of both protocols lasts about 16-20
seconds, and depicts a single communicative act performed
by an actor toward a partner. Each fiction ends immediately
before the partner’s reaction to the communicative act
performed by the actor: there was only one communicative
act per scene. The facial expressions of the actors are
coherent with their communicative intentions.
Participant’s comprehension was assessed differently for
the linguistic and the extralinguistic protocol. In the former
they were asked, at the end of each fiction, what they believe
the communicative intention of the actor was (i.e., “What
does she mean, by saying that ?”). In the extralinguistic
protocol, participant’s comprehension was instead assessed
by asking subjects to choose, from a set of four photographs
given in random order, the one depicting the communicative
intention of the actor. For instance, the four alternatives for
the second child’s communicative intention in the fiction [2]
are:
(a)
He is evidently angry with the other child.
(b) He is happy and smiles at the other child.
(c)
He shows the other that he has caught a fly.
(d) He paints.

The aim of our experiment is to investigate into possible
differences in the process of comprehension of linguistic and
extralinguistic communicative acts. For this purpose, we
tested both healthy individuals and RHD patients.
Predictions:
1. In comparing performance to linguistic and
extralinguistic tasks, we expect to find that both participants’
groups show the same pattern of difficulty among the
different pragmatic phenomena.
Furthermore, we expect that, as concerning the overall
performance to each protocol, RHD patients are more
impaired in the extralinguistic communication respect to the
linguistic communication, as due to the characteristics of
RHD patients’ pragmatic impairment.
2. In comparing performance to standard versus nonstandard communicative acts, we expect to find that, for both
participants groups, standard communication is easier to
comprehend than non-standard communication.
3. In between-groups comparisons, RHD patients should be
impaired, with respect to healthy individuals, in
comprehending both linguistic and extralinguistic
communication.

Participants
The RHD group consisted of 11 right hemisphere injured
patients (9 males, 4 females), whose age ranged from 51 to 70
years (mean age: 56;4), and whose education ranged from 0
to 18 years (mean: 8). Patients did not suffer multiple
vascular damage, they had a minimum score of 26 at the Mini
Mental State Examination (to avoid any incipient dementia);
none of them was apraxic, as resulted at the Apraxia Subtest
of the Western Aphasia Battery (Kertesz, 1982). All of them
had suffered vascular damage (ischemia or haemorrhage). Six
of them had an anterior lesion (frontal lobe, of frontotemporal areas), five a posterior lesion (parietal or temporal
lobes).
The healthy individuals group consisted of 11 adults
matched for sex (9 males, 4 females), age (mean age: 54;6)
and education (mean years: 8,6).

Materials and procedures
The participants dealt with the experiment individually, in a
quiet room. They were told that the experiment was
concerned with humans' communicative ability.
The experiment consisted of three experimental sessions
for patients, and two for healthy subjects, with a break of one
week between sessions. As regards patients, in the first
session they had to pass three entrance tests: the MMSE
(Mini Mental State Examination), a theory of mind test
(Smarties test), and a visuo-perceptive test. The visuoperceptive test consisted of four videotaped scenes, depicting
objects in movement according to laws of physical causality,
designed to test if the patient could correctly perceive the
whole screen of the television. Only patients with 26 or more
at the MMSE, and with a full score on the other two tests

Thanks to such procedure language plays no role in the
extralinguistic protocol, since it appears neither in the
material presented, nor in the response requested.
For both protocols, we assigned one point per each correct
answer, that is each time the participants correctly recognizes
the communicative intention of the actor.

520

Results

significant for standard communication (Wilcoxon test: z=1.603, p=.051), whereas it is fully significant for non-standard
communication (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.807, p=.035). In more
detail, the difference is not significant for simple standard acts
(that obtained full-score correct performance), whereas it is
significant for complex standard acts (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.88,
p=.045); as concerning non standard communication, the
difference is significant for deceits (Wilcoxon test: z=-2.20,
p=.027) but it is not significant for ironies (Wilcoxon test: z=1.60, p=.108).

Prior to the analysis of the data we verified an implicit
assumption of our study, namely that participants experienced
the same easiness/difficulty in comprehending the 3
communicative acts utilized to investigate each single
pragmatic phenomenon (e.g. the 3 ironic communicative
acts). Results reveal that, for both protocols, all the
communicative acts of a given sort were comparable in
difficulty both for patients (Friedman non parametric analysis
of variance: p value ranging from .417 to .913) and for
controls (Friedman non parametric analysis of variance: p
value ranging from .549 to .717).
Within the group of patients it is possible to distinguish
between those with an anterior lesion site (n=6) and those
with a posterior lesion site (n=5). The performance of the two
subgroups of patients do not differ significantly nor in the
linguistic protocol (Mann Whitney test: z=-512, p=.321), nor
in the extralinguistic protocol (Mann Whitney test: z=-531,
p=.284). Thus, we pooled together their results.
Within Groups Comparisons. Comparisons between
linguistic and extralinguistic communication
The means of correct performance of patients and healthy
individuals with both linguistic and extralinguistic
communicative acts are in Table 1 and 2.

Table 2. Means of correct performance by healthy individuals
with linguistic and extralinguistic acts. Standard deviations in
parentheses.
Healthy
individuals

Table 1. Means of correct performance by RHD patients with
linguistic and extralinguistic acts. Standard deviations in
parentheses.
RHD
patients

Standard acts

Ironies

(n =3)

(n =3)

(n =3)

(n =3)

Linguistic

3

3

Extraling.

2.68
(.64)

2.28
(.72)

2.24
(.84)
1.41
(.65)

1.95
(.74)
1.64
(.79)

Non-standard
acts

Simple Complex

Deceits

Ironies

(n =3)

(n =3)

(n =3)

(n =3)

Linguistic

3

3

3

Extraling.

3

2.73
(.60)

2.61
(.68)

2.51
(.44)
2.60
(.50)

Comparisons between standard and non-standard
communicative acts.
In the linguistic protocol RHD patients perform better with
standard acts than with non-standard acts (Wilcoxon test: tied
z=-3.059, tied p=.0001). Control subjects instead do not show
a significant difference between standard and non-standard
acts (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.825, p=.067); it has to be noticed
that healthy individuals obtain a full-score performance in 9
tasks (3 simple, 3 complex, 3 deceit) out of 12.
In the extralinguistic protocol RHD patients perform better
with standard acts than with non-standard ones (Wilcoxon
test: z=-2.760, p=.003). The same result holds for healthy
subjects (Wilcoxon test: z= -2.201, p=.028).

Non-standard
acts

Simple Complex Deceits

Standard acts

As concerning the global performance, RHD patients
perform better with linguistic communication than with the
extralinguistic one (Wilcoxon test: z=-2.942, p=.0016). We
detected a significant difference in performance both for
standard communication (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.82, p=.034)
and for non-standard communication (Wilcoxon test: z=2.234, p=.008): in both cases, patient performed better in the
linguistic protocol. In more detail, the difference is significant
for simple standard acts (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.98, p=.034), for
complex standard acts (Wilcoxon test: z=-2.26, p=.0044), for
deceits (Wilcoxon test: z=-1.83, p=.033) and for ironies
(Wilcoxon test: z=-1.79, p=.042).
Also the healthy individuals group perform better with
linguistic communication than with extralinguistic
communication (Wilcoxon test: z=-2.792, p=.016), as
concerning the global performance (see Table 2). In
particular, the difference in performance is marginally

Between Groups Comparisons In the linguistic protocol
considered as a whole, RHD patients perform worse than
controls (Mann-Whitney test: z=-3.37, p=.0003). In
particular, the difference in performance is significant for
non-standard phenomena (deceits: Mann-Whitney test: z=3.281, p=.0005; ironies: Mann-Whitney test: z=-2.373,
p=.009), but not for standard phenomena (in each of them
both groups performed 100% correct interpretations).
In the extralinguistic protocol considered as a whole, RHD
patients perform worse than controls (Mann-Whitney test: z=3.698, p=.0001). The difference is significant for each
pragmatic phenomenon: simple standard acts (Mann-Whitney
test: z=2.126, p=.02), complex standard acts (Mann-Whitney
test: z=2.219, p=.01), deceits (Mann-Whitney test: z=-3.413,
p=.0003), and ironies (Mann-Whitney test: z=2.926, p=.001).

521

actors in the linguistic fictions communicate in an ecological
way, that is using both language and its spontaneous
accompanying gestures. Thus, it is possible that the
communication that took place in the linguistic fictions was
more informative than communication that took place in the
extralinguistic ones. Furthermore, in healthy subjects the
difference in performance between linguistic and
extralinguistic communication does not occur on each
pragmatic phenomena; indeed, as concerning standard
communication, the difference is only marginally significant
(p=.051). It means that some other factor affected the RHD
performance with the extralinguistic communication, other
than elements listed below. Probably, RHD patients
pragmatic abilities are more damaged than their performance
on linguistic tasks let us suppose: indeed, they can use their
intact linguistic ability to little counterbalance their pragmatic
deficit. But when no language can help, patients’ performance
is fully indicative of their pragmatic deficit.
Among other things, these results suggest that a proper
assessment of pragmatic competence in patients ought to
consider both linguistic and extralinguistic pragmatic
competence.
Finally, relative to healthy subjects, patients show an higher
degree of difference in performance, between standard and
non-standard communication. This finding is compatible with
the well-known RHD patients difficulty in integrating
different sorts of information (see for instance Richards et al.,
1997), particularly when some piece of information contrasts
with another piece of information or with previous
knowledge.
Summarizing, the results suggest that the differences in
dealing with conflicting versus not conflicting mental
representations (that is, non-standard communication versus
standard communication, respectively) can be found with
similar patterns both in the linguistic and in the gestural
communication comprehension; thus, the presence/absence of
conflicting mental representations accounts for different
degrees in the difficulty of understanding different types of
pragmatic phenomena.

Interactions Finally, we detected a significant interaction: as
regards the extralinguistic protocol, the difference in
performance between standard and non-standard tasks in
patients is significantly higher than the difference in
performance between standard and non-standard tasks in
healthy individuals (Mann-Whitney test: z=-3.021, p=.0001).

Conclusions and Discussion
A main aim of our experiment is to compare the participants’
ability to comprehend the actor’s communicative meaning via
linguistic and extralinguistic means.
Results show that both healthy individuals and RHD
patients have more difficulties in comprehending
extralinguistic communication than linguistic communication.
Furthermore, RHD patients, who are impaired in
understanding a communication realized through linguistic
modalities, show even more pragmatic difficulties in
comprehending a communication realized through
extralinguistic modalities.
In any case, participants in both groups shows the same
pattern of difficulty: they find it easier to comprehend
standard communication than non-standard communication.
This result holds for both participants’ groups as concerning
extralinguistic communication, and as concerning linguistic
communication it holds for the RHD patients’ group only. As
regards the healthy individuals performance on linguistic
protocols, we obtained a ceiling effect on standard
communication, and a performance close to the ceiling effect
on non-standard communication. The easiness of linguistic
fictions (that had to be comprehensible for patients also),
thus, does not allow healthy individuals to fully show the
upper limit of their ability (with the exception of ironies).
The results show that the sort of the mental representation
involved in comprehending a communicative act (conflicting
mental representation for non-standard communication versus
not conflicting mental representation for standard
communication) can account for the difficulty experienced in
comprehending the communication, independently of its
being expressed linguistically or extralinguistically. Indeed,
results confirm that both RHD patients and healthy
individuals find it harder to comprehend non-standard
communication than standard communication.
Nevertheless,
the
finding
that
extralinguistic
communication is systematically more difficult to
comprehend (for each task considered, except than simple
standard acts and ironies in healthy subjects) needs to be
accounted for. It is possible that there are some features of the
communicative expressive mean that could facilitate or, by
the contrary, hinder, the comprehension of a communicative
act. It is possible that language, that evolved as the main
communicative tool of human beings, and that is so widely
and abundantly used in everyday conversations, has reached a
sort of “privileged status” respect to any other communicative
tool; thus a communication entirely sustained by gestures is,
in any case, less immediate to understand than the
correspondent linguistic communication.
Alternatively, it is possible that something in the protocol
construction made easier the linguistic tasks; in particular,

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the M.I.U.R. of Italy, PRIN
Project: “Modellizzazione matematica del comportamento
naturale e artificiale”, Research Code n. 2004111320.

References
Airenti G., Bara B.G., & Colombetti M., (1993).
Conversation and behaviour games in the pragmatics of
dialogue. Cognitive Science 17, 197-256.
Bara, B.G., Bosco F.M., & Bucciarelli M., (1999).
Developmental pragmatics in normal and abnormal
children. Brain and Language 68 (3), 507-528.
Bara, B.G., Bucciarelli M., & Geminiani G., (2000).
Development and decay of extralinguistic communication.
Brain and Cognition, 43, 1-3.

522

Kaplan, J.A., Brownell, H.H., Jacobs, J.R., & Gardner, H.,
(1990). The effects of right hemisphere damage on the
pragmatic interpretation of conversational remarks. Brain
and Language, 38, 315-333.
Myers, P.S., & Linebaugh, C.W., (1981). Comprehension of
idiomatic expressions by right-hemisphere damaged adults.
In R.H. Brookshire (Ed.), Clinical aphasiology:
Conference proceedings (pp. 254-261). Minneapolis: BRK.
Neville HJ., Daphne B., Corina D., Rauschecker J., Karni A.,
Lalwani A., Braun A., Clark V., Jezzard P., Turner R.,
(1998). Cerebral organization of language in deaf and
hearing subjects: biological constraints and effects of
experience. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, USA, 95(3), 922-929.
Reiter, H., & Raymond, V., (1980). A logic for default
reasoning. Artificial Intelligence 13, 81-132.
Richards, L., & Chiarello, C., (1997). Activation without
selection: parallel right hemisphere roles in language and
intentional movement? Brain and Language, 57, 151-178.
Schmitzer, A.B., Strauss, M., & DeMarco, S., (1997).
Contextual influences on comprehension of multiplemeaning words by right hemisphere brain-damaged and
non-brain-damaged adults. Aphasiology, 11, 447-459.
Stemmer, B., Giroux, F., & Joanette, Y., (1994). Production
and evaluation of requests by right hemisphere brain
damaged individuals. Brain and Language, 47, 1-31.
Tompkins, C.A., & Mateer, C.A., (1985). Right hemisphere
appreciation of prosodic and linguistic indications of
implicit attitude. Brain and Language, 24, 185-203.
Weylman, S.T. Brownell, H.H., Roman, M., & Gardner, H.,
(1989). Appreciation of indirect requests by left-and rightbrain damaged patients: the effect of verbal context and
conventionality of wording. Brain and Language, 36, 580591.
Winner, E., & Gardner, H., (1977). The comprehension of
metaphor in brain-damaged patients. Brain, 100, 719-727.

Bara B. G., Cutica I., Tirassa M., (2002) Neuropragmatics:
extralinguistic communication after closed head injury.
Brain and Language, 77, 72-94.
Bara, B. G. Tirassa, M., (1999) A mentalist framework for
linguistic and extralinguistic communication. In S. Bagnara
(Ed) Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference on
Cognitive Science (ECCS '99), 285-290, Certosa di
Pontignano, Siena, Italy.
Bara B.G., & Tirassa M., (2000). Neuropragmatics: Brain and
communication. Brain and Language, 71, 10-14.
Bara B.G., Tirassa M., Zettin M., (1997). Neuropragmatics:
neuropsychological constraints on formal theories of
dialogue. Brain and Language, 59: 7-49.
Brownell H.H., Carroll J.J., Rehak A, & Wingfield A (1992).
The use of pronoun anaphora and speaker mood in the
interpretation of conversational utterances by right
hemisphere brain-damaged patients. Brain and Language,
43, 121-147.
Bucciarelli M., Colle L., & Bara B.G., (2003). How children
comprehend speech acts and communicative gestures.
Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 207-241.
Cutica I., Bara B. G., Bucciarelli M., (2003) Extralinguistic
pragmatic ability in right hemisphere brain damaged
patients. In: F. Schmalhofer, R. Young, G. Katz (Eds),
Proceedings of the 2nd European Cognitive Science
Conference, 610-616, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ.
Gardner H., Brownell H.H., Wapner W., & Michelow D.,
(1983). Missing the point? The role of the right hemisphere
in the processing of complex linguistic materials. In E.
Perecman (Ed.), Cognitive processing in the right
hemisphere (pp. 37-74). New York: Academic Press.
Hough, M.S., (1990). Narrative comprehension in adults with
right and left hemisphere brain-damage: Theme
organization. Brain and Language, 38, 253-277.

523

