UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Newcomb's Problem as Cognitive Illusion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1k86m0jx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Sloman, Steven
Walsh, Clare R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Newcomb’s Problem as Cognitive Illusion
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science
School of History & Philosophy of Science
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

gain of $1,000 when it can not influence the outcome of the
choice.

Abstract
Richard Jeffrey (1983) has said that Newcomb’s Problem may
be seen as a rock on which Bayesianism must founder. Despite
a vast literature of great technical subtlety and complexity, no
solution has emerged. Most recently, Jeffrey (2004) renounced
his earlier position and no longer regards Newcomb’s problem
as a genuine decision problem at all. Rather, Jeffrey suggests,
“Newcomb problems are like Escher’s famous staircase on
which an unbroken ascent takes you back where you started.”
Jeffrey’s analogy is apt for a puzzle whose specific logical
features can be precisely articulated. I offer a novel analysis of
the problem going beyond mere analogy to reveal the source of
its persistent intractability. In the spirit of Jeffrey’s analogy, I
propose that the central problem has arisen from the misguided
attempt to reconcile the impossible science-fictional features of
the story with a plausible causal analysis and, therefore, the
contest between causal and evidential decision theories is
misconceived. As the analogy with Escher figures suggests,
Newcomb’s Problem is an instance of a compelling cognitive
illusion whose underlying mechanism is proposed here.

Intellectual Cripples?

Keywords: Newcomb's Problem; decision theory; rational
choice; Bayesianism; paradoxes of self-reference.

Newcomb’s Problem may suggest ill-understood features of
rational choice behavior and appears to reveal anomalies in
our tacit principles of decision making like the tradition of
research on ‘heuristics and biases’ (Tversky and Kahneman
1974). On such a view, Newcomb’s problem is an addition to
the list of such famous “paradoxes” as those of Allais (1953)
and Ellsberg (1961). On standard accounts, Newcomb’s
Problem appears to support Slovic’s jaundiced view that
research into such phenomena “has led to the sobering
conclusion that, in the face of uncertainty, man may be an
intellectual cripple, whose intuitive judgements and decisions
violate many of the fundamental principles of optimal
behaviour” (Wright 1984: 114). I will argue that such
pessimism is unwarranted, in this case at least, because the
problem is merely a pseudo-problem and, therefore, needing
not to be solved but to be dissolved.
Two decades after having introduced the puzzle, Nozick’s
(1993) judgement that no resolution has been completely
convincing suggests that something essential has been
overlooked. As the few ‘no-box’ accounts suggest, a radically
new approach is needed that can meet the important criterion
of adequacy on any solution – namely, revealing the source of
the problem’s peculiar obduracy. In particular, I will suggest
that, contrary to the nearly universal view, Newcomb’s
Problem does not raise any questions concerning rationality
or decision theory. However, if this solution in the spirit of
Jeffrey’s apostasy is good news about our capacity for
rational choice, it is bad news about other cognitive abilities
of interest. Revealed as an instance of a familiar class of
paradoxes, Newcomb’s Problem is a manifestation of
problems that have plagued theorizing about the mind. In the
extensive literature on Newcomb’s Problem, Sorensen (1987,
1988), Priest (2002) and Maitzen and Wilson (2003) are
among the few who appear to have noted the affinity with a
family of problems having nothing essentially to do with
rationality or decision theory. I show that Jeffrey’s late insight
can be given precise formulation which reveals unnoticed, but
not entirely coincidental, similarity between Newcomb’s
demon and that of Descartes: Just as Descartes’ demon
systematically thwarts our beliefs, so Newcomb’s demon
systematically thwarts our choices.

Introduction
The Problem involves a choice between two alternatives: Of
two boxes A and B, you may choose either to take Box B
only, or you may choose to take both boxes A and B. Box A
is transparent and contains $1,000; Box B is opaque and
contains either a million dollars or nothing, depending on the
prediction of the demon who places the money there. If the
demon predicts you will choose only Box B, then he will
place the million dollars in it. If he predicts that you will
choose both boxes, he will leave Box B empty. This predictor
demon is known from previous experience to be extremely
reliable, making correct predictions 95 percent of the time. He
makes his prediction, and depending on what he predicts
about your choice, either places the million dollars in Box B
or not. He departs and can no longer influence the outcome,
and then you make your choice. What do you do?
Given the high reliability of the demon’s predictions, the
principle of subjective expected utility recommends taking
only Box B since there is almost certainty of winning a
million dollars. However, since the demon either places the
money or not prior to your choice and can no longer influence
the situation, the principle of dominance recommends taking
both boxes since you will be $1,000 better off regardless of
what the demon has done. There is no point leaving a certain

2027

Goofball Cases
Zeno’s paradox of Achilles and the Tortoise is not resolved
by trying to reconcile its conclusions with algebraic
calculation of their relative positions over time. The
conclusion that Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise is taken
as a reductio ad absurdum of Zeno’s argument, and the
intellectual task is to expose its fatal flaw. Newcomb’s
problem has not been approached in this way, since the
intellectual effort has been expended mainly on reconciling
the famous scenario of the predicting demon with some
plausible causal structure (Eells 1982). Thirty years of failure
has not been widely taken as evidence of the futility of this
project and the underlying conception of the project.
Ironically, however, taking the puzzle seriously entails
embracing the paradox rather than attempting to re-tell the
story in a way that avoids it.
David Lewis (1979) notes that some have dismissed
Newcomb’s Problem as a “goofball” case unworthy of
serious attention. On the contrary, however, I suggest that it is
worth of serious attention because it is a goofball case of a
specific kind. In the literature, illuminating similarities have
been noted between Newcomb’s Problem and various
structurally similar problems such as “common cause” cases
and Prisoner’s Dilemma. However, these real-life analogs of
Newcomb’s Problem have been crucially misleading by
diverting attention from the dis-analogy and the essential
function of the science-fiction of a demon predictor.
Neglecting the implications of the supposed supernatural
powers has led to missing their precise role in generating the
recalcitrant perplexity.

with geometry and physics, as Richard Gregory (1981: 409)
has demonstrated with an apparent real-life impossible
Penrose Triangle. However, McKay’s analysis leads us
astray, like most others, because she fails to take seriously the
fiction of an inherently occult “acausal synchronicity”
between our choices and the predictor’s actions. McKay is
not at liberty to re-tell the story in a way that eliminates the
puzzle arising from the predictor’s supernatural ability.
The peculiarity of the apparent link between one’s choice
and the previously determined contents of the opaque box is
the central, defining feature of Newcomb’s Problem. It is this
mysterious a-causal link that prompted Jeffrey’s (1983: 25)
original characterization of the problem as “a secular, sci-fi
successor to the problems of predestination.” Thus, the
science-fictional nature of the problem frees, indeed
precludes, us from the need to wonder about how such a
predictor could possibly accomplish his success.

Common Causes

The Shadowy Predictor

Burgess (2004) also defends the causalist position, bringing
into relief the same difficulties. Burgess argues that
Newcomb’s Problem must be understood as a ‘common
cause’ problem following Eells (1982). On this basis he
argues “the evidence unequivocally supports two-boxing as
the rational option” (2004: 261). Burgess does not consider
the possibility that there might be no right choice at all in
principle – the ‘no-box’ alternative that has been
independently raised by a few authors for varied reasons
(Levi 1975, Sorensen 1987, Priest 2002, Maitzen and Wilson
2003). Again, we see a characteristic difficulty when Burgess
is forced to count the lesser expectation of two-boxing as,
nonetheless, “most desirable.” At the very least, it is to strain
ordinary usage to claim that greater monetary expectation is
not necessarily the most desirable. Above all, assimilating
Newcomb’s Problem to common cause cases is to stack the
deck and to prejudice the case in favor of two-boxing unless
the differences are inessential. However, Newcomb’s
Problem can only be categorized as a case of common cause
on certain untenable, question-begging assumptions.

A central feature of Newcomb’s Problem is the peculiarity of
the apparent link between one’s choice and the previously
determined contents of the opaque Box B. Causal theorists
such as Gibbard and Harper (1978) propose simply ignoring
the link and recommend the ‘two-box’ solution as rational
despite being forced to admit that you will fare worse in
choosing it. They explain “We take the moral of the paradox
to be … If someone is very good at predicting behavior and
rewards predicted irrationality richly, the irrationality will be
richly rewarded” (1978: 369). However, if “irrationality” socalled is richly rewarded, it must be rational to act in such
ways. This “solution” has a distinct air of question-begging
and appears “to just repeat one of the arguments, loudly and
slowly” as Nozick (1969) originally remarked. Gibbard and
Harper are not alone. Recently, McKay (2004) emphasizes
the predictor’s unfathomable ability and suggests that his
reliability is so extraordinary “that it undermines your belief
that your choice can have no causal influence” and even
“challenges the conviction that the action of the predictor is
genuinely in the past” (2004: 188). McKay says that faced
with the predictor’s reliability, “it is not impossible that you
would come to believe that there is some very cleverly
arranged cheating going on” (2004: 188). Indeed, if it were
not science fiction but a real case, we would be desperate to
find some plausible basis for the phenomenon. Equally, if we
encountered an Escher staircase in real life, we would be
anxious to resolve the anomaly in a way that is consistent

Brainstate
At the Time of
the Brainscan
(BATOB)

Your decision

Predictor's action

Figure 1.

2028

Following Eells (1982), Burgess’s picture may be represented
in the schema of Figure 1, showing the analogy with the case
in which there is a high correlation between smoking and
cancer but smoking is assumed not to cause cancer because
they are both assumed to be caused by a common gene.
Despite providing unwelcome evidence that one has the
cancer gene, smoking is the rational choice if it provides

pleasure – the analog of choosing two boxes in Newcomb’s
Problem. Since backwards causation is ruled out, these
choices cannot affect the earlier facts for which they merely
provide evidence. In Eells’ terminology, ‘symptomatic acts’
and ‘symptomatic outcomes’ in such cases are highly
correlated but causally independent. Eells (1982: 210) says
that despite first appearances, the differences between such
cases and Newcomb’s Problem are not really important ones.
He says “it seems that on any plausible account of successful
prediction, the causal structure must be of this form” (1982:
210-11). However, the point is precisely that we are not
necessarily required to seek any plausible account in this
sense. As we will see, the effort to do so has not merely
involved gratuitous inventions that go beyond the story’s
specifications, but has diverted attention from the specific
source of puzzlement created by the science-fiction.
Significantly, Eells says that the common cause structure is
the only kind of causal explanation of the predictor’s success
that he can think of, since “it seems presupposed by much of
our inductive reasoning that a high statistical correlation has a
causal explanation” (1982: 210). The question that remains
unasked is why we should search for any thinkable, plausible
explanation of this kind consistent with our inductive
reasoning rather than assume that the problem is inherently
incapable of being reconciled with any causal structure.
Closely analogous are those science-fiction stories of time
travel whose impossibility according to physical theory
creates inevitable, diverting paradoxes. If we are not misled
by the analogy with problems that are, in fact, realizable,
such as common cause cases, we may simply accept the
occult relation between our choice and the predictor’s earlier
action, and thereby focus on the logical structure of the
puzzle, rather than its supposed causal structure.
We see from Figure 1 that, on Burgess’s account, the
diagnostic Brainstate At the Time of Brainscan (BATOB) is
assumed to be the common cause of your decision and also
the Predictor’s action. However, the relevant brainstate and
the decision cannot be separated in this way. The Predictor’s
action cannot be caused by the relevant brainstate unless
either (a) there is backward causation, contrary to the
specifications of the problem, or (b) the brainstate in question
is taken to be one preceding both the actual decision and also
the Predictor’s action. It is only by separating some diagnostic
brainstate from the one directly responsible for (i.e. identical
with) the decision that Newcomb’s Problem can be
characterized in terms of Eells’ schema for common cause
problems. That is, Burgess assumes that the Predictor bases
his action on some brainstate earlier than the one actually
constituting the decision itself, but this opens a questionable
gap in the causal sequence between the brainstate and the
decision. Of course, like the so-called precursor presentiment
or ‘tickle’ (Eells 1984), this gap provides the room for
supposing that the actual decision might somehow deviate
from the one determined by the brainstate being scanned and
thereby deviate from the demon’s prediction. Burgess’s
strategy attempts to avoid the demon’s prediction by
assuming that a presentiment or tickle is merely evidence of
the choice and not identical with the choice decision itself
which is, thereby, assumed to be possible contrary to the
tickle. Clearly, however, this must be ruled out since, ex

hypothesi, as a reliable predictor, the demon will anticipate
such a sneaky strategy. Although futile, this ruse captures
something of the inescapable paradox of trying to avoid one’s
self – to flee one’s fate. As we will see, the assumption of the
demon introduces an inessential step in what is, in fact, the
anticipation of one’s own decision. If not through backward
causation, the ‘state of nature’ is, nonetheless, not
independent of my choice. Contrary to Burgess’s strategy, if
the brainstate relevant to the decision is taken to be the very
one most directly responsible for (i.e. identical with) it, then it
cannot be a cause of the Predictor’s action unless it
contravenes the stipulation prohibiting backward causation.
Strictly speaking, the only brainstate that is relevant is the one
at the moment of decision, precisely when it is impossible for
you to incorporate it into any deliberation – for logical
reasons, as we will see.

Appointment in Samarra
In a revealing remark, Burgess explains that Newcomb’s
problem “is taken to be a distinctive kind of common cause
problem in that you are presently in a position to influence the
nature of the common cause. Indeed, all you have to do to
influence it appropriately is to make a commitment to oneboxing” (2004: 283). Burgess evidently hopes to distinguish
the commitment to one-boxing from the actual, real choice
itself, thereby contriving a means to avoid the predictor’s
supernatural powers. However, this attempt to split the
commitment from the choice is clearly a futile attempt to
outwit the Predictor by separating the diagnostic brainstate
from the actual decision. Such an analysis is clearly ruled out
by the specifications of the problem since the Predictor
cannot be assumed to base his prediction on the wrong, or
irrelevant, earlier diagnostic brainstate – Burgess’s BATOB
in Figure 1. Of course, without this spurious assumption, the
parallel with common cause cases cannot be maintained. The
attempt to outsmart the Predictor with a two-stage strategy is
futile because it misconceives or reformulates the problem,
thereby avoiding it rather than solving it. Burgess’ suggestion
that we switch commitments in order to trick the Predictor
recalls the famous story told by W. Somerset Maugham in
which a servant is frightened when encountering Death in the
market place of Baghdad and, taking the master’s horse, flees
to Samarra. Recounting the meeting to the master, Death
says: “I was astonished to see him in Baghdad, for I had an
appointment with him tonight in Samarra.”

Taking Science Fiction Seriously

2029

Burgess accepts that the contest between causal and
evidential decision theories is meaningful and defends the
former by assimilating Newcomb’s Problem to realizable
‘common cause’ cases where the recommendation of causal
theory is generally acknowledged to be the rational one.
Schmidt (1998), too, is concerned to “prevent this beautiful
paradox from being classified as physical nonsense” (1998,
68) and seeks to refute claims that Newcomb’s Problem is
“physically nonsensical and impossible to imagine” (1998,
67). However, despite claiming that backward causation is
realizable in a physically plausible way, Schmidt is concerned
only with an agent’s subjective impressions and intuitions

that constitute the problem and not its solution. It is striking to
see that the effort to make sense of the puzzle within the
framework of plausible scientific reasoning has persisted as
the most widespread approach since Eells’ (1982) account
along these lines.

representation (Figure 2) shows your payoffs (your choices in
rows, twin’s choices in columns):

Schrödinger’s Cash

2 Boxes
1 Box

2 Boxes
$1,000 + 0
0

1 Box
$1,000 + $ 1M
$ 1M

Figure 2.

The anomalous correlation of our choice with the contents of
the opaque Box B has been illuminated by a creative resort to
other suggestive mysteries. Although it should not require
argument to explain why Wolf’s (1981) appeal to Heisenberg
uncertainty, superposition of quantum states and observer
effects cannot be taken seriously in this context, it is a
revealing manifestation of the same motivations and
strategies we have already seen. Indeed, Wolf’s analysis is
not merely absurd or desperate, and its appeal to quantum
effects is analogous to McKay’s (2004) resort to extra
information about unknown causal structure. Both seek to
deal with the mysterious reliability of the Predictor by
gratuitous, invented appeals beyond the actual specifications
of the puzzle. In this case, the resort to quantum physics is no
more unwarranted than the usual appeal to causal structures
within classical physics. However, despite the manifest
absurdity of invoking quantum effects, by taking the occult
link between choice and box contents seriously, Wolf’s
analysis acknowledges and embraces the essential sciencefictional feature of Newcomb’s Problem that has been the
source of its notorious recalcitrance. While Burgess sees the
link as a realistic opportunity to “influence the nature of the
common cause” (2004: 283), Wolf proposes in the same spirit
that “the million dollars is in paradox-land where it is in the
box and not in the box at the same time” (1981: 150). Like
Schrödinger’s Cat that is both dead and alive, the money is in
a superposition of states, being both in the box and not in the
box until you make your choice. Wolf says “Choosing both
boxes creates [opaque] box B empty. Choosing box B creates
it one million dollars fuller” (1981: 150). Although the failure
to be convinced by Wolf’s account need not be evidence of
“our Western preconditioned minds” as he claims, Wolf’s
eccentric resort to an observer-induced effect captures the
crucial peculiarity of the problem of uncaused backward
correlation.

Commentators appear not to have drawn an obvious
consequence of this analogy. The isomorphism of the two
problems reveals that Newcomb’s Problem is a way of
contriving a Prisoner’s Dilemma against one’s self. The other
player in Newcomb’s version of Prisoner’s Dilemma is one’s
self mediated by the reversing mirror of the predicting
demon. The illusion of a partner, albeit supernatural,
disguises the game against one’s self – the hidden selfreferentiality that underlies Priest’s (2002) diagnosis of
“rational dilemma,” Sorensen’s (1987) instability and
Maitzen and Wilson’s (2003) vicious regress. Newcomb’s
Problem is a device for externalizing and reflecting one’s own
decisions.
The hidden circularity facing the decision-maker in
Newcomb’s Problem may be seen more directly by
considering its formulation in extensive form (Figure 3). Here
we may assume without material difference to the problem
that the demon makes his decision following the agent’s
choice, though without knowing what the agent’s move was.

Demon’s
move
Your
move

$1 Million
0
$1 Million + $1,000

Demon’s
move

$1,000

Figure 3.
As we contemplate our best move, we must consider the next
level in the game tree representing the demon’s decision
which is actually reflection on the very same game tree and,
in particular, the first node that we currently occupy. That is,
the branches from the second level nodes are copies of the
first node, since they represent the demon’s prediction of our
own decision at the first node. As we deliberate, we represent
the demon’s deliberations that incorporate our own.
The analogy between Newcomb’s Problem and Prisoner’s
Dilemma appears to have obscured the indirect selfreferentiality involved in the latter by highlighting the twoperson structure of the contest. The other player in the
Newcomb case is actually one’s self mediated by the
reversing mirror of the predicting demon. The predictor is not
merely a fiction providing insufficient “extra information”
about causal structure that might be reconciled with a
meaningful choice as both McKay and Levi suggest. Rather,

Twin Prisoner’s Dilemma
Like Levi (1975, 1982), McKay blames the perplexity of
Newcomb’s Problem on the obscurity or under-specification
of the choice conditions. On the contrary, however, I suggest
that the problem is neither obscure nor ill-defined but rather
clear, though formally paradoxical in a strict and familiar
logical sense. This is a ‘no-box’ view according to which the
very idea that there is a right choice is misconceived since the
problem is ill-formed or incoherent in an identifiable way.
Burgess rejects analyses of Newcomb’s Problem as a variant
of Prisoner’s Dilemma (Nozick 1969, Lewis 1979), but
acknowledges that Prisoner’s Dilemma would be a case of
common cause if the players were to make and keep a prior
agreement to cooperate. However, Burgess misses the
significance of the case of duplicates or ‘twin’ prisoners who
are assumed to be identical. The strategic or normal form
2030

the choice is paradoxical in a strict and familiar logical sense,
thereby permitting a precise specification of the source of its
notorious perplexity. It is along these lines that Sorensen’s
(1987) “instability,” Priest’s (2002) “rational dilemma” and
Maitzen and Wilson’s (2003) “hidden regress” have
important affinities with the present analysis and promise to
break the long-standing stalemate.

“Deliberation Crowds Out Prediction”
Levi (1997: 80) and Schick (1979) have drawn attention to
the problem arising when a deliberating agent adopts the
posture of spectator concerning his own performances. In
such cases, Levi says the agent cannot coherently assign
unconditional probabilities to hypotheses as to what he will
do for “deliberation crowds out prediction,” or as Schick puts
it, “logic alone rules out our knowing the whole truth about
ourselves” (1979: 243). However, neither Levi nor Schick
appear to offer this analysis of self-referential paradox
specifically as a diagnosis of Newcomb’s Problem and the
source of its perplexity.
Recently, Maitzen and Wilson (2003) suggest that the
puzzle arises from an infinitely long, infinitely complex
proposition and a hidden regress that is incomprehensible.
They have an important insight, but their account is
misleading because the regress they note is a symptom of a
familiar circularity and paradox which is, nonetheless,
perfectly intelligible. Significantly, Maitzen and Wilson offer
the illustration of the Liar paradox, suggesting that
“something can look comprehensible without being so.”
However, the analogy with the Liar is closer than Maitzen
and Wilson themselves appear to think, and the moral to be
drawn from it is quite different. Maitzen and Wilson suggest
that “the classical Liar sentence makes trouble only because
people mistakenly take it to mean something.” They explain
“Every constituent of the sentence is comprehensible, but,
arguably, the sentence itself is not” (2003, 159). On the
contrary, however, the classical problem of the Liar arises
precisely because the sentence is perfectly meaningful, but
appears to be both true and false. Indeed, the paradox with its
contradictory truth values would not arise if the Liar sentence
were meaningless. Thus, Maitzen and Wilson miss the way in
which the Liar paradox does indeed illuminate Newcomb’s
Problem when its relevance is properly understood.
The logical source of the problem may be seen from a
schematization that brings out its logic in a familiar form:

[I choose the opposite of whatever I choose]
We see the analogy with the Liar Paradox and the family of
related conundrums arising from self-reference. The Liar
Paradox may be represented as:
(p*) ~ (p*)
[It is not the case that (p*)]
More generally, the problem arising from self-reference is a
version of ‘paradoxes of grounding’ (Herzberger 1970).
Slezak (1983) has shown that Descartes’ notorious Cogito
argument, too, may be captured in the following formula that
says of itself that it is doubtful and is, therefore, certain:
(x*) I doubt (x*)
The sentence (x*) captures Descartes’ insight, for attempting
to doubt (x*) means considering it to be false. In turn, since
(x*) asserts ‘I doubt (x*)’, its falsity means that I don’t doubt
(x*) or, in other words, that (x*) is indubitable or certain. This
diagonal sentence makes perfect sense of remarks which
otherwise remain obscure or irrelevant. Thus, Descartes
(1984: 418) says “my doubt and my certainty did not relate to
the same objects: my doubt applied only to things which
existed outside me, whereas my certainty related to myself
and my doubting.”
The analogy of the decision proposition (a*) with the Liar
sentence (p*) and the Cogito sentence (x*) is evident. As
Schick noted in relation to decisions, “logic alone rules out
our knowing the whole truth about ourselves,” suggesting that
Descartes’ demon and Newcomb’s are one and the same. The
seemingly unrelated problems appear to reflect inherent
cognitive mechanisms akin to familiar cognitive illusions – in
this case arising in the attempt to understand one’s self.

Experimental Realization

(a*) I choose ~ (b*)
[I choose the opposite of whatever the demon predicts]

Schmidt (1998) claims that Newcomb’s Problem may be
realized in classical physics with backward causation, but he
defends only a subjective ersatz – the impression or intuition
of backward causation in an “anthropically oriented causal
description” which is not the real thing that others have ruled
out. Moreover, Schmidt’s “strange but possible story”
involving tiny sub-particle “dwarf” creatures whose scientific
knowledge is millennia ahead of our own may be questioned
on the grounds of plausibility. However, by exploiting
available techniques and well-known facts of neuroscience,
we may rig an experimental arrangement that simulates the
predicting demon and presents exactly the same choice
problem to a subject. Well-known work (Libet 1985) on the
subjective delay of consciousness of intention, the so-called
‘readiness potential’ or ‘preparatory response,’ provides a
means for a laboratory simulation of Newcomb’s Problem.
Instead of Schmidt’s fiction of sub-particle dwarfs, we may
obtain precise, reliable prediction of a subject’s actions from
the prior state of their brain, just as in the usual speculations
(Burgess’s BATOB), but without depending on utopian
neuroscience. EEG recordings from scalp electrodes show
that the instant of a subject’s conscious decisions are around
400 milliseconds later than the onset of cerebral electrical

(b*) The demon predicts (a*)
[The demon predicts whatever I choose]
Substituting appropriately, we get:
(a*) I choose ~ (The demon predicts (a*))
Assuming that the demon predicts reliably,
(a*) I choose ~ (a*)
2031

activity that is the substrate of voluntary action. It is a trivial
matter to connect scalp electrodes to a computer screen in
such a way that the readiness potential for a choice would
cause a million dollars or nothing to be placed in the second
opaque box before the subject consciously “makes the
decision.” This would amount to a prediction by the
apparatus of the subject’s choice. Exploiting readiness
potentials is simply a way of making just those predictions
about our actions from earlier brain-states that are standardly
assumed in the literature. Of course, the interest of this case
derives from the direct way that the experiment reveals what
is implicitly involved in making choices under the
circumstances of the problem – namely, the futile attempt to
incorporate prediction of our own behaviour into our
deliberations.

Conclusion
The seemingly unrelated problems we have noted appear to
reflect certain deep, inherent cognitive mechanisms arising
from attempting to understand one’s self. Self-reference gives
rise to well-known paradoxes in logic which may be abstract
schemata capturing deep psychological processes. These
cognitive mechanisms may be inherent features of our mental
representations of the world insofar as they attempt to
encompass themselves. Long forgotten in the philosophical
literature, an analysis of self-knowledge along these lines was
given by Josiah Royce (1900) in his Gifford Lectures, and
more recently by K. Gunderson (1970) as an account of the
aetiology of certain puzzles about the mind. Such reasoning
may, after all, be seen as akin to the cognitive illusions
uncovered in the ‘biases and heuristics’ research program,
though in this case of a particular, limited variety. Happily the
domain of thought affected seems to be narrowly confined:
The cognitive illusions in question appear to violate the
norms of rational thought only in philosophical speculation.

References
Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l’homme rationnel
devant le risque. Econometrica, 21, 503-546.
Burgess, S. (2004). The Newcomb Problem: An Unqualified
Resolution, Synthese 138, 261-287.
Descartes, R. (1984). The Search for Truth, Philosophical
Writings of Descartes II, J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff & D.
Murdoch. Cambridge University Press.
Eells, E. (1982). Rational Decision and Causality.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eells, E. (1984). Metatickles and the Dynamics of
Deliberation, Theory and Decision, 17, 71-95.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity and the Savage axioms,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75, 643-669.
Gibbard, A., & Harper, W.L. (1978). Counterfactuals and
Two Kinds of Expected Utility. In P. Gärdenfors & N.

Sahlin (Eds.), (1988), Decision, Probability and Utility,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gregory, R. (1981). Mind in Science, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Gunderson, K. (1970). Asymmetries & Mind-Body
Perplexities, M. Radner & S. Winokur eds., Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 4, Minneapolis:
Univesity of Minnesotta Press.
Herzberger, R.C. (1970). Paradoxes of Grounding in
Semantics, Journal of Philosophy, 67, 145-67.
Jeffrey, R.C. (1983). The Logic of Decision, 2nd Revised
Edition, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jeffrey, R.C. (2004). Subjective Probability: The Real Thing,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levi, I. (1975). Newcomb’s Many Problems, Theory and
Decision, 6, 161-175.
Lewis, D. (1979). Prisoner’s Dilemma is a Newcomb
Problem, Philosophy & Public Affairs, 8,3, 235-240.
Libet, B. (1985). Unconscious Cerebral Initiative & the Role
of Conscious Will in Voluntary Action, Behavioral &
Brain Sciences, 8, 529-566.
Maitzen, S. & Wilson, G. (2003). Newcomb’s Hidden
Regress, Theory and Decision, 54, 151-162.
McKay, P. (2004). Newcomb’s Problem: The Causalists Get
Rich, Analysis, 64,2, 187-89.
Nozick, R. (1969). Newcomb’s Problem and Two Principles
of Choice. In N. Rescher (Ed.) Essays in Honor Of Carl G.
Hempel, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Nozick, R. (1993). The Nature of Rationality, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Priest, G. (2002). Rational Dilemmas, Analysis, 62, 11-16.
Royce, J. (1900). The World & the Individual; reprinted 1959.
New York: Dover.
Schick, F. (1979). Self-Knowledge, Uncertainty and Choice,
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 30, 235-252.
Schmidt, J.H. (1998). Newcomb’s Paradox Realized with
Backward Causation, British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 49, 67-87.
Slezak, P. (1983). Descartes’ Diagonal Deduction, British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 33, 41-52.
Sorensen, R.A. (1987). Anti-Expertise, Instability, and
Rational Choice, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 65, 3,
301-315.
Sorensen, R.A. (1988). Blindspots, Oxford: Clarendon.
Tversky A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement Under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Science, 185, 11241131.
Wolf, F.A. (1981). Taking the Quantum Leap, New York:
Harper & Row.
Wright, G. (1984). Behavioural Decision Theory: An
Introduction, Harmondsworth: Penguin.

2032

