UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Optimality Theory and Human Sentence Processing: The Case of Coordination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92n9w8bb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hendricks, Petra
Hoeks, John C.J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Optimality Theory and Human Sentence Processing:
The Case of Coordination
John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Petra Hendriks (p.hendriks@rug.nl)

Center for Language and Cognition, University of Groningen,
PO Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.
Abstract

derive processing characteristics from linguistic theory itself
(Artstein, 2000; de Hoop & Lamers, to appear; Fanselow,
Schlesewsky, Cavar, & Kliegl, 1999; Gibson & Broihier,
1998; Phillips, 1995; Stevenson & Smolensky, 2005;
Weinberg, 2001). In its strongest form this approach
considers all theoretical constraints to be processing
restrictions and vice versa, and it is postulated that this
model can be a model of competence (i.e., traditionally
called ‘grammar’) and a model of performance (i.e.,
traditionally called ‘parser’) at the same time. It is the aim of
this paper to show that such a model is viable, and even
necessary, for the understanding of a linguistic phenomenon
that otherwise seems to resist an adequate theoretical
analysis, namely coordination.

In line with recent studies we propose a model of human
sentence processing that is based on Optimality Theory (OT).
Rather than explaining parsing preferences through
extralinguistically motivated parsing strategies or frequencies
in the hearer’s linguistic environment, our model explains
these preferences as the intermediate results of the
incremental application of our OT grammar. In contrast to
most other current OT-approaches to language processing, we
use constraints from OT semantics rather than from OT
syntax to explain on-line comprehension. We illustrate the
workings of our model by investigating the comprehension of
coordination, a phenomenon which is ill-understood from a
competence perspective and sparsely investigated from a
processing perspective. The psycholinguistic evidence that is
currently available strongly suggests that the on-line
comprehension of coordinate structures is influenced by
constraints from many different information sources:
pragmatics, discourse semantics, lexical semantics, and
syntax. The competence / performance model we propose is
able to formalize this cross-modular constraint interaction,
and to yield concrete predictions with respect to both
intermediate parsing preferences and ultimate interpretations.

Linguistic Theory and Coordination
Linguistic theory is concerned with the syntactic and
semantic structure of all sentences and phrases that
constitute a given language. However, it is generally
assumed that coordinate structures (e.g., "X and Y") are
somehow special, and distinct from all other structures,
especially in the syntactic domain. This exceptional position
for coordination is implicit in works such as Ross (1967)
and others, but has recently surfaced in more explicit terms.
For example, the syntactic analyses of coordination such as
developed by Munn (1987) and by Johannessen (1993) are
incompatible with the X-bar schema, which is assumed to
underlie all syntactic structure (Borsley, 1994). For one
thing, the fact that the categorial makeup of coordinate
structures reflects that of the conjuncts cannot be derived
from X-bar schema and associated standard mechanisms.
That is, if two conjuncts are noun phrases, as in the
coordination cats and dogs, the entire coordinate structure
syntactically behaves as a noun phrase as well. Secondly, it
does not follow from standard syntactic mechanisms that the
conjuncts must generally be of the same syntactic type or
category (i.e., ‘coordination of likes’). Thirdly, conjunctions
differ from other heads in that they may also take nonmaximal projections as their conjunct complements, for
example prepositional heads, as in on or under the table. So
it is impossible to derive the main properties of coordination
from standard syntactic assumptions. Consequently,
coordination is treated as a special type of structure,
generated by special rules that enforce the structural
properties typical for coordination. Some syntacticians have
suggested that coordination can only be represented by
means of non-standard three-dimensional structures (e.g., de

Introduction
A fundamental issue in linguistic research is the relation
between linguistic theory (competence) and human sentence
processing (performance). A quite influential line of
research aims at trying to explain human sentence
processing through parsing strategies that are not themselves
part of the competence, such as, for example, Frazier’s
(1987a) Minimal Attachment principle (i.e., in case of
ambiguity, choose the syntactic structure that is least
complex) or her right association principle Late Closure
(i.e., in case of ambiguity, attach the new node to the most
recently processed constituent). According to this type of
approach, structural preferences in processing are the result
of general cognitive limitations, such as limitations on
working memory or bounds on complexity. Another
approach is to view processing preferences as tuning to
frequencies in the hearer’s linguistic environment
(MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Mitchell,
Cuetos, Corley, & Brysbaert, 1995). An important
assumption underlying both of these approaches is that
linguistic competence provides a hearer with a set of
possible structures for a given sentence, from which the
human sentence processor then selects the preferred
structure. However, an alternative approach is to try and
959

Vries, 2003). Others have even gone so far as to argue that,
because of its deviant properties, coordination must be
viewed as an extragrammatical parsing procedure rather
than a linguistic structure (cf. Kempen, 2004, who suggests
to analyze coordination as a grammaticalized form of selfrepair). But if coordination must indeed be treated distinctly
from regular syntactic structures, it is not clear how the
syntactic rules that determine regular structure, and the
syntactic rules or procedures that determine coordinate
structure can coexist and interact. Moreover, it is not
obvious why there would be such a distinction between
coordination and other linguistic forms. We will argue that
no special status for coordination is necessary in Optimality
Theory (OT).

dependent on 1) pragmatic constraints, 2) discoursesemantic constraints, 3) syntactic constraints, and 4) lexicalsemantic constraints. Adopting the framework of OT allows
us to formalize this cross-modular constraint interaction.
Most psycholinguistic studies on the comprehension of
coordinated structures have focused on the NP- versus Scoordination ambiguity (e.g., Frazier, 1987b; Hoeks, Vonk,
& Schriefers, 2002; Hoeks, Hendriks, Vonk, Brown, &
Hagoort, in press). For instance, Frazier (1987b) showed
that readers prefer NP-coordination over S-coordination in
sentences such as (1a) and (1b); slashes indicate how
sentences were divided into segments.
1a. Joe kissed Ann and / Mary / today. (NP-coordination)
1b. Joe kissed Ann and / Mary / laughed. (S-coordination)

Optimality Theory
OT is in essence a hybrid cognitive architecture, combining
rule-governed
symbolic
processing
with
parallel
subsymbolic, or connectionist, processing. It was originally
introduced as a model of linguistic competence, and as such
has been very successful in the linguistic domains of
phonology (e.g., Prince & Smolensky, 2004), morphology
(e.g., McCarthy & Prince, 1993), syntax (e.g., Barbosa et al.,
1998), and semantics/pragmatics (e.g., Hendriks & de Hoop,
2001). In OT, inputs are mapped onto outputs by first
generating all possible candidates for each input (by the
generator function GEN), and then selecting the optimal
candidate from among them (through the evaluator function
EVAL). GEN has the property of '
freedom of analysis'
(Kager, 1999): the number of outputs is infinite, and the
outputs can have any conceivable form (cf. Beaver, 2004).
These two features are crucial, because if the number of
candidates were finite, or would have a predefined structure,
the grammar would have to place restrictions on the
candidates before the constraints are evaluated. And since
the grammar is actually formed by the set of constraints, the
grammar would have to apply twice, which is an unwelcome
situation. Therefore it is stipulated that there are infinitely
many outputs of every conceivable structure. Importantly,
the number of output candidates is only virtually infinite: at
the level of the neural computation that underlies OT
models, these candidates are not actually physically
represented; they can be said to be present as possible
outcomes (cf. Smolensky & Legendre, 2005). Evaluation
consists of the simultaneous application of a hierarchically
ordered set of constraints to the candidate outputs. The
constraints differ in strength, and crucially, the strongest
constraint has absolute dominance over all the weaker, i.e.
lower ranked, constraints. In contrast to many other
approaches to linguistics, especially those that are concerned
with the nature of the grammar rather than the parser, these
constraints are soft, which means that they can be violated
by well-formed candidates, but only if violation of a weaker
constraint is necessary to satisfy a stronger constraint.
Importantly, in the present model, constraints are included
that arise from many different sources of information.

Constraints on Coordination
On the basis of the currently available empirical evidence,
we will argue that the processing of coordinate structures is
960

It was assumed that readers prefer to take the ambiguous NP
Mary as part of the direct object of kissed as in (1a).
Consequently, they will run into trouble when reading the
final segment of (1b), where the finite verb laughed
indicates the ambiguous NP is actually the subject of a
conjoined sentence. And indeed, Frazier found significantly
longer reading times for laughed in (1b) than for today in
(1a). This finding was replicated by Hoeks et al. (in press)
who corrected for a number of confounds in Frazier’s earlier
study. S-coordinated sentences such as (2a) and (2b) were
used, the first of which was temporarily ambiguous, whereas
the latter served as a control sentence, made unambiguous
by inserting a comma after the first object NP (Hoeks et al.,
2002). Underlined is the critical verb opened which forces
an S-coordination reading, where the photographer in (2a) is
the subject of a conjoined sentence, which goes against the
preferred reading in which the photographer is part of the
direct object of embraced (i.e., conjoined with the designer).
2a. The model embraced the designer and the photographer
opened a bottle of expensive champagne
2b. The model embraced the designer, and the photographer
opened a bottle of expensive champagne.
With these materials it is possible to compare sentences that
are identical in sentence meaning, and to compare regions
that are identical in length, frequency, and syntactic
category. Thus, these studies show that readers prefer to
interpret an ambiguous NP as an argument of the first main
verb (NP-coordination), instead as the subject of a new
clause (S-coordination). As a result, temporarily ambiguous
S-coordinations give rise to processing difficulty. What has
been ignored, however, is that there is an earlier point at
which the sentence is ambiguous: at the connective itself.
Before the ambiguous NP is read, the sentence can continue
as an NP- or an S-coordination, but also as a VPcoordination, as shown in sentence (3).
3. The model embraced the designer and laughed.
And indeed, recent evidence from sentence completion
studies has shown that language users strongly prefer to
continue a fragment such as (4) as a VP-coordination.

4. The model embraced the designer and …

testing can confirm the validity of this specific constraint, or
whether it should be replaced by or augmented with another
type of constraint.
To summarize, with the two constraints we just defined,
we can describe one step in the incremental comprehension
of coordinated structures, and explain how the VPcoordination preference arises at the connective in structures
such as (4). Tableau 1 displays how the optimal VPcoordination interpretation is chosen from among the
alternatives. We will only show a subset of candidates,
namely the ones that have some chance of being optimal,
but recall that there are infinitely many candidates (that
clearly cannot be shown here). In OT it is assumed that
constraints are hierarchically ordered, that is, from strongest
constraint to weakest constraint. However, in this case both
orderings, namely UT >> FD and FD >> UT produce the
same optimal candidate, VP-coordination. In such instances,
where there is no direct conflict between constraints, more
evidence is needed to specify the correct ranking. This is
signified by a dashed instead of a solid boundary between
the constraints (see tableau 1).

In about 86 % of all cases coordinated VPs were produced,
as opposed to 9 % NP-coordinations and 5 % Scoordinations (Hoeks et al., 2002, Exp. 1). This outcome
suggests that language comprehenders expect the connective
to be followed by a VP, not by an NP. Only when the NP is
actually presented, and VP-coordination is no longer
possible, NP-coordination becomes the preferred structure.
This finding provides us with important clues as to which
constraints may be necessary to describe the processing of
coordinate structures.

Pragmatic Constraints
Why should there be a VP-coordination preference at the
connective? According to Hoeks et al. (2002) this preference
is the consequence of language users, especially readers,
constructing their own default ‘topic-structure’ in the
absence of prosodic or other topic-marking cues. Topicstructure can be loosely defined as describing the relation
between the topic of a sentence: the element referring to an
entity about which information is given, and the information
that is expressed by the sentence. In VP-coordinations there
is only one topic, which is presumed to be the default and
most frequently occurring situation, whereas for instance Scoordinations contain an additional topic, e.g., the
photographer. Having more than one topic, Hoeks et al.
argue, is unexpected and leads to processing difficulty
because readers will have to accommodate an entity that has
not been introduced as a second topic in their model of the
discourse. This preference for a single topic is formally
described in the UNIQUE TOPIC constraint, adopted from
Beaver'
s (2004) work on anaphor resolution:

Input: Fragment (4)
S-coordination
VP-coordination
NP-coordination

UT
*
ok
ok

FD
ok
ok
*

Tableau 1: Optimization in fragment (4); =optimal
candidate for interpretation of the input; * = constraint
violation; ok=constraint satisfaction; dashed boundary=
ranking between the constraints has not been determined;
UT=Unique Topic; FD=Forward Discourse.

Syntactic Constraints

UNIQUE TOPIC: With respect to any sentence, there is
exactly one discourse entity which is the topic of that
sentence.

Now let us consider the situation in which the conjunction
and is followed by an NP, as in sentence fragment (5).
5. The model embraced the designer and the photographer ...

Importantly, the UNIQUE TOPIC constraint (UT) does not
differentiate between VP-coordination and NP-coordination,
as both constructions have but one topic, namely the subject
of the sentence (see leftmost constraint "UT" in tableau 1).
However, language users clearly prefer VP-coordination
over NP-coordination at the connective. Thus, another
constraint is in order to explain this preference.

We have seen that at the time the conjunction and is read,
VP-coordination is the optimal parse candidate. However, if
a VP-coordination parse is adopted in (5), this entails that
the VP must have non-canonical word order. In English and
Dutch, VPs do not normally begin with an NP in a nonembedded clause. The canonical word order in main clauses
in these languages is SVO. Because, in (5), the first
constituent following the conjunction is an NP, if the
coordinate structure is preferably interpreted as VPcoordination the VP must have the non-canonical word
order OV rather than VO. This option is ruled out by the
same constraints on syntactic structure that also rule out OV
word order in the first conjunct in (5). In this specific case it
could be the hearer-oriented variant of the constraint STAY
(or: “Do not move”), which prohibits movement of lexical
items (taken from work by Grimshaw, 1997; see also
Ackema & Neeleman, 1998):

Discourse-Semantic Constraints
We would like to propose that the constraint prohibiting NPcoordination is the discourse-semantic constraint FORWARD
DISCOURSE:
FORWARD DISCOURSE: Introduce new events into the
discourse.
If additional information has to be incorporated into the
hearer’s model of the discourse, this constraint prefers the
introduction of a new event to elaboration of a previously
introduced event. Its effect is the promotion of discourse
structures consisting of a sequence of minimally elaborated
events. It is important to note that only further empirical

STAY: Respect canonical word order.
So, the VP-coordination parse violates the constraint STAY
961

if the second conjunct starts with an NP. If the constraints
STAY and UNIQUE TOPIC both outrank FORWARD
DISCOURSE, as in tableau 2, this will account for the
empirical observations discussed above that support the NPcoordination preference for (5). This fact also settles the
indeterminacy of the ordering of UNIQUE TOPIC and
FORWARD DISCOURSE. If namely the ordering S >> FD >>
UT is assumed, this will yield S-coordination as the optimal
parse, which goes against our empirical observations.
Input: Fragment (5)
S-coordination
VP-coordination
NP-coordination

S
ok
*
ok

UT
*
ok
ok

and performance) proposed by Stevenson and Smolensky
(2005), each of these shifts from one interpretation to
another will give rise to processing difficulty. In the
beginning of this section, we summarized a number of
studies showing that there is indeed processing difficulty at
the disambiguating verb of the S-coordinated sentences that
are in focus here. Unfortunately, there is no empirical work
explicitly testing whether there is processing difficulty due
to the VP-coordination preference at the ambiguous NP in
structures such as (5). Preliminary results from a recent
ERP-study done in our lab, however, suggest that there is
processing difficulty at the article of the ambiguous NP
following the connective. Thus, the OT model formulated in
tableau 4 seems to adequately capture all relevant aspects of
processing coordinated sentences such as (6).

FD
ok
ok
*

Tableau 2: Optimization in fragment (5); * = constraint
violation; ok=constraint satisfaction; =currently preferred
interpretation;
=previously preferred interpretation;
S=Stay; UT=Unique Topic; FD=Forward Discourse.

Lexical-Semantic Constraints
An important factor in the interpretation of linguistic
utterances that we haven'
t dealt with yet is plausibility.
Plausibility can be thought of as involving three interrelated
categories of conceptual knowledge: 1) lexical-semantic
knowledge (e.g., regarding the fillers of thematic roles), 2)
knowledge about the discourse that is presently under
consideration, and 3) general knowledge about the world.
For our present purposes, we will only discuss the role the
first kind of plausibility plays in our model. The chances for
alternative interpretations to be optimal decline if the
thematic fit of an argument is poor given the requirements
of the thematic role assigner that is associated with it. This
can be clearly seen in a sentence fragment such as (7).

Note that the optimal parse of (5), corresponding to the NPcoordination interpretation, violates the FORWARD
DISCOURSE constraint, which made NP-coordination suboptimal in partial sentence (4) (see Tableau 2). Nevertheless,
NP-coordination is optimal in (5) because the competing
analyses violate stronger constraints.
Finally, when in a sentence such as (5) the ambiguous NP
is followed by a finite verb (as in (6)), all options but Scoordination are rejected by STAY and also other, not further
specified syntactic constraints, as no NP-coordinated or VPcoordinated sentence can be construed from the current
ordered set of words (for convenience we will use STAY as a
label for all of those).

7. Jasper sanded the board and the carpenter ...
Here, the poor thematic fit between carpenter and sanded
argues against NP-coordination, which would normally have
been the preferred structure (cf. Tableau 2). If on the basis
of the thematic fit information S-coordination is assumed
instead of NP-coordination, no processing difficulty is
expected to ensue when a disambiguating verb comes in.
And indeed, the results of the experiments by Hoeks et al.
(2004), using sentences such as (8a), as compared to (8b),
indicated that information regarding poor thematic fit was
used very rapidly, and processing difficulty was largely
eliminated (cf. Tableau 3).

6. The model embraced the designer and the photographer
laughed ...
Input: Fragment (6)
S-coordination
VP-coordination
NP-coordination

S
ok
*
*

UT
*
ok
ok

FD
ok
ok
*

Tableau 3: Optimization in fragment (6); * = constraint
violation; ok=constraint satisfaction; =currently preferred
interpretation;
=previously preferred interpretation;
S=Stay; UT=Unique Topic; FD=Forward Discourse.

8a. Jasper sanded the board and the carpenter repaired ...
8b. Jasper sanded the board, and the carpenter repaired ...
Thus a lexical-semantic factor such as thematic fit is of great
influence on the processing of coordination. We will call the
associated constraint THEMATIC FIT (adapted from Lamers
and De Hoop, 2005).

We have seen that during the processing of the Scoordinated sentence (6), there are two occasions where
there is a shift from one interpretation to another: When the
ambiguous NP is read, the preference for VP-coordination
shifts to a preference for NP-coordination, as VPcoordination becomes structurally impossible, and NPcoordination does not violate the UNIQUE TOPIC constraint.
On the arrival of the disambiguating verb however, the NPcoordination reading becomes impossible and the Scoordinated alternative that has long been suboptimal, is
now the optimal interpretation of the sentence. Under the
‘Linking Hypothesis’ (i.e., linking linguistic competence

THEMATIC FIT: A thematic element must meet the
requirements of the thematic role that is assigned to it.
Tableau 4 shows how the constraints interact at the time the
ambiguous NP the carpenter is read. Tableau 5 shows the
constraint interaction at the time the disambiguating verb
repaired is presented.
962

Input: Fragment (7)
S-coordination
VP-coordination
NP-coordination

TF
ok
ok
*

S
ok
*
ok

UT
*
ok
ok

knowledge of a language is required (as in other processing
theories). In addition, OT provides a relatively restricted
framework within which to interpret empirical data.
Standard constraint-based models are probabilistic, which
means that constraints are defined in terms of the amount of
(probabilistic) support they provide for one syntactic
alternative over the other. In the strong version of OT that
we propose here, however, any parsing preference produced
by the constraints is discrete, as constraints are violated or
not; they cannot be violated to a certain degree. Thus, OT
makes stronger predictions that can be easily tested.
A related difference between OT and standard constraintbased models is that constraint violations in our version of
OT are not cumulative. This means that any higher-ranked
constraint takes absolute priority over any lower-ranked
constraint. A single violation of a higher-ranked constraint is
always worse than any number of violations of any number
of lower-ranked constraints. In this respect, OT is also more
restricted than constraint-based models. As a result, the OT
framework is able to prohibit certain output patterns, while a
system of numerical constraints is not. The fact that certain
output patterns never arise can therefore only receive a
principled explanation in OT, whereas such an observation
would be completely coincidental in '
standard'constraintbased models.
Note that, although OT constraints produce discrete
preferences, this does not imply that OT models cannot give
rise to probabilistic effects. With the partial ranking model
of Anttilla and Cho (1998), or the stochastic OT variant
proposed by Boersma (1998), very specific probabilistic
output patterns can be predicted.
Adopting the OT approach has also considerable
advantages in the domain of competence. Whereas many
competence theories apply the grammar at the level of the
entire sentence, our proposed OT performance theory
incrementally optimizes interpretation one word at a time.
Such an approach is impossible within grammatical
frameworks of inviolable constraints such as current
generative syntax, because sentence fragments simply do
not meet inviolable constraints and hence cannot be
interpreted. By contrast, in OT any input receives a parse
because the constraints are violable. Consequently, many
theories of linguistic competence do not seem to be
extendible to the domain of processing. Although attempts
have been made to apply competence results from
generative syntax to the domain of processing (e.g.,
Weinberg, 2001), these attempts do not involve the entire
grammar but rather a very limited set of conditions that can
be viewed as violable conditions as well, such as those
regarding syntactic economy. And although lexicalist
linguistic theories like Categorial Grammar also allow for
the interpretation of sentence fragments, they require these
sentence fragments to be syntactically well-formed. In OT,
on the other hand, every input receives an interpretation,
even if this input would be ungrammatical. This corresponds
to the observation that we understand people even when
their utterances are not completely well-formed. There is
currently no other theory that has a principled account for
this phenomenon.

FD
ok
ok
*

Tableau 4: Optimization in fragment (7). Legend: see below.
Input: Fragment (8a)
S-coordination
VP-coordination
NP-coordination

TF
ok
ok
*

S
ok
*
*

UT
*
ok
ok

FD
ok
ok
*

Tableau 5: Optimization in fragment (8a); * = constraint
violation; ok=constraint satisfaction; =currently preferred
interpretation; dashed boundary=ranking between the
constraints has not been determined yet; TF=Thematic Fit;
S=Stay; UT=Unique Topic; FD=Forward Discourse.
Note that on the basis of the currently available evidence we
cannot decide on the ordering of the constraints THEMATIC
FIT (TF) and STAY; these do not conflict in the structure at
hand and appear in the tableaux in random order.

OT Versus Other Models
We have seen that in OT alternative interpretations for
potentially ambiguous sentences compete and are evaluated
on the basis of interacting constraints coming from multiple
sources of information (e.g., syntactic, semantic, discourserelated). The interpretation that satisfies the total set of
constraints best is the optimal interpretation, and will be
selected by the hearer. In a sense, OT is very similar to
‘standard’ constraint-based models of human sentence
processing as for instance proposed by MacDonald et al.,
(1994). In these models, it is assumed that lexical and
syntactic processing is interleaved with interpretative
processing and the construction of a discourse model, much
like in the OT model that we propose here. Constraint-based
models are usually contrasted with syntax-first models of
human sentence processing (Frazier, 1987a). In syntax-first
models, non-syntactic constraints only play a role after the
initial phase of building a syntactic tree. In principle, syntaxfirst models can be viewed as a special case of constraintbased models, namely one in which syntax-based constraints
(such as, e.g., Minimal Attachment and Late Closure) apply
before other constraints. A syntax-first approach can easily
be modeled in OT as well, by assuming that constraints
pertaining to syntactic structure are stronger than other
constraints. As a result, it will be more important to satisfy
the syntactic constraints than it will be to satisfy the nonsyntactic constraints.
Thus, at face value OT seems to be compatible with both
the standard constraint-based models and syntax-first
models of human sentence processing. But if OT is more or
less similar to current models of human sentence processing,
then what is the advantage of OT? To begin with, one
important advantage of using OT in the domain of
processing is that it also can serve as a complete model of
competence, so no separate module describing the
963

Conclusion

Fanselow, G., Schlesewsky, M., Cavar, D., & Kliegl, R.
(1999). Optimal parsing: Syntactic parsing preferences
and optimality theory. Ms.: U. Potsdam, ROA 367.
Frazier, L. (1987a). Sentence processing: A tutorial review.
In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention and performance XII: The
psychology of reading. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frazier, L. (1987b). Syntactic processing: Evidence from
Dutch. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 5, 519–
559.
Gibson, E., & Broihier, K. (1998). Optimality theory and
human sentence processing. In: P. Barbosa et al. (Eds.), Is
the best good enough? Optimality and competition in
syntax. Cambridge: MIT.
Grimshaw, J. (1997). Projections, heads and optimality.
Linguistic Inquiry, 28, 373-422.
Hendriks, P., & de Hoop, H. (2001). Optimality Theoretic
Semantics. Linguistics and Philosophy, 24, 1-32.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Hendriks, P., Vonk, W., Brown, C.M., &
Hagoort, P. (in press). Resolving the NP/S conjunction
ambiguity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002).
Processing coordinated structures in context: the effect of
topic-structure on ambiguity resolution. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 99-119.
Johannessen, J.B. (1993). Coordination: A minimalist
approach. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Oslo.
Kager, R. (1999). Optimality Theory. Cambridge: CU Press.
Kempen, G. (2004). Symmetrical clausal coordination as
grammaticalized self-repair. Paper presented at Tabu-dag
2004, Groningen, June 4, 2004.
Lamers, M., & de Hoop, H. (2005). Animacy information in
human sentence processing: an incremental optimization
approach. LNAI, 4338.
MacDonald, M.C., Pearlmutter, N.J., & Seidenberg, M.
(1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity
resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Mitchell, D.C., Cuetos, F., Corley, M.M.B., & Brysbaert, M.
(1995). Exposure-based models of human parsing:
Evidence for the use of coarse-grained statistical records.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 24, 469-487.
Munn, A. (1987). Coordinate Structures, X-bar Theory and
Parasitic Gaps. Honours research paper, McGill
University, Montreal.
Phillips, C. (1995). Right Association in Parsing and
Grammar. In: C. Schütze et al. (Eds.), Papers on
Language Processing and Acquisition. Cambridge: MIT.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (2004). Optimality Theory.
Constraint Interaction in Generative Grammar.
Blackwell.
Ross, J, R. (1967). Constraints on variables in syntax. MIT
doctoral dissertation.
Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (2005). The harmonic mind:
From neural computation to Optimality-Theoretic
grammar (2 volumes). Cambridge: MIT.
Stevenson, S., & Smolensky, P. (2005). Optimality in
sentence processing. In: P. Smolensky & G. Legendre
(Eds.), The Harmonic Mind. Cambridge: MIT.
Weinberg, A. (2001). A Minimalist Theory of Human
Sentence Processing. In: Epstein & Hornstein (eds.),
Working Minimalism. Cambridge: MIT.

In this paper we developed an OT model of coordinated
structures, and we argued that adopting an OT framework
has many advantages: 1) it solves some of the problems that,
until now, beset syntactic theories; 2) it incorporates
linguistic competence as no other current model of language
processing; 3) as a processing model, it accounts for all
processing phenomena associated with coordinated
structures; 4) it allows for the interpretation of all structure,
including ungrammatical utterances; and finally 5) it
provides very clear and testable predictions. Importantly, the
model as it is formulated here represents only the first step
towards a complete theory of sentence processing. Many
aspects of the model still have to be developed and tested.
For one thing, though we aimed to only include constraints
that have been validated in earlier research (e.g, UNIQUE
TOPIC, adopted from Beaver'
s (2004) work on discourse
anaphora, or THEMATIC FIT, adapted from studies by Lamers
& De Hoop regarding the processing of Subject-Object
ambiguities), it is essential to further investigate the
FORWARD DISCOURSE constraint, as it has not yet been
empirically supported. In addition, it is important to find out
whether the present model makes the right predictions for
other linguistic phenomena. Nevertheless, we are confident
that the OT approach to coordination that was put forward
here can be successfully transferred to other areas of
language interpretation, and that constructing an OT
grammar of language interpretation in general is indeed a
feasible enterprise.

Acknowledgements
This research was partly funded by grant # 015.001.103
from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research,
awarded to Petra Hendriks. We thank Helen de Hoop,
Monique Lamers, and Laurie Stowe for helpful comments.

References
Ackema, P., & Neeleman, A. (1998). Optimal questions.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 16, 443-490.
Anttila, A., & Cho, Y.-M. Y. (1998). Variation and change
in Optimality Theory. Lingua, 104, 31-56.
Artstein, R. (2000). Case constraints and empty categories
in optimality theory parsing. Ms.: Rutgers.
Barbosa, P., Fox, D., Hagstrom, P., McGinnis, M., Pesetsky,
D. (1998) (Eds.). Is the Best Good Enough? Optimality
and Competition in Syntax. Cambridge: MIT.
Beaver, D. (2004). The optimization of discourse anaphora.
Linguistics & Philosophy, 27(1), 3-56.
Boersma, P. (1998). Functional phonology. The Hague:
Holland Academic Graphics.
Borsley, R.D. (1994), In defense of coordinate structures.
Linguistic Analysis, 24:3-4, 218-246.
De Hoop, H. & Lamers, M. (to appear). Incremental
distinguishability of subject and object. In: Studies in
Language Companion Series. Benjamins, Amsterdam.
De Vries, M. (2003). Three-dimensional grammar. In L.
Cornips & P. Fikkert (Eds.), Linguistics in the
Netherlands 2003, 2001-212.
964

