UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Orientation Specific Effects of Automatic Access to Categorical Information in Biological
Motion Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03d8t9vw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Hemeren, Paul E.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Orientation Specific Effects of Automatic Access to Categorical Information in
Biological Motion Perception
Paul E. Hemeren (paul.hemeren@his.se)
University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 541 28, Skövde, Sweden, and
Lund University Cognitive Science
Kungshuset, Lundagård, 222 22, Lund, Sweden

•

involves high-level global processing mechanisms
(Bertenthal & Pinto, 1994; Shiffrar, Lichtey, Heptulla
Chatterjee, 1997);
• involves access to categorical level information
(Dittrich, 1993, Pinto & Shiffrar, 1999);
• requires attention (Thornton, Rensink & Shiffrar,
2002). (But see Giese and Poggio (2003) for a
different view.)
Concerning the relationship between global processing
mechanisms and access to categorical level information,
results from object recognition indicate that access to the
global shape of objects automatically activates identification
(Boucart & Humphreys, 1992). Therefore, to the extent that
displays of biological motion represent dynamic objects,
information about the categorical nature of the depicted
actions may be automatically accessed if visual processing
occurs on a global level.
In relation to the factors characterizing the processing of
upright actions and for the purpose of the work presented
here, there is evidence to suggest that the visual processing
of inverted actions:
• is slower and indicates less (if any) pop-out (Dittrich,
1993; Pavlova & Sokolov, 2000);
• impairs accurate high-level global processing and
appears to rely more on local motion processing
(Pavlova & Sokolov, 2003; Pinto & Shiffrar, 1999);
• impairs access to categorical level information (Pinto
& Shiffrar, 1999).
• There is no specific data on the role of attention in
the visual processing of inverted displays.
Hochstein and Ahissar’s (2002) Reverse Hierarchy
Theory (RHT) provides a plausible theoretical framework
from which to understand and investigate the relationship
between the factors characterizing the processing differences
between upright and inverted actions. According to RHT
explicit high-level visual processing involves initial
feedforward mechanisms that implicitly follow a bottom-up
hierarchical pathway. The end product of this processing,
and the beginning of explicit visual perception, is conscious
access to perceptual content in high-level cortical areas. The
further claim is that explicit high-level perception is holistic
and is where basic-level category judgments are made. This
ability to quickly make basic-level category judgments is
termed ‘vision at a glance.’ Regarding the role of access to
global level representations, Hochstein and Ahissar assert,
“…the whole is perceived first due to explicit perception
initially accessing only high-level representations.” (p. 796)

Abstract
Previous findings from studies of biological motion
perception suggest that access to stored high-level knowledge
about action categories contributes to the fast identification of
actions depicted in point-light displays of biological motion.
Three priming experiments were conducted to investigate the
automatic access to stored categorical level information in the
visual processing of biological motion and the extent to which
this access varies as a function of action orientation. The
results show that activation of categorical level information
occurs even when participants are given a task that does not
require access to the categorical nature of the actions depicted
in point-light displays. The results suggest that the visual
processing of upright actions is indicative of Hochstein and
Ahissar’s notion of vision at a glance, whereas inverted
actions indicate vision with scrutiny.
[Key words: visual processing, biological motion, viewdependence, conceptual knowledge]

Introduction
Gunnar Johansson’s (1973) point-light technique reveals
the sensitivity of human vision to biological motion.
Depicted actions in the point-light displays seem to pop out
as soon as motion is perceived among the point-light
elements. When presented in an upright orientation, we
appear to have phenomenally direct access to the high-level
categorical nature of the motion pattern. When presented
with point-light displays, we see actions, not just local
motion patterns. An effective method of disturbing action
recognition is to show the actions upside-down, i.e., to
invert them. Despite having the same structural hierarchy
among elements as in upright actions, inversion leads to
severely reduced performance in tasks of identification,
detection and recognition, as well as long-term priming
(Dittrich, 1993; Bertenthal & Pinto, 1994; Pavlova &
Sokolov, 2000; Pinto & Shiffrar, 1999; Ahlström, Blake &
Ahlström, 1997 to name a few).
The difference in behavioral results for the visual
processing of upright and inverted displays suggests
differential access to stored high-level representations. More
specifically, findings from experiments on biological motion
perception indicate the following differences in the visual
processing of upright and inverted displays. For upright
displays, visual processing:
• is fast and “automatic” (indicates pop-out) (Jokisch,
Daum, Suchan & Troje, 2005; Giese & Poggio,
2003);
935

It should also be mentioned that according to Hochstein and
Ahissar explicit visual perception requires spread attention.
Findings from the perception of inverted actions, on the
other hand, suggest a greater role for ‘vision with scrutiny.’
According to RHT, vision with scrutiny involves the
operation of top-down feedback mechanisms in making fine
perceptual discriminations and in the veridical binding of
local features. In line with RHT, if the initial explicit
processing of inverted biological motion fails to access a
stored global representation, then top-down feedback
mechanisms will be needed to re-bind local motion elements
in order to create a global pattern that more veridically
matches a stored representation. This may be one important
reason why inverted displays take longer to process.
In relation to biological motion perception previous
results suggest that perception of upright actions is
indicative of vision at a glance (Jokisch et al., 2005). Visual
processing of upright actions of biological motion indicates
access to high-level representations that automatically
activate categorical information about the depicted action.
If categorical level information is automatically activated
as a result of access to global level representations, then we
should see categorical level effects during a task that does
not explicitly require categorical processing.
Three priming experiments were performed to investigate
the potential differential access to categorical level
information in upright and inverted actions. Since the
activation of categorical level information for upright
actions appears to be greater compared to inverted actions,
viewing upright actions should lead to greater facilitation for
the categorical processing of actions viewed later.

Method
Participants: Eight students (4 f, 4 m) from the University of
Skövde participated in the experiment. (Mean age: 22yrs.)
Materials and procedure: Point-light displays of a person
walking, doing jumping jacks and climbing a rope were used
in the experiment. Each motion sequence contained 26
frames. Frame display rate was set to 20 fps, resulting in a
display duration of 1.3 seconds for each action.
Point-light displays were presented upright and inverted.
Two neutral stimuli of nonhuman form, based on the
previous work of Verfaillie (1993), were used to establish a
neutral baseline for potential priming effects. To prevent
participants from recognizing the actions by only perceiving
the first frames, each action started randomly at one of three
different points in the action cycle.
Each action type served as both priming and primed
stimulus for each of the other actions, resulting in 9 different
action transitions (action congruence transitions). There
were also four orientation transitions for the priming and
primed stimuli: upright-upright, inverted-inverted, uprightinverted and inverted-upright. The combination of these
transition types results in 36 total priming transitions.
The stimuli were displayed on a Macintosh 17” monitor
set to black and white color with a resolution of 832 x 624
pixels and a refresh rate of 75Hz. Stimulus presentation was
controlled by a Macintosh 7100/66AV (66 MHz) and
specially written software (DotPlayer).
Participants participated individually in 5 sessions
distributed over a period of 6 days. Each of the 5 sessions
was divided into two sub sessions, and each sub session
contained 6 blocks of trials. One block contained 144 trials
where each action, orientation and neutral display occurred
18 times. Each subsession therefore contained 864 trials, and
each session contained 1728 trials. A total of 8640 trials was
completed by each participant during the 5 sessions. Trials
within blocks and block order within each subsession were
randomized for each participant.
Participants were told they would view 5 different patchlight sequences in random order and that 3 of the sequences
represented actions performed by a human actor. Each
action would be presented upright and inverted. In addition
to the 3 human actions, 2 abstract, or neutral, patch-light
sequences would also be presented. These sequences would
be presented many times throughout the five sessions. When
presented with a patch-light action, participants were
instructed to simply indicate whether they thought the action
was upright or inverted by pressing assigned keys (counterbalanced across participants). Both speed and accuracy were
emphasized and no response feedback was given to the
participants.
Participants sat in a dimly lit room with a viewing
distance of 70cm to the computer screen. The stimuli were
presented in the center of the computer screen. Following a
response indicating the orientation of the motion, a
response-stimulus interval (RSI) of 500 occurred. The time
(ms) to make an orientation decision was recorded for each
action.
Stimulus configurations appeared one at a time in a
random order. Each motion was viewable for up to a
maximum of 1.3 seconds, after which followed a blank

Experiment 1
This experiment used short-term (repetition) priming to
assess the extent to which automatic access to categorical
level information facilitates the visual processing of upright
and inverted actions and the extent to which potential
facilitation varies as a function of orientation congruence.
To assess automatic access to categorical level
information, an orientation decision task was used. This task
simply required subjects to indicate the orientation of the
presented point-light action. It seems quite unlikely that
categorical information about action categories is needed to
make an orientation decision. Three different actions were
also used to assess potential categorical effects on priming.
For orientation congruent transitions, categorical level
effects will be demonstrated if priming varies as function of
type of action. If there is greater priming when an action
primes itself compared to when it is primed by a different
action (action congruency), this would indicate that subjects
are able to distinguish between the different actions. Based
on the reasoning presented previously, the prediction here is
that facilitation due to categorical level information should
be greater for upright than for inverted actions that are
orientation congruent. The effect of categorical level
information for orientation incongruent transitions may also
differ depending on the orientation of the priming action as
previously mentioned.

936

screen. A participant response that occurred before the end
of a sequence terminated the sequence and started the RSI.

effects of action congruence. In contrast, results in Panel D
show that an inverted action prime is no more effective at
facilitating a response to the orientation decision than the
neutral displays. This clearly indicates a difference in access
to information conveyed by upright and inverted displays.
This difference is also strengthened by the significant
priming effects when upright actions acted as primes for
inverted displays. This clearly shows that effects of
orientation congruence depend on the orientation of the
priming action. This interaction was significant, F(1,7) =
10.17, p < .05.
In summary, the data presented in Figure 1 show two
significant results that support the prediction of different
levels of automatic activation of categorical information for
upright and inverted actions. The first result was the
significant main effect of action congruence, F(2,14) =
12.73, p < .01. There was greater facilitation when an action
primed itself than when it was primed by a different action.
The second result is seen in the significant interaction
between the orientation of the priming action and action
congruence, F(2,14) = 6.58, p < .05. When a priming action
was presented upright there was significantly more priming
when an action primed itself than when it was primed by
different actions. This however was not the case for inverted
actions.
Contrary to predictions, the significant priming effects in
Panel B indicate that inverted actions can prime inverted
actions and even automatically activate categorical level
information to some extent. Since participants were exposed
to hundreds of trials of inverted actions, they may have
developed representational and processing resources that
facilitated the orientation decisions for inverted actions.
Although this learning aided orientation decisions for
inverted actions, it did not lead to any advantages when
inverted actions preceded upright actions.
In this experiment, effects of automatic access to
categorical information were evaluated by a task that did not
explicitly require access to the categorical nature of the
actions. Evidence for categorical effects is admittedly based
on a processing assumption of implicit access to categorical
level information. The results suggest that access to this
information plays a role in biological motion perception. A
more direct test of this assumption would be to instruct
participants to identify the action, which is a task that
explicitly requires access to categorical level information.
This was done in the following two experiments.

Results and discussion
Mean reaction time for correct orientation decisions for
upright actions was 409ms. For inverted actions, the mean
was 436ms. The difference was significant, F(1,7) = 16.67,
p < .01.
Twelve neutral baselines were calculated to reflect the
independent effects of different key presses, orientation and
the three different actions. A sorting program identified
relevant transitions. The neutral baselines were then used to
calculate priming effects. The priming results are presented
in Figure 1.
Panel A shows the results for upright-upright transitions.
In relation to the neutral baseline, all priming actions led to
facilitation for the orientation decision in all 9 transitions.
Facilitation due to priming was significant as indicated by
the 95% confidence intervals. More importantly, in relation
to the prediction, there was greater facilitation when an
action primed itself compared to when it was primed by
other actions, i.e., action congruency effect. This was the
case for 5 of the 6 action incongruent priming transitions,
indicated by the star (*). This suggests automatic access to
the categorical nature of the different actions.
Panel B shows the results for inverted-inverted transitions.
The results appear to be similar to the results in Panel A. In
relation to the neutral baseline, viewing any of the three
actions as an inverted prime led to priming for the
orientation decision. There was significant priming in all 9
conditions. A planned comparison between priming levels
for Panel A and B revealed no significant difference, F(1,7)
= 2.93, p > .10. This appears to contradict the prediction that
access to categorical level information should be greatly
reduced for the inverted actions. (This will be discussed
below.) However, the effect of action congruency was less
pronounced for the inverted-inverted transitions in Panel B.
A significant difference between levels of priming when an
action primed itself and when it was primed by a different
action was found only for 1 of the 6 action incongruent
transitions, indicating reduced categorical processing.
Panel C displays the priming effects for orientation
incongruent transitions where upright actions act as primes
for inverted actions. In relation to the neutral primes,
viewing an upright prime facilitated an orientation decision
response for inverted actions in 7 of the 9 transitions,
indicating that participants have access to categorical
information that distinguishes human motion from the
neutral displays. Looking at the bars in Panel C shows
however that there are no differences between priming
levels when an action primed itself and when it was primed
by a different action.
The results in Panel D show no facilitation for the
orientation decision task when an inverted action precedes
an upright action. There is no significant priming for any of
the transitions. This stands in stark contrast to the results in
Panel A (upright-upright transitions) where an upright action
prime leads to a level of activation that facilitates the
response to the orientation decision, which also leads to

Experiments 2 and 3
The purpose of these experiments was to directly assess the
role of categorical information in biological motion
perception by using an action identification task. If action
identification is facilitated by previous exposure to the
actions, this would indicate that the priming action activates
categorical level information. Consistent with previous
predictions, upright-upright transitions should lead to
significant priming. Furthermore, if priming in uprightinverted transitions is due to access to categorical level

937

Orientation congruent transitions
Prime orientation

Action congruence

upright

same action

inverted

different action A

100

different action B

Mean facilitation (ms)

90
80
70

*

* *

60
50

*

*
*

40
30
20
10
0
climbing rope jumping jacks

walking

climbing rope jumping jacks

Primed action

walking

Primed action

B
Orientation incongruent transitions

A

Prime orientation
upright

inverted

Mean facilitation (ms)

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
climbing rope

jumping jacks

walking

climbing rope

jumping jacks

Primed action

Primed action

C

D

walking

Figure 1: Mean facilitation effect for the orientation decision as a function of orientation congruence, prime orientation,
primed action and action congruence. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. A star (*) represents a significant
Bonferroni adjusted priming level difference between an action priming itself and when it was primed by a different
action.
The 40 actions were randomly divided into two sets, 20
actions in each set. The two sets were used in the study and
test phases of the experiment. The study phase consisted of
20 actions. The test phase, on the other hand, contained all
40 actions, including the 20 actions shown during the study
phase and 20 new actions not previously viewed. The
purpose of the 20 new actions was to establish a baseline
from which to evaluate potential priming effects. Study and
test action sets were rotated across participants. Each set of
actions was further divided into two subsets where one
subset was presented in an upright orientation, and the other
subset
was
presented
inverted.
Subsets
were
counterbalanced across study sets. All actions appeared an
equal number of times in the study and test sets as well as in
upright and inverted orientations.
Participants were instructed to attend to the monitor and
view the actions as they appeared. Participants did not
respond verbally to the actions. Each action was presented
for 5 seconds. The actions were masked with a static
checker board pattern to reduce ceiling effects. Half of the
actions were presented upright, and the other half was

information, then the results for this transition in exp. 1
should be replicated.
An additional prediction concerns the priming effects for
inverted-inverted transitions. If the priming effects for these
transitions resulted from extensive exposure to inverted
actions, then those effects should be significantly reduced if
participants are only given one exposure to inverted primes.
A long-term priming paradigm was used in these
experiments to evaluate the potential long-term effects of
priming in contrast to the repetition priming used in exp. 1.

Method
Participants: Forty adults (20 f, 20 m) (mean age = 27yrs)
participated in exp. 2 and 40 adults (21 f, 19 m) (mean age =
32 yrs) participated in exp. 3.
Materials and procedure: Forty different point-light actions
were used in this experiment, e.g., walking, jumping,
running, kicking, throwing, sawing, etc. The stimuli were
presented on a television monitor.

938

inverted. Prior to the study phase, participants received
practice trials to acquaint them to the masked point-light
actions. The practice actions were not included in any
further phases of the experiment.
After the study phase (between 5 and 10 minutes),
participants were individually tested on an identification
task (test phase) where they viewed a total of 40 actions.
Twenty actions were previously presented in the study
phase, and 20 actions were new. In the test phase, all actions
had the same orientation. This provided the test of
orientation congruence. So, 10 ‘old’ actions presented in the
study and test phases had the same orientation (orientation
congruence) and 10 ‘old’ actions were orientation
incongruent between study and test. The 20 new actions
served as a baseline for possible priming effects. For half of
the participants, the 20 new actions were upright and for the
other half, the new actions were inverted. Participants were
randomly assigned to these conditions. Participants verbally
identified the actions as soon as they could. The
experimenter wrote down the responses.
The materials and procedure from exp. 2 were also used in
exp. 3 with the exception of viewing time. Instead of
viewing the displays for 5 seconds in the study and test
phases in exp. 2, display duration was reduced to 1 second
because of an apparent ceiling effect for upright-upright
transitions in exp. 2.

Results for the inverted-inverted transitions show no
significant priming, exp. 2 62% vs. 60%, t(19) = .42, p >
.60, exp. 3, 26% vs. 19%, t(19) = 1.37, p > .18. The results
from exp. 1 did not replicate in these experiments. This
suggests that inverted actions, in contrast to upright actions,
do not sufficiently activate categorical level information
such that later categorical processing is facilitated.
Results for the upright-inverted priming transitions in exp.
2 indicate that upright actions facilitate the later
identification of inverted displays, 73% vs. 60%, t(19) =
2.90, p < .01. This result is similar to the short-term priming
effect in exp. 1 (Panel C). When participants are given 5
seconds to view the upright actions in the study phase,
identification of inverted actions significantly improves.
However, this effect did not hold for the same transition in
exp. 3. With a display duration of 1 second, there was no
significant difference, 27% vs. 19%, t(19) = 1.53, p > .10.
Finally, there was no reliable long-term priming for the
inverted-upright transitions in either experiment, exp. 2,
85% vs. 84%, exp. 3, 49% vs. 44%, t(19) = 1.21, p > .20.
This result is consistent with the results from exp. 1 showing
no significant priming for this transition. Viewing an
inverted action has no effect on later identification of the
same action presented in an upright orientation.

General Discussion

Results and discussion

Previous findings suggest that high-level access to
categorical level information for inverted actions is impaired
relative to upright actions. The further claim here is that this
access in turn is a result of limited global level processing
for inverted displays. Boucart & Humphreys (1992) showed
this to be the case for static objects. Two major predictions
were formulated to evaluate the role of categorical level
information in biological motion perception. First, if access
to categorical information is automatic then we should see
categorical effects in priming for a task that does not require
access to categorical level information. Secondly, if this
access is greater for upright than for inverted actions, we
should see greater effects of action congruence for upright
than for inverted actions. These predictions were confirmed
in exp. 1.
Experiments 2 & 3 directly assessed the contribution of
categorical level information by explicitly asking
participants to identify actions. The results from these
experiments confirmed the findings from exp. 1. Participants
were significantly better at identifying actions when they
were previously exposed to upright actions than when they
previously viewed inverted actions (with the exception of
upright-inverted transitions in exp. 3). There were no
significant priming effects with inverted action primes.
As mentioned previously, the significant priming effects
for inverted-inverted transitions in exp. 1 may be due to
learning to process inverted actions over the course of many
trials. Palmeri and Gauthier (2004) suggest that object
identity may be automatically activated by expertise. As
people become experienced at visually discriminating
objects, access to knowledge mediating identification

Results for exp. 2 and 3 for correct percent identification for
the different priming transitions are presented in Table 1.
The means show differences between identification
performance for upright and inverted actions not previously
viewed in the study phase, i.e., new actions, 85% vs. 60%
for exp. 2, t(38) = 4.91, p < .001, and 44% vs. 19% for exp.
3, t(38) = 4.68, p < .001. These results confirm the general
finding of orientation specificity in the literature.
For the priming results, a comparison of upright-upright
transitions between study and test (88% vs. 85%) did not
reach significance in exp. 2. This was largely due to a
ceiling effect as indicated by the significant difference for
the same transition in exp. 3, 63% vs. 44 %, t(19) = 3.28, p
< .01. This shows that there is significant facilitation for
upright displays when the task requires access to categorical
level information, i.e., identification of specific actions.
Table 1: Mean proportions of correctly identified actions for
exp. 2 & 3. Transitions indicate display orientation for
study-test phases. UPR=upright and INV=inverted. ‘Old
actions’ indicate actions presented in study and test. ‘New
actions’ indicate actions presented only in the test phase.
New
Actions

Old Actions
UPRUPR

INVINV

UPRINV

INVUPR

UPR

INV

Exp. 2

.88

.62

.73

.84

.85

.60

Exp. 3

.63

.26

.27

.49

.44

.19

Transition

939

becomes more automatic. The differences in priming effects
for inverted primes between exp. 1 and exps. 2 & 3 are
consistent with this suggestion. Admittedly, the extensive
exposure to inverted actions in exp. 1 and the one-time
viewing occasion in exps. 2 & 3 were confounded with
priming paradigm. Further analyses and research needs to be
done to systematically evaluate the effects of these two
factors.
Taken together, the results from the three experiments
show a clear interaction between display orientation and
access to categorical level information. The role of access to
categorical level information is supported by Giese and
Poggio’s (2003) model of the recognition of biological
movement. High-level areas in the form and motion
pathways are selective for body shapes and specific human
actions like walking and running. Feedforward processing
from ‘lower’ visual areas along the different pathways
activates motion pattern neurons that selectively encode
motion patterns of human movement. Results from
simulations of their model are consistent with the categorical
processing of different actions based on psychophysical
data.
In addition to the theoretical and modeling framework
proposed by Giese and Poggio, the findings from the 3
experiments presented here also suggest that the visual
processing of upright displays is indicative of vision at a
glance, whereas viewing inverted displays indicates vision
with scrutiny. Within the framework of RHT, access to
categorical level information for upright displays is fast and
automatic. This indicates that participants had early access
to high-level stored representations of human motion
patterns that depicted specific actions. Findings from exps. 2
& 3 showed that viewing an upright prime led to
significantly greater performance in an action identification
task. It seems reasonable to suggest that this effect was due
to greater access to categorical level information activated
by the priming actions.
In contrast to upright actions, orientation decisions for
inverted actions took significantly more time and led to
relatively less categorical level priming. In terms of RHT,
this suggests that the feedforward mechanisms involved in
the visual processing of inverted actions do not have the
same level of access to stored representations of human
motion patterns. The longer processing time for inverted
displays could reflect the operation of feedback mechanisms
that attempt to rebind local motion components (e.g., local
rigidity) into a hierarchical whole for the purpose of
identification. This is not to say that inverted displays cannot
be reliably detected or recognized. It is rather a relative lack
of access to categorical level information that distinguishes
the processing of upright actions from inverted actions.
The findings from the work presented here confirm the
general findings of orientation specificity for biological
motion perception. The contribution from the experiments
presented here indicates that access to categorical level
information is one important factor that differentiates the
visual processing of upright actions from inverted actions.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Sigríður H. Pálsdóttir, Maria Nilsson,
Patrick Söderberg and Peter Thorvald for running the
experiments. This research is supported by the University of
Skövde.

References
Ahlström, V., Blake, B. & Ahlström, U. (1997). Perception
of biological motion. Perception, 26, 1539-1548.
Bertenthal, B. I. & Pinto, J. (1994). Global processing of
biological motion. Psychological Science, 5, 221-225.
Boucart, M. & Humphreys, G. W. (1992). Global shape
cannot be attended without object identification. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: HP&P, 18(3), 785-806.
Dittrich, W. (1993). Action categories and the perception of
biological motion. Perception, 22, 15-22.
Giese, M. & Poggio, T. (2003). Neural mechanisms for the
recognition of biological movements. Nat. Reviews:
Neuroscience, 4(3), 179-192.
Hochstein, S. & Ahissar, M. (2002). View from the top:
Hierarchies and reverse hierarchies in the visual system.
Neuron, 36, 791-804.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological
motion and a model for its analysis. Perception and
Psychophysics, 14, 201-211.
Jokisch, D., Daum, I., Suchan, B. & Troje, N. F. (2005).
Structural encoding and recognition of biological motion:
evidence from event-related potentials and source
analysis. Behavioural Brain Research, 157, 195-204.
Palmeri, T. J. & Gauthier, I. (2004). Visual object
understanding. Nat. Reviews: Neuroscience, 5, 291-303.
Pavlova, M. & Sokolov, A. (2000). Orientation specificity in
biological
motion
perception.
Perception
&
Psychophysics, 62(5), 889-899.
Pinto, J. & Shiffrar, M. (1999). Subconfigurations of the
human form in the perception of biological motion
displays. Acta Psychologica, 102, 293-318.
Shiffrar, M., Lichtey, L. & Heptulla Chatterjee, S. (1997).
The perception of biological motion across apertures.
Perception & Psychophysics, 59(1), 51-59.
Thornton, I. M., Rensink, R. A. & Shiffrar, M. (2002).
Active and passive processing of biological motion.
Perception, 31, 837-853.
Verfaillie, K. (1993). Orientation-dependent priming effects
in the perception of biological motion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: HP&P, 19, 5, 992-1013.

940

