UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual Modes of Presentation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9716312q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Kupper-Tetzel, Carolina E.
Wiemer-Hastings, Katja

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual Modes of Presentation
John Kulvicki (Kulvicki@Dartmouth.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 6035 Thornton Hall
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755 USA

provide a new way of being an externalist
representationalist.
The next section explicates the three theses just
mentioned and shows why they are inconsistent and how
some philosophers stand with respect to them. Section
three explains why phenomenal internalism presents such
worries for externalist representationalists. Section four
looks briefly at some problems with using modes of
presentation to address these worries, section five presents
the account of perceptual MoPs, and sections six applies the
proposal.

Abstract
Representational externalism is the view that what an individual’s
mental state represents is determined in part by facts external to
the individual. Representationalism has it that we are only ever
aware of what we represent to be the case. According to
phenomenal internalism, what it is like to perceive—the
phenomenal character of perceptual states—is determined wholly
by facts internal to the perceiver. Each thesis has compelling
arguments and intuitions behind it, but taken together they are
inconsistent, so something has to give. Quite a few philosophers
hold the first two while denying the third, but this leaves them
with the task of explaining away powerful intuitions favoring
phenomenal internalism. This paper accounts for what it is like to
see a property in terms of perceptual modes of presentation and
shows that this can accommodate intuitions in favor of
phenomenal internalism without vindicating the thesis itself.

Three’s a Crowd
Philosophers working on consciousness must deal with the
tension created by three, mutually inconsistent theses, each
of which has its own intuitive and theoretical appeal. The
first concerns what determines the contents of mental states
and the last two regard the nature of what it is like to be in
those states. Representational externalism is the view that
what an individual’s mental state represents is determined
in part by facts external to the individual. That is, facts
outside of the skin of the representer play an ineliminable
role in determining what that individual represents. It is in
part because I am in an environment that contains water
that some of my beliefs manage to be about water, for
example (Putnam, 1975). Representationalism has it that
we are only ever aware of what we represent.
Representationalists believe that what it is like to see a
shade of color, hear a sound, or what have you, can be
exhaustively explained in terms of what is perceptually
represented, though they disagree about many points of
detail. According to phenomenal internalism, what it is
like to see a shade of color—the phenomenal character of
such a perceptual state—is wholly determined by facts
internal to the perceiver. It may be that what one believes
depends on the environment in which one exists, but what it
is like for one to perceive depends on how one is built from
the skin-in. If one were to create a molecule for molecule
duplicate of a perceiver, for example, that copy might differ
in what (and even whether) it represents, but what it is like
for that creature, phenomenally, is just what it is like for the
perceiver.
One can accept any two of these views, but taken
together they are inconsistent, and philosophers can be
sorted as to which pair among the three they accept. Ned
Block (1990; 1996) accepts representational externalism

Keywords: Consciousness; externalism; mode of presentation;
phenomenal internalism; representation.

Introduction
When I look at the green grass, I am in a perceptual state
that has as its content, among other things, a particular
shade of green. The fact that I have no concept of that
shade of green does not interfere with my perceptual state
picking it out, since perceptual states present us with a rich
array of information that we usually conceptualize only in
the coarsest terms. Also, when I perceptually represent that
shade of green, there is something that it is like for me to do
so. Just what this what it is like is supposed to be, and how
it relates to what my perceptual state represents are two big
problems in consciousness studies today.
The central claim of this paper is that what it is like to see
green or any other perceptible property is just the
perceptual mode of presentation of that property.
Perceptual modes of presentation are important because
they help resolve a tension in current work on
consciousness. Philosophers are pulled by three mutually
inconsistent
theses:
representational
externalism,
representationalism, and phenomenal internalism. I throw
my hat in with defenders of the first two: the externalist
representationalists. We are faced with the problem of
explaining away intuitions that favor phenomenal
internalism. Perceptual modes of presentation account for
what it is like to see properties in a way that comfortably
accommodates those intuitions without vindicating
phenomenal internalism itself. Perceptual MoPs therefore

1202

phenomenal character, or what have you—that cannot be
captured in terms of the intentional, externally determined
content of those perceptual states. It is possible for subjects
to be identical in terms of what they represent to be the case
and yet differ in what it is like for them to do so. To the
extent that such a scenario is intuitively plausible, the
externalist representationalists’ story seems to capture
something but not everything about what it is like to see
color. Furthermore, what plausibly accounts for the
differences between Paul and Molly is something about
how they are built on the inside. It is because they are
different in their internal constitution—despite being alike
in what they perceptually represent—that they differ in
what it is like to see green.
For Thau (2002), the worry is not that
representationalism is false, but that if it is true Paul and
Molly cannot perceptually represent the colors. That is,
their perceptual judgments concerning the grass’ color
coincide—these contents are externally determined—and
pick out the green of the grass. On the other hand, the
perceptual states that give rise to these judgments have
different contents that are wholly internally determined.
When Paul looks at the grass he forms a perceptual state
that represents the instantiation of some property, G.
Whenever he has a state with that content he tends to judge
that the object he sees is green. Molly’s corresponding
perceptual state represents the presence of R, which leads to
her judgments that objects are green. It needn’t be that R
and G are the same properties or even that they are color
properties for them to serve as an internally determined
basis for judgments concerning the greenness of objects. In
this sense, what it is like for Paul to see green can differ
from what it is like for Molly because they perceptually
represent different properties when they see a given shade
of green.
Inversion per se is not the problem here. The worry is
that perceivers can be alike in what external facts they
represent but nevertheless differ, somehow, in what it is
like for them to do so. Subjects may be inverted, but they
may just be different, and in either case, the externalist
representationalist has some explaining to do. Recently,
Sydney Shoemaker (1994; 1996) and Michael Thau (2002)
have argued that undetectable inter-subjective inversion is
not as significant for theories of perceptual awareness as the
possibility of differences in what it is like between subjects
despite their representational identity. I agree. Whether the
differences are detectable and whether it is a genuine
inversion, as opposed to some other kind of difference, are
points orthogonal to the worry that externalist
representationalism cannot account for what it is like. That
being said, inversion still has an appeal that eludes other
ways of expressing the problem. Toward the end of the
paper in section seven there will be occasion to revisit
inversion per se as a worry for theories of perceptual
awareness.
There is another and less talked about scenario that can
push intuitions in favor of phenomenal internalism.

but thinks that what it is like is internally determined. This
commits him to denying representationalism since what it is
like, if internally determined, cannot exhaustively be
explained in terms of (externally determined)
representational facts. His use of inverted spectrum and
inverted earth examples is meant both to pump intuitions in
favor of phenomenal internalism and to argue against
representationalism. Michael Thau (2002) is, like Block, a
phenomenal internalist, but he is also a representationalist.
Thau is swayed by the intuitive plausibility of spectrum
inversion and related cases that favor phenomenal
internalism but he does not think that this spells trouble for
representationalism. Thau claims that the content of
perceptual representations is wholly internally determined,
so he rejects representational externalism for perceptual
states. He accepts representational externalism for belief
states, however, which results in his claim that perceptual
states do not represent what our belief states do. Though
we form beliefs about the colors of objects on the basis of
perceiving them, we do not, on Thau’s view, perceptually
represent colors at all.
Fred Dretske (1995), Gilbert Harman (1990), William
Lycan (1996), and Michael Tye (1995; 2000), despite their
differences, accept representational externalism and
representationalism, so they are committed to the view that
what it is like is in part externally determined. While Block
and Thau embrace phenomenal internalism, this group—the
externalist representationalists—must explain away
intuitions in favor of it. The strategy is usually to show that
in some interesting sense what it is like is determined by
facts internal to perceivers but it is not wholly determined
by facts internal to perceivers. Exactly how one does this,
of course, depends on one’s account of perceptual
awareness. The account on offer here—explaining what it
is like in terms of perceptual modes of presentation—is
new but it has natural affinities with information theoretic
approaches to perceptual content found in Dretske and Tye.
Before presenting the account, however, let’s look at why
phenomenal internalism is so appealing.

Phenomenal Internalism’s Appeal
It is difficult to see how facts about what we perceptually
represent alone can account for what it is like to perceive,
given that representation is externally determined. First,
there are powerful intuitions that perceivers can be alike in
what features of the world they pick out perceptually, but
nevertheless differ in what it is like for them to do so. This
idea is rendered most (in)famously as the inverted spectrum
hypothesis (Block 1990; 1996). Paul and Molly are best
friends and neighbors who live and work in the same
environment. When they look at the grass they agree that it
is a specific shade of green. In the perceptually rich sense
of ‘looks’, the grass looks that shade of green to both of
them. Nevertheless, what it is like for Molly to see that
shade of green is what it is like for Paul to see fire engine
red and vice versa. That is, there is something about
perceptual states—what it is like to be in them, their
1203

Scientists and philosophers are far from agreed that colors
are physical properties of the objects that seem to have
them. They do agree, however, that if colors are physical
properties of the objects that seem to have them then even
the maximally determinate perceptible shades of color are
either complicated messes of surface spectral reflectances
(Hilbert, 1987; Byrne & Hilbert, 2003) or complicated
messes of micro-physical properties (Armstrong, 1968;
Smart, 1975). Also, if colors are not those messy physical
properties, then those messy properties are the physical
properties that our color experiences track. Now, though
we perceptually represent a shade of green when looking at
the grass, greenness doesn’t in any interesting sense seem to
be a messy set of reflectances or microphysical properties.
So, the story goes, it cannot just be the shade of green—or
the property that such an experience tracks—that accounts
for what it is like to see it. Something internal to perceivers
is responsible for what it is like to see green. Greenness
itself, whatever it is, is not up to the job of accounting for
what it is like to see it. This problem—call it the manifest
image problem—has not generated as much discussion as
the inverted spectrum in relation to consciousness, though it
has a long history in discussions of color.1 The manifest
image problem admits of both Blockean and Thauean
responses along similar lines to how their responses to the
inverted spectrum problem.
The remainder of this paper shows that perceptual modes
of presentation can accommodate intuitions in favor of
phenomenal internalism without vindicating the thesis
itself. The next section reviews some reasons for thinking
it is a good idea to appeal to MoPs in solving this problem
and some reasons for caution in this regard.

electromagnetic properties, and thinks of grass in those
terms. The grass has all of these properties, so neither of us
misrepresents the grass. The Martian, however, can no
more see greenness and texture than I can see chlorophyll
or the electromagnetic properties. We pick out grass in
virtue of being able to see different sets of properties and
we therefore think of grass in terms of different properties
or under different modes of presentation. But Dretske
(1995) has pointed out that the phenomenal character of
experience rests with the perceptual representation of
properties, not thoughts about objects. In the present
context, the worry is that subjects can be alike in
perceptually representing a given property but differ in
what it is like for them to do so. Perceptual MoPs are
supposed to account for this difference, so instead of
applying to thoughts about objects they must apply to
sensations of properties.
Second, we must explain these MoPs in purely
representationalist terms. Without a representationalist
account of MoPs, invoking them is a bit unhelpful. As
Thau (2002, 46-47) notes:
It’s all well and good to suggest that there might be a
kind of mode of presentation that can do the job here—
that is, that can directly affect representational content,
and, hence, account for the internally determined way
things perceptually seem to subjects—but, if it is to
amount to more than just a suggestion, some account of
what these modes of presentation are like must be given.
Thau is pessimistic about MoPs’ prospects, but the
following explicates a kind of MoP that the externalist
representationalist can deploy to explain away intuitions in
favor of phenomenal internalism.

Good MoP – Bad MoP

Perceptual Modes of Presentation

Modes of presentation are a useful tool for dealing with the
manifest image and inverted spectrum problems because
they are a way of distinguishing what is represented from
how it is represented. Peter Carruthers points out that “My
perceptual state when I see something red surely does not
represent a reflective property as such.” (2000, 143) That
being said, there are two problems with appealing to MoPs
to solve these problems.
First, it is usually said that we think of objects under
modes of presentation. (Cf. Evans, 1982) I see the grass as
green and having a certain texture and when I think of grass
it is usually as this green, grassy-textured thing. My
Martian friend, who is just as good at identifying grass as I
am, sees it as being chlorophyllic and having certain

To begin, think about how we perceive shapes, in contrast
to how we see colors. Some simple facts about squares are
that they are all four sided, have sides of equal length, have
equal internal angles, have straight sides, have at least two
sides, and so on. Now it is one thing for something to be
true of squares and quite another for that fact to be
something we can come to know solely on the basis of
perceiving squares. In the case of shape perception,
however, it seems as though we can come to know very
much about what it is to be a given shape on the basis of
seeing that shape. It is not just being square, but being four
sided, having sides of equal length, and so on, that are
perceptible properties: we can come to know that they are
instantiated just on the basis of seeing them. So whenever
our visual system and the world conspire to let us know that
there is a square out there, they also let us know that there
is something four-sided out there, that there is a cornered
thing out there, and so on.
This point about shape perception may seem quite
uninteresting, but it turns out to be rather significant. To
see why, it helps to consider what this point is not. First, it
is not that in order to be square an object must be four-sided
and so on. True as it is, this fact about squares and says

1

A brief aside for color cognoscenti: Hardin (1993) and
Boghossian and Velleman (1989; 1990) take the manifest image
problem and related issues to show that colors are not physical
properties of the objects that seem to have them. Though I
disagree, this is not the place to argue about color. What follows
shows that the manifest image problem is not really a problem
even if one is a physicalist because the problem is solved by
appeal to the nature of perceptual awareness, not the nature of
color.
1204

nothing at all about the perceivers of squares. Second, it is
not that it is overwhelmingly likely that everyone knows or
at least believes that squares have four sides, right angles
and so on. This is a fact about the perceivers of squares,
but an uninteresting one: most people know something or
other about what makes a square a square. Third, it is not
that everyone with the concept of a square also has
concepts of corneredness, laterality, and so on. This is an
interesting fact about those who have the concept of
squares, but not relevant to the point being made here. By
comparison, my point is that information about what makes
a square a square is perceptually available. We come to
know about these features necessary for the instantiation of
squareness, such as corneredness and laterality, in the same
way that we come to know about squareness: by looking.
It is admittedly a bit difficult to imagine, but consider a
creature so constructed that it is just as good as humans at
perceptually registering planar shapes. It can tell squares
from pentagons and circles as well as any of us. This
creature differs from us, however, in that it cannot tell, just
by looking, that squares have four sides and pentagons five.
Casual visual inspection of the world does not reveal that
these shapes differ in laterality, though some clever science
might just do the trick. Because of the way it perceives the
world, this creature requires a scientific inquiry into the
nature of shape properties while we have a much easier
time.
Perhaps this creature would not thrive in
environments such as those in which our own visual
systems have evolved, but this is beside the point.
This creature may seem like a philosopher’s implausible
dream, but it turns out that our color perception works very
much like this creature’s perception of shape. As noted
above, if colors are physical properties of the objects that
seem to have them, then we seem able to know only very
little about them just by looking. Look at the grass and you
can see that it is green, that the green is a bit unsaturated,
that it is greenish, and perhaps a bit yellowish but not
bluish, unless you’re in Kentucky.2 That is the most one
can usually say about the grass’ color just by looking, and
that is not much, considering the complicated natures of the
colors.
A reflectance, for example, tells you what
percentage of light a surface reflects for each of the visible
wavelengths of light. Large sets of these reflectances—the
determinate perceptible shades of color—are related to one
another in a myriad of ways to which we have no
perceptual access. We need scientific investigation to
reveal these properties of colored objects just as the

hypothetical creature needs science to ascertain the
sidedness of objects that have certain shapes.
The upshot is that perceptual representations make
information about the ambient environment available to the
cognitive faculties of an agent, but they are selective in how
they do this. It is important to distinguish this from a point
William Lycan (1996, 54) and others have made: “...our
perceptual processors are filters; they take in and retain
only a tiny and tendentiously selected fraction of the
information available in an object under scrutiny.” Lycan’s
point is that perceptual processors leave a lot of information
alone; there is a lot of information that they do not carry.
As we will see in the following sections, any state that
carries information about squareness also carries
information about corners, sides, and the like.
Nevertheless, creatures can be alike in the information that
that their perceptual systems carry but differ in what parts
of that information they are able to use. The creature
perceptually represents squareness, but its perceptual
representation does not make information about sides and
corners perceptually available.
Let’s say that the perceptual mode of presentation of a
property, P, for observer O is just the set of properties P
that O’s perceptual system makes available whenever it
makes P available. Perceptual availability, as I appeal to it
can be understood in terms of perceptual states licensing
non-inferential judgments concerning the instantiation of
properties in the environment. It is likely they do more
than that, but for now this weak claim is all that is needed
because at issue is what it is like to perceive properties.
Furthermore, at issue is not so much the licensing per se,
but the way in which perceptual states naturally lead one to
make such judgments, regardless of the warrant these
judgments thereby obtain. The creature cannot make the
non-inferential perceptual judgment that four-sidedness is
present whenever it is in a position to make that judgment
about squareness. Our perceptual systems, by contrast,
make information about four-sidedness available whenever
they make information about squareness available. We
both perceptually represent squareness, but under different
perceptual MoPs. There is doubtless an interesting story to
tell about just how perceptual states lead to and license noninferential judgments.
Second, the availability mentioned here is front-end
availability, or what it is about the deliverer of information
that makes it available, and not what it is about the
consumer that allows it to use that information. Perceptual
MoPs concern the perceptual system’s part in making
information available to one’s cognitive faculties. The
cognitive faculties themselves—the back end of
availability—need to be built so as to take advantage of this
front-end availability. One might think that availability
cannot be cleanly cut into front-end and back-end
capacities. In fact this is an open empirical question.
Third, perceptual availability may amount to different
things for different kinds of perceivers. For humans, MoPs
and availability can be understood in terms of non-

2

For a more detailed exposition of this distinction between colors
and shapes, as paradigm examples of primary and secondary
qualities, see my (2005). Aydede and Güzeldere (2005) have an
interesting way of distinguishing the concepts of colors from
shapes that is in line with the distinction being drawn here. They
claim that we form sensory concepts of the perceptually
represented qualities to which we have little perceptual access
while we form perceptual concepts of those qualities to which our
perceptual representations afford us access. Their idea is that
perceptual concepts are built up from perceptual representations of
qualities for which we can only have sensory concepts.
1205

inferential judgments. For less sophisticated creatures,
availability may amount to something less than the ability
to make bona fide judgments. Whatever the analogues of
belief and knowledge are for your average catbird or ringed
seal, information can be made perceptually available in
terms of those analogues.
Perceptual MoPs distinguish what is represented from
how it is represented. In that sense, they count as modes of
presentation, though they work differently than MoPs
ordinarily conceived. Usually, MoPs are conceived as
ways of thinking of objects, perhaps insofar as one is able
to think of a set of properties that uniquely identifies a
given object. Here, MoPs are ways of sensing properties.
The next section argues that perceptual MoPs can be
identified with what it is like to see a property, that they
respect the intuitions behind phenomenal internalism
without vindicating the thesis itself, and that perceptual
MoPs respect the externalist representationalist requirement
that we are only ever aware of what we perceptually
represent to be the case. Despite its appeal, phenomenal
internalism must go.

constitution. In that sense, what it is like to see a property
is internally determined.
At this point it is rather easy to respond to the manifest
image problem articulated in section three. When we
perceptually represent a shade of green, we are aware of
that shade of green under a perceptual MoP that only gives
us access to a limited number of its constituents. That is
why these messy sets of reflectances can both (a) be the
colors, and (b) not relate to how colors perceptually seem in
any obvious way. It is not just that colors are not
perceptually represented as reflectances per se, but that
they are not perceptually represented in such a way that we
can know about all of the respects in which they are
intrinsically related to one another. Also, if two creatures
are alike in the colors they can represent objects as having
but differ in their perceptual MoPs of those properties, they
can differ in what it is like for them to see colors. In this
sense, we have a response to part of the inverted spectrum
problem from section three. There is a sense in which
perceivers can be alike in the colors they represent objects
as having but differ in what it is like for them to do so. The
last step in this section is to show that perceptual MoPs can
account for these problem cases while respecting the
externalist representationalists’ requirement that we are
only ever aware of what we perceptually represent to be the
case.
Perceptual MoPs do not require that we are ever aware of
the information-carrying states of our perceptual systems
themselves or any other intrinsic qualities of perceptual
states—cf., e.g., Block (1990; 1996). One perceptual
representation of a property presents that property
differently from another perceptual representation of it just
in case one makes information about some of the property’s
constituents available that the other does not. The effect
that these MoPs have on what it is like to see things can be
understood in terms of the beliefs that one can form based
on perceptual representations. Given that information
about the colors’ constituents is not perceptually available,
we cannot form beliefs to the effect that objects have those
constituents on the basis of perceiving the colors alone,
whereas the hypothetical creatures mentioned above can do
just that. Furthermore, nothing has been said to suggest
that the content of these representations is wholly internally
determined, as Thau (2002) would have it. That is, this
proposal is consistent with externalist representationalism,
and not just representationalism.
In sum, perceptual MoPs do the job they are designed to
do. First, they can plausibly be identified with what it is
like to see a property. Second, they account for the
intuition that there is an internal determiner of what it is
like so they handle the manifest image problem and at least
part of the inverted spectrum problem. And third, they do
not require that we are ever aware of anything but what we
perceptually represent to be the case while being consistent
with representational externalism.
Even though the
structure of the perceptual representation determines the
perceptual MoP, one needn’t ever be aware of perceptual

MoPping up the Mess
To begin, we can identify the perceptual MoP of a property
with what it is like to see that property. The question,
“What is what it is like to see green?” is notoriously
difficult to answer. On the one hand, we are being asked to
say something about ourselves, but on the other, it is a
long-standing observation that in such situations there is
little we can do except describe what the property is like, as
far as we can tell by looking. When asked what it is like to
see squares we tell someone what squares are like as far as
our eyes reveal to us and it is not clear what more we could
do. Likewise for colors, which are popular examples in
discussing what it is like because we quickly reach the limit
of what we can say about them. The idea here is that what
it is like to see a property is just what that property is like
from our perceptual perspective. Posed with the question
“What is it like?” we are, strictly speaking, being asked to
introspect: to say something about our own minds. We
answer, however, in terms of the property we see, not in
terms of features of our minds, and we get rather confused
when asked to do much more. My claim is that by
answering the question in terms of perceived properties, we
convey something about ourselves: what we can know
about the property on the basis of seeing it. Since
perceptual MoPs are what our perceptual perspective on a
property consists in, they are good candidates for being
what it is like to see a property.
Second, how does this proposal about what it is like to
see a property accommodate the intuitions that favor
phenomenal internalism? Put simply, the perceptual MoP
of a property depends on how our perceptual systems are
built. The creature without access to the constituents of
shape properties must be built to process information about
shape quite differently than we are, just as our lack of
access to the constituents of colors results from our internal
1206

Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Hardin, C. L. (1993). Color for philosophers. Indianapolis:
Hackett.
Hilbert, D. R. (1987). Color and color perception. Stanford,
CA: CSLI.
Kulvicki, J. (2005). Perceptual content, information, and
the primary/secondary quality distinction. Philosophical
Studies, 122, 2.
Lycan, W. G. (1990). Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Lycan, W. G. (1996). Consciousness and experience.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ‘meaning’. In K.
Gunderson (Ed.). Language, mind, and knowledge.
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, VII.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Shoemaker, S. (1994). Phenomenal character. Noûs, 28.
Shoemaker, S. (1996). The first person perspective and
other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smart, J. J. C. (1975). On some criticisms of a physicalist
theory of colors. In C. Cheng (Ed.). Philosophical
aspects of the mind-body problem. Honolulu: University
Press of Hawaii.
Thau, M. (2002). Consciousness and cognition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten problems of consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, color, and content.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

representations or their structure. The one lacuna, it seems,
is the intuition that inversion per se is possible. So far
nothing has been said as to whether genuine inversion is
possible, or what special problems this introduces for
perceptual MoPs.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Torin Alter, Murat Aydede, Steven Davis,
Heidi Maibom, David Rosenthal, and audiences at Carleton
University, Dartmouth College, and the Eastern Division
APA for their helpful comments.

References
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A materialist theory of mind.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Aydede, M. & Güzeldere, G. (2005). Cognitive
architecture, concepts, and introspection. Noûs.
Block, N. (1990). Inverted earth. Philosophical
Perspectives 4.
Block, N. (1996). Mental paint and mental latex.
Philosophical Issues, 7.
Boghossian, P. & Velleman, D. (1989). Colour as a
secondary quality. Mind, 98.
Boghossian, P. & Velleman, D. (1991). Physicalist theories
of color. Philosophical Review, 100.
Byrne, A. & Hilbert, D. (2003). Color realism and color
science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal consciousness.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the flow of information.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1207

