UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Picture Theory, Tacit Knowledge or Vividness-Core? Three Hypotheses on the Mind's Eye
and Its Elusive Size

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zb621fb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
D'Angiulli, Amedeo
Reeves, Adam

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Picture Theory, Tacit Knowledge or Vividness-Core?
Three Hypotheses on the Mind’s Eye and Its Elusive Size
Amedeo D’Angiulli (adangiulli@tru.ca), Thompson Rivers University
School of Education & Department of Psychology, 103-1402 McGill Road
Kamloops, BC V2C 5N3

Adam Reeves (reeves@neu.edu), Northeastern University
Department of Psychology, 125 NI
Boston, MA 02115 USA
visible details because one knows from daily experience that
real-world objects that are smaller are less detailed when
viewed from far off. One could have generated any image at
any size with any level of detail, but one did not, because of
one’s (tacit) knowledge of how objects look. This is similar to
the notion of ‘demand characteristics’, in that the participant
is trying to understand the implications of the imagery task
(and does so by relating it to actual visual experience), even
though there is no explicit demand from the experimenter.
Paraphrasing Pylyshyn's argument, if we are asked to
generate a small image, we are likely to generate it as having
fewer visible details than if we are asked to generate it as
looming large directly in front of us. If the task of generating
a small image, as opposed to generating a large one, entails
having fewer visible details, then we can predict the result
expected by the experimenter, without the need of assuming
that we are actually basing our responses on a real scale of
small and large images. The results of indirectly increasing or
decreasing image detail by manipulating image size will be
obvious and will be as expected by the subject and the
experimenter (Pylyshyn, 2002, p. 163).
Pylyshyn’s and Kosslyn’s claims have implications for the
data we report, which concern both the time required to
generate an image or image latency, and the amount of detail
(detailedness) and clarity of the mental images, that is, their
vividness (Marks, 1973). Although Kosslyn and Pylyshyn did
not explicitly use the construct or term of vividness in their
theories, other researchers have shown that introspectively
available properties, such as the ones included in the present
definition of vividness, can reflect the resolution of the visual
buffer (e.g., Dean & Morris, 2003). In particular, vividness
ratings can provide a reasonably good estimation of image
detailedness (D’Angiulli, 2001). Thus, it seems that, together
with image latency, vividness could be used to derive new
interpretations and hypotheses from picture theory, tacit
knowledge or other imagery accounts, providing also a
common test bench for competing hypotheses.
Indeed, a third alternative account (vividness-core) proposes
that size manipulations can be confounded with changes in
vividness, and that changes in image latency are really related
to vividness, not to size. In a study that addressed specifically
the relationship between vividness, size and image latency,
D’Angiulli and Reeves (2002) found that vividness, not size,
had a major effect on image latency, with the most vivid

Abstract
In this study, we compared hypotheses derived from our
interpretation of three imagery theories – picture theory, tacit
knowledge and vividness-core. Participants were asked to
generate “small” (1.2o), “medium” (11o or 16o), or “large” (91o)
images of concrete, everyday objects. Image size varied between
subjects in Experiment 1, and within subjects in Experiment 2.
Vividness ratings and image latency were measured. According
to picture theory, vividness should increase directly with latency,
and both should increase continuously with size, in both
Experiments. According to tacit knowledge theory, such a
continuous increase will occur only in Experiment 2 when the
full range of sizes is known to the subjects. According to
vividness-core theory, latency and vividness should be inversely
related in both experiments, and latency should increase with
size in Experiment 1 but not in Experiment 2. Results support
vividness-core. Images, we conclude, are primarily derived from
memories whose latent activation is reflected in reported
vividness, as specified by vividness-core theory.

In the recently revived “imagery debate”, one contention has
been that tacit knowledge can explain the classic findings on
the effects of manipulating the size of mental images without
the need of postulating visual mental imagery or pictorial
representations (Pylyshyn, 2002). In the classic study,
Kosslyn (1975) verbally cued participants to imagine an
animal (e.g., tiger) so that the entire visual image would fill
one of four randomly presented squares of different areas.
Latencies were longer for generating images that filled larger
squares, suggesting to Kosslyn that more time was consumed
to “fill out” the larger images with the imaged object parts,
and, hence, with more details. According to Kosslyn's (1994)
picture theory, images are depictive representations formed in
a structure (visual buffer) that has space limits, which
constrain image resolution. If the object is imagined so small
(or so large) that one cannot appropriately represent a part in
which a given detail belongs, then the detail will not be
incorporated. As size increases within an optimal range, it
will offer progressively more locations for representing
details of the imaged object, thereby requiring continuously
more time to be completely fleshed out.
However, this direct relationship between size and
generation latency of mental images may also be explained
by tacit knowledge (Pylyshyn, 2002); if one is asked to
generate a small mental image, one may generate it with few
536

images would be similar, as would those for 16o- and 91oimages.
If, however, the pictorial theory is correct, we should
replicate Kosslyn's findings that image latency increases
continuously with size, as the participant’s response should
reflect an absolute size criterion, therefore being of
intermediate order between the independent response of a
participant generating only tiny images and that of a
participant generating only enormous images.
With respect to vividness, one interpretation of Pylyshyn’s
claims is that tacit knowledge will induce subjects to report
large images as more vivid than small ones, provided the
experimental instructions do not ask subjects to simulate nonideal viewing conditions such as imagining objects out of
focus or through a fog. Therefore, one may expect vividness
to increase with size. Here, the issue associated with medium
sizes can be reiterated for vividness as well. Do imagers use
an absolute criterion to place more or less detail in an image,
as posited in picture theory? If so, will medium-sized images
have an intermediate level of vividness between that of small
and large images, so that there is a continuous increase of
vividness with size?
Both picture theory and tacit knowledge predict a direct
relationship between image latency and size, in which
vividness is either a covariate (picture theory) or a mediated
outcome (tacit knowledge). Thus, vividness ratings should
increase with size, continuously if picture theory is correct,
but discontinuously if tacit knowledge is correct.
Finally, the vividness-core hypothesis would predict that if
image latency will increase with size (whether continuously
or not), then vividness will show the inverse trend, namely, it
will decrease with size.

images being generated 4-5 s earlier than the least vivid ones.
In contrast, display size effects were not significant in one
experiment and relatively small in a replication. An inverse
relation was found in virtually every participant; response
latency actually declined with vividness. According to the
vividness-core hypothesis, this inverse relationship between
vividness and response latency is a central feature of normal
image generation, in that vividness reflects the latent state of
activation of the visual memory system and the speed in
responding with the generation of a mental image is
correlated to the level of that activation (Finke, 1980). Size
would play an important role only in circumstances which
call for extreme transformations such as expanding a tiny
image to a giant one (Reeves & D’Angiulli, 2003).
In the two experiments that follow, we compared the
hypotheses derived from our interpretations of picture theory
and tacit knowledge to the vividness-core account.

Experiment 1
We attempted to replicate Kosslyn (1975) with three crucial
experimental variations: 1) we used a completely betweensubject design in which the participants generated particular
images at one given size only once (one-trial images), and
they did not know that other size conditions existed; 2) we
included two conditions in which images had to be generated
at larger sizes (16o and 91o) as well as those used by Kosslyn
(1.2o and 11o); and 3) we did not rely solely on image latency,
but also on vividness ratings.
With respect to image latency, tacit knowledge seems to
imply that a participant could infer quite easily that the image
generation task should be rather quick when the target size is
tiny, and conversely that the image generation task should be
time-consuming when the target size is enormous. However,
what would happen if, like in the present case, the participant
was asked to generate an image in a single trial, at a medium
size (11o and 16o), that is, neither ‘evidently small’ (1.2o) nor
‘evidently large’ (91o)?
Participants should be able to infer the demand
characteristics more accurately when a relative criterion is
made easily available (Keppel, 1982), that is, when mediumsized images are intermixed with small and large ones. In
contrast, when these image sizes are taken as a betweensubjects factor, with each size fixed in a block of trials, such
comparisons will not be readily available to suggest obvious
inferences. One way of bringing the general claim that tacit
knowledge affects imagery/size relations to bear, is to assume
that tacit knowledge is categorical. That is, participants are
assumed to have expectations about the appearances of, say,
two types of image; small, and large; or possibly three types
of image, small, medium, and large. However, the number of
such categories is strictly limited. In this case intermediate
images will be assimilated to the nearest category, and the
effects of size on performance will be discontinuous. In the
particular case of two categories, intermediate sizes will be
assimilated to 'small' or to 'large'. Thus, for example, if 11oimages were assimilated to the 'small' category and 16oimages to the 'large' one, then latencies for 1.2o- and 11o-

Method
Participants. Seventy-four undergraduate students; none
had participated in an imagery experiment before.
Stimuli. We selected 40 verbal descriptions used in
previous research (D'Angiulli, 2001; D'Angiulli & Reeves,
2002). These verbal descriptions were matched for high
vocabulary frequency, imageability and concreteness values
(with imageability and concreteness values both high,
namely, above 5.0). The descriptions selected included
animate beings (e.g., cat, elephant) and inanimate objects
(e.g., bottle, refrigerator); preliminary data indicated no
reliable differences between these subsets. For images of
these stimuli, generated at the smaller display sizes (1.2o and
11o), mean vividness ratings were strongly correlated (reffect size
= .75) with mean ratings of the amount of detail (see
D’Angiulli, 2001). (Ratings were only weakly correlated for
individual images, but in the present study we focus on group
averages.) Although about half of the variance in the mean
vividness ratings of our images reflects image detailedness, it
is probable that other factors such as image color and
luminance also contributed to the overall impression of each
image (see McKelvie, 1995).
Apparatus and Procedure. Participants sat facing a
computer monitor and pressed the right button of a mouse to
537

display each description and to respond. At the beginning of
each experimental session, a black outline square was
displayed at centre screen and remained there throughout
each trial. The square could have one of four angular sizes
(1.2o, 11o, 16 o and 91o) fixed for each participant. Participants
fixated the middle of the square's upper side. Upon their
mouse click, an alerting beep was sounded, followed 250 ms
later by a description (e.g. 'table') displayed 0.5 cm above the
square. Participants were instructed to read the description
silently and as quickly as possible, and then to project an
image of the corresponding object, as if seen in the frontal
plane from a ¾ side-view, so as to fill the entire square area.
Participants were asked to consider their image as complete
or finished as soon as they could not notice any further
improvements in its vividness, clarity, or detail. They
indicated that the image was complete by clicking the mouse
button. The computer covertly recorded the image latency
(i.e., time elapsed from the description presentation to the
mouse-click indicating image completion). The participants
were not informed that their manual responses were being
timed.
A horizontal array of seven buttons then appeared at the
bottom of the screen. Participants clicked on one of the
buttons to report the vividness of their image; there was no
deadline for the rating response. From left to right, each
button was labeled with one of seven vividness level
descriptions (i.e., 'no image', 'very vague/dim', 'vague/dim',
'not vivid', 'moderately vivid', 'very vivid', 'perfectly vivid');
which we identify as levels 1 (no image) through 7. Valid
trials were defined by vividness ratings > 1; invalid trials (<
2%) were excluded from the data analysis. Participants were
also instructed to rate as 1 any failure to imagine as
instructed. Care was taken during practice sessions to
familiarize the participants with using these vividness ratings.
They were instructed to rate the detailedness and clarity of
their mental image of a given object as these compared to the
ones of the actual percept (Marks, 1973).
Following the rating response, the array of buttons
disappeared and the screen reverted just to the square outline
in preparation for the next trial. The stimuli were presented in
random order with a minimum inter-trial interval of 5 s to
minimize imagery persistence between trials (Craver-Lemley
& Reeves, 1987).
There were four between-subjects size conditions: 1.2o, 11o,
16o and 91o. The frames were drawn as black outline squares
and were displayed on a white Macintosh screen set at low
emission. Larger visual angles were obtained by expanding
the sizes of the 1.2o- and 11o-square frames, which had been
used in previous research (e.g., Kosslyn, 1975; D’Angiulli,
2002).

(F (3, 78) = 88.67, MSE = 54.40, p < .001). The top panel of
Figure 1 indicates that although latencies increased with size,
the increase was discontinuous. Multiple comparisons on a
Tukey HSD test (p < .05) confirmed a discontinuous increase.
Images generated at 11o typically had longer latency than
images generated at 16o, but the latencies of 11o- and 16oimages did not differ from, respectively, the latencies of 1.2o
and 91o-images.
13.0

Mean image latency (s)

12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1.2 deg

11 deg

16 deg

91 deg

Image-sizing condition

Mean image vividness rating

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0
2.0
1.2 deg

11 deg

16 deg

91 deg

Image-sizing condition

Figure 1: Top Panel: Mean image latencies plotted as a
function of the angular sizes used in the image-sizing task of
Experiment 1. Bars indicate 1 standard error; deg = degrees of
visual angle. Bottom Panel: Mean vividness ratings (min = 2,
max = 7) plotted against the sizes used in Experiment 1.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows that vividness
decreased with size, which contradicts both picture theory and
tacit knowledge accounts. Multiple comparisons on a Tukey
HSD test revealed the same type of discontinuous effect
found for image latencies, but in the inverse direction (i.e.,
decrease in vividness). That is, images generated at 11o were
generally more vivid than images generated at 16o.

Results and Discussion
Figure 1 shows means for image latency (top panel) and for
vividness (bottom panel), both plotted according to image
size. One-way ANOVA tests (with four levels of size)
showed that there was an overall effect of size on image
latency (F (3, 78) = 7.25, MSE = .11, p < .001) and vividness
538

account would be that: 1) image latency should increase with
size; 2) vividness should also increase with size; and 3) the
continuous pattern would occur because it can be inferred
from knowing the different sizes involved in the experiment
(which may be used as points of reference for response and
vividness rating). However, if the mental retina hypothesis is
correct, we should expect a pattern of result similar to the one
found in Experiment 1. Namely: 1) vividness should decrease
with size; 2) image latency should increase with size; and 3)
the discontinuous pattern will occur, reflecting a drop-off
from high to low resolution.
Finally, the vividness-core hypothesis would predict an
inverse relationship between vividness and image latency.

Comparing the panels of Figure 1, it is clear that image
latency and vividness follow inverse trends, the former
increases, whereas the latter decreases with size. Because the
overall ANOVA estimated the effects associated with all
between-group sources of variation, we tested for trends
associated with vividness partialling out the other betweensubjects effects. To this end, we performed a polynomial
contrast on mean latencies using as contrast weights the z
scores of the mean vividness ratings (i.e., .85, .87, -.79, -.93).
The contrast showed that image latency and vividness were
inversely related (F (1, 78) = 14.23, MSE = .11, p < .001).
These results support the vividness-core hypothesis, in that
the most salient predicted outcome was the inverse
relationship between image latency and vividness. Although
tacit knowledge could explain the discontinuous patterns, it
does not explain the decreasing trend of vividness as a
function of increasing size. That smaller images would be
more detailed and clearer cannot be derived from knowledge
or recall of how things look like in everyday life, since, when
compared to close objects, distant objects project smaller and
less detailed retinal images. Also, tacit knowledge would not
explain the different direction of the effects of size on image
latency and vividness.
The present findings remain open to a pictorial reinterpretation, since the visual buffer may contain two
spatially-defined regions analogous to the retina’s fovea and
periphery (Finke & Kosslyn, 1980). Images will be clear if
within the fovea (high-resolution), but much less clear if
falling onto the periphery (low-resolution). Hence, an object
imagined at a small size might fit entirely within the highresolution region, but the same object might overflow this
high-resolution region, and mostly fall onto the lowresolution one, if imagined at larger size. This may explain
why vividness would decrease with increasing size. The
discontinuous patterns for vividness and image latency could
be explained if, in imagery, the high-resolution region could
extend between, say, 1o and 11o, and that the boundary
between high-resolution and low-resolution regions could be
somewhere between 11o and 16o. Further, if image latency covaried with vividness, our findings would be entirely
accounted for by the “mental retina” model. Still, the mental
retina account could be explained by tacit knowledge.
Because the imagers notice the difference between peripheral
and foveal view when seeing a real scene, they might simply
use that knowledge to simulate what happens during
perception. To contrast tacit knowledge, mental retina and
vividness-core accounts, we designed another experiment.

Method
Participants. Twenty freshmen undergraduate students.
Stimuli. The same descriptions used in Experiment 1.
Apparatus and Procedure. The apparatus and procedure
were identical to the one used in Experiment 1, with the
following exceptions. Participants were instructed to read
silently the description with an accompanying cue-letter (A,
B, C, or D) given on each trial at fixation point, and then to
imagine each corresponding object with their eyes open. Each
subject read each description 4 times (thus, they imagined 4
sets of the same repeated stimuli) and depending on the trial
they had to project the corresponding image in a frame
indicated by the cue accompanying the stimulus description.
Each letter corresponded to a frame subtending a different
visual angle: 5° for cue A, 11° for B, 16° for C, and 24° for
D. Prior to the actual experimental trials the subjects were
given two practice blocks of an abbreviated version of the
experiment. During this period they learned to associate each
cue letter with the required display.

Results and Discussion
Figure 2 shows means for image latency (top panel) and for
vividness (bottom panel), both plotted according to image
sizing conditions. Repeated-measure ANOVA tests (with size
as the four levels of the repeated-measure factor) showed that
the manipulation of angular size had no overall effect on
image latency (F < 1), however, it had an overall effect on
vividness (F (2, 30) = 14.74, MSE = .35, p < .001).
Focused repeated-measure contrasts showed that although
there was no difference between image vividness at 5o and
11o (F < 1) there was a vividness increment for larger sizes
(11o vs. 16o: F (1, 19) = 10.75, MSE = .15, p < .01; 16o vs.
24o: F (1, 19) = 18.79, MSE = .28, p < .001). These results
would suggest a discontinuous pattern (contra tacit
knowledge) as well as a vividness improvement for images >
11o (trend opposite to that expected on the mental retina).
But overall, images were rated below vividness level 4,
namely, below ‘not vivid’. Therefore, the vividness
improvement for the larger images may simply indicate a
“spurious” relationship between vividness and size, with no
functional role, as it is unrelated to image latency response.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we asked participants to imagine a set of
objects projecting their images in displays with increasing
visual angle, up to 24o, across several repeated withinsubjects trials, as in Kosslyn (1975; Experiment 5). This
experiment was designed to test three sets of predictions.
Because the within-subjects design introduces a relative
criterion for judgment one would expect a changed role of
tacit knowledge. Thus, the predictions derived from this
539

12.0
11.0

7.00

10.0
9.0

6.75

Mean image latency (s)

Mean image latency (s)

13.0

8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
5 deg

11 deg

16 deg

6.25

11 deg

6.00

1.2 deg
16 deg

5.75
5.50

24 deg

5.25

24 deg

5.00
-1.5

Image-sizing condition
7.0

Mean image vividness rating

6.50

-1.0

-.5

0.0

.5

1.0

1.5

Mean vividness ratings (z scores)

Figure 3: Mean image latency plotted against z scores of the
mean vividness ratings obtained in Experiment 2; the angular
sizes are shown for each mean.

6.0

5.0

unaware of the other size conditions. In two of these betweensubjects conditions, images had to be generated at “medium”
angular sizes (11o and 16o); the other two experimental
conditions included very small and very large angular sizes
(1.2o and 91o). Although both picture theory and tacit
knowledge predict a direct effect of image size on latency and
vividness, using medium sizes allowed us to operationalize a
possible difference between these two theories: picture theory
predicts a steady, continuous effect of size, but tacit
knowledge is likely to be categorical – recall, these
participants each experienced only one display size, so they
had no obvious point of comparison. The vividness-core
hypothesis implies a third, distinctly different prediction. If
image latency increases with size (whether continuously or
not), then vividness should show the inverse trend. We found
that image latency and vividness are inversely related, which
supports the vividness-core hypothesis. That vividness shows
the inverse trend to that of image latency poses serious threats
to both picture theory and tacit knowledge because it implies
that small images are relatively more vivid than large images,
and this is at odds with ordinary visual perception and our
intuition of it.
Together with the inverse latency-vividness relation, in
Experiment 1 we also found discontinuous changes in latency
and vividness as a function of increasing size. This pattern of
results may be interpreted with another picture theory, the
mental retina account, which postulates that the imagery
medium has a high-resolution region affording mostly “foveal
view” for small-sized images (i.e., between 1o and 11o) and a
low-resolution region affording mostly “peripheral view” for
large-sized images ( >11o). Hence, the discontinuous pattern
for latency and for its covariate vividness would simply
indicate a fall-off in image resolution. In Experiment 2,
participants were asked to generate images with increasing
angular size across several repeated within-subjects trials. If

4.0

3.0
2.0
5 deg

11 deg

16 deg

24 deg

Image-sizing condition

Figure 2: Top Panel: Mean image latencies plotted as a
function of the angular sizes used in the image-sizing task of
Experiment 2. Bars indicate 1 standard error; deg = degrees of
visual angle. Bottom Panel: Mean vividness ratings (min = 2,
max = 7) plotted against the sizes used in Experiment 2.
To test the vividness-core prediction of an inverse
relationship between image latency and vividness,
independent of size, we conducted a polynomial contrast on
mean latencies using as contrast weights the z scores of mean
vividness ratings irrespective of the order of angular sizes
(i.e., -.77, -.64, 0, 1.41). The result of this analysis,
represented in Figure 3, confirmed the inverse relationship (F
(1,19) = 23.45, MSE = .01, p < .001).

General Discussion
The purpose of this study was to contrast three accounts of
imagery – derived from picture theory, tacit knowledge, and
vividness-core – by examining the relationships between the
manipulation of size, image latency and vividness.
In Experiment 1, participants generated images at one given
size, only one time (one-trial images), and they were

540

sensory mechanisms react more quickly to more intense or
more informative stimulation (Finke, 1980). Therefore, it may
have a more general import for imagery than pictorial aspects
or tacit knowledge. Notably, it could apply equivalently to all
modalities, not just to vision.

the mental retina account were correct we should have
replicated the findings of Experiment 1 and find a
discontinuous pattern (foveal vs. peripheral view). If the tacit
knowledge were true we should have found direct and
continuous relationships between image latency and size, and
between vividness and size (because, being exposed to all
size conditions, the participants may think that the continuous
increase should be the most plausible outcome if they were
seeing in those conditions). However, in Experiment 2 we
found a latency-vividness inverse relation which was
independent of size and clearly supported the vividness-core
account again.
Experiment 2 also yielded: (a) lack of size effects, and (b)
overall lower vividness ratings than Experiment 1. We
suggest that the repeated images of Experiment 2 were not
constructed ex-novo, like the one-trial images of Experiment
1. Rather, they were retrieved as “carbon-copies” at nonsignificantly different rates in any size. Accordingly, their
visual contents, and vividness, decayed as images were
maintained in a temporary ‘back up store’, similar to the one
proposed by Baddeley (2000). Retrieval from this episodic
buffer (via conscious awareness) may be how the vividnesscore is implemented.
One conclusion that is suggested by the present findings is
that, contra Pylyshyn, the outcomes of simple image
generation tasks such as the one we used are not trivially
obvious. We have already discussed how the present findings
are counterintuitive. Participant’s expectations empirically
cannot account for the vividness-latency inverse relationship.
After both experiments, our participants (94 collapsed over
Experiment 1and 2) were asked to predict a relationship
between vividness and image latency, 19% gave a prediction
interpretable as a positive correlation (e.g., “if you work more
at it your images will become more vivid”). The majority
(76%) responded they could not predict any regularity or
relationship. Only 5% guessed there would be a negative
correlation between the two variables. Virtually the same
results were found in another study (D’Angiulli & Reeves,
1998) in which subjects simply judged both ‘perceived’ speed
and vividness of their images using two four-point rating
scales. Thus, a more plausible and parsimonious explanation
than participants’ expectations is that latency as well as the
experience of vividness reflect the way mental images are
ordinarily generated in everyday life.
In sum, the present study suggests that mental images are
not pictures or tacit knowledge but rather already-computed
representations episodically stored in memory. These
representations seem to require minimal size-adjustment if at
all. What seems to make them available is that their latent
state of activation in memory is reflected by the reported
vividness, we have called this underlying organization of
relationships
vividness-core.
Latent
activation
of
representations is associated with the image generation speed,
thus images that are relatively more vivid are also more likely
to be generated faster than less-vivid ones (D’Angiulli &
Reeves, 2002). The vividness-latency inverse relationship
may derive from the adaptive principle that some perceptual-

References
Craver-Lemley, C., & Reeves, A. (1987). Visual imagery
selectively reduces vernier acuity. Perception, 16, 599614.
Baddeley, A. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new
component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 417-124.
D’Angiulli, A., & Reeves, A. (1998). Vividness and the
time to generate mental images. [Abstract]. Proceedings
of the 69th annual meeting of the Eastern Psychological
Association, Feb 27, Boston, MA.
D’Angiulli, A. (2001). Phenomenal and temporal aspects
of visual mental image generation: validating verbal report
on vividness through latency analysis. Dissertation
Abstracts International,61 (9-B), 5015.
D’Angiulli, A. (2002). Mental image generation and the
contrast sensitivity function. Cognition, 85, B11-B19.
D’Angiulli, A., & Reeves, A. (2002). Generating mental
images: Latency and vividness are inversely related.
Memory & Cognition, 30, 1179-88.
Dean, G. M., & Morris, P.E. (2003). The relationship
between self-reports of imagery and spatial ability. British
Journal of Psychology, 94, 245-273.
Finke, R.A. (1980). Levels of equivalence in imagery and
perception. Psychological Review, 87, 113-132.
Finke, R. A. & Kosslyn, S. M. (1980). Mental imagery
acuity in the peripheral visual field. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 6, 126-39.
Keppel, G. (1982). Design and analysis: A researcher's
handbook. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1975). Information representation in visual
images. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 341-370.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and brain. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Marks, D.F. (1973). Visual imagery differences in the recall
of pictures. British Journal of Psychology, 64, 17-24.
McKelvie, S. J. (1995). Vividness of visual imagery:
Measurement, nature, function & dynamics. New York:
Brandon House.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (2002). Mental imagery: In search of a
theory. Behavioural & Brain Sciences, 25, 157-182.
Reeves, A. & D’Angiulli, A. (2003). What does the mind’s
eye tell the visual buffer? Size, latency and vividness of
visual images [Abstract]. Abstracts of the Psychonomic
Society, 44th Annual Meeting, 8, 82.

541

