UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Practice Doesn't Always Make Perfect: Goal Induced Decrements in the Accuracy of Actionand Observation-based Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86r4s0rr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Heyes, Cecilia
Osman, Magda

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Practice Doesn’t Always Make Perfect: Goal Induced Decrements in the Accuracy
of Action- and Observation-based Problem Solving
Magda Osman (m.osman@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London. Gower Street
London, WC1E 6BT England

Cecilia Heyes (c.heyes@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London. Gower Street
London, WC1E 6BT England

broader and deeper understanding of the problem (Miller,
Lehman, & Koedinger, 1999).

Abstract
Recently, studies of problem solving within a dynamic
environment (e.g. Burns & Vollmeyer, 2002; Vollmeyer,
Burns, & Holyoak, 1996) show that performance is more
accurate when people are engaged in a non-specific goal
compared with a specific goal. We discuss findings from an
experiment that was designed to replicate and extend the
original work of Burns and Vollmeyer (2002). In Burns and
Vollmeyer’s study the learning phase of the problem solving
task was action based, whereas in the present study
participants either learnt to solve the task under observational
or action conditions. Consistent with the original findings,
this study shows that goal specificity affects the accuracy of
problem solving in the same way when the learning phase of
the task is observational rather action based. Additionally, the
present study is an example in which there are no benefits of
action over observational learning.

Observational learning

Goal Specific and Non-specific Problem
Solving
Early research showed that people typically solve problems
by selective search through large problem spaces using
heuristics (short cut strategies) such as means-ends analysis
(Hammond, 1996; Newell & Simon, 1972). This is a
method that decomposes the ultimate goal (end) of a
problem into smaller intermediate goals, and at each stage
sets out actions (means) which help to achieve these smaller
goals.
Recent laboratory studies have found that people also find
solutions to problems without directed conscious effort
(Geddes & Stevenson, 1997; Burn & Vollmeyer, 2002). The
limited research on this type of problem solving suggests
that problems are also solved intuitively, by exploring the
task without a specific goal in mind. This incidental
approach to solving problems may be highly profitable,
involving less effort and more efficiency than when the
solver works toward a specific goal. The main difference
between specific and non-specific problem solving is
thought to lie in the type of information search that is
carried out. In specific goal problem solving people only
examine information that is relevant to the identified goal, at
the cost of having a superficial understanding of the
problem (Sweller, 1988). In non-specific goal problem
solving the search is unrestricted, and so people gain a

In the real world, most problem solving occurs in a social
context. Studies of observational learning have shown that
problem solving is easier when tackled during or after we
have observed others attempting the same problems, rather
than in social isolation. This work has led to a distinction
between two forms of observational learning: imitation and
mimicry. Imitation is thought to be intrinsically goal
directed (or intentional) (Bekkering, Wohlschlager, &
Gattis, 2000), to give rise to explicit knowledge (Kelly &
Burton, 2001), to be unique to humans (Tomasello, Kruger,
& Ratner, 1993), and to be a highly efficient way of
acquiring information. Mimicry, on the other hand, is
thought to be automatic (or unintentional), to occur
implicitly, to be an evolutionary older phenomenon (Roth &
Leslie, 1998; Melzoff, & Moore, 1977; Tomasello, et al.
1993), and to be a relatively weak means of acquiring
knowledge. However, the results of several studies are
inconsistent with this picture. For example, there is now
evidence that observational learning can be both highly
efficient and implicit (Bird, Osman, Saggerson, & Heyes, in
press), and that enhancing goal-directedness can have a
detrimental effect on the efficiency of observational learning
(Bird, Brindley & Heyes, in prep). These findings raise the
possibility that goal specificity affects observation learning
in much the same way as it does problem solving;
observational learning is more efficient when the goal is
undirected or non specific, compared to when learning is
goal directed or oriented toward a specific goal.

Present Study

1690

Current empirical advances in the understanding of problem
solving and observational learning suggest that the ways in
which people store and access new knowledge depends on
the specificity of the goal. These distinct research fields
have found evidence that goal specificity affects the
efficiency of problem solving and learning in the same way.
That is, provided with a specific goal, learners who perform
simple motor tasks or complex problem solving tasks are
impaired relative to the performance of non-specific goal

learners. If this is correct, one would expect goal specificity
to have similar effects on performance in a problem solving
task when the learning stage is action-based and when it is
observation-based. Thus far there has been no empirical
investigation of the effects of observational learning in a
complex problem solving task. We investigate this issue by
using a complex problems solving task. We predict that
problem solvers who learn to control a complex problem
solving task without directly intervening, given sufficient
motivation, should engage with the task to the extent that
they will successfully solve it. Additionally, observational
learners should demonstrate the exact same goal specificity
effects that have been reported in problems solving
environments in which the task is learnt through direct
intervention. We propose that the reason for this is based on
the supposition that the underlying properties of a problem
solving task involve learning processes which are also
required in simple learning tasks (Holland, Holyoak,
Nisbett, & Thagard, 1989).

Experimental Paradigm
The present study is based on the Water tank problem
solving task devised by Burns and Vollmeyer’s. In their task
participants were required to control a linear system (Water
tank system). This consisted of three inputs (substances:
salt, carbon, lime) which were connected to three outputs
(measures:
oxygenation,
chlorine
concentration,
temperature) (see Figure 1). For each input to output link
there was added noise. For example, if, on trial 1 a
participant had entered a value of 100 to the input lime then
the value of oxygen would be 202, because the starting
value of oxygen is 100 on trial 1, and the added noise
further increases the value of this output.

Inputs

Water Tank System
Outputs

Salt

Carbon

+6

attempting to attain and then maintain specific output values
over the course of 6 trials.
The final phase (transfer phase) was exactly the same as
the solution phase with the exception that participants were
given a new set of output values to achieve.
The crucial manipulation in Burns and Vollmeyer’s study
was the instructions given to the two experimental groups.
For the non-specific goal group, the task was presented as
has just been described. Participants were simply told that
they were to learn as well as they could the structure of the
system in the exploration phase. In contrast, the specific
goal group was told at the outset that they were to control
the system in the exploration phase. Their goal was to reach
a specific set of output values and to maintain them over the
12 trials. The values of the outputs were exactly the same as
those that would later be examined in the solution phase.
Consistent with their predictions, Burns and Vollmeyer
found that the non-specific group matched the performance
of the specific group in the solution phase, but outperformed them in the transfer phase. Evidence from
protocols confirmed that a non-specific goal improved
learning because it increased hypothesis testing. The
specific goal group used a limited form of hypothesis testing
that ensured they gained enough knowledge of the task
environment to attempt to reach their goal. They would
switch between instance learning and minimal hypothesis
testing which was a costly strategy for the reason that they
only learned information relevant to performing a specific
goal.
Burns and Vollmeyer proposed that without a specific goal,
participants set an appropriate goal themselves by engaging
in hypothesis testing. In turn, their understanding of the
underlying causal structure is superior to the specific goal
group because they search for rules and examine particular
instances (input-outputs pairs). In contrast, the specific goal
group are bounded by the goals they are trying to attain and
this constrains their understanding of the task.

Present Experiment

Oxygen

-0.5

Chlorine

There were two main objectives of the present experiment.
First, the aim was to replicate the effect reported by Burns
and Vollmeyer that non-specific goal learning is superior to
specific goal learning. Evidence from observational learning
studies suggests that goal specificity effects performance in
a similar way to that which has been reported in studies of
problem solving. However, to our knowledge, no dedicated
empirical work has examined the effects of goal specificity
in an observation-based problem solving task. Therefore, the
second objective was to investigate whether changing the
exploration phase of Burn and Vollmeyer’s problem solving
task to an observational version yields the same effects of
goal specificity detected in the action-based version.
In the following experiment there were four groups: Nonspecific goal (action – participants would directly
manipulate the values in all phases of the experiment),
Specific goal (action), Non-specific goal (observation –
participants would only observe values changing during the
exploration phase, and could not directly manipulate the
values themselves), Specific goal (observation).

+4

Lime

+2

Temp.

Figure 1: Water tank system
The task began with 12 learning trials described as the
exploration phase. The starting values of the inputs were set
to 0, and those of the outputs were: Oxygen = 100, Chlorine
concentration = 500, Temperature = 1000. Participants
would learn the causal structure of the system by changing
the values of the inputs on each trial and learning which
outputs were affected and by how much.
In the next phase (solution phase) participants
demonstrated their skills at controlling the system by

1691

We predicted that the groups given non-specific goal
instructions would outperform groups that had been given
specific goal instructions.

Method
Participants Sixty-four students from University College
London volunteered to take part in experiment and were
paid £4 for their involvement. They were randomly
allocated to one of the four conditions, with sixteen in each.
Participants were tested individually.
Design The experiment was a 2x2 between subjects design
with two levels of goal specificity (non-specific, specific)
and two levels of learning (action, observation). All
participants were presented with an exploration phase
consisting of 12 trials; a solution phase consisting of 6 trials;
and a transfer phase consisting of 6 trials. The main
manipulation was the instructions that participants received
before the exploration phase (non-specific, specific) and the
effects of these were measured in the solution and transfer
phases. The second manipulation was whether participants
explored the problem solving environment by directly
manipulating the input values themselves or by observing
changes to inputs and outputs without setting the values
themselves. In the latter case (non-specific observe, and
specific-observe) because participants were not directly
manipulating the input and output values on each trial
during the exploration phase, the values and order in which
they were changed was pre-determined. The actual values
that were changed from trial to trial were based on a
participant’s responses from the Specific goal (action)
group. The reason for this was twofold. The exact same
input values in the exploration phase were presented to nonspecific and specific observers in order to make direct
comparisons, and to isolate the effects of goal specificity by
reducing the differences between the groups to just the
instructions. The input values of an above average specific
action learner were used. It was thought that a high
performer from this group would necessarily demonstrate a
high level of rule and instance learning, and would give
observers of both types a good opportunity to learn the
problem solving environment.
Procedure Participants were told that they would be taking
part in a problem solving task and they were to learn and
later control a water tank system. They were also assured
that throughout the task, were they to encounter any
difficulties, they should ask the experimenter for assistance.
Exploration phase: All participants were presented with the
same computer display which was similar to Figure 1 with
the exception that the connections and added noise of each
connection were not presented. At the beginning of the
exploration phase the input values were set to 0. The
starting values of the outputs were: Oxygen = 100, Chlorine
concentration = 500, Temperature = 1000. In Burns and
Vollmeyer’s study participants were able to see the starting
values of input and output values at the beginning of each

trial. In the present experiment participants were only
shown the starting values of the inputs values and not the
output values; the output values were only revealed on the
first trial and not before.
In the action group participants would begin a trial by
changing the value of an input using a slider on a scale
ranging from -100 to 100. On each trial participants were
free to change as many inputs are they liked, although
everyone was advised that varying one input per trial was a
useful strategy to adopt. Vollmeyer, et al. (1996) found that
without this advice performance was highly impaired for
specific and non-specific learners because many more suboptimal strategies were used. Once they were satisfied with
their changes to the inputs, participants would click on a
button labeled ‘output readings’ and this would reveal the
values of all three outputs. This procedure would complete a
trial. On the next trial the input values entered would change
the values of the outputs from the previous trial. This
procedure continued for 6 trials.
When it ended,
participants were presented with a structure task; Burns and
Vollmeyer devised the task to examine participants’
knowledge of the causal structure of the environment. A
diagram of the water system was shown on screen, and
participants were asked to tick which of the options they
took to be the causal links between a particular input and
output (see Figure 2). They could also enter what they
thought was the numerical relationship between inputs and
outputs. When they had finished, they clicked a button to
continue, and then completed the remaining six trials of the
exploration phase, and another version of the structure task.
The non-specific group completed the exploration phase
without having to achieve a particular goal. The specific
goal group was told from the outset that they were to control
the system by trying to reach and maintain the following
output values: Oxygen = 50, Chlorine concentration = 700,
Temperature = 900.

Salt

o2 Carbon

o2 Lime

o2

Chl con.

Chl con.

Chl con.

Temp.

Temp.

Temp.

Figure 2: Structure Task
In the observation group the procedure was similar to the
action group with two exceptions. First, instead of entering
input values themselves, observers clicked a button to reveal
the input values generated by a participant in one of the
action groups. When they were ready they would then click
a second button to reveal the output values for that trial. The
second exception was that participants in the non-specific
group were told to simply try and learn about the automated
system that they were observing. The specific group were
told to assess the effectiveness of the system’s ability to
achieve specific output values on each trials (i.e. Oxygen =

1692

50, Chlorine concentration = 700, Temperature = 900). In
all other respects, the action and observe groups did not
differ, and the structure tasks were completed in the same
way, as were the remaining phases of the experiment.
Solution phase: In this phase all participants were required
to change the input values to achieve the following output
values: Oxygen = 50, Chlorine concentration = 700,
Temperature = 900. The specific groups had been
previously exposed to these values, whereas the nonspecific groups had not. Participants were allocated 6 trials
in which they were to reach and then maintain the output
values given.
Transfer phase: As in the solution phase, all participants
were now required to change the input values to achieve
given output values. However, the required ouput values
were now : Oxygen = 250, Chlorine concentration = 350,
Temperature = 1100. This was the first transfer test for the
specific groups, because they had no prior experience of
learning to set the values required in this phase.

reported by Burns and Vollmeyer. Neither the main effect of
learning type, F(1, 60) = .59 p = .45, nor any of the
interactions, were significant. These results imply that
regardless of the method by which participants learnt the
problem solving environment, non-specific goal learners’
knowledge of the structure was superior to specific goal
learners.

Scoring

Solution and Transfer Error Scores: Table 1 also includes
the overall mean solution and transfer error scores for each
group. These figures indicate that the non-specific groups
achieved lower solution and transfer error scores than the
specific groups. In addition, they suggest that transfer error
scores were higher than solution error scores. To analyze
this a 2x2x2 ANOVA was conducted with phase (Solution,
Transfer) as the within subject factor, and goal type (nonspecific, specific) and learning type (action, observation) as
between subject factors. The analysis revealed significant
main effects of phase, F(1, 60) = 13.55 p < .0005, and of
goal type, F(1, 60) = 40.33 p < .0005. As in the structure
score analysis, neither the main effect of learning type, nor
any of the interactions, were significant. (F>1).
Burns and Vollmeyer reported a difference between the
non-specific and the specific group in the transfer phase, but
not in the solution phase. In contrast, the present study
found superior performance by the non-specific group in
both the solution and the transfer phases. Given that
learning type was not significant, the error scores from both
action and observation groups were combined. The
tendency for non-specific groups to perform better than
specific groups was confirmed using a one-way ANOVA
with goal specificity as the independent factor, and Solution
error scores as the dependent factor. This revealed a highly
significant main effect, F(1, 63) = 17.38, p < .0005.

Structure scores: A simple scoring scheme was used which
computed the proportion of input-output links correctly
identified. A correction for guessing was incorporated in the
scoring and this was based on the same procedure used by
Vollmeyer et al. (1996). The maximum value for each
structure score was 1.
Solution error scores/ Transfer error scores: The procedure
Burns and Vollmeyer used in scoring errors was adopted
here. Success in achieving the goal states was computed as
the sum of the absolute differences between each goal value
and the value produced for each of the three outputs. All
analyses of these scores are based on the mean solution
error averaged over all six trials and averaged across all
three output variables. A log transformation (base 10) was
applied to the error scores of each individual participant for
each round to minimize the skewness of the distribution of
scores. Transfer error scores were calculated in the exact
same way as the Solution error scores. In each case a lower
score indicates better performance.

Results
Structure Scores: Table 1 indicates that structure scores
increased across all groups after the second round of 6 trials
in the exploration phase. Additionally, the mean structure
scores of both non-specific goal groups are higher than
those of the specific goal groups, suggesting that the nonspecific goal groups achieved better performance.
A 2x2x2 ANOVA was carried out with round (Structure
Score 1, Structure Score 2) as the within subject factor, and
goal type (non-specific, specific) and learning type (action,
observation) as between subject factors. Confirming the
trends indicated in Table 1, the analysis revealed significant
main effects of round, F(1, 60) = 14.04, p < .0005, and of
goal type F(1, 60) = 11.73, p < .001. Thus, the present
experiment successfully replicated the findings originally

Table 1: Overall Group Mean Structure Scores, Solution
Error and Transfer Error Scores
Condition
Non-specific
Action
Specific
Action
Non-specific
Observe
Specific
Observe

Structure
Score 1

Structure
Score 2

Solution
Error

Transfer
Error

0.33

0.61

2.75

2.82

0.21

0.33

2.93

3.04

0.38

0.48

2.77

2.85

0.17

0.26

2.92

3.06

Discussion

1693

The evidence from this study can be summarized as follows:
first, we successfully replicated Burn and Vollmeyer’s
findings which showed that goal specificity affects the
accuracy of performance in a dynamic problem solving
environment. Second, we demonstrated that the effects of
goal specificity extend to a problem solving environment in
which learning is performed under observational conditions.
Third, both specific goal groups showed no advantage over

the non-specific goal groups in the solution phase, despite
the fact that they had received 12 trials of prior training in
the exploration phase. Rather, the non-specific goal groups
outperformed the specific goal groups in both test phases.
The findings raise two questions: Why were there no
differences between action and observation learning
conditions? And, why was prior training relatively
ineffective for specific goal groups?
Action and observation learning have been contrasted in
simple SRT (serial reaction time) tasks (e.g., Bird & Heyes,
in press; Kelly & Burton, 2001; Kelly, Burton, Riedel, &
Lynch, 2003); in causal learning (e.g., Lagnado & Sloman,
2004); and problem solving (e.g., Berry, 1991; Lee, 1995).
Although the evidence from these studies is mixed, the lack
of difference between action and observation is still held as
a controversial view. It is important to elaborate at this stage
that although the action vs. observation contrast is often
translated into a comparison between passive and active
learning, we would like to propose that this translation is not
relevant in the present experiment.
There are properties of the task that indicate why action
and observation learning conditions did not differentially
affect error scores in the later stages of the experiment.
Observers were required to engage with the task throughout
the exploration phase and this involved processes that were
more similar than different to the action based learning
condition. That is, they were motivated to examine the
information on screen, particularly because during the first
phase of the experiment changes to input values on a given
trial were not accompanied by the subsequent output values
until participants pressed a button to reveal them. The
separation of input values from output values encouraged
participants to actively process input information before
output information on each trial during the exploration
phase . For example, in the specific goal group participants
were required to examine the outputs to check the extent to
which they differed from the actual values that the system
had to maintain on each trial. This process involved some
mental calculation in order to track the differences between
the values set and those achieved. The non-specific goal
observers were required to learn the environment because
they would later have to control it. As observers they would
have had to identify which aspects of the task to focus on,
i.e. which inputs were changed, was there a pattern to the
change in inputs, what values were entered for each input
and was there a pattern to this, which outputs changes, what
were the changes to the actual output values. Thus, both
types of observers were required to do more than passively
watch the changes in input and output values.
It could be argued that observers may have responded
poorly, but because the input values they received on each
trial were from a high performing participant, this increased
their performance. The rationale for yoking participants to
the values of a member of the specific goal action group has
been presented earlier in this article. Although we cannot
eliminate the possibility that participants in the observe
group would have performed poorly otherwise, the evidence
from this study suggests that there was no difference
between action and observation groups according to
structure tests and error scores. Moreover, the main effect of

goal specificity still clearly emerged in the observer group
even though the actual input values were from a participant
from the specific action group, and despite both observers
being presented exactly the same trial information. This is
particularly noteworthy since it suggests that there is
nothing particular to the actual input and output values
themselves, or the number of input values changed on each
trial that influences the goal specificity effect, only the
instructions.
The second issue raised in this study was that both specific
groups behaved in the same way, in that their performance
was poorer than the non-specific group. This was most
evident in the solution phase in which the specific group
showed no advantage in performance in the solution phase
compared to the non-specific group despite receiving 12
trials of prior learning in the exploration. In contrast, Burns
and Vollmeyer found that there was no difference in error
scores in the solution between specific and non-specific goal
groups. Burn and Vollmeyer (Experiment 1) report that the
mean solution error scores for the non-specific group was
2.64 (sd. 1.40) and for the specific group was 2.40 (sd.
2.10). In the present study the mean solution error scores for
action and observers were higher than the mean values
reported by Burns and Vollmeyer. Although nothing can be
directly inferred from this comparison, it does give some
indication that, overall, participants in Burns and
Vollmeyer’s study performed more accurately than in the
present study. Of course further work would be needed to
examine if the differences in performance between studies
were the result of changes in difficulty or other factors.
One difference between Burns and Vollmeyer’s study and
the present experiment that can account for this difference is
that of task difficulty. In order to make the task harder, in
the present study participants were not given the starting
values of the outputs at the beginning of each phase. Thus
participants were forced to pay close attention to the change
in output values from the first trial, than if they were given
them to begin with. Furthermore, because they were not
reminded of the starting values it would have been harder to
track the changes in outputs across the trials unless they
accurately recalled the change in input as well as output
values. The non-specific group may have increased their
knowledge of both instances and rules because they were
required to work harder to recall and track changes in the
system. In contrast the specific group was impaired by the
added cognitive load. Although they were primarily
engaged in instance learning, they were given a specific
goal which concerned the output values, the effort required
in recalling and tracking changes to these values detracted
even more from any resources that otherwise would have
been directed at learning the relationship between the inputs
and outputs.

Conclusions

1694

The main objective of this study was to replicate and extend
the findings reported by Burns and Vollmeyer. The present
study was successful in providing further evidence that the
specificity of the goal has a marked affect on the accuracy

of performance in a dynamic problem solving task. The
innovation in this study was to investigate whether the
effects would be found in the same problem solving task
when the learning phase was observation based. We
demonstrated that performance in action and observation
conditions did not differ and that goal specificity was the
most reliable factor in determining differences in accuracy
of problem solving.

Acknowledgments
Preparation for this article was supported by Economic and
Social Research Council ESRC grant RES-000-27-0119.
The support of the Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC) is gratefully acknowledged. The work was also part
of the programme of the ESRC Research Centre For
Economic Learning and Human Evolution.

References
Bekkering, H., Wohlschlager, A., & Gattis, M. (2000).
Imitation of gestures in children is goal-directed.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53, 153164.
Berry, D. (1991). The role of action in implicit learning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 43, 881906.
Bird, G., Brindley, R., & Heyes, C. (in preparation). The
effects of goal specificity on observational sequence
learning.
Bird, G., & Heyes, C. (in press) Effector-dependent learning
by observation of a finger movement sequence. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Bird, G., Osman, M., Saggerson, A., & Heyes, C. (in press).
Implicit learning by observation of animate, but not
inanimate, sequential stimuli.
Burns, B. D., & Vollmeyer, R. (2002). Goal specificity
effects on hypothesis testing in problem solving.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 241261.

Geddes, B. W., & Stevenson, R.J. (1997). Explicit learning
of a dynamic system with a non-salient pattern. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A, 742-765.
Hammond, K. R. (1996). Human judgment and social
policy. New York: Oxford Press. Kelly, S., & Burton, A.
M. (2001). Learning complex sequences: No role for
observation. Psychological Research, 65, 15-23.
Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., & Thagard, P.
R. (1989). Induction: processes of inference, learning and
discovery. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kelly, S., & Burton, A. (2001). Learning complex
sequences: No role for observation? Psychological
Research, 65, 15-23.
Kelly, S., Burton, A., Riedel, B., & Lynch, E. (2003)
Sequence learning by action and observation: Evidence for
separate mechanisms. British Journal of Psychology, 94,
355-372.
Lagnado, D., & Sloman, S. (2004). The advantage of timely
intervention. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 30, 856-876.
Lee, Y. (1995). Effects of learning contexts on implicit and
explicit learning. Memory and Cognition, 23, 723-734.
Melzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1977). Imitation of facial
and manual gestures by human neonates. Science, 198, 7578.
Miller, C.S., Lehman, J. F., & Koedinger, K. R. (1999).
Goals and learning in microworlds. Cognitive Science, 23,
305-336.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Roth, D., & Leslie, A. M. (1998). Solving belief problems:
Towards a task analysis. Cognition, 66, 1-31.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving:
Effects of learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A. C., & Ratner, H. H. (1993).
Cultural learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495511.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B. D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). The
impact of goal specificity and systematicity of strategies
on the acquisition of problem structure. Cognitive Science,
20, 75-100.

1695

