UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predicting Experimental Similarity Ratings and Recognition Rates for Individual Natural
Stimuli with the NIM Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/136797q1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Lalumera, Elisabetta

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predicting Experimental Similarity Ratings and Recognition Rates for Individual
Natural Stimuli with the N IM Model
Joyca P.W. Lacroix (j.lacroix@cs.unimaas.nl)
Eric O. Postma (postma@cs.unimaas.nl)
Department of Computer Science, IKAT, Maastricht University; Minderbroedersberg 6a, Maastricht, The Netherlands

Jaap M.J. Murre (jaap@murre.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam; Roeterstraat 15, 1018 WB Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
In earlier work, we proposed a recognition memory model
that operates directly on digitized natural images. The model
is called the Natural Input Memory (N IM) model. When
presented with a natural image, the N IM model employs a
biologically-informed perceptual pre-processing method that
translates the image into a similarity-space representation. In
this paper, the N IM model is validated on individual natural
stimuli (i.e., images of faces) in two tasks: (1) a similarityrating task and (2) a recognition task. The results obtained
with the N IM model are compared with the results of corresponding behavioral experiments. The similarity structure of
the face images that is reflected in the similarity space forms
the basis for the comparison. The results reveal that the N IM
model’s similarity ratings and recognition rates for individual
images correlate well with those obtained in the behavioral experiments. We conclude that the N IM model successfully simulates similarity ratings and recognition performance for individual natural stimuli.
Keywords: Memory modeling, perception, representation,
recognition, computer science, computer simulation.

that the N IM model can predict similarity ratings and recognition rates for individual natural stimuli. The model is tested
on a similarity-rating task and a face-recognition task using
the same facial stimuli that were used in behavioral experiments (Busey, unpublished results; Busey, 1998; Busey &
Tunnicliff, 1999).
The outline of the remainder of this paper is as follows. In the
following section, the N IM model is introduced and discussed
briefly. Then, we will test the N IM model on the similarityjudgment task and the face-recognition task, discuss the results, and provide a conclusion.

The N IM model
The N IM model encompasses the following two stages.
1. A perceptual pre-processing stage that translates a natural
image into feature vectors.
2. A memory stage comprising two processes:
(a) a storage process that stores feature vectors in a straightforward manner;
(b) a recognition process that compares feature vectors of
the image to be recognized with previously stored feature vectors.

Introduction
Many psychological modelers have developed so-called ‘similarity spaces’ that represent similar items in close proximity to each other (e.g., Shepard, 1957; Nosofsky, 1986;
Shepard, 1986; Valentine, 1991; Busey, 1998; Edelman,
1998; Steyvers, Shiffrin, & Nelson, 2004). So far, existing
memory models have usually been tested with three types
of spaces: (1) artificially generated similarity spaces (e.g.,
Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997), (2) similarity spaces derived from
co-occurrence of objects in the environment (e.g., word cooccurrence in texts; Landauer & Dumais, 1997), and (3) similarity spaces derived from human similarity judgments (e.g.,
Busey & Tunnicliff, 1999). In the latter, the resulting similarity spaces reflect similarities obtained from human judgments. However, because representations are not derived directly from the stimuli, these models fall short in constructing
a representation that is grounded in the natural world.
We proposed the Natural Input Memory (N IM) model
(Lacroix, Murre, Postma, & Van den Herik, 2004), which
employs a biologically-informed perceptual pre-processing
method to derive representations directly from natural visual
stimuli. Therefore, unlike any of the existing models, the N IM
model is able to make predictions for responses to individual
natural stimuli. In our earlier work, we showed that the N IM
model produces general effects found in experimental recognition memory studies (Lacroix et al., 2004; Lacroix, Murre,
Postma, & Van den Herik, in prep). In this paper, we show

Below we will discuss both stages briefly (see Lacroix et al.,
2004, for a more detailed exposition of the N IM model).

The perceptual pre-processing stage
The perceptual pre-processing stage in the N IM model is
based on the processing of information in the human visual
system. Motivated by eye fixations in human vision, the preprocessing stage takes local samples at selected locations in
a natural image. Since humans tend to place fixations at or
near contours in a visual scene, the N IM model ’fixates’ randomly along the contours in an image (e.g., Norman, Phillips,
& Ross, 2001). The features extracted at fixation locations in
the face image consist of the responses of different derivatives
of Gaussian filters. Such multi-scale wavelet decomposition
models are biologically plausible (see, e.g., Bartlett, Littleworth, Braathen, Sejnowski, & Movellan, 2003; Kahana &
Sekuler, 2002; Palmeri & Gauthier, 2004). By applying a set
of filters at multiple scales and orientations, a representation
of the image area centered at the fixation location is obtained
(Freeman & Adelson, 1991). A pre-processed image is then
represented by a number of feature vectors, each corresponding to a fixation. After feature-vector extraction, we apply a

1225

principal component analysis to the extracted feature vectors
in order to reduce their dimensionality. We selected the first
50 principal components, since it has been shown that approximately 50 components are sufficient to accurately represent
faces (e.g., Hancock, Burton, & Bruce, 1996).

ratings for each possible pair. The similarity ratings for individual subjects were translated into z-scores and within each
experiments these scores were averaged over subjects.

Similarity-rating simulations with the N IM model

The memory stage
Whereas in the N IM model, the pre-processing stage is biologically informed, the memory stage is kept as simple as
possible. Instead of attempting to model the cortical or subcortical memory structures in a biologically plausible way, we
simply assume that feature vectors are retained (i.e., ‘stored’)
in a similarity space (c.f., Nosofsky, 1986). The memory
stage comprises two processes: the storage process and the
recognition process. The storage process stores the preprocessed natural image in memory. The recognition process determines the familiarity of the image to be recognized
by comparing feature vectors of the image with previously
stored feature vectors. The familiarity of an image is equal to
the average familiarity of its feature vectors. The familiarity
of a feature vector is determined by the number of previouslystored feature vectors that fall within a hypersphere with radius r, centered around the feature vector (i.e, the number
of nearest neighbors). Formally, the familiarity of image A,
t
∑A f

Ai
which we will denote as fA , is defined as: fA = i=1
, with
tA
fAi the familiarity of the ith feature vector of image A, and
tA the total number of feature vectors extracted from image
A. To obtain false-alarm and hit rates, we compare our familiarity values, f , to a decision criterion θ. When a familiarity
value, f , of an image to be recognized exceeds the criterion,
the image is recognized, otherwise, the image is not recognized.

The similarity-rating task
To test the psychological plausibility of the similarity-space
representations that the N IM model derives from natural
stimuli a comparison to human similarity ratings is needed.
Therefore, we compared model and human similarity ratings
on identical sets of natural stimuli. In this section, we review two behavioral similarity-rating experiments, describe
the similarity-rating stimulations with the N IM model, and
provide a brief discussion of the results.

Behavioral similarity-rating experiments
Human similarity-ratings were obtained in two studies:
Busey (unpublished results1 ) and Busey (1998). In both experiments, subjects were repeatedly presented with two faces
and were instructed to rate the similarity by assigning a number ranging from 1 (most similar) to 9 (least similar). This
resulted in human similarity ratings for all possible pairs of
faces. In the experiment of Busey (unpublished results), 238
subjects were tested on pairs of faces from a set of 60 faces
(8 of the faces contained in the set were morphs, created by
averaging 2 of the 52 other faces). Across subjects, this resulted in a total of about 25 ratings for each possible pair. In
Busey (1998), 343 subjects were tested on pairs of faces from
a set of 104 faces (16 of which were morphs, created from
averaging two of the 88 other faces), resulting in at least six
1 also

referred to in Steyvers and Busey (2000)

The N IM model bases a similarity rating for two faces
on the similarity-space representations that result from preprocessing those faces. Since this task involves no memory
processes, the memory stage is not employed in these simulations. We presented the N IM model with all possible face
pairs from the sets of face images used in the experiments
of Busey (unpublished results; 1998). For each face of a pair
(A, B), 100 feature vectors were extracted. Then, for each feature vector of face A, the number of feature vectors of face B
residing within a hypersphere with radius r centered around
the feature vector (i.e., the nearest neighbors), were counted.
The average number of nearest neighbors for all feature vectors of face A determined the similarity value, s, of face A
and B. Since, subjects in the experimental study made a similarity rating from 1 (most similar) to 9 (least similar), we
transformed each similarity value s into a similarity rating,
SR, from 1 to 9. We applied the following linear transform:

 [(9 − s−(u−0.01)
)] if 0 < s < 8 ∗ b + u
b
SR =
9
if s = 0

1
otherwise
where [x] represents the entier function that returns the largest
integer value contained in x, r is the radius parameter, and b
and u are constants. First, we varied the radius r to obtain the
r value for which correlations between human similarity ratings and similarity values produced by the N IM model were
optimal. With this optimal value r held constant, u and b were
varied to find the u and b values for which human similarity
ratings and model similarity ratings SR correlated best. Similarity values, s, and similarity ratings, SR, were averaged over
1000 simulations.

Similarity-rating simulation results
We varied the value of the radius r from 2.0 to 6.0. For both
experiments (Busey, unpublished results; 1998), we found
that simulations with r = 5.0 resulted in the highest correlations between model similarity values (s) and experimentally
obtained similarity ratings. The precise value of r was not
critical to the results. Then, for the similarity values s produced with r = 5.0, we varied the u and b values of the linear transform to find those that produced the best correlations
between human and model similarity ratings SR. For both
experiments, we found that for u = 0.02 and b = 0.02, the
highest correlations were obtained, which were R = 0.65 and
R = 0.70 for the two experiments, respectively. Fig. 1 shows
the similarity ratings SR produced by the N IM model (r = 5.0,
u = 0.02, and b = 0.02) as a function of the similarity ratings
that were obtained experimentally by Busey (1998). A similar distribution of similarity ratings was found when comparing the N IM model’s similarity ratings to those obtained in
the experiment by Busey (unpublished results).

Discussion of the similarity-rating results
An analysis of the similarity ratings obtained in the experiment by Busey (unpublished results) showed that there was

1226

nition rates produced by the N IM model with those that were
obtained in two behavioral experiments. The first behavioral recognition experiment is the face-recognition experiment of Busey (unpublished results), employing 60 faces and
238 subjects. The second is the face-recognition experiment
of Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), employing 104 faces and 180
subjects. The face images used in these experiments are identical to those used in the similarity-rating experiments. Again,
our simulations used the same face images as were used in the
behavioral experiments.
Below, we describe the behavioral face-recognition experiments, present the simulation results obtained with the N IM
model, and provide a brief discussion.
Figure 1: The N IM model’s similarity ratings (z-scores; r =
5.0, u = 0.02, and b = 0.02) as a function of the experimental similarity ratings (z-scores+10) obtained by Busey (1998),
R = 0.70.
considerable variation between different subject’s similarity
ratings. When similarity ratings of the subjects were divided
into 5 groups, correlations between the different group averages ranged from 0.72 to 0.75. This demonstrates the limited
consistency of the similarity judgments across subjects. It is,
therefore, highly unlikely that correlations between similarity
ratings produced by our model and experimental similarity
ratings will exceed the value of 0.75. Given this consideration, the similarity-space representations of the N IM model
can be said to correlate reasonably well with the experimentally obtained similarity ratings.
Although very high correlations are unlikely, small increases
might be achieved by testing different transforms of the similarity values into the similarity ratings. It is very well possible
that human similarity-rating category boundaries are not linear.
Several studies have compared representation spaces resulting from various image pre-processing schemes to the outcomes of psychological experiments. For instance, Calder,
Burton, Miller, Young, and Akamatsu (2001) and Dailey,
Cottrell, Padgett, and Adolphs (2002) did this for coding facial expressions and Hancock, Bruce, and Burton (1998), and
Kalocsai, Zhao, and Biederman (1998) did this for face identity. Hancock et al. (1998) used an approach similar to ours,
by comparing human similarity judgments with similarityspace representations. They found small correlations of about
0.20 and argued it to be caused by the noisiness of the human data. Kalocsai et al. (1998) used a same-different judgment task to compare the performances of a Gabor-filter preprocessing scheme and a global template-matching classifier
with human data. In the experiment subjects had to judge
whether two sequentially presented images were of the same
individual. They found correlations up to 0.91. However,
these were based on a small sample of 16 trials. Moreover,
the similarity judgments were obtained using a much simpler
binary classification task.

The recognition task
In order to validate the recognition predictions of the N IM
model for individual natural stimuli, we compared the recog-

1227

Behavioral recognition experiments
In the experiments, Busey (unpublished results) and Busey
and Tunnicliff (1999) determined the recognition rates (i.e.,
hit rates and false-alarm rates) for different types of faces.
The sets of 60 and 104 faces employed in the experiments
contained three types of faces: (1) normal faces, (2) parent
faces, and (3) morph faces. Each morph face was the average
of two parent faces.
In the face-recognition experiment of Busey (unpublished results), the set of 60 faces was subdivided into two sets of 30
faces such that each set contained 18 normal faces, 8 parent
faces and 4 morph faces. When a morph was in one set, its
parents were in the other. Half of the subjects were presented
with a study list with the faces from set 1 and tested for oldnew recognition for the faces from both set 1 (i.e., targets)
and set 2 (i.e., lures). For the other half of the subjects this
was reversed. This allowed hit and false-alarm rates to be obtained for each of the 60 faces.
In the face-recognition experiment of Busey and Tunnicliff
(1999), subjects were presented with a study list with 36 normal faces and 32 parent faces. Then, old-new recognition was
tested for these 36 normal faces (i.e., normal targets) and 32
parent faces (i.e., parent targets) along with 20 new normal
faces (i.e., normal lures) and 16 new morph faces (i.e., morph
lures). The morph lures were the average of two parent targets
that were either dissimilar or similar to each other. Dissimilar
and similar morph lures resulted from dissimilar and similar
morph parents, respectively.

Recognition simulations with the N IM model
In half of the simulations of Busey’s (unpublished results)
face-recognition experiment, the N IM model was presented
with the 18 normal faces, 8 parent faces, and 4 morph faces
from set 1 and in the other half with those from set 2. Then
the model was tested for old-new recognition of the presented
faces (i.e., targets) along with the 18 normal faces, 8 parent
faces, and 4 morph faces from the other set (i.e., lures).
In the simulations of the face-recognition experiment of
Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), the model was presented with
the 36 normal faces, and 32 parent faces from the study list
of the behavioral study. Then recognition was tested for these
faces along with the 20 new normal faces (i.e., normal lures)
and the 16 new morph faces (i.e., morph lures) from the test
list of the behavioral experiment.
In the behavioral experiments, the images were presented for
1500 ms, followed by a two-second delay. In our simulations, the number of fixations selected and stored for each

face was set to 10 which corresponds to approximately 2 seconds of viewing time. For recognition, the N IM model calculated the familiarity of each target and lure on the basis
of 100 fixations (as described previously). Comparison of
the familiarity values to the decision criterion, θ, determined
the recognition rates, i.e., the hit-rates for the targets and the
false-alarm rates for the lures. In these simulations the radius
r and the decision criterion θ were varied to determine the
root mean square errors (RMSE) and the correlation values
between recognition rates produced by the N IM model and
experimentally obtained recognition rates. The radius r and
the decision criterion θ were our only free parameters.

Recognition simulation results
For the simulations of the face-recognition experiment of
Busey (unpublished results) in which set 1 were the targets
and set 2 were the lures as well as for the simulations in
which this was reversed, the smallest RMSE between experimentally obtained recognition rates and those produced by
the N IM model resulted with a radius r = 3.5 and a recognition decision criterion θ = 0.01. The correlations with these
parameter settings, were R = 0.82 for the experiment in which
set 1 were the targets and set 2 were the lures and R = 0.68 for
the experiment for which this was reversed. Fig. 2 shows the
model recognition rates with these parameter settings ((a) for
simulations in which set 1 were the targets and set 2 were
the lures, (b) for simulations in which set 2 were the targets and set 1 were the lures) as a function of experimentally
obtained recognition rates. For the simulations of the facerecognition experiment of Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), the
smallest RMSE between experimentally obtained recognition
rates and those produced by the N IM model resulted with a
radius r = 3.5 and a recognition decision criterion θ = 0.02.
The correlation obtained with these parameter settings was
R = 0.60. Fig. 3 shows the recognition rates produced by the
N IM model with these parameter settings as a function of the
experimentally obtained recognition rates.

(a)

(b)

Discussion of the recognition results

Figure 2: The N IM model’s face-recognition rates (r = 3.5,
θ = 0.01) as a function of the experimental recognition rates
obtained by Busey (unpublished results). (a) set 1: targets, set
2: lures, R = 0.82, and RMSE = 0.156 and (b) set 2: targets,
set 1: lures, R = 0.68 and RMSE = 0.167.

Recognition rates produced by the N IM model agree quite
well with experimentally obtained recognition rates. Across
the two behavioral face-recognition experiments, three main
effects were found in the data. These will be discussed and
compared to the recognition results of the N IM model. Then,
an important difference between the recognition rates produced by the N IM model and those obtained experimentally
for dark-skin faces will be discussed. Finally, we will make a
brief remark about the radius parameter r that was used in the
simulations.
The first effect found in the experimental data is that morph
lures are falsely recognized more often than normal lures.
This effect was successfully produced by the N IM model for
simulations of both the experiments of Busey (unpublished
results) and Busey and Tunnicliff (1999).
The second effect is that in the experiment of Busey and
Tunnicliff (1999), which employed similar and dissimilar
morph lures, false-alarm rates for the similar morph lures
were higher than those for the dissimilar morph lures. This
effect was also produced successfully by the N IM model simulations of the experiment of Busey and Tunnicliff (1999).

The third effect concerns the false-alarm rates for lures compared to the hit rates for their parents. In the behavioral experiments the false-alarm rate for the morph lures approached
the hit rates for their parents. In the experiment of Busey
and Tunnicliff (1999) the false-alarm rates even marginally
exceeded the hit rates for the similar lures (and not for the
dissimilar lures). However, as can be seen in Figs. 2 and
3 the N IM model produced clearly smaller false-alarm rates
for the morph lures compared to the hit rates for their parents. By changing the parameters of the N IM model, a better agreement with experimental findings could be obtained.
Fig. 4 shows the results with parameter settings r = 3.9 and
θ = 0.02 for simulations of Busey’s (unpublished results) experiment in which set 1 were the targets and set 2 were the
lures and Fig. 6 shows the results for simulations of Busey
and Tunnicliff (1999)’s experiment with parameter settings
r = 3.8 and θ = 0.03. Compared to the data in Figs. 2(a) and
3, the false-alarm rates for the morph lures are increased relative to the hit rates for their parents. This is at the expense,

1228

specific lures, indicated by an ellipse in Fig. 3, considerable
deviations from the experimental data are observed. The N IM
model produces a recognition rate around 0, while humans
tend to falsely recognize these faces very often. The corresponding faces are shown in Figs. 5(a), 5(c), 5(c), and 5(d). A
striking fact is that these are faces of people with a very dark
skin color. Moreover, no other lures were faces with such a
dark skin color. Experimental studies have shown that much
experience with faces of a given race, improves recognition
of these faces relative to others (for an overview see, Meissner & Brigham, 2001). As a result, faces of other races look
more similar than faces from one’s own race. This effect is
also known as the other-race effect. In the experiment, when
a subject has seen a face of a certain racial type other than
its own on the study list, it will have a hard time discriminating it from a different face of that same racial type presented
on the test list. Presumably the larger part of the subjects
participating in the experimental face-recognition task were
Caucasians that have abundant experience with Caucasian
faces compared to non-Caucasian faces. Therefore, they will
exhibit a worse recognition performance for non-Caucasian
faces. In contrast, the N IM model is presented with the 104
faces only, and bases the PCA on the characteristics of these
faces of which roughly a quarter were non-Caucasian. This
is a possible explanation for the low false-alarm rate of the
N IM model on the four black-skin lures and the relatively
high false-alarm rate of human subjects on these same faces.

Figure 3: The N IM model’s face-recognition rates (r = 3.5
and θ = 0.02) as a function of the experimental recognition
rates obtained by Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), R = 0.60 and
RMSE = 0.180. For the group of lures indicated by an ellipse,
a large difference in experimental and model recognition rates
is observed.
however, of lower overall correlations and larger RMSE’s between experimental and model recognition rates.
Two points should be noted about the third effect. First,
the experimental data showed substantially larger variations
in rates obtained for similar as well as dissimilar target parents than for other types of faces. Therefore, deviations between the model and experimental results concerning the difference in recognition of parents and their morphs can partly
be explained by the noisiness of the experimental recognition
rates for parents. Second, while in the experimental data of
Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), the false-alarm rate for the similar morph lures exceeded the hit rate of their parents (and
the false-alarm rate for the dissimilar lures did not), this effect was small and not significant (α = 0.05). For the four

Figure 4: The N IM model’s face-recognition rates (r = 3.9,
θ = 0.02) as a function of the experimental recognition
rates obtained by Busey (unpublished results), R = 0.73, and
RMSE = 0.184.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5: The four faces corresponding to the four dots indicated by an ellipse in Fig.3

Figure 6: The N IM model’s face-recognition rates (r = 3.8
and θ = 0.03) as a function of the experimental recognition
rates obtained by Busey and Tunnicliff (1999), R = 0.52 and
RMSE = 0.210.

1229

As a final remark we would like to note that for the
similarity-rating and the recognition tasks, a different setting
of the radius parameter r resulted in the best correlations between model and human data. Although we have not explicated the meaning of the radius parameter r, we interpret it as
the attentional weighing of all dimensions that depends on the
task (cf., the Generalized Context Model (G CM); e.g., Nosofsky, 1986). In our future work, we intend to explore the integration of our model with Nosofsky’s G CM.

Conclusion
Previous studies showed that the N IM model produces general effects found in experimental recognition-memory studies. In this paper, the N IM model is validated on individual
natural stimuli. The model is tested on a similarity-rating task
and a face-recognition task using the same face images as
were used in experimental studies. From our results we conclude that the N IM model can simulate similarity judgments
and recognition performance for individual natural stimuli
quite reliably.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Dr Busey for providing us with his experimental data. The research project is supported in the framework of the NWO Cognition Program with financial aid from
the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
It is part of the larger project: ’Events in memory and environment: modeling and experimentation in humans and robots’
(project number: 051.02.2002).

References
Bartlett, M. S., Littleworth, G., Braathen, B., Sejnowski, T. J.,
& Movellan, J. R. (2003). A prototype for automatic
recognition of spontaneous facial actions. In S. Becker &
K. Obermayer (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 15). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Busey, T. (1998). Physical and psychological representations
of faces: Evidence from morphing. Psychological Science,
9, 476-482.
Busey, T. A., & Tunnicliff, J. (1999). Accounts of blending,
typicality and distinctiveness in face recognition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 25, 1210-1235.
Calder, A. J., Burton, A. M., Miller, P., Young, A. W., &
Akamatsu, S. (2001). A principal component analysis of
facial expressions. Vision Research, 41, 1179-1208.
Dailey, M. N., Cottrell, G. W., Padgett, C., & Adolphs, R.
(2002). A neural network that categorizes facial expressions. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 1158-1173.
Edelman, S. (1998). Representation is representation of similarities. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 449-498.
Freeman, W. T., & Adelson, E. H. (1991). The design and
use of steerable filters. I EEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 13, 891-906.
Hancock, P. J. B., Bruce, V., & Burton, A. M. (1998). A
comparison of two computer-based face identification systems with human perceptions of faces. Vision Research, 38,
2277-2288.

1230

Hancock, P. J. B., Burton, A. M., & Bruce, V. (1996). Face
processing: human perception and principal components
analysis. Memory and Cognition, 24, 26-40.
Kahana, M. J., & Sekuler, R. (2002). Human sensitivity to
face statistics computed on v1 similarity. Journal of Vision,
4(8), 2177-2192.
Kalocsai, P., Zhao, W., & Biederman, I. (1998). Face similarity space as perceived by humans and artificial systems. In Proceedings, Third International Conference on
Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (pp. 177-180).
Nara Japan.
Lacroix, J. P. W., Murre, J. M. J., Postma, E. O., & Van den
Herik, H. J. (2004). The natural input memory model. In
Proceedings of the XXVI Annual meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 773-778).
Lacroix, J. P. W., Murre, J. M. J., Postma, E. O., & Van den
Herik, H. J. (in prep). Modeling recognition memory using
the similarity structure of natural input. (Preprint available
at www.cs.unimaas.nl/lacroix/Nim.pdf)
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to platos
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001). Thirty years of
investigating the own-race bias in memory for faces: A
meta-analytic review. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law,
7, 3-35.
Norman, J. F., Phillips, F., & Ross, H. E. (2001). Information concentration along the boundary contours of naturally
shaped solid objects. Perception, 30, 1285-1294.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2004). Visual object understanding. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 291-303.
Shepard, R. N. (1957). Stimulus and response generalization:
A stochastic model relating generalization to distance in
psychological space. Psychometrika, 22, 325-345.
Shepard, R. N. (1986). Discrimination and generalization
in identification and classification: Comment on nosofsky.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 58-61.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition memory: Rem: Retrieving effectively from memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Steyvers, M., & Busey, T. (2000). Predicting similarity ratings to faces using physical descriptions. In M. Wenger
& J. Townsend (Eds.), Computational, geometric, and process perspectives on facial cognition: Contexts and challenges. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Steyvers, M., Shiffrin, R. M., & Nelson, D. L. (2004). Word
association spaces for predicting semantic similarity effects
in episodic memory. In A. Healy (Ed.), Experimental cognitive psychology and its applications. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Valentine, T. (1991). Representation and process in face
recognition. In R. Watt (Ed.), Vision and visual dysfunction, Vol. 14: Pattern recognition by man and machine.
London, UK: MacMillan Press.

