UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preferred Mental Models in Spatial Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5h49106t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Jahn, Georg
Johnson-Laird, P.N.
Knauff, Markus

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preferred Mental Models in Spatial Reasoning
Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, Friedrichstrasse 50
D-79098 Freiburg, Germany

Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@cognition.iig.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, Friedrichstrasse 50
D-79098 Freiburg, Germany

P. N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

Abstract
The assessment of whether a statement is consistent with what
has gone before is ubiquitous in discourse comprehension.
One theory of the process is that individuals search for a
mental model of a situation in which all the statements in the
discourse are true. In the case of spatial descriptions,
individuals should prefer to construct models that retain the
information in the description. Hence, they should use
strategies that retain information in an efficient way. If the
descriptions are consistent with multiple models then they are
likely to run into difficulties. We report two experiments in
which the participants judged the consistency of spatial
descriptions. The participants made more errors when later
assertions in the description conflicted with the preferred
models of earlier assertions. The results shed light on the
sequential integration of relational assertions, and they show
that participants exploit implicit constraints for strategical
chunking.

Reasoning with Relations
When we think about which alternative to choose, we often
integrate relational information. For example, before buying
a camera you might read several published tests that each
ranks cameras. One test might tell you that camera A is
better than camera B, another that camera B is better than
camera C. You can easily infer that camera A is also better
than camera C. The predominant strategy to draw such
transitive inferences is to integrate relations in a mental
representation – an idea that goes back to William James
and was revived by De Soto, London, and Handel (1965)
and Huttenlocher (1968). Relational assertions are
interpreted by constructing a spatial representation (a mental
model) that serves as a structural analog of the situation
under description and that supports inferences (JohnsonLaird, 1983). Neuroimaging studies (e.g., Knauff,
Fangmeier, Ruff, & Johnson-Laird, 2003) have confirmed
the involvement of spatial representations in relational
reasoning. Verbal processes in reasoning with relational
assertions (cf. Clark, 1969) may be a precursor to the
construction of models. But, the use of mental logic (Rips,
1994) has received less empirical support.

The difficulty of relational reasoning problems varies
with the number of possible interpretations. The camera
tests in the example yield a determinate ordering of the
cameras: A B C. However, a third test might tell you that
camera D is better than camera B and consequently, camera
A or camera D might be the best. There are two possible
rank orders, ADBC and DABC, but the tests are not
inconsistent. Hence, the information is indeterminate.
With an indeterminate set of assertions, multiple
possibilities have to be considered to validate a general
conclusion. Multiple model problems are reliably harder
than single model problems in relational reasoning. The
general fact that individuals have difficulty in keeping track
of multiple possibilities holds across a range of deductive
reasoning tasks (Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005).
The multiple models of an indeterminate set of assertions
might be narrowed down by further information. Imagine
that in order to arrive at a decision between camera A and
camera D, you head for a shop. You ask a sales assistant and
learn that they do not sell camera A, but that camera C is
better than camera D in any case. This is interesting,
because this assertion is inconsistent with what you have
read about the tests. According to the model theory,
individuals notice such inconsistencies because they
sequentially integrate assertions in a mental model,
searching for a possibility in which all the asserted relations
are true (Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, & Legrenzi,
2000).
Multiple possibilities are on the same footing logically,
but they might not be equally obvious. In the introductory
example, the information in the first two tests that yielded
the ordering: A B C, can be summarized as “Camera B is
between camera A and camera C,” where it is clear from the
context that camera A is the best. However, in isolation such
an assertion is indeterminate. For example, if a grocer gives
his apprentice three crates and tells him to put the apples
between the oranges and the grapes, he probably does not
care whether the oranges end up to the left or to the right of
the apples. If it matters, then a further assertion or the
context itself may eliminate one possibility. Otherwise,

1036

“between” refers to a one-dimensional layout, and there are
two possibilities:

Method

oranges apples grapes
or
grapes apples oranges

Participants. Twenty-four students of the University of
Tübingen served as paid participants. The mean age of the
19 women and 5 men was 23.1 (SD = 4.1).
Materials, Procedure, and Design. The reasoning
problems consisted of three assertions that referred to
horizontal one-dimensional layouts of four objects.
Examples of experimental problems are shown in Table 1.
In all problems, the first or second assertion referred to a
“between” relation among three entities. The terms A, B, C,
and D were replaced by the names of common objects in the
experiment.

Are these two possibilities equally likely and equally
salient? In reasoning from a verbal description, individuals
are likely to preserve the order in which the terms are
written (Jahn, Johnson-Laird, & Knauff, 2005). Hence,
given the assertion, “The apples are between the oranges
and the grapes,” they should construct first the order:

Table 1: Examples of reasoning problems in Experiment 1

oranges apples grapes

Assertions

We refer to this phenomenon as the order of mention
preference. It probably reflects a culturally determined habit
to scan from left to right (e.g., Spalek & Hammad, 2005). If
individuals enter the objects in spatial models from left to
right, the result is an order of mention preference (cf.
Huttenlocher, 1968).
Such preferred interpretations of indeterminate
descriptions can affect the difficulty of reasoning (Knauff,
Rauh, & Schlieder, 1995; Rauh et al., in press). In a
judgment of consistency, for example, if the preferred
interpretation of the first assertion is consistent with
subsequent assertions, they can be integrated into the model
smoothly. But, if a later assertion is inconsistent with the
preferred model, then the alternative model of the initial
indeterminate assertion has to be checked to determine
whether the later assertion is consistent with it. The model
theory accordingly predicts that the evaluation of the
consistency of a set of assertions should be more difficult if
a mental model of earlier assertions is inconsistent with a
later assertion (Johnson-Laird et al., 2000).

Possible Layouts
Neutral

C between B and D
A left of B
C next to D

4 ABCD DCAB DACB ADCB
3 ABCD DCAB
ADCB
Reordering

C between B and D
A left of B
C next to A
C between B and D
D next to A
B next to C

4 ABCD DCAB DACB ADCB
2
DCAB DACB
Neutral
4 BCDA BCAD DACB ADCB
4 BCDA BCAD DACB ADCB
Reordering

C between B and D
D next to A
A left of B

4 BCDA BCAD DACB ADCB
2
DACB ADCB

Experiment 1 – The Difficulty of Reordering

The initial two assertions in the experimental problems
had four possible layouts (see Table 1). In problems with
neutral third assertions there was at least one layout
possible that was consistent with all three assertions and that
preserved the order of mention. In contrast, in problems
with reordering third premises, the third assertion ruled out
all layouts that preserved order of mention.
In addition to 30 experimental problems, 12 problems had
inconsistent sets of assertions. 6 further consistent problems
were included in the study but are not discussed in this
paper. The problems and instructions were in German. We
constructed 24 different sets of objects. The four objects in a
set were from a single domain and of comparable size, e.g.,
hammer, saw, drill, and pliers. We assigned these contents
four times at random to the forms of problems in Table 1,
and tested equal numbers of participants with each
assignment.
The problems were displayed in black on white on a LCD
screen. The presentation was self-paced. Each trial began
with the initial two assertions. When participants pressed
the space-key, the third assertion replaced the initial
assertions. The third assertion was presented together with
the prompt "Is there a layout for which all are true?". After

In Experiment 1, we compared problems that could be
solved by a smooth extension of the preferred model with
problems in which the preferred model ran into an
inconsistent assertion. The participants had to write down a
possible arrangement consistent with three assertions (see
Table 1). The first assertion referred to a “between” relation
among three entities in all the problems. Hence, the order of
mention preference should bias participants towards one
model. In the neutral problems, the second and the third
assertion could be integrated in the preferred models of the
first assertion. In the reordering problems, the third
assertion was inconsistent with the preferred model, and the
solution called for an alternative model of the first assertion
(see Table 1). If participants started reordering problems
with the preferred model, the third assertion forced them to
reorder the tokens. The theory therefore predicts that the
reordering problems will be more difficult than the neutral
problems.

1037

Despite the lengthy encoding of assertions, which is
shown in the reading times, the participants often failed to
construct the alternative solution that was necessary for
reordering problems. The successful attempts took two to
three times as long as for neutral problems.
As Table 1 shows, two models remained possible after the
third assertion in reordering problems. The remaining
possibilities in reordering problems were less than in neutral
problems, in which three or four models remained possible.
However, among the possible models in neutral problems,
the models that did not conform to the order of mention
were hardly ever suggested by participants. Hence, the
slightly lower number of possibilities in reordering
problems in itself does not explain their difficulty.
Reordering problems were difficult because participants had
to change their interpretations of the initial assertions.

the participants had responded “yes” or “no” with one of the
response keys, they used the initial letters of the four objects
to write down a layout on the answer sheet. The next trial
started as soon as participants hit the space-key.
Every participant evaluated each of the 48 problems once.
The trial sequence was pseudo-random to ensure an even
distribution of inconsistent problems. Each session started
with two practice trials.

Results and Discussion
The drawings for problems with neutral third assertions
indicated whether participants were biased towards
solutions that preserved the order of mention in the first
assertion. The drawings were correct if they matched one of
the layouts that were possible after the third assertion. The
percentage of correct drawings for the neutral problems was
84.5% (see Figure 1). Among these correct drawings, the
percentage of drawings that preserved the order of mention
in the between-assertion was 94.4%. Thus, the presumed
order of mention preference was confirmed. All 24
participants showed this bias (.524 Binomial test).
The mean reading time for the initial two assertions was
33.3 s for correctly solved problems (SE 2.4). These long
reading times suggest that participants made an effort to
memorize the information in the initial assertions in order to
be able to consider alternative models.
Figure 1 shows the percentages of correct drawings and
the response times for correctly solved problems. As
predicted, participants solved neutral problems more often
than reordering problems. Neutral problems were solved
more often by 21 participants, only 3 participants solved
reordering problems more often, Binomial test, p < .0001.
Reordering problems took longer to solve than neutral
problems, t(22) = 5.82, p < .001 (there were 22 degrees of
freedom, because 1 out of 24 participants did not solve any
reordering problem).

Experiment 2 – Adjacency and Linked Items
Indeterminate spatial relations such as “between” and “next
to” are not the only way to introduce multiple possible
orderings. For example, the assertions “The grapes are to the
right of the oranges. The apples are to the left of the
grapes.” are consistent with two orderings:
oranges apples grapes
or
apples oranges grapes

Figure 1: Accuracy and mean response times in
Experiment 1 (error bars indicate the standard error).

Effects of indeterminacy in relational reasoning have been
studied mainly with such assertions, which each determines
the order of two terms. With a first subset of reasoning
problems in Experiment 2, we tested whether the two
possibilities in the example are equally likely to be
envisaged by reasoners. Individuals may have a tendency to
interpret “to the right of” as if it meant “to the right of and
adjacent to” and likewise for “to the left of”. Hence, the
second assertion in the example creates an adjacency
conflict. Adjacency can be fulfilled for only one assertion in
an ordering.
In the first ordering of the example above, adjacency is
fulfilled for the second assertion “The apples are to the left
of the grapes”. The apples that are introduced in the critical
second assertion have been inserted inside. They break up
the adjacency of oranges and grapes that have been
introduced in the first assertion “The grapes are to the right
of the oranges”. In contrast, in the second ordering, the
apples have been put outside and oranges and grapes
remained adjacent. We designed problems to explore
preferred solutions of such adjacency conflicts (see
Table 2). The critical assertions in this set of problems
introduced objects either leftward or rightward. We also
manipulated whether the critical assertion was the second
one (early) or the third one (late). Late adjacency conflicts
might be resolved less often with inside insertions, because
participants may be reluctant to break up an established
ordering of three objects after two initial assertions.

1038

Experiment 2 also examined a strategy that individuals
might adopt to lower the difficulty of reordering problems.
This strategy is possible if two adjacent objects in an
ordering can be treated as though they were a single unit (cf.
Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998). Thus, orderings of four
objects would be reduced to orderings of three objects. To
examine this hypothesis, we used a second set of problems
that consisted of reordering problems similar to the ones in
Experiment 1. For linking problems, participants might
notice that they could link two objects that formed the inner
pair, and treat them as constant in all possible models (“A”
and “C” in the examples in Table 2). If so, they had to
consider only three entities when they had to reorder a
preferred model because of an inconsistent assertion. Such
linking problems should be easier than problems that
contained no such linked items.

Method

Table 2: Examples of reasoning problems in Experiment 2

Participants. Twenty-three students of the University of
Tübingen who had not taken part in the first experiment
served as paid participants. The mean age of the 20 women
and 3 men was 24.3 (SD = 5.1). One additional participant
performed far below the average accuracy (only 6% correct
overall) and was not included in the analyses.
Materials, Procedure, and Design. As in Experiment 1,
the problems consisted of three assertions that described
horizontal layouts of four objects. Examples of problems are
listed in Table 2. A first subset of problems aimed at model
preferences for sets of assertions with adjacency conflicts.
The conflict either arose early in integrating the second
assertion or late in integrating the third assertion. In half of
the problems, the critical object could be inserted at the
leftmost position (leftward problems), in the remaining
problems, the critical object could be inserted at the
rightmost position (rightward problems).
With a second set of 5 problems, reordering and linking
were studied. In all reordering problems, the preferred
layouts that fulfilled the order of mention principle were
ruled out by the third premise as in the reordering problems
in Experiment 1. In two problems, the inner two objects
(“A” and “C”) could be identified after the second assertion,
which yielded linking of these two objects possible (linking
problems). In contrast, the remaining reordering problems
were no linking problems. In addition to the experimental
problems, 5 inconsistent problems were constructed. The
same 24 sets of objects as in Experiment 1 were used to
replace A, B, C, and D.
The procedure in Experiment 2 was similar to the
procedure in Experiment 1. On each trial, the participants
indicated with “yes” or “no” whether there was a possible
layout, and finally produced a drawing of this layout on an
answer sheet. Each participant evaluated 36 problems in
total (16 problems with an adjacency conflict, 15 reordering
problems, and 5 inconsistent problems). Six pseudo-random
trial sequences and four random assignments of object sets
to problems were used.

Assertions

Possible Layouts

Adjacency Conflict
* indicates the preferred solution (see Table 3)
Early conflict, leftward insertion of B
C right of A
B left of C
2 *ABC BAC
D right of C
2 *ABCD BACD
Late conflict, rightward insertion of D
B left of C
A left of B
1
ABC
D right of A
3 ADBC *ABCD ABDC
Reordering
Linking possible (A and C)
C between B and D
A next to C
4 BACD BCAD DACB DCAB
A right of D
2
DACB DCAB

Results and Discussion

No linking
C between B and D
A next to D
A left of B

The participants’ drawings showed their preferences. The
adjacency conflicts in the first subset of problems were early
or late, and the insertion of the critical object was leftward
or rightward. Both variables affected the percentage of
insertions inside an established model. Inside insertions
sacrifice adjacency in the existing model in favor of
adjacency of the critical assertion that introduces the
conflict. Table 3 shows the percentages of inside insertions.
They were more frequent early in a sequence of assertions
when the established model consisted of two instead of
three tokens. This bias held for leftward and rightward
insertions. In addition, leftward insertions were more often
inside insertions, rightward insertions were more often
outside insertions.

4 BCAD BCDA ADCB DACB
2
ADCB DACB

Linking possible (A and C)
A between B and D
C between B and D 4 BACD BCAD DACB DCAB
D left of B
2
DACB DCAB
No linking
A between B and D
A between B and C
D left of B

4 BACD BADC DCAB CDAB
2
DCAB CDAB

1039

Table 3: Percentages of inside insertions of the critical
object to resolve adjacency conflicts in Experiment 2. With
inside insertions, adjacency is preserved for the assertion
that introduces the critical object.
Insertion
of critical object
Early leftward
Early rightward
Late leftward
Late rightward

Inside
insertions [%]
69
51
58
35

N
71
72
78
71

χ2(1)
10.27
0.06
1.85
6.21

Thus, as the reading times showed, the predicted
advantage for linking items mainly affected the encoding of
the initial assertions. But, trends in line with the expected
advantage for linked items were observed in all performance
measures.

p
.001
.807
.174
.013

General Discussion

What the data imply is first that three token models of two
initial assertions are less often broken up by inside
assertions than two token models of a single assertion.
Hence, late insertions tend to be outside. Second, rightward
insertions tend to be outside. Individuals construct models
from left to right and so it is easier to add an entity on the
right-hand end of a model than to add it on the left-hand
end, which entails a mental shift of the model rightwards.
The left to right construction of linear models is also shown
by the order of mention preference and has already been
noted in early experiments on linear reasoning (e.g.,
Huttenlocher, 1968).
Turning to reordering problems, we tested whether the
opportunity to link items improved performance. As
Figure 2 shows, mean accuracy of drawings was higher, if
linking was possible, but the difference was not reliable.
However, the reading times for the initial assertions in
correctly solved problems were lower for linking problems
than for control problems in which linking was not possible,
t(16) = 3.79, p = .002 (there were 16 degrees of freedom,
because 6 out of 23 participants did not solve any linking
and/or “no linking” problem). In mean response times, the
advantage with linking problems was also noticeable, but it
was less pronounced, t(16) = 1.55, p = .14.

The main aim of the experiments was to study the difficulty
of changing an initial model in reasoning to consistency
with spatial relations. According to the model theory,
individuals focus on one possibility and run into difficulties
if they have to switch to another possibility. We used a
preference in interpreting “between”-assertions to bias
participants towards one possibility. In Experiment 1, we
corroborated the order of mention preference and showed
that participants had difficulties in constructing the
alternative possibility if the third assertion called for it.
Experiment 2 showed that when a linking strategy was
feasible, the initial assertions of reordering problems were
easier to encode as reflected in reading times. Performance
slightly improved with linked items, but it remained hard to
change the initial model.
There are several ways in which individuals can try to
keep track of alternative spatial layouts. They can try to
hold all the possibilities in mind at the same time. This task
is highly demanding. A strategy that places less of a load on
working memory is to annotate just those items whose
relative positions are indeterminate (Vandierendonck,
Dierckx, & De Vooght, 2004). Or, as Rauh, Hagen, Knauff,
Kuß, Schlieder, & Strube (in press) suggest, reasoners start
with the preferred mental model and then vary this model to
find alternative models that are also consistent with the
assertions. Still another strategy is to build a single model
and to try to remember the premises more or less verbatim if
there are other possibilities. Our participants probably
varied in the strategies that they used. Yet, our evidence
suggests that they relied chiefly on constructing just a single
model. The third author has implemented this strategy for
temporal reasoning (see, e.g., Schaeken, Johnson-Laird, &
d'Ydewalle, 1996). The program refers back to the premises
when it encounters an inconsistency with its current model.
Participants’ solutions for a subset of problems in
Experiment 2 (problems with adjacency conflicts) shed light
on the process of integrating spatial relations in mental
models. The construction of models proceeds from left to
right. This asymmetry is consistent with a culturally based
left-to-right bias in visual attention. One of its
consequences, which Experiment 2 demonstrated, is that it
is easier to add an item to the right-hand end of a model
than to the left-hand end of a model. This finding is in
accordance with a recent computational theory of spatial
reasoning (Ragni, Knauff, & Nebel, 2005).
Adjacency conflicts arise from a tendency to interpret “to
the right of” as if it meant “to the right of and adjacent to”
and likewise for “to the left of”. Where does this principle
of adjacency come from? A spatial description of the
interior of a room usually proceeds in the sequence in which

Figure 2: Accuracy for reordering problems in
Experiment 2 with the respective mean reading times for the
initial two assertions, and mean response times (error bars
indicate the standard error).

1040

objects are encountered if the room is visually scanned
(“gaze tours”, e.g., Linde & Labov, 1975). It follows that
assertions relating objects are likely to refer to objects that
are adjacent in the room. If the assertions are taken as
instructions for how to place objects rather than as
descriptions of their location, it is justified to interpret them
as implying adjacency. It is reasonable to assume that the
speaker specifies the intended placement precisely and
chooses the closest reference object. In discourse, spatial
descriptions and instructions referring to a linear ordering of
objects usually proceed in one direction and adjacency
conflicts are avoided.
The integration of spatial relations is also affected by
more subtle linguistic principles that we tried to
counterbalance in our materials (Hörnig, Oberauer, &
Weidenfeld, in press). This control was imperfect, but the
effects of adjacency and left-to-right processing were so
strong that such linguistic factors do not provide an
alternative explanation for our results.
The problems that we have investigated are artificial.
They have to be in order to control many variables that
might affect performance. Nevertheless, individuals do
reason about spatial relations in daily life. There are obvious
cases in which individuals also use spatial representations to
represent other sorts of relation, such as temporal order (cf.
Boroditsky, 2000). The model theory postulates that spatial
representations may even underlie the human ability to
reason in general (Johnson-Laird, 1983).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants from the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the Transregional
Collaborative Research Center SFB / TR 8 Spatial
Cognition (www.sfbtr8.uni-bremen.de) to Markus Knauff,
and by an NSF grant (BCS-0076287) to Johnson-Laird to
study strategies in reasoning. Markus Knauff is also
supported by a Heisenberg Award from the DFG.

References
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Clark, H. H. (1969). Linguistic processes in reasoning.
Psychological Review, 76, 387-404.
De Soto, C. B., London, M., & Handel, S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Personality and Social
Psychology, 4, 513-521.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005). Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 21,
803-864.
Hörnig, R., Oberauer, K., & Weidenfeld, A. (in press). Two
principles of premise integration in spatial reasoning.
Memory & Cognition.

Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550-560.
Jahn, G., Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Knauff, M. (2005).
Reasoning about consistency with spatial mental models:
Hidden and obvious indeterminacy in spatial descriptions.
In C. Freksa, M. Knauff, B. Krieg-Brückner, B. Nebel &
T. Barkowsky (Eds.), Spatial Cognition IV. Lecture Notes
in Artificial Intelligence Vol. 3343 (pp. 165-180). Berlin:
Springer.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., & Legrenzi,
M. S. (2000). Illusions in reasoning about consistency.
Science, 288, 531-532.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: Behavioral
measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 1-15.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning: A
cognitive assessment of Allen's calculus. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 200-205): Mahwah, JN: Erlbaum.
Linde, C., & Labov, W. (1975). Spatial networks as a site
for the study of language and thought. Language, 51, 924939.
Ragni, M., Knauff, M., & Nebel, B. (2005). A
computational theory of spatial reasoning with mental
models. Paper accepted for CogSci05.
Rauh, R., Hagen, C., Knauff, M., Kuß, T., Schlieder, C., &
Strube, G. (in press). From preferred to alternative mental
models in spatial reasoning. Spatial Cognition and
Computation.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Schaeken, W. S., Johnson-Laird, P. N., & d'Ydewalle, G.
(1996). Mental models and temporal reasoning.
Cognition, 60, 205-234.
Spalek, T. M., & Hammad, S. (2005). The left-to-right bias
in inhibition of return is due to the direction of reading.
Psychological Science, 16, 15-18.
Vandierendonck, A., Dierckx, V., & De Vooght, G. (2004).
Mental model construction in linear reasoning: Evidence
for the construction of initial annotated models. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A, 1369-1391.

1041

