UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Privileged Processing of Low Spatial Frequencies in Emotional Faces?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5v03355w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Phillips, Matthew

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Privileged Processing of Low Spatial Frequencies in Emotional Faces?
R. Hans Phaf (r.h.phaf@uva.nl)
Psychonomics Department

Robert Wendte (robert.wendte@gmail.com)
Psychonomics Department

Mark Rotteveel (m.rotteveel@uva.nl)
Social Psychology Department
University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15
1018 WB Amsterdam NL
Abstract
It is proposed that spatial frequency filtering can act as a new
kind of masking technique, so that conscious and
nonconscious processing can be contrasted while presentation
durations remain constant. Stronger affective priming by
emotional faces in suboptimal than optimal presentation
conditions is a striking example of such a contrast. Similarly,
images containing only low spatial frequencies (LSF) were
expected to produce larger priming than images with only high
spatial frequencies (HSF). Conscious report on the emotional
expressions should, however, be more accurate for the HSF
than the LSF faces. The results supported only the former
expectation, but ceiling effects, procedural issues, and
inadequate filtering may account for this limited support. It is
assumed that the stronger-suboptimal-than-optimal affective
priming pattern reflects the biologically privileged processing
of LSF components of affective stimuli. Nonconscious
processing of low frequency features is discussed in the
context of evolution and models for affective processing.
Keywords: Emotion; Conscious vs. Nonconscious
Processing; Spatial Frequency; Facial Expressions.

Processing of a select class of stimuli, such as emotional
faces, but also snakes, spiders, and injuries, seems to be
evolutionary prepared and can take place rapidly and in the
absence of consciousness (LeDoux, 1996, Öhman &
Mineka, 2001). Little is known, however, about which
particular stimulus features are processed nonconsciously.
Vuilleumier et al. (2003) found evidence in fMRI research
that images of fear faces, filtered to contain only low spatial
frequencies, addressed subcortical pathways to the
amygdala, but could be (consciously) evaluated less
accurately than unfiltered and HSF fear faces. This paper
investigates in an affective priming experiment whether
particularly the low spatial frequencies of negatively
valenced faces are subject to nonconscious processing.
The neurobiological dual-route model of LeDoux (1996)
postulates parallel processing of, on the one hand, global
stimulus features and, on the other hand, more detailed
features. The model, which primarily addresses fear,
distinguishes a subcortical route from the sensory thalamus
directly to the amygdala performing fast and coarse
processing, and a slower and more detailed processing
route, indirectly via cortical areas, to the amygdala.
Behavioral and information processing tendencies
1744

associated with fear, such as freezing, or increased attention
to potential threats, is triggered from these neural regions. It
has been suggested that the amygdala are also involved in
other emotions, such as happiness (Hamann et al., 2002),
but the evidence for this is more mixed.
The direct route is shorter than the indirect route and
responsible only for nonconscious, ‘quick and dirty’,
processing of affective stimuli. More complex, including
conscious, affective processing takes place in the slower
cortical route. Although there is also evidence for learning
in the direct route, it appears to be primarily dedicated to
processing specific affective stimuli (Öhman & Mineka,
2001), that have been associated with potential threats
throughout most of evolutionary history. The fast
recruitment by privileged stimuli of adaptive behavioral
tendencies, already from the earliest age, would be helpful
for survival. It could be said that a ‘miss’ of a threat is more
costly than a ‘false alarm’. The slower route may then form
a parallel control circuit with the function, which may also
be evolutionary prepared, to correct for false alarms evoked
by the fast route, when there is sufficient time.
The LeDoux model also seems well suited to explain
experimental results in the field of conscious and
nonconscious affective processing. Murphy and Zajonc
(1993, see also Rotteveel et al., 2001) found that some
affective stimuli (i.e., happy and angry emotional
expressions) can be more readily processed nonconsciously
than non-affective stimuli (e.g., male and female faces with
an affectively neutral expression), but that this was reversed
with conscious processing. In a priming paradigm they
compared conscious and nonconscious effects of affective
and non-affective primes. To avoid the terms ‘subliminal’
and ‘supraliminal’, which suggest the existence of a single
consciousness threshold, Murphy and Zajonc used the terms
‘optimal’ and ‘suboptimal’ for the presentation conditions of
the primes. These terms better reflect that there is a mixture,
in different proportions, of conscious and nonconscious
processing in all conditions (Merikle, 1992). Immediately
after prime presentation in optimal (1s) or suboptimal (4ms
nominally, presumably the effective presentation duration
was in the order of 10ms) fashion, an affectively neutral
ideograph, which was meaningless to participants, appeared.
The participants rated the ideographs on a rating scale
according to an affective or a non-affective (i.e., size,
symmetry, or gender) dimension. Murphy and Zajonc

Vuilleumier et al. (2003). Though the evidence is mixed
(Adams et al., 2003), angry faces are sometimes thought to
evoke more unequivocal fear responses than fear faces.
Whalen et al. (2001), however, found that fear faces evoked
more activity in the amygdala than angry faces. Immediately
after the prime, an affectively neutral Japanese ideograph
appeared that the participants should evaluate intuitively in
a two-alternative-forced-choice task. A face trial was
followed by an empty prime trial to investigate affective
transfer effects between trials. Finally, participants directly
evaluated the faces, which were presented for 100ms and
not masked by an ideograph. We expected stronger affective
priming in the LSF than in the HSF condition and,
conversely, more accurate direct evaluation of the faces in
the HSF than in the LSF condition.

(1993; see also Rotteveel et al., 2001) found stronger
suboptimal-than-optimal affective priming but weaker
suboptimal-than-optimal non-affective priming. When there
are strong nonconscious tendencies, presumably evoked in
the direct route, as may be the case with these affective
stimuli, conscious processing in the indirect route works to
counteract these strong response tendencies, if they are
inappropriate in the context (i.e., constitute a ‘false alarm’).
It is highly unlikely that all characteristics of a complex
stimulus, such as a face, can be processed by the direct route
(via only a few synapses). The research by Vuilleumier et
al., (2003) suggests that different spatial frequencies of
facial images are processed along different routes. Every
visual stimulus can be analyzed in spatial components of
several frequencies, similar to the auditory frequencies in a
sound wave. Spatial frequency can be defined as “the
number of changes in brightness value per unit distance in
any part of an image” (Setlur & Gooch, 2004; p.81). Low
spatial frequencies correspond to smooth features with
gradual changes, high spatial frequencies to rougher details
with abrupt changes. There is an extensive literature (for a
discussion see Morrison & Schyns, 2001) on the role of
spatial frequencies in visual perception. It is often assumed
that coarse, low spatial frequency, features are processed
first and that this is followed by a finer analysis of the high
frequencies. This assumption applies to both affective and
non-affective visual stimuli. The core assumption of this
paper is that specifically for, evolutionary prepared,
affective stimuli there is an additional direct processing
route available that is primarily addressed by the low spatial
frequency content of the affective stimulus.
Vuilleumier et al. (2003) investigated in an fMRI
experiment which spatial frequencies are processed along
which route. Participants were presented with high spatially
frequent (HSF), low spatially frequent (LSF) filtered, and
unfiltered faces showing affectively neutral or fear
expressions. The amygdala were relatively ‘blind’ to the
fear expressions of the HSF faces, but revealed clear
activations with intact and LSF fear faces. Activations of
pulvinar and superior colliculus, only with LSF fear faces,
indicated that subcortical pathways may provide coarse
inputs to the amygdala. The expressions of the LSF faces,
however, were harder to report subjectively than those of
the unfiltered and HSF faces. LSF information thus seems to
be processed less consciously than HSF information.
The conceptual similarity of the results of Murphy and
Zajonc (1993) with those of Vuilleumier et al. (2003)
suggests that suboptimal conditions can be replaced by
presentation of LSF faces, and optimal conditions by HSF
faces. To test this hypothesis, an affective priming
experiment, similar to Experiments 1 and 2 of Murphy and
Zajonc (1993), was carried out. LSF and HSF filtered,
affective (i.e., angry, happy and neutral), facial primes were
presented for a single presentation duration (100 ms), which
can be said to lie between suboptimal and fully optimal
presentation. It was expected that the filtering status of the
faces could bias processing in a particular direction, towards
direct or indirect processing. In this experiment angry and
happy faces were chosen as primes, as in the research of
Murphy and Zajonc (1993), instead of fear faces, as with

Method
Participants
Thirty-nine psychology students from the University of
Amsterdam (13 men, with an average age of 23.08 years,
SD = 3.04; 26 women, with an average age of 22.69 years,
SD = 5.86, all right-handed) took part in the experiment.
They participated for course credit or for a financial
compensation of €7. All participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. They had no knowledge of
Japanese or related languages. The data of three participants
were not analysed because of equipment problems.

Design
The priming task and the direct evaluation task both had a 2
(HSF vs. LSF) x 3 (happy, neutral, angry) mixed factorial
design. Spatial frequency was manipulated between
participants, and the factor affect within participants. The
evaluations of the Japanese ideographs, or the faces, were
the dependent variables. Only one of the three expressions
of a particular model and each ideograph was presented
once in the priming task. A participant received twelve
happy, twelve angry and twelve neutral trials. These 36
expressions were repeated in the direct evaluation task. The
selection of the three expressions was counterbalanced over
the 36 models. The order of faces presentation was varied
randomly between participants. The faces were coupled to
different Japanese ideographs, so that an ideograph would
be combined equally often with a positive and a negative
expression. To minimize transfer effects between affective
trials, moreover, after every face trial an empty trial (i.e.,
with a grey screen instead of a face) followed. In total a
participant completed 72 trials in the priming task.

Material and Apparatus

1745

Thirty-six models (18 men and 18 women) from the
Karolinska-set (Lundqvist, Flykt & Öhman, 1998) were
selected. Of each of the models three grey-scale face images
were available (i.e., with angry, neutral, and happy
expressions). These 108 face images were filtered in the
Adobe Photoshop program through the Gaussian low and
high pass filter (see also Vuilleumier et al., 2003), with
high-pass cut-off larger than 24 cycles/image for the HSF

faces, and low-pass cut-off smaller than 6 cycles/image for
the LSF faces. The faces were placed in a rectangular frame
excluding most of the hair and nonfacial contours. The
images had a resolution of 198 x 252 pixels. The size of the
projected images was 17cm x 25cm. The viewing distance
was approximately 90cm, which resulted in a horizontal
visual angle of 10.9° and vertical visual angle of 16.1°. For
the empty trials evenly grey images, matched on grey scale
with the faces, served as primes. Seventy-two Japanese
ideographs matched on complexity (10-12 strokes on a gray
background) served as targets in the priming task.

Figure 1: In a face priming trial the fixation frame (600ms),
precedes the face (100ms, a LSF neutral face here), which is
immediately followed by the ideograph (400ms).

meaning which can be felt when they use their intuition. The
faces should be ignored when evaluating the ideographs (see
Rotteveel et al., 2001). Both images should, however, be
looked at carefully, because questions about the faces would
be asked later. Participants were asked to relax and rely on
their feelings. When participants are in a positive and
relaxed mood, they may carry out the tasks more
heuristically and intuitively. Such a nonanalytic strategy
may enhance priming effects (Whittlesea & Price, 2001).
After the priming task, the primes (i.e., for 100ms without
masking by the ideograph) were presented once again, and
the participants were instructed to directly assess the
valence of the faces. Finally, a semi-structured exit
interview was administered, in which first open questions
were asked (e.g., can you tell a bit more about how you
carried out these different tasks?) and subsequently more
direct questions were asked (e.g., were you influenced by
the faces when evaluating the ideographs?).

Results

A face trial (Figure 1) started with a frame (for 600ms) to
indicate the area within which the prime and target would
appear, followed by the face prime (100ms) and was
immediately replaced by the target ideograph (400ms). A
face trial was followed after 800 to 1200ms by an empty
trial (Figure 2). This trial also started with the fixation frame
(600ms), followed by the empty prime (100ms), which was
immediately replaced by the target ideograph (400ms).

Participants frequently indicated in the exit-interview that
they looked at specific characteristics of the Japanese
ideographs for their evaluation. Some participants rated
sharply angular, ideographs as negative, whereas others saw
some symbolic content in the ideographs, such as a sword or
a house. This more analytical processing strategy (see
Whittlesea & Price, 2001) may have reduced priming, but in
both spatial frequency conditions most participants (n = 33)
indicated that they had mainly assessed the ideograph on the
basis of their feeling. Most participants (n = 28) thought that
the faces had influenced the evaluation of the Japanese
ideographs. For direct evaluation, the participants reported
to have looked particularly at the eyes and mouth areas of
the faces in both spatial frequency conditions.

Affective Evaluation of Target

1.80

Figure 2: In an empty trial the order and presentation
durations are the same as in the face priming trial, but the
face prime has been replaced by an empty grey screen.
After 800 to 1200ms the next trial started. The in-house
developed experimentation program WESP, which was
running on a PC, controlled stimulus presentation. The
stimuli were back-projected with a data projector on an
opaque screen into a dimly lit, sound-attenuated, room
where the participant sat in a comfortable chair. The
affective response to the target was measured through a twobutton response box in a two-alternative-forced-choice task.
The response was given with the fore finger and the middle
finger of the right hand on the positive and negative buttons.
Only one response between 200 and 2000ms after the start
of prime presentation was registered by the computer.

Procedure
After a participant was seated in a comfortable chair, it
was explained that both faces and Japanese ideographs
would be shown on the screen and that both would be
important for the two subsequent tasks. The participants
were informed that the ideographs also have an affective

LSF

1.70

HSF
1.60

1.50

1.40

1.30

1.20
Happy

Neutral

Angry

Prime Expression

Figure 3: Average (error bars represent SEMs) affective
evaluation (1 = negative, 2 = positive) of the ideographs as a
function of expression in the LSF and HSF conditions.
Both spatial frequency conditions showed, relative to the
neutral primes, clear overall priming effects (Figure 3) that
were congruent with the positive (Wilcoxon signed rank
tests, p < 0.0001) and negative (p < 0.005) facial
expressions. Priming by happy faces (i.e., positive – neutral
priming) was larger in the LSF than in the HSF-condition
(Mann-Whitney U tests, p < 0.01), but priming by angry

1746

faces did not differ significantly. The neutral condition may
not be well suited to serve as control condition, however,
because the neutral faces were also filtered with respect to
spatial frequency. LSF neutral faces induced more negative
priming than HSF neutral faces (p < 0.05).
Interestingly, an incongruent priming effect (see Figure 4)
showed up in the empty priming trials (Friedman test, p <
0.05), only after the priming trials with the happy
expressions. Evaluation of an ideograph with an empty
prime was more negative when a positive face, irrespective
of filtering, had been presented in the previous priming trial
(p < 0.005). After trials with an angry expression no such
incongruent priming effect occurred.
1.80

Affective Evaluation of Target

LSF
1.75

HSF

1.70
1.65
1.60
1.55

the positive and negative faces, separately. Only for LSF
angry faces was a negative correlation (r = -0.53, p < 0.05)
found between the evaluation differences for angry and
neutral faces in the priming and direct evaluation tasks. The
other correlations between priming and direct evaluation
(LSF happy: r = -0.06; HSF angry: r = -0.15; HSF happy; r
= -0.02) did not significantly deviate from zero. It appears
that participants who had the most difficulty in evaluating
LSF angry faces showed the largest priming by these faces.
Faces were overall appreciated more negatively than
meaningless ideographs. The evaluation of the ideographs
primed by neutral faces was more positive than the direct
evaluation of the neutral faces (p < 0.01). The frontal
confrontation with a face may be experienced as
threatening, even if it is neutral (see also Raccuglia & Phaf,
1996). Also the difference between the neutral priming
condition and the empty trial condition after a neutral
priming trial proved to be reliable (p < 0.0001), showing
that the presence of a face staring at the observer may lower
overall evaluations.
Table 1: Average (SEM) affective evaluation of ideographs
in the filtering conditions as a function of faces that could be
evaluated quickly or slowly in the direct evaluation task.

1.50
1.45
1.40
Happy

Neutral

Prime Expression

Angry

Previous Prime

Fast direct evaluation

Figure 4: Average (SEM) affective evaluation (1 = negative,
2 = positive) of the ideographs in the empty trials as a
function of prime in the previous trial.

Happy

Angry

Slow direct evaluation
Happy

Angry

1.80
1.36
1.73
(0.04)
(0.07)
(0.04)
HSF
1.69
1.33
1.64
(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.05)
Note. Evaluation: 1 = negative, 2 = positive

1.38
(0.07)
1.52
(0.06)

LSF
When the faces were presented for 100ms without mask,
they could be accurately evaluated (see Figure 5) in both
spatial frequency conditions (Friedman, p < 0.0001).
Presumably due to ceiling effects, HSF faces could not be
evaluated more accurately than LSF faces, neither for happy
(NS), nor for angry faces (p = 0.088). The participants,
however, found it difficult to unambiguously classify the
neutral faces as either positive or negative.
2.00

Ceiling effects may have prevented the finding of a
differential effect of filtering in the direct evaluation task.
The finding that even LSF faces could be evaluated well
suggests that our filtering procedure should be improved to
obtain similar effects as Vuilleumier et al. (2003). The
emotional features in the faces of some models may also be
better visible than of other models. To investigate this, we
divided the prime faces in two halves on the basis of the
reaction times in the direct evaluation task and analyzed
priming effects for the quickly and slowly evaluated LSF
faces, separately (Table 1). The faces that could be
evaluated quickly showed no effect of filtering (NS) on
priming (happy – angry priming). The faces that could be
accurately evaluated, but at a slower pace, revealed larger
priming in the LSF condition than in the HSF condition (p <
0.05). Similar to the findings of Murphy and Zajonc (1993,
see also Rotteveel et al, 2001), affective priming appears to
be largest for the stimuli that allow for the smallest degree
of conscious processing.

Affective Evaluation of Face

1.90
LSF
1.80

HSF

1.70
1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
Happy

Neutral

Angry

Facial Expression

Figure 5: Average (SEM) affective evaluation (1 = negative,
2 = positive) of the faces in the direct evaluation task as a
function of expression and filtering.

Discussion

The relation between affective priming and direct
evaluation was examined in the two filtering conditions for
1747

To our knowledge, this is the first affective priming
experiment with faces filtered for spatial frequencies.

Filtering may be thought of as a new masking technique,
where presentation time is constant (see also Rotteveel &
Phaf, 2004), and LSF filtering replaces suboptimal
presentation conditions and HSF filtering optimal
conditions. The results of this experiment suggest that
nonconscious processing is more dominant with LSF faces,
whereas HSF faces are mainly processed consciously.
Privileged processing of low spatial frequencies, moreover,
primarily seems to apply to faces with negative expressions.
Participants who could not accurately evaluate angry faces,
in particular, showed the largest priming effects by these
faces. Angry LSF faces that could not quickly be assessed
directly, moreover, also revealed somewhat less priming
than angry HSF faces. In combination with the results of
Vuilleumier et al. (2003) this strengthens the notion that
particularly angry LSF faces address the direct route in the
LeDoux (1996) model. In contrast to the results of
Vuilleumier et al. (2003), however, LSF faces could not be
(consciously) evaluated less accurately than HSF faces.
Ceiling effects may, however, have masked such
differences. In sum, the experiment provides some evidence
for the hypothesis that particularly the low spatial
frequencies of negative faces are processed nonconsciously.
The support for an increase in affective priming, and a
decrease in accuracy of direct evaluation, with lower spatial
frequencies was limited. The experiment differed in many
respects from the experiment of Vuilleumier et al (2003).
Presentation times and masking conditions, for instance,
differed in the experiments. Some of the procedural
differences may explain the limited correspondence between
experiments of the general pattern of results. We may, for
instance, have not selected exactly the same cut-off
frequencies as Vuilleumier et al., because these frequencies
can only be calculated indirectly in Abobe Photoshop. In
retrospect, after further analyses of the filtered images, our
lower spatial frequency limit seemed to be higher than the
limit of Vuilleumier et al. We tried to replicate, moreover,
the absolute filtering conditions of Vuilleumier et al. in
terms of cycles per image, but did not have the same
subjective spatial frequencies in terms of cycles per visual
angle, due to the larger size of our presentation screen. The
HSF images may, thus, have contained a sufficient
proportion of low frequencies to allow for substantial
affective priming.
A crucial difference may have been the angry faces used
in our experiment versus the fear faces used by Vuilleumier
et al. In order to replicate the optimal and suboptimal
affective priming effects found by Murphy and Zajonc
(1993), we used HSF and LSF, angry and happy, faces.
Adams et al. (2003) found that angry expressions with an
averted gaze, and fear expressions with a direct gaze evoked
the highest amygdala activation. When the gaze of the
stimulus face is directed at the observer, fear faces may,
thus, be more effective fear stimuli than angry faces
(Whalen et al., 2001). A pilot experiment in our laboratory
has, moreover, shown that, after improved filtering to get
similar subjective frequencies as Vuilleumier et al., LSF
fear faces could be evaluated less accurately than LSF angry
faces (i.e., both types of faces with direct gaze). Both fear

1748

and angry faces were, moreover, rated more correctly in
HSF than in LSF conditions.
We are currently performing a new affective priming
experiment in which we have made a number of
improvements. Fear faces are included and filtering
procedures have been adjusted. To enhance the sensitivity of
the evaluations, the two-alternative-forced-choice task has
been replaced by a five-point rating scale. Next to the above
improvements, presentation times are shortened further in
all conditions, and the ideographs are also presented after
the face images to effectively shorten presentation time of
the faces in the direct evaluation task. It is thought that
contrasts in the processing of HSF and LSF stimuli will
become more apparent when there is less opportunity for
conscious processing.
A new independent variable is added to the experiment
that enables further conclusions about how coarsely or
finely a visual stimulus is processed. There appears to be a
close link between the size of eye movements and the
spatial frequency range that is being perceived. The large to
small order in eye movements, when inspecting a facial
image (Loftus & Mackworth, 1978), seems to correspond to
the coarse to fine order in processing spatial frequencies
(Morrison & Schyns, 2001). Attentional shifts from a global
(accompanied by relatively large eye movements) to a local
scale of an image also leads to shifts towards processing
higher spatial frequencies (Shulman & Wilson, 1987).
Green, Williams and Davidson (2003), finally, found that
the distance between fixations was larger when inspecting
fear faces than neutral faces suggesting that negative stimuli
evoke larger eye movements than neutral stimuli. If the
association between eye movements and spatial frequencies
holds, it would be expected that larger eye movements are
made with LSF images than with HSF images, and that
negative expressions also show the largest eye movements.
At a practical level, filtering for spatial frequency may
provide a further technique for contrasting conscious and
nonconscious processing (e.g., Merikle, 1992), next to
impoverished processing due to short presentation and
masking (e.g., Murphy & Zajonc, 1993), and dividing
attention (e.g., Rotteveel & Phaf, 2004). Interestingly, the
corresponding effects of eye movements and spatial
frequency suggest that the making of large eye movements
biases towards processing low spatial frequencies and
consequently to nonconscious processing. In addition, the
size of eye movements may act as a new dependent variable
in affective priming to indicate the level of nonconscious
affective processing. A further application of spatial
frequency filtering may lie in the construction of masks
capable of interfering with conscious processing. Such
masks should only contain high spatial frequencies but no
low spatial frequencies, so that nonconscious processing is
not reduced by the mask. In the new affective priming
experiment discussed above, care was taken to filter out
both low and high frequencies, so that only the middle range
of frequencies remained in the ideograph targets.
From a theoretical point of view, the results are
compatible with the notion that the privileged processing of
evolutionary prepared visual stimuli (Öhman & Mineka,
2001) in the direct route mainly concerns their low spatial

frequency components. LSF components of stimuli that are
not evolutionary relevant may also be processed before HSF
components in a coarse-to-fine order (see Morrison &
Schyns, 2001), but for these stimuli a direct subcortical
route does not seem available. Within the context of priming
studies, the presence of such a route is deduced from the
stronger-suboptimal-than-optimal priming pattern with,
evolutionary relevant, affective stimuli, which contrasts to
the weaker suboptimal-than-optimal priming by,
evolutionary irrelevant, non-affective stimuli. The affective
priming study, thus, strengthens the case for a parallel,
direct processing, route which is addressed by coarse
features of evolutionary prepared stimuli.
The selection of LSF features of, particularly negative,
stimuli for directly triggering action tendencies makes sense
from an evolutionary perspective. Threatening stimuli, for
instance, require urgent action and do not allow for
extensive processing. In addition, Moore and Oaksford
(2002) suggested that mood biases towards processing of
specific spatial frequencies. In a negative mood, processing
would shift towards lower spatial frequencies. A mood
preparation, thus, facilitates processing in the appropriate
route, so that adaptive actions can be taken even earlier.
Potential ‘false alarms’ arising from these action tendencies
may be dealt with later, when there is more time, so that
even the, already low, costs generated by the direct route
can be minimized. Evolutionary simulations in our group
(den Dulk, Heerebout & Phaf, 2003) have shown that dualroute network architectures readily arise under these
environmental pressures. Interestingly, the direct route of
the evolved networks processed only the main stimulus
components, whereas the indirect route handled more
compound stimulus features. New simulation studies may
investigate whether low-frequency analyzers develop in the
direct route and high-frequency analyzers in the indirect
route, when stimuli containing both are presented to the
network during its evolutionary ‘history’. New experimental
studies may be set up to determine whether nonconscious
processing of low-frequency components also extends to
other affective stimuli, such as snakes and spiders, and
indeed whether the same type of dual processing applies to
affectively positive stimuli.

Acknowledgments
We thank Emoke Jakab and Marcus Spaan for their help.

References
Adams, R.B., Gordon, H.L., Baird A.A., Ambady, N. &
Kleck, R.F. (2003). Effects of gaze on amygdala
sensitivity to anger and fear faces. Science, 300, 1536.
Dulk, P. den, Heerebout, B. T. & Phaf, R. H. (2003). A
computational study into the evolution of dual-route
dynamics for affective processing. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 194-208.
Green, M.J., Williams, L.M., & Davidson, D.J. (2003) In
the face of danger: specific viewing strategies for facial
expressions of threat. Cognition and Emotion, 17, 779786.

Hamann, S.B., Ely, T.D., Hoffman, J.M. & Kilts, C.D.
(2002). Ecstasy and agony: activation of the human
amygdala in positive and negative emotion. Psychological
Science, 13, 135-141.
LeDoux, J.E. (1996). The emotional brain. New York, NY:
Simon & Schuster.
Loftus, G.R. & Mackworth, N.H. (1978). Cognitive
determinants of fixation location during picture viewing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 4, 565-572.
Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., & Öhman, A. (1998). The
Karolinska Directed Emotional Faces. Psychology
section, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Merikle, P.M. (1992). Perception without awareness.
American Psychologist, 47, 792-795.
Moore, S.C. & Oaksford, M. (2002). An informational value
for mood: Negative mood biases attention to global
information in a probabilistic classification task. In S.C.
Moore & M. Oaksford (Eds.), Emotional cognition.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Morrison, D.J. & Schyns, P.G. (2001). Usage of spatial
scales for the categorization of faces, objects, and scenes.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 454-469.
Murphy, S.T. & Zajonc, R.B. (1993). Affect, cognition and
conciousness: Affective priming with optimal and
suboptimal stimulus exposures. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 64, 723-739.
Öhman, A. & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and
preparedness: toward an evolved module of fear and fear
learning. Psychological Reviev, 108, 483-522.
Raccuglia, R.A. & Phaf, R.H. (1997). Asymmetric affective
evaluation of words and faces. British Journal of
Psychology, 88, 1, 93-116.
Rotteveel, M., de Groot, P., Geutskens, A. & Phaf, R.H.
(2001). Stronger suboptimal than optimal affective
priming? Emotion, 1, 348-364.
Rotteveel, M. & Phaf, R.H. (2004). Loading working
memory enhances affective priming. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 11, 326-331.
Setlur, V. & Gooch. B. (2004). Is that a smile? Gaze
dependent facial expressions. Proceedings of the 3rd
international symposium on non-photorealistic animation
and rendering (pp. 79-84). New York: ACM Press
Shulman, G.L. & Wilson, J. (1987). Spatial frequency and
selective attention to local and global information,
Perception, 16, 89-101.
Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J.L., Driver, J. & Dolan, R.J.
(2003). Distinct spatial frequency sensitivities for
processing faces and emotional expressions. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 624-631.
Whalen, P.J., Shin, L.M., McInerney, S.C., Fischer, H.,
Wright, C.I. & Rauch, S.L. (2001). A functional MRI
study of human amygdala responses to facial expressions
of fear versus anger. Emotion, 1, 70-83.
Whittlesea, B.W.A. & Price, J.R. (2001). Implicit/explicit
memory
versus
analytic/nonanalytic
processing:
Rethinking the mere exposure effect. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 234-246.

1749

