UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Qualitative and Quantitative Aspects of Vowel Harmony: A Dynamics Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qw9481w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Benus, Stefan
Gafos, Adamantios

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Qualitative and Quantitative Aspects of Vowel Harmony: A Dynamics Model
Stefan Benus (sbenus@cs.columbia.edu)
Columbia University, Department of Computer Science, 1214 Amsterdam Avenue, M/C 0401, 450 CS Building
New York NY 10027 USA

Adamantios I. Gafos (adamantios.gafos@nyu.edu)
New York University, Department of Linguistics, 719 Broadway, New York NY 10003 USA &
Haskins Laboratories, 300 George Street, New Haven CT 06511 USA

best achieved when the relation between continuity and
discreteness is formalized explicitly for representative
language-particular cases. In this paper, we propose a model
of how low-level spatial phonetic properties of vowels
determine the high-level phonological behavior described as
vowel harmony. Our model employs tools made available
by the mathematics of non-linear dynamics. Building on
previous theoretical and experimental work, we consider if
and how changes in appropriate control parameters result in
qualitative changes or phase transitions from one stable
pattern to another. The key idea is that categorical aspects of
linguistic grammars emerge from non-linear interactions of
lower-level continuous dynamical systems.

Abstract
A fundamental problem in spoken language is the duality
between the continuous aspects of phonetic performance and
the discrete aspects of phonological competence. We study a
specific instance of this problem in Hungarian vowel
harmony. We present a model where continuous phonetic
distinctions uncovered by our experiments are linked to the
discreteness of phonological form using the mathematics of
nonlinear dynamics.
Key words: vowel harmony; phonetics-phonology relation;
non-linear dynamics; Hungarian.

1

Introduction

2

A primary aim in the cognitive science of language is to
discover the computational principles underlying our ability
to speak. A major problem is how to relate the symbolic or
discrete aspects of our speaking competence to their
continuous manifestation in terms of vocal tract action. The
study of these two aspects of speech has traditionally been
pursued under separate domains, the symbolic aspects being
the domain of phonology and the continuous aspects being
the domain of phonetics.
The problem of the phonology-phonetics relation is an
instance of a fundamental problem in cognitive science,
namely, the problem of relating the low-dimensional,
discrete aspects of cognition to the high-dimensional, vastly
detailed aspects of performance. At the heart of this problem
one meets a methodological challenge. Computation is
embedded in a continuously varying environment. To
understand computation we must use inferences based on
surface, performance data that have been extracted from
specific contexts. Abstracting away from contextual or
environmental factors requires an understanding of how
computation adapts to different contexts, which in turn
assumes an understanding of computation. Kosslyn has
aptly dubbed this “the inference problem” for cognitive
psychology and emphasizes that surface data are a function
of competence with added noise, and both competence as
well as the nature of the function mapping competence onto
surface data must be studied (Kosslyn, 1978).
In this paper, we follow Kosslyn’s approach, focusing on
two central questions: How is the discreteness of a
phonological system related to the continuity of the speech
signal? What kinds of formal tools are best in dealing with
this duality? We think that progress on these questions is

Background Notions from Dynamics

We begin by a general mathematical formulation for the
simplest class of non-linear dynamical systems, namely,
first-order, autonomous dynamical systems (Percival &
Richards, 1982). Any such system can be described by a
differential equation x& = f ( x ) , where f(x) is a nonlinear
function of x, x is the state of the system, which can be
thought of as the position of a particle in an abstract onedimensional space called the phase space, and f(x) is the
force. For first-order systems, the force can be expressed as
a function of the derivative of a potential V(x),
x& = f ( x ) = − dV ( x ) / dx . An intuitive grasp of the dynamics
of our state variable x can be inferred by examining
geometric properties of f(x) or its related potential V(x). For
example, consider the behavior of a particle placed in the
potential of Figure 1, and assume that the position of our
particle, its x value, corresponds to the state of the system.
The points xk where f (xk ) = 0 represent states of equilibrium
– if our particle is placed initially at xk it remains there for
all time. Such points are called fixed points. There are two
types of fixed points, stable and unstable. Stable fixed
points correspond to the minima of the potential V(x) – x1, x3
in Figure 1. Around these points f(x) is a decreasing
function of x, or intuitively, the arrows on the x-axis of
Figure 1, which show the flow, point towards that point.
Unstable fixed points correspond to the maxima of the
potential V(x) – x2 in Figure 1. Around such points, f(x) is an
increasing function of x, and the arrows of the flow point
away from that point. Stable fixed points are also called
attractors, and unstable fixed points repellers.

226

It can be seen that the probability of finding the system
around the mean states of the two attractors is quite high.
The probability to find the system at some other point
decreases quickly as we move away from the mean states
but it may not be zero. In short, the preferred modes of
essential parameters, the attractors, are resistant to noise in a
probabilistic sense.
A key notion of non-linear dynamics is non-linearity. A
system exhibits non-linearity when large or discontinuous
changes can be observed in the behavior of that system as
some control parameter varies smoothly. In a prototypical
example of this situation from speech, Stevens (1972) has
argued that the relation between articulatory parameters and
their acoustic/auditory output is ‘quantal’ in the following
sense. There are certain ranges of articulatory parameter
variation within which the acoustic output remains
relatively stable. In other ranges, however, small variations
in the articulatory parameter cause large (non-linear)
changes in the quality of the acoustic output. Put differently,
gradual changes in some articulatory parameters lead to
qualitatively distinct acoustic outputs. In another example
from biological coordination, Kelso (1995) observed that
when adults are asked to move their index fingers in an antiphase pattern (both fingers move to the left or the right at
the same time), they can perform this task over a wide range
of cycling frequencies. But as frequency is increased,
subjects show a spontaneous shift to an in-phase pattern,
that is, to a pattern where the fingers move toward each
other or away from each other at the same time. In these
examples, then, scaling of a continuous parameter results in
qualitative changes in the behavior of a dynamical system,
the shift from one stable mode to another. Such qualitative
changes are commonly referred to as bifurcations by
mathematicians or phase transitions by physicists.
We can illustrate the fundamental property of nonlinearity with a simple mathematical example. Consider a
force function parameterized by a so-called ‘control’
variable k and specified by f ( x, k ) = −kx − x 3 . We are
interested in what happens to x – ultimately the solutions to
our equation – as the control parameter k is varied. The
potential
corresponding
to
our
force
function
2
4
is
plotted
in
Figure
3
for
various
V ( x, k ) = kx / 2 + x / 4 + (C)
values of k. For k > 0 , as shown in the top row of Figure 3,
the control parameter changes but the system retains a
qualitative sameness of form. The minimum in the valley of
V(x) represents the stable fixed point of x. This is the
attractor, the preferred region within the continuum of x
where the particle ends up. But as k passes through zero,
suddenly a qualitative change occurs. The system changes
to a bistable regime, showing two attractors – a bifurcation.
Within the ranges k > 0 or k < 0 , variation in k does
affect smoothly the attractor landscape (this is known as
scaling). For example, from k = 4 to k = 1 there is a
change in the stability of the attractor, as is evident from the
flattening of the walls in the attractor’s basin.

Figure 1 : Potential V(x), attractors x1, x3, and repeller x2 of a
simple dynamical system.
At a high-level of description any behavioral pattern can
be described by a few parameters whose dynamics are
coupled to lower-level subsystems controlling the more
specific components. For speech, the high-level description
is specified by the macroscopic parameters of phonology
(e.g., place and degree of oral constriction, laryngeal state,
etc.) and the lower levels correspond to the neuronal,
aerodynamic and myodynamic subsystems controlling the
speech articulators. Due to the complexity of this
organization, noise is inevitably a part of any behavioral
phenomenon. Following Haken (1977), we describe noise as
a small, random perturbation force pushing the
representative point of the system x, the position of the
particle, back and forth randomly. Mathematically, noise
enters the dynamics of high-level parameters as shown in
(1), with the additional factor representing Gaussian whitenoise of strength Q.

x& = f ( x ) + Noise

= −

dV ( x )
+
dx

Q

ξ

(1)
t

The presence of noise introduces stochasticity in the
dynamics of the state variable x. Consequently, we can only
compute the probability of finding x within a given interval
of x values. This probability is described by the probability
density function p(x) multiplied by the length of the interval.
For any first-order dynamical system, there exist methods
allowing us to compute the probability distribution function
by finding a stationary solution to the Fokker-Planck
equation (see Haken 1977; Freidlin & Wentzell 1984). An
example of a probability density function corresponding to a
bi-stable potential (two attractors present) is shown below.

Figure 2 : V(x) and probability density function p(x).

227

Recasens, 1999). V-to-V coarticulation effects are generally
assumed to provide a natural phonetic basis to vowel
harmony, a categorical version of V-to-V coarticulation
where the suffix vowels are maximally coarticulated with
the stem vowels (Fowler, 1983; Ohala, 1994).
In many languages with vowel harmony, however, one
also finds vowels that disagree with their adjacent vowels.
These vowels appear in so-called disharmonic stems and
have been traditionally divided into two categories.
Transparent vowels may intervene between the trigger and
the target vowels even when they bear the opposite value for
the harmonizing feature. For example, the /í/ in papír
‘paper’ is transparent because papír selects [+back] suffixes,
e.g., papír-nak ‘paper-Dative’, in agreement with the
[+back] value of the initial stem vowel and despite the
intervening [–back] value of the /í/. Opaque vowels also
show disagreement with the preceding stem vowel(s) but
require a local agreement with the following suffix vowel.
For example, the front rounded /ü/ in parfüm ‘perfume’ is
opaque because it selects the [–back] version of the suffix,
parfüm-nek ‘perfume-Dative’, and disagrees with the
preceding [+back] stem vowel.
Hungarian transparent vowels, then, present a challenge
to the proposal that vowel harmony has its basis in
continuous V-to-V coarticulation effects between
consecutive vowels. However, the assumption that
transparent vowels do not participate in vowel harmony is
based on impressionistic auditory observations. There has
been no systematic investigation of the phonetic
characteristics of these vowels. The experiments described
below are aimed at filling this gap in our knowledge.

Figure 3 : Potential as a function of a control variable k.
In the next two plots, as we move from k = −1 to
k = −2 , the stable points drift apart smoothly. But as long
as k does not pass the critical value of 0, that is, within the
ranges k > 0 or k < 0 , the macroscopic form of the system
remains unaltered. It is only when variation in k passes a
critical value (here, k = 0 ) that a qualitative change takes
place.
Next, we consider how the concepts just introduced can
be applied to our specific problem, the relation between
continuous and discrete dimensions of speech patterns in
vowel harmony.

3

Dynamics Applied to Vowel Harmony

Vowel harmony is a systematic regularity found in many
languages by which vowels in a word must agree in terms of
certain phonetic properties. For example, vowels in
Hungarian words tend to be drawn either from the set of
vowels articulated with a frontward movement of the tongue
body ([i í e é ö ı ü ő]) or from the set of vowels articulated
with a backward movement of the tongue body ([u ú o ó a
á]). In our examples, we will be using Hungarian
orthography where the acute accent denotes length, and the
umlaut denotes front round vowels. In terms of
phonological features, the ‘front’ vowels [i í e é ö ı ü ő]
share the feature [–back], and the ‘back’ vowels [u ú o ó a á]
share the feature [+back].
The phonological consequences of vowel harmony are
most readily observed in suffix vowel alternations where the
[±back] quality of the suffix vowel is determined by the
[±back] quality of the stem vowel. For example, the Dative
suffix alternates between a front /e/ and a back /a/ as a
function of the stem vowel: ház-nak ‘house-Dative’ but kéznek ‘hand-Dative’. Because the stem vowel determines the
suffix form, it is called the trigger and the suffix vowel the
target of the harmony process.
Phonetic investigations have shown that vowels exert
influences on neighboring vowels across intervening
consonants (Öhman, 1966). Such ‘V-to-V coarticulation’
effects are observed as quantitative, phonetic patterns whose
degree varies depending on the quality of the intervening
consonants, stress distribution, and other factors (e.g.,

3.1. Experiments on Transparent Vowels
In Hungarian, the transparent vowels consist of the front
unrounded vowels {/i/, /í/, /é/, /e/}. In addition to allowing
agreement between vowels that are not in consecutive
syllables (e.g., papír-nak), three stable distributional
patterns have been observed in the phonology of transparent
vowels (e.g., Vago, 1980; Kaun 1995; Benus, 2005). First,
stems with only transparent vowels (T stems) may trigger
both front and back suffixes. The majority of T stems
trigger front suffixes (cím-nek ‘address-Dative’, szél-nek
‘wind-Dative’), but approximately sixty monosyllabic T
stems trigger back suffixes (síp-nak ‘whistle-Dative’, célnak ‘aim-Dative’). Second, stems where a back vowel
precedes one or two transparent vowels (BT and BTT stems
respectively) may trigger vacillation in suffixes. For
example, Hungarian speakers accept both hotel-nek and
hotel-nak as acceptable renderings of ‘hotel-Dative’.
Finally, increasing the number of the transparent vowels
that follow a back vowel decreases the likelihood of
selecting back suffixes. For example, kabin ‘cabin’ selects
back suffixes (kabin-nak) but aszpirin ‘aspirin’ vacillates
(aszpirin-nak, aszpirin-nek).
To understand the nature of transparent vowels, we
conducted for the first time a systematic study of their
articulatory properties using two experimental techniques.
228

Diminutive-Allative’. EMMA data from three subjects and
ultrasound data from one subject were analyzed.
For all subjects and both methodologies, the tongue
position during transparent vowels in stems triggering back
suffixes was slightly, but significantly, more retracted than
the tongue position during transparent vowels in stems
triggering front suffixes. The significant effect of harmonic
environment ranged between 0.4 and 2.5 mm for various
measurements. Figure 6 shows the effect of back harmony
(darker, dotted shapes) vs. front harmony (lighter, solid
lines) context with the ultrasound data.

The first technique, EMMA (Electro-magnetic Midsagittal
Articulometry, Perkell et al. 1992), uses an electro-magnetic
field to track the movements of small receivers attached to
the articulators.

Figure 4 : Articulator kinematics as recorded with EMMA.
Figure 4 shows the horizontal (dashed) and vertical
(solid) trajectories of receivers attached on the tongue tip
(TT), body (TB), dorsum (TD), and the upper and lower lips
(UL, LL) during the production of zafír-ban. To quantify
the spatial properties of transparent vowels (such as í in
zafír-ban), we measured the maximal horizontal
advancement of the TB and TD receivers during the
production of the transparent vowel (‘max’ in Figure 4).
Our second technique uses ultrasound (Stone 1997) to
provide 2D images of almost the complete surface of the
tongue at its midline, during the production of transparent
vowels. First, the frame with the most advanced tongue
position was determined as the target frame (left, Figure 5).
The tongue edge in this target frame was then traced using
methods of Iskarous (in press) by determining the points of
maximal contrast within the selected region (middle panel,
Figure 5), and fitting multiple snakes into a curve that
balances the distance of the points from the curve with the
curve’s smoothness (right panel, Figure 5).

Figure 6 : Effect of environment on /i/ (left) and /é/ (right).
In addition, transparent vowels in T stems produced in
isolation (with no overt suffix) were more retracted in those
stems that select back suffixes than in the stems selecting
front suffixes. For example, /í/ in words like síp ‘whistle’
was more retracted than /í/ in words like cím ‘address’; the
former triggers back suffixes while the latter triggers front
suffixes.
The overarching generalization from the phonetic and
phonological data is that fine differences in articulatory
retraction of transparent vowels are linked to an alternation
in the suffix form. The advanced/retracted version of a
transparent vowel selects the front/back suffix, respectively.
This systematic correlation between the phonetics and
phonology of transparent vowels argues for an approach in
which the phonetic backness of the stem-final vowel plays a
role in determining the phonological form of the suffix.
More broadly, we require an approach that integrates
continuous and discrete properties of transparent vowels
within a unified system.

3.3. Dynamic Model of Suffix Selection
Formally, the relation obtained between degree of retraction
and suffix selection is nonlinear. Small changes in degree of
retraction can cause large (nonlinear) changes in suffix
form. In other words, we require a formal language that
expresses this nonlinear nature of the relation between
retraction degree and suffix selection. This is the language
of nonlinear dynamics.
In the proposed dynamic model, the two discrete forms of
an alternating suffix (e.g., Dative -nak vs. -nek) are mapped
to attractors of a single dynamical system. To model the
dependence between the continuous parameter of retraction

Figure 5 : Static tongue surfaces captured with ultrasound,
and extraction of tongue contours.
Stimuli consisted of carefully selected pairs of words
where transparent vowels appear in similar consonantal
environments and are followed by either front or back
suffixes. For example, the /i/ in Tomi-hoz ‘Tom-DiminutiveAllative’ was compared to the /i/ in Imi-hez ‘Imre-

229

degree R of the stem-final vowel and the discrete form of
the suffix, we require that the choice of the suffix attractor
be modulated by variation in R. Following the discussion in
section 2, these ideas can be stated in the form of
equation x& = f ( x, R ) + Noise . This equation expresses the
temporal evolution of the suffix vowel constriction location,
denoted by x, as a nonlinear function f of the current state x
and the control parameter of retraction degree R.
What determines f(x,R)? An appropriate dynamical
system for the suffix alternation is required to have (at least)
a bistable (two-attractor) potential to capture the presence of
two stable forms of a suffix, front and back. A polynomial
of degree less than three allows for at most one attractor
(Arnold 2000). Hence, the simplest model for suffix choice
can be specified by a cubic polynomial. A good candidate
for f(x,R) is the ‘tilted’ anharmonic oscillator, whose
dynamics are described by f ( x, R) = (1 − R) + x − x3 (Gafos,
in press). Since x& = f ( x, R) = −dV ( x, R) / dx , we can compute

(BACK), corresponding to the back variant of the suffix. The
probability that a particle left in this potential ends up in the
vicinity of the BACK attractor is very high. Because the
position of the particle represents the [±back] form of the
suffix, it is predicted that the suffix is back, e.g., Tomi-hoz.
The graph in the upper right panel shows how the
potential V(x) changes for stems whose final vowels show
minimal or no retraction like Imi–. For minimal retraction,
modeled as R ≈ 0 , a qualitative change is evident in the
shape of V(x). The BACK attractor has been replaced by a
FRONT attractor that corresponds to the front variant of the
suffix. A stem with minimal retraction of its final vowel is
thus predicted to select front suffixes, e.g., Imi-hez.
The graph in the bottom panel of Figure 7 shows the
behavior of the system for intermediate values of the
parameter R ( R ≈ 1 ). In nonlinear dynamics, a change
from one macroscopic state of the system to another implies
an intermediate stage of fluctuation. We see that there are
now two minima representing the presence of two stable
states, FRONT and BACK. For intermediate values of R thus
our model predicts that the suffix can vary between a front
and a back version. To see this, we must consider the effects
of noise and initial position of the particle. For example,
consider a particle at a position around (0,0) in any of the
potentials of the bottom panel. Due to the random kicks
introduced by the fluctuations, the particle will end up either
in the FRONT or BACK attractor, and thus both front and back
suffix are possible. As discussed earlier, we do in fact find
two sources of suffix vacillation in Hungarian: stems where
a back vowel is followed by the low /e/ (e.g., hotel) and
stems where a back vowel is followed by two transparent
vowels (e.g., aszpirin).
Figure 7 illustrates the fundamental property of nonlinearity: equal changes in the control parameter (degree of
retraction) do not always effect proportionately equal
changes in the essential parameter (quality of the suffix).
For example, both R = 2 , and R = 1.6 result in
qualitatively the same potential, with the single BACK
attractor, albeit with different stability. But as R changes
from R = 1.6 to R = 1.2 or from R = 0.4 to R = 0.8 the
potential changes qualitatively from a mono-stable regime
(upper panels) to a bi-stable regime (lower panel). Hence, a
change of R by ∆ = 0.4 leaves the qualitative form of the
system unaltered within a certain region of the control
parameter space. But within a different region of control
parameter values, a change of the same magnitude causes a
qualitative change in the behavior of the system.
Our model then provides a qualitative match to the
Hungarian data by predicting that stems with minimal
retraction of their final vowel trigger front suffixes (e.g., Imi
and parfüm), stems with intermediate degree of retraction
trigger vacillation (e.g., hotel and aszpirin), and stems with
significant retraction trigger back suffixes (e.g., Tomi and
papír). These differences in stem-final vowel retraction
among the different stem classes have been explicitly
derived in a model of coarticulation between adjacent stem
vowels (Benus 2005). For example, the differences in

the potential landscape V ( x , R ) = ( R − 1) − x 2 / 2 + x 4 / 4 ,
by integrating f(x,R). Using concepts from section 2, the
value of the constriction location for a suffix vowel is
interpreted by the position of a particle running downhill in
this potential and the asymptotic behavior of x in this
equation can be visualized by looking at the simulations
shown Figure 7. For exposition purposes, in our simulations
we (arbitrarily) map the back form of the suffix (–nak) to an
attractor around x = −1.4 , and the front form (–nek) to an
attractor around x = 1.4 . The control parameter R varies
between 0 and 2, corresponding to minimal and maximal
retraction, respectively.

Figure 7 : Suffix form as a function of retraction degree R.
The graph in the upper left simulates suffix selection in
stems like Tomi–, which select back suffixes. We observed
experimentally that in such stems, the transparent vowel is
retracted. In our model, retraction enters the dynamics via R.
The function f(x,R) for a range of R values, R ≈ 2
(significant retraction), provides a potential V(x,R) with an
attractor close to the value of constriction location x = −1.4
230

Fowler, C. (1983). Converging sources of evidence for
spoken and perceived rhythms of speech: cyclic
production of vowels in sequences of monosyllabic feet.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 112, 384-412.
Freidlin, M. & Wentzell, A. (1984). Random perturbations
of dynamical systems. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gafos, A. (In press). Dynamics in grammar: Comments on
Ladd and Ernestus & Baayen. In L. Goldstein, D. Whalen,
C. Best (Eds.), Varieties of Phonological Competence
(Laboratory Phonology 8). Berlin, New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Haken, H. (1977). Synergetics, an introduction. Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag.
Iskarous, K. (In press). Edge detection and shape
measurement of the edge of the tongue. Clinical
Linguistics and Phonetics.
Kaun, A. (1995). The typology of rounding harmony: An
Optimality Theoretic approach. Doctoral dissertation,
UCLA. [Published as UCLA Dissertations in Linguistics,
No. 8.].
Kelso, S. (1995). Dynamic patterns: the self-organization of
brain and behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1978). Imagery and internal representation.
In E. Rosch & B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
categorization (pp. 217-257). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum
Associates.
Ohala, J. (1994). Towards a universal, phonetically-based,
theory of vowel harmony. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (pp. 491494).
Öhman, S. (1966). Coarticulation in VCV utterances:
Spectrographic measurements. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 39, 151-168.
Percival, I. & Richards, D. (1982). Introduction to
dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Perkell, J., Cohen, M., Svirsky, M., Matthies, M., Garabieta,
I., & Jackson, I. (1992). Electromagnetic midsaggital
articulometer (EMMA) systems for transducing speech
articulatory movements. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 92, 3078-3096.
Recasens, D. (1999). Lingual coarticulation. In W.J.
Hardcastle & N. Hewlett (Eds.), Coarticulation: Theory,
Data and Techniques in Speech Production (pp. 78-104).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Siptár, P. & Törkenczy, M. (2000). The phonology of
Hungarian. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stevens, K. (1972). The quantal nature of speech: evidence
from articulatory-acoustic data. In E. David & P. Denes
(Eds.), Human Communication: A Unified View (pp. 5166). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stone, M. (1997). Laboratory techniques for investigating
speech articulation. In J. Hardcastle & J. Laver (Eds.),
The Handbook of Phonetic sciences (pp. 11-32). Oxford:
Blackwell.
Vago, R. M. (1980). The sound pattern of Hungarian.
Washington: Georgetown University Press.

retraction degree of /i/, /e/, and /ü/ when they follow a back
vowel are linked to quantal properties of these front vowels.
More specifically, the low and somewhat retracted position
of /e/’s tongue body and the lip-rounding of /ü/ allow for
only limited retraction when these vowels coarticulate with
a preceding back vowel. With respect to stems where a back
vowel is followed by multiple transparent vowels, Benus
(2005) argues that the retraction degree of the stem-final
vowel in aszpirin is smaller than that of the stem-final
vowel in Tomi. This is based on the fact that the transparent
vowel in the stems like Tomi is directly preceded by a back
vowel while the stem-final transparent vowel in stems like
aszpirin is adjacent locally to a slightly retracted front
vowel and only non-locally to a back vowel.
Given the lawful relationship between retraction degree
and suffix form, our model thus accounts for the patterns of
suffix selection in stems like Tomi (back suffix) vs. Imi
(front suffix). The model also makes plausible and testable
predictions for the patterns of opacity (parfüm) and
vacillation (hotel, aszpirin). Currently, we are designing an
experimental paradigm to test these predictions. Overall
then, the proposed model builds on rigorous phonetic
methods for phonological research, provides an explicit link
between the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the
relevant speech patterns, and makes specific predictions
leading to new experimental studies.

4

Conclusion

We presented a model that allows one to relate continuous
phonetic distinctions to discrete phonological form using the
mathematics of nonlinear dynamics. In Hungarian
transparent vowels, small changes in tongue body
constriction location are related to qualitative changes in the
form of the suffix. This is the fundamental property of
nonlinearity, a hallmark of complexity in natural systems in
general and in phonetics-phonology in particular. In the
language of nonlinear dynamics, it is possible to model the
relation between the discreteness of phonological form and
the continuity of phonetic substance in which that form is
embedded.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank three anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments. Support by NIH Grant HD-01994 to
Haskins Labs is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are
ours.

References
Arnold, V. I. (2000). Nombres d’Euler, de Bernoulli et de
Springer pour les groupes de Coxeter et les espaces de
morsification: le calcul de serpents. In É. Charpentier &
N. Nikolski (Eds.), Leçons de Mathématiques
d’Aujourd’Hui (pp. 61-98). Paris: Cassini.
Benus, S. (2005). Dynamics and transparency in vowel
harmony. Doctoral dissertation, Department of
Linguistics, New York University.

231

