UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reflective Cognition as a Secondary Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zm624nq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hendricks, Petra
Mol, Lisette
Vebrugge, Rineke

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reflective Cognition as a Secondary Task
Lisette Mol (LisetteMol@cmu.edu), Niels Taatgen (Taatgen@cmu.edu),
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University;
5000 Forbes Av., Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

Rineke Verbrugge (L.C.Verbrugge@ai.rug.nl),
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen;
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, 9712 TS Groningen, The Netherlands

Petra Hendriks (P.Hendriks@let.rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, University of Groningen;
P.O. Box 716, 9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

Abstract

and acquire complex skills in the domains of reasoning about
others and language use.
In the next section, some theories relevant to the present
study will be described. Then follows a description of the
research question and the hypotheses that were stated. To
test the hypotheses, an experiment was conducted in which
participants played a game against each other. This game was
a variant of the game Mastermind. The experimental setup
and the predictions are described, followed by the results of
the experiment. The last two sections contain a discussion of
the results, the conclusions that can be drawn from this study,
and some ideas for future work.

Our hypothesis is that reflective cognition is necessary to
achieve expert level performance in certain skills, and that reflective cognition can be seen as a secondary task in skill acquisition. To investigate to what extent people use and acquire
complex skills and strategies in the domains of reasoning about
others and natural language use, an experiment was conducted
in which it was beneficial for participants to have a mental
model of their opponent, and to be aware of pragmatic inferences. Individual differences in the use of complex skills and
strategies, that support our hypothesis, were found.

Introduction

Background

In every day life, people frequently make use of their ability
to reason about others and to infer the implicit meaning of
sentences. Consider the following two situations:

Learning by Reflection

Situation 1 You are called by a friend who asks you for a
phone number. You know the number by heart, so you ask her
whether she has pen and paper. She answers you with “No, I
don’t”. Can you conclude that she also does not have a pencil
and paper ready?
Situation 2 You are playing happy families and you are the
first to pose a question. You ask your opponent for the ‘elephant’ of the family ‘mammals’. Your opponent replies with
“No, I don’t have this card”. Can you conclude that he doesn’t
have any member of the mammals family?
In the first case, you know that your friend has the desire to
be cooperative and thus your reasoning would be something
like, ‘She does not have a pencil, for if she did she would
have told me so, since she knows it is relevant’. In the second
case you know that your opponent does not want you to know
which cards he has, since he has the desire to win the game.
You therefore are aware that he would not tell you whether he
has any other members of the family, unless he really had to,
and thus you do not conclude that he does not have them.
These examples make it clear that people use their knowledge about the situation and about others to determine the
meaning of a sentence. It would be interesting to know how
humans use and acquire such skills. In the study described in
this article, it has been investigated to what extent people use
1525

The classical theory of skill acquisition (Fitts, 1964), describes learning as a process of automation: one starts a
new skill in the cognitive stage, in which controlled deliberate reasoning is needed to perform the task. This stage is
characterized by slow performance and errors. By repeatedly performing the skill, eventually the autonomous stage
is reached, where performance is fast and automatic, requiring little working memory capacity. During the process of
automation, the control that one has over the process of performing the task decreases. Deliberate access to automated
skills is therefore limited.
Although the classical theory can explain many phenomena, it is limited: Skills are usually considered in isolation,
whereas in reality they build on one another. For example, the
skill of multiplication is based on the skill of addition. However, according to the classical theory, mastered and hence automated skills cannot in themselves serve as a basis for more
advanced skills, because deliberate access to automated skills
is limited. Hence, it remains unclear how transfer of knowledge from one skill to another is possible.
In Karmiloff-Smith (1992), it is reported that children can
only describe what they are doing after they have mastered
a skill (e.g., in number conservation experiments). Thus, the
capacity for deliberate reasoning sometimes increases rather
than decreases with expertise. This cannot be explained by
assuming skill acquisition to end in the autonomous stage.
We suggest that skill acquisition is a continuous interplay
between deliberate and automatic processes. During the ini-

is the case that not all students passed the test. This is because if all students would have passed the test, the teacher
would have used the more informative term all instead of the
weaker term some, since otherwise the quantity maxim would
have been violated.
Some and all are scalar terms. Scalar terms can be ordered
on a scale of pragmatic strength. A term is said to be stronger
if more possibilities are excluded. An example is ha, some,
most, alli which is ordered from weak to strong. The above
example is an example of a scalar implicature. In case of
a scalar implicature, it is communicated by a weaker claim
(using a scalar term) that a stronger claim (using a more informative term from the same scale) does not hold.
Feeney, Scrafton, Duckworth, and Handley (2004), propose that there are three stages to people’s understanding of
some:

tial stages of acquiring a skill all deliberation is focused on
basic performance of the task. Once performing the task starts
to become more automatic, deliberate processes can shift to
reflection of the task. Basic performance of the task and reflection on the task can be considered dual tasks, both competing for resources. Once performance becomes more automated, more resources become available for reflection. Reflection allows using the skill as a building block for more
complex skills, looking ahead a few steps, or, as is the case
in the present study, reasoning about others’ knowledge (also
see Taatgen (2005), for examples of how automation can improve flexibility in reasoning).
We assume that to reach expert level performance in domains such as reasoning about others, pragmatics, and learning from instruction, deliberate reasoning processes, such as
self-monitoring, are crucial.

Theory of Mind Use
One of the advanced skills that we are interested in is the use
of Theory of Mind (ToM). Although children from the age
of six are able to distinguish between their own mental states
and those of others, Keysar, Lin, and Barr (2003) argue that
even adults do not reliably use this sophisticated ability to interpret the actions of others. They found a stark dissociation
between the ability to reflectively distinguish one’s own beliefs from others’, and the routine deployment of this ability
in interpreting the actions of others. The second didn’t occur
in their experiment.
To have a first order ToM is to assume that someone’s beliefs, thoughts and desires influence one’s behavior. A firstorder thought could be: ‘He does not know that his book is
on the table’. In a second-order ToM it is also recognized that
to predict others’ behavior, the desires and beliefs that they
have of one’s self and the predictions of oneself by others
must be taken into account. So, for example, you can realize
that what someone expects you to do will affect his behavior.
A second-order thought could be: ‘He does not know that I
know his book is on the table’. To have a third order ToM is
to assume others to have a second order ToM, etc.
In defining the different orders two choices have been
made. The first is that to increase the order, another agent
must be involved. ‘I know his book is on the table’ and ‘I
know I know his book is on the table’ are said to be of the
same order. So for the order to increase, the agents the knowledge is about must be different.
The second choice made is to consider both ‘I know p’
and p to be zeroth order knowledge. This mainly is a matter
of speech. The fact p in itself, which can be true or false,
only becomes knowledge when it is known by someone. So
only when someone knows that p, p can be considered zeroth
order knowledge.

(a) the logical (truth-conditional) interpretation which precedes children’s sensitivity to scalar implicatures,
(b) the pragmatic interpretation which results from drawing
pragmatic inferences,
(c) a logical interpretation that results from choice rather than
from the incapability to make the pragmatic inference.
The first two stages are in line with the results in Noveck
(2001) and Papafragou and Musolino (2003). Feeney et al.
(2004) found evidence for a third stage, in which adults can
choose a logical interpretation over a pragmatic interpretation, even though they can make the pragmatic inference that
some implies not all. They conducted an experiment in which
undergraduate students performed a computerized sentence
verification task. They recorded the student’s answers and
reaction times. Here are two of the some sentences they used.
1. Some fish can swim.
2. Some cars are red.

Pragmatic Inferences

Feeney et al. (2004) found that for participants who gave
logical responses only, reaction times for responses to infelicitous some sentences such as 1 were longer than those for
logically consistent responses to felicitous some sentences as
2. Notice that to both sentences the logical response is ‘true’.
The pragmatic response to 2 is ‘true’ as well. The pragmatic
response to 1 is ‘false’. So the sentences in which the logical
and pragmatic response are in conflict resulted in longer reaction times. These results favor a theory that logical responses
are due to inhibition of a response based on the pragmatic interpretation over a theory that logical responses result from
failure to make the pragmatic inference. This suggests that
a more logical language use in adults can be seen as an advanced skill.

Besides ToM reasoning, a second skill that has been investigated is language use, especially drawing pragmatic inferences. According to Grice (1989), people use the quantity
maxim to infer the implicit meaning of a sentence. The quantity maxim states that interlocutors should be as informative
as is required, yet not more informative than is necessary.
Using the quantity maxim it can be inferred that, for example, if a teacher says ‘Some students passed the test’, it

The context described in the previous section leads to the
following problem statement: How do deliberate and automatic processes interact in the acquisition of complex skills?
The study described in this article is an exploratory study, for
which the following research question is stated: To what extent do people use and acquire complex skills and strategies,

Research Question and Hypotheses

1526

Experimental Setup

in the domains of reasoning about others and language use.
This is narrowed down to the specific case of playing Master(s)Mind(s), a symmetric version of the game Mastermind,
which is described by Kooi (2000). A variant of this game is
used in the experiment described in the following section. To
find an answer to the research question, three hypotheses are
stated.

Participants (native Dutch speakers) had to complete two sessions, each of about three hours, in which they played a symmetric head to head game via connected computers. In this
game they had to correctly guess the secret code, consisting
of four different, ordered colors, of their opponent. Players
gave each other feedback by selecting Dutch sentences from
a list. Although not explicitly told to participants, these sentences differed in pragmatic strength. The game was about
gaining as much information as possible, while at the same
time revealing as little information as possible. Because of
this second aspect, the conversation is not fully cooperative
and thus hypothesis 2 is relevant.

Hypothesis 1 Performing a task and simultaneously reflecting upon this task can be seen as a form of dual tasking.
This hypothesis states that when people perform a task
which involves reasoning with incomplete information, or
drawing pragmatic inferences, reflection can be considered
a secondary task. The first task includes reasoning based on
one’s own knowledge and the truth-conditional (e.g., logical)
meaning of utterances. The second task is more complex, and
includes using reflection to reason about others, and to infer
from pragmatically implicated meaning. These tasks compete
for resources and their demands decrease with skill acquisition.
When playing Master(s)Mind(s) (see next section), the first
task is to play the game according to its rules. This involves
reasoning about the game rules and determining which sentences are true. The second task is to develop a winning strategy for the game. This involves reasoning about what the
opponent thinks, is trying to make you think, or thinks that
you are trying to make him think, etc., as well as determining
what is pragmatically implicated by an utterance, or which
utterances reveal the least information while still being true.

During the game, players had to submit their interpretation of the sentences they received as feedback. They had to
submit all the ‘worlds’ that they thought to be possible given
the feedback sentences, using a code: For each right color in
the right position they had to select a black circle and for each
color which was correct but in the wrong place, a white circle.
To represent ambiguity, participants could submit more than
one combination of black and white circles that they considered possible.
Let’s look at an example. Imagine John having the secret
code 1 = red, 2 = blue, 3 = green, 4 = yellow and Mary guessing 1 = red, 2 = orange, 3 = yellow, 4 = brown. The evaluation of this situation is that exactly one guessed color is right
and in the right place (red) and exactly one guessed color is
right, but in the wrong place (yellow). John has to choose
two feedback sentences to send to Mary, one about color and
one about position. He could say ‘Some colors are right.’ and
‘There is a color which is in the right place.’ This would indicate that John thinks that some can mean exactly two and
that a can mean exactly one. This is a pragmatic production
(in accordance with Grice’s maxims). If he had chosen the
sentence ‘One color is right.’, then he would allow one to
mean exactly two. This would be a more logical production
(in logic one is true in case of at least one).

Hypothesis 2 In an uncooperative conversation, people will
shift their interpretation and production of quantifiers from a
pragmatic (using Grice’s quantity maxim) to a less pragmatic
(not using Grice’s quantity maxim) use.
The idea behind hypothesis 2 is that in an uncooperative
situation, people will be aware that others are trying to reveal
little information (first order knowledge) and therefore will
be aware that the quantity maxim does not hold. They will
therefore not use the pragmatic inferences that they usually
do in interpretation. In addition, people may develop more
logical productions to be less informative themselves.
The reasoning necessary for this change in strategy is part
of the secondary task of reflective cognition. Therefore, people will only be able to make this change when the first task
is sufficiently automated.

Mary now has to give her interpretation of the sentences
chosen by John. So if she thinks that, given the first two sentences, it could be the case that two colors are right, of which
one is in the right position, she would submit (black, white) as
a possible interpretation. If she considers the situation where
three colors are right, of which two colors are in the right position, possible as well, she would also submit (black, black,
white). If she would only submit the first possibility, her interpretation would be pragmatic. If she would also submit the
second case, her interpretation would be more logical.

Hypothesis 3 In using quantifiers, people make use of an
automated process, which results in a pragmatic use of the
quantifier. This automated process can be ‘overruled’ by a
deliberate reasoning process, which results in a logical use
of the quantifier.

In the experiment Mary would have to give John feedback
about her guess compared to her own secret code as well, and
John would then submit his interpretation of those sentences.
Each turn, one player can make a guess, in this example Mary.

Hypothesis 3 is on what kind of reasoning is involved in
using quantifiers, especially to make the shift described in
hypothesis 2. The theory of three stages that is proposed by
Feeney et al. (2004) seems in line with the theory of skill acquisition we propose. If so, the process of making pragmatic
inferences should be an automated process and the ability to
overrule this pragmatic interpretation would result from reflective cognition. Once the demands of the first task have
decreased sufficiently, this reflective cognition can take place,
resulting in the change of strategy described in hypothesis 2.

During the experiment participants had to answer questions. The purpose of those questions was to get information
on their strategy and the order of the theory of mind they were
using. For the same purpose, participants completed a questionnaire after each session. More details on this experiment
and the results can be found in (Mol, 2004).
1527

Predictions
Since the game Master(s)Mind(s) involves many actions
which need to be performed each turn, participants are expected to start with a very simple or no strategy. As they get
more experienced in playing the game they will have enough
resources left to develop a more complex strategy.
Grice’s maxims are best applied in situations where conversation is cooperative. Since a rational strategy for playing
the game in the experiment is to be as uninformative as possible, communication will probably not be cooperative in the
experimental conditions. So once the participants have mastered the game well enough to think about strategy and have
become familiar with the uncooperative context, they are expected to develop a less pragmatic use of the sentences.
It is expected that while playing the game, the order of the
theory of mind used by the participants increases. This will
lead to the participant considering the amount of information
that is revealed by the feedback sentences chosen, and the
amount of information that will have to be revealed as a result of a guess made (first order ToM). The participant will
also become aware that his opponent is trying to reveal little information (second order ToM). This will lead to a more
logical interpretation. Eventually, the participant may use the
knowledge that his opponent knows that he is trying to hide
certain information (third order ToM).
Individual differences in what order of ToM will be used
and how logical language use becomes are expected, as well
as individual differences in the speed of developing a better
strategy. Since the logical language use participants eventually reach results from a conscious reasoning process, participants are expected to be able to describe this part of their
strategy.

Table 2: Strategy. This table shows what kind of strategy
participants used during the experiment, initially and finally.
The strategy was determined from answers that participants
gave to questions posed during the experiment. The numbers
of the participants who made a shift are in italic in the row
that represents the final strategy.

initially
finally

pragmatic

other
6, 7
2, 3, 6,
7, 8 10

initially

8

finally

6, 7,
8, 12

fairly
pragmatic
5, 6, 7, 9,
10, 12
9, 10

fairly
logical
1, 2, 3,
4
1, 2, 3,
4, 5

logical
11
11

The remaining eight participants all used first order ToM.
An example of first order ToM use in this game is that agent
1 takes into account what agent 2 already knows about agent
1’s secret code. Two of these participants had a strategy of
being uninformative and a fairly logical language use, similar
to the participants who used second order ToM. The other six
used the strategy of being informative or a strategy which did
not consider the amount of information being revealed and
had a fairly to strict pragmatic language use.
All participants with a strategy of being uninformative and
a fairly to strict logical language use showed a type of behavior which the others did not show (table 4). This behavior
consists of preferring less informative sentences to more informative ones in production. For example, favoring sentence
1 over sentence 2 in a case where, from a logical perspective,
they both hold.

The participants are numbered from 1 to 12. Participants 10,
11 and 12 completed only one session.
Table 1: Highest Order of ToM used. This table shows the
highest order of ToM that participants used during the experiment. The numbers represent the participants. The order
used was determined from the answers participants gave to
questions that were asked during the experiment.
possibly 2nd order
4

being
informative
3, 8, 9, 12
9, 12

Table 3: Language use. This table shows the type of productions and interpretations (logical or pragmatic) of participants
during the experiment, initially and finally. The numbers represent the participants. The numbers of the participants who
made a shift are in italic in the row that represents the final
language use.

Results

1st order
3, 5, 6, 7, 12
8, 9, 10

being
uninformative
1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 11
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11

2nd order
1, 2, 11

1. ‘Some colors are right.’
Three out of twelve participants showed clear signs of the
use of second order ToM (table 1). One additional participant
probably used second order ToM as well, but in this case it
was less clear. An example of second order ToM use in this
game is that agent 1 assumes that the guesses made by agent
2 are evasive about agent 2’s own code, since agent 2 does
not want agent 1 to know agent 2’s secret code. All of these
four participants played in accordance with a strategy of being uninformative (table 2) and had a fairly to strict logical
language use (table 3).

2. ‘All colors are right.’
All participants who used second order ToM did so from
the start. No shifts in order of ToM used were observed.
Some shifts were measured in language use. One participant
shifted from a fairly pragmatic to a fairly logical use. This
participant had a strategy of being uninformative. Three participants shifted from a fairly pragmatic to a fully pragmatic
use. They did not use a strategy of being uninformative. The
other participants were constant in their language use.
1528

takes, and had relatively much experience in working with
computers and playing strategic games. Also, three of them
indicated to have a fair knowledge of logic.
There were two participants that had a strategy of being
uninformative and a logical language use, but did not seem to
use second order ToM. These were the participants that developed either their strategy or their language use during the
experiment. These participants may represent an intermediate stage in which some resources are available for reflective
cognition, but not yet enough to use all the complex skills.
Half of the participants did not show the use of any complex skills. Some of them developed strategies which they described as making things difficult for the opponent, but they
did not relate this to the amount of information they revealed.
It could be that these participants were too occupied with the
first task to use reflective cognition, or that they did not think
of logical language use as a possible way to use language.
These participants made relatively many mistakes.
Hypothesis 2 stated that in an uncooperative situation, people will shift their interpretation and production of quantifiers
from pragmatic (using Grice’s quantity maxim) to less pragmatic (not using Grice’s quantity maxim). None of the participants developed a more logical language use in the way
that was meant in hypothesis 2. However, by the end of the
experiment, half of the participants had a fairly to strict logical language use. As explained above, it could be the case
that these participants had enough resources left for reflective
cognition from the start of the experiment, so that they could
use logical productions and interpretations.
Hypothesis 3 stated that in interpreting and producing
quantifiers, people make use of an automated process, which
results in pragmatic use of the quantifier, and that this automated process can be ‘overruled’ by a deliberate reasoning
process, which results in logical use of the quantifier. It seems
that pragmatic language use is not automated for all people in
the situation of the experiment, since some participants developed pragmatic language use while repeatedly playing Master(s)Mind(s). This could be because of the context dependent meaning of some of the scalar terms used. It is unlikely
that half of the participants were unable to use pragmatic language use, since they were all adults. Thus, it seems that
people can indeed choose not to use pragmatic language use.
Since most participants wrote down comments on their way
of interpreting the scalar terms, it seems that changing this
interpretation is indeed a deliberate reasoning process.

Table 4: The preference for uninformative sentences. This
table indicates which participants preferred to use less informative sentences in production. The numbers represent the
participants. The numbers of the participants who made a
shift are in italic in the row that represents the final behavior.

initially
finally

preferred less
informative
sentences
1, 3, 4 , 5 , 11
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11

did not prefer less
informative
sentences
2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12

One participant shifted from a strategy of being informative to a strategy of being uninformative. This participant had
a fairly logical language use. One participant abandoned the
strategy of being uninformative, to give the opponent a better
chance of winning (!). This participant had a fairly pragmatic
use of language.
The participants using more advanced strategies clearly
had to put little effort into playing the game and understanding the computer program used. The people with the least
advanced strategies made more mistakes in playing the game
than others.
Most participants wrote down thoughts on the meaning of
scalar terms, the terms they considered possible and their
strategy in their answers to the questions posed during the
experiment.

Discussion and Conclusion
The research question for this study was: To what extent do
people use and acquire complex skills and strategies, in the
domains of reasoning about others and language use. It was
found that four out of twelve participants used all complex
skills that were measured: a strategy of being uninformative,
using logical interpretation and production, and using second
order ToM reasoning. By the end of the experiment half of
the participants had a logical interpretation and production
and also half of the participants had the strategy of being uninformative. One participant developed this strategy during
the experiment. Another participant developed a more logical language use during the experiment. A third participant
developed a better strategy in production.
There clearly were individual differences. Some participants did not seem to use complex skills and strategies.
Some participants developed a more pragmatic language use.
This may be because the pragmatic meaning of some of the
scalar terms used was dependent on the situation and therefore was not yet fully automated for the context of playing
Master(s)Mind(s).
Hypothesis 1 stated that performing a task and simultaneously reflecting upon this task is a form of dual-tasking. Although participants showed little development during the experiment, the results are in line with this hypothesis. The four
participants that showed the use of all complex skills did so
from the start of the experiment. It could be the case that the
first task, playing the game according to its rules, was relatively easy for these participants. They made few or no mis-

Future Work

1529

In future work, more evidence for or against hypothesis 1
has to be found. The difficulty of the first task needs to be
varied, to investigate whether this influences the use of skills
that result from reflective cognition. In the Master(s)Mind(s)experiment, there are several ways to do so. The interface of
the computer program used could be made less user friendly,
time pressure could be added, and the number of colors in
a secret code could be varied. Also, a less well known game
similar to Master(s)Mind(s) could be used, because most people know the regular version of the game Mastermind, which
can be a benefit in playing Master(s)Mind(s).
An improvement in the experimental setup should be made
to better be able to measure complex skills and strategies.

Participants with pragmatic language use had a disadvantage
in strategy development. A strong strategy for this game is
to reveal little information. The less informative sentences
that logical language users could prefer often were regarded
as false by pragmatic language users such that they could not
use these sentences. By including more expressions, such as
for example niet alle (not all), the possibilities for pragmatic
language users can be increased. In addition, logical language
use should be taught to participants prior to the experiment,
to make sure that all participants are aware of the possibility
of using language in this way.
An alternative for hypothesis 2 could be: In an uncooperative conversation, some people will use quantifiers in a way
that is not in accordance with Grice’s quantity maxim, but
more truth-conditional. To test this hypothesis, it should be
investigated whether the cooperativeness of the situation has
an influence on language use. This could be done by observing the language use of the participants who had a logical
language use during the Master(s)Mind(s)-experiment, while
they play a fully cooperative game, in which a mutual goal
has to be reached by two or more players.
To make it more clear whether or not logical language use
can only result from overruling pragmatic language use, as
stated in hypothesis 3, it would be interesting to let the participants to the Master(s)Mind(s) experiment do an experiment
like the one that was conducted by Feeney et al. (2004). This
could also be done for other scalar terms than some. Such an
experiment could reveal whether the participants who had a
logical language use from the start still need to overrule their
pragmatic language use. If participants were to complete such
an experiment before and after doing the Master(s)Mind(s)experiment, people who have shifted to more logical use are
expected to have increased reaction times, since they now
have to overrule their automated interpretation process.
In addition to conducting more experiments, cognitive
modeling could also be used to find answers to the remaining
questions. This could be particularly helpful in determining
what kind of reasoning processes, automated or deliberate,
are involved in using scalar terms and theory of mind reasoning. Also, it could be investigated what parameters, such as
for example working memory capacity, correlate with the use
of a particular order of ToM reasoning and a particular type
of language use.

References
Feeney, A., Scrafton, S., Duckworth, A., Handley, S. J.
(2004). The story of some: Everyday pragmatic inference
by children and adults. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58:90–101.
Fitts, P. M. (1964). Perceptual-motor skill learning. In Categories of human learning. New York: Academic Press.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond modularity: A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA:
MIT/ Bradford Books.
Keysar, B., Lin, S., Barr, D. J. (2003). Limits on theory of
mind use in adults. Cognition, 89:25–41.
Kooi, B. (2000). Master(s)mind(s). See http://www. philos.rug.nl/˜barteld/.
Mol, L. (2004). Learning to reason about other people’s
minds. Master’s thesis, University of Groningen.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78:165–188.
Papafragou, A. & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics-pragmatics interface. Cognition, 86:253–282.
Taatgen, N. A. (2005). Modeling parallelization and flexibility improvements in skill acquisition: From dual tasks to
complex dynamic skills. Cognitive Science, 29:421–455.

1530

