UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representing Events using Fuzzy Temporal Boundaries

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ph2105h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Harter, Derek
Lu, Shulan

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representing Events Using Fuzzy Temporal Boundaries
Shulan Lu (Shulan_Lu@tamu-commerce.edu)
Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University
Commerce, TX 75429 USA

Derek Harter (Derek_Harter@tamu-commerce.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Texas A&M University
Commerce, TX 75429 USA
are the same. Event representations may have more dynamic
event nodes linked to each other than the temporal links
suggested by simple hierarchical structures (Schank, 1999).
What temporal relations are necessary for constructing
event representations? In artificial intelligence, Allen (1984;
1991) proposed a representation that contains seven
relational primitives. Figure 1 provides an illustration of
Allen’s seven event temporal relations. Each double-headed
arrow in Figure 1 represents an event that occurs over some
time interval, whereas each arrow-head represents either the
beginning or the end of an event. The relation between each
pair of events is described by one of seven predicates. These
seven primitives have been used as basic temporal operators
for automated planning and reasoning systems that reason
with and make logical deductions about event temporal
relations.

Abstract
This study investigates whether people represent the
beginnings and ends of events as fuzzy temporal frames and
subsequently construct event temporal relations. The study
adopted Allen’s (1984; 1991) seven logical categories of
temporal relations. Constructing the seven relations often
requires the accurate encoding and (or) retrieval of the
beginnings and ends of events. We used a recurrent neural
network to simulate the performance of humans in
representing event temporal relations. The network was given
fuzzy event inputs, generated using Zadeh (1975) fuzzy logic
functions, and trained to judge the event temporal relations.
We compared the performance of the recurrent neural
network to that of humans in a task where they were asked to
remember and reconstruct everyday temporal relations. The
simulations showed that the recurrent neural network
mimicked human judgments in the correct judgments,
preferences toward particular temporal relations, and
directions of error. The results support that event temporal
relations are best thought of as fuzzy analogue representations
in humans and the simulated network.

BEFORE
MEET

Keywords: temporal representation; events.

OVERLAP
START

Introduction
Our everyday life consists of various events we experience
and enact. Consider a few examples: going to work, having
dinner at a restaurant, and meeting with friends. Each of
these events has a number of subevents. These subevents are
related to each other in various dimensions such as by
causal links. Most of all, events unfold in time and relate to
each other temporally. In this paper, the term event refers to
something that happens at a given place with a beginning
and an end.
Many researchers suggest that event temporal properties
provide a basic framework for structured event
representations (Allen, 1984; Barsalou, 1999; Freyd, 1987;
Graesser, Kassler, Kreuz, & McLain-Allen, 1998). Events
have time spans (duration) over which they take place.
Events also have temporal locations relative to each other
(temporal relations). Most studies in psychology tend to
treat events as following one another within the event
hierarchy (e.g., no overlapping of events at the same level of
a hierarchy). However, when two or more events are
occurring, they can have overlaps in time. In addition, the
overlap in time can vary. For some events, the beginnings
are the same. For others, neither the beginnings nor the ends

DURING
FINISH
EQUAL
Figure 1: Temporal Relations (Allen, 1991, pp.5).
Some events have crisp, clear cut temporal frames.
Moving a coffee mug is an example, where the beginning,
the end, and the temporal trajectory are not ambiguous.
Some events have fuzzy temporal frames. Viewing sunset is
an example, where the beginning and end are ambiguous,
and the temporal trajectory may be on and off. The
psychological frame of an event may or may not deviate
from its physical frame. Allen’s representation captures
some intuitive aspects of human temporal reasoning. For
example, people tend to make relatively good estimations of
event durations (Golding, Magliano, & Hemphill, 1992;
Loftus, Schooler, Boone, & Kline, 1987), whereas people

1343

tend not to be good at estimating the points of time when
events take place (Golding et al., 1992; Linton, 1975). Such
evidence suggests that an interval based representation may
be a more natural way of relating events and drawing
inferences about the temporal relations between events.
When people perceive and remember event temporal
relations, it appears that the beginnings and ends of the
event psychological frame may deviate from the physical
frame (Lu, 2004). Figure 2 depicts a psychological frame of
event temporal properties. An Event Ei has a psychological
frame of Ei (bi, ci, ei), where bi is the parameter that controls
the region where the beginning point of an event Ei is likely
to have occurred, ci is the (psychological, not objective)
fuzzy centroid during which Event Ei occurs, and ei is the
parameter that controls the region where the end point of
event Ei is likely to have occurred. The perceived properties
of an event interval may be fuzzy, that is, an approximation
to the physical frame. In the figure, probability of 1
represents areas where there is complete certainty that the
event occurred. Probability 0 represents times when there is
certainty that the event was not occurring. Intermediate
values represent fuzzy regions, where recall or perception
are not completely sure of the occurrence or non-occurrence
of the event.

formation of temporal patterns of activity. More
specifically, based on the proposal in Figure 2, the
constructed temporal relation between events will be
influenced by the fuzzy, analogue nature of event temporal
properties, where the beginnings and ends of the events are
represented to be somewhere in the fuzzy regions.
Elman (1990) showed that simple recurrent neural
networks (SRNN) are ideal for modeling cognitive
processes that depend on not only spatial but temporal
properties. Recurrent connections save and propagate past
states of a network to the current context to allow for the
recognition of patterns with temporal properties. Therefore
SRNN allow for the history of the inputs, and the dynamics
of the system, to affect the pattern recognition. This paper
investigates how humans construct temporal relations by
comparing the performance of simple recurrent neural
network models against the performance of human
perception and memory of event temporal relations. In the
SRNN simulation presented, the networks received events
with fuzzy beginnings and ends.
We compare the
performance of the SRNN with human performance in a
judgment task about event temporal relations. In the human
experiment, participants made judgments of complex
everyday events such as two subevents of stirfry vegetables.
If humans perceive event temporal properties in a fuzzy,
analogue world, then the temporal representations may not
preserve the detailed, accurate properties of the physical
temporal frames. In the network simulation, the proportions
of the correct judgments made by SRNN receiving fuzzy
events should mimic the judgments made by humans
remembering everyday events. In addition, the error patterns
of SRNN should exhibit some of the same patterns as the
human errors.

SRNN Simulation
Training
Figure 2 : Fuzzy event psychological frame.

In the network simulation, we trained a SRNN network to
categorize event temporal relations. The network received
25 discrete time steps as inputs. There were two inputs to
the network, representing the certainty of the presence of
two events, A and B. The network had 7 outputs, one for
each of the 7 possible temporal relations, and a number of
hidden units between the input and output layers. Networks
were trained by creating a training set of 1000 examples
(divided approximately equally between the 7 relations).
For each given input relation, an output unit was trained to
become active as soon as it recognizes its target temporal
relation.
Figure 3 presents an example of an OVERLAP temporal
relation used in the training. Here event A has an objective
starting time of t = 5 and objective end time of t = 10,
whereas event B started at t = 7 and ended at t = 15. In the
network simulation uncertainty was added into the input
representation. This uncertainty, we believe, better models
the situation of humans where event comprehension is often
noisy and uncertain. Therefore, instead of binary inputs of 0

How might humans go about constructing event temporal
relations? Symbolic approaches in artificial intelligence,
when representing temporal relations, typically assign
temporal stamps to the events and build representational
graphs. There are similar proposals in psychology on how
event temporal properties are represented (Linton, 1975).
However, such approaches have been challenged by the
connectionist and embodiment theorists (Barsalou, 1999;
Boroditsky, 2000; Elman, 1990; Lakoff & Johonson, 1999;
Michon, 1993). Elman (1990) showed that temporal
properties can be modeled in their implicit effects on
processing rather than explicit spatial representations.
Boroditsky (2000) showed that time is grounded and built
up through experiential domains. In this paper, we propose
that the event psychological temporal frames are fuzzy
(inexact) and that event temporal relations get constructed
via the dynamic processing of events and subsequent
1344

⎧0
⎪ ⎛ x − α ⎞2
⎪2⎜
⎟
⎪ ⎜ γ − α ⎟⎠
S ( x;α , β , γ ) = ⎨ ⎝
2
⎪1 − 2⎛⎜ x − γ ⎞⎟
⎜ γ −α ⎟
⎪
⎝
⎠
⎪
⎩1

or 1, the event inputs were real valued numbers ranging
from 0 to 1 inclusive, where 1 indicates certainty that the
event is occurring, 0 indicates certainty that the event is not
occurring, and numbers in between indicate more
intermediate certainty. When training the network output,
the unit representing the OVERLAP relation would be
trained, for the event in Figure 3, to begin responding with a
1 value at time step 19.

β
⎧
⎪S(x;γ − β,γ − 2 ,γ)
Π ( x; β , γ ) = ⎨
β
⎪1 - S(x; γ, γ + ,γ + β)
2
⎩

for x ≤ α
for α ≤ x ≤ β
(Equation 1)
forβ ≤ x ≤ γ
for x ≥ γ

for x ≤ γ
for x ≥ γ

(Equation 2)

Results
Number of Hidden Units We first determined an
appropriate number of hidden units to use for the SRNN
networks in our simulation. The networks were trained
with a number hidden units ranging from 20 to 100 in
increments of 5, 10 networks for each hidden unit
parameter. We then used the performance of the 10
networks on a separate set of test events to determine the
number of hidden units that will be selected.

Figure 3: Example fuzzy event input to SRNN.
The s-function (Equation 1) was used to generate the realvalued certainty levels shown in Figure 3. The s-function
defines a membership, or certainty curve, over some time
range x. In the s-function, β serves as the inflection point,
where the certainty measure is 0.5 (indicating neutrality in
the perception of whether the event is occurring or not
occurring), and α and γ define beginnings and ends of the
event interval where their certainty ranges from 0
(absolutely certain that an event is not occurring) to 1
(absolutely certain that an event is occurring) respectively.
In our simulation, if Event A had an actual begin time at t =
5, we used this time step as the inflection point (β = 5 in the
s-function). We calculated α and γ based on the length of
the event in such a way that the complete certainty an event
is occurring only happens at the midpoint of the actual
event. Since event A lasted from t = 5 to t = 10, we set γ to
be at this midpoint, or 7.5. The α parameter was then set to
be symmetrical to γ from the inflection point, or 2.5 in this
case. The final call to the s-function for the beginning of
Event A was therefore with the parameters S(x; 2.5, 5.0,
7.5), which generated the certainty curve for the beginning
of the Event A shown in Figure 3. We used a similar
method to generate the curve for the end of the event, but
simply reversed the sense of the s-function so it generated a
decreasing rather than increasing certainty curve over the
end-point of the event. The equation for generating the total
certainty curve is known as the Π-function and is given in
Equation 2.
1345

Figure 4: Network architecture used in relational judgments
simulation.
The best single performance occurred with number of
hidden units set to 60, where an error of .027 is reached. The
best average performance occurred with 75 hidden units,
which was the number of units we used to generate the
performance data for the simulation in the next section.
Relational Judgments A trained Elman SRNN with 75
hidden units, as shown in Figure 4, performed temporal
relational judgments. The Elman SRNN feeds back a copy
of the activation of the hidden units at a previous time step
in order to achieve its recurrent connectivity. In the
simulation using this architecture, the probability of the
network making correct judgments of event temporal
relations was .54 (SD = .33) on average.

Table 1: Proportion of Network Judgments on Fuzzy Events.
Network Judgment
Events in the World
BEFORE
MEET
OVERLAP
START
DURING
FINISH
EQUAL

BEFORE
.738
.132
0
.015
0
.013
0

MEET
.262
.840
.118
.008
0
0
0

OVERLAP
0
0
.176
.015
.028
.084
0

START
0
.028
.426
.649
.448
.078
.033

DURING
0
0
.067
.076
.214
.019
0

FINISH
0
0
.066
.046
.083
.221
0

EQUAL
0
0
.147
.191
.228
.584
.966

confusions between BEFORE and MEET at times. Overall,
the network performed well in judging BEFORE and
MEET, which suggests that the network could form
distinct activation patterns for BEFORE and MEET
respectively.
The relations with temporal overlap (e.g., DURING,
OVERLAP) and mixed synchronous/asynchronous end
points (FINISH, START) seem to be the most difficult for
the SRNN. These four relations appear to form a third
distinct group, and can be easily confused with one another
by the network.

Table 1 presents the confusion matrix of the network
performance on the fuzzy test event set. The test set was a
new set randomly generated and different from the training
set used to train the network. In Table 1, rows represent the
actual events presented to the network, and columns hold
data on how the network actually performed. We report the
proportion of the actual network judgments for a particular
event temporal relation. For example, of the MEET events
tested, the network correctly made MEET judgments 84%
of the time. However, looking across the row, the network
misjudged 13% of the MEET events as BEFORE events and
made a further smaller error in judging 3% of the MEET
events as START events. The network made the correct
judgments on each of the seven temporal relations above
chance level (assuming chance = 1 / 7 = .143), with the
OVERLAP receiving the lowest proportion of correct
judgments (.176). The network performed better on some
event temporal relations (e.g., EQUAL) than others
(OVERLAP).

Remembering Everyday Event Time

Discussion The network had the best performance when
categorizing BEFORE, MEET, and EQUAL events. The
performance on BEFORE and MEET events are well above
average at .738 and .840 respectively. The simulation does
particularly well on EQUAL event relations achieving a
.966 accuracy. The network had the most problems with
OVERLAP, DURING and FINISH events, doing slightly
better but still not well on START events.
The excellent performance on EQUAL events is
intuitively not surprising. In an EQUAL relation, both
events last exactly the same number of time steps and both
start and end at the same time step. All these features may
allow for fairly simple networks to come up with solutions
to recognize EQUAL.
BEFORE and MEET appear to be fairly similar. To
discriminate between the two, the network has to develop
some recognition of whether a temporal gap occurred
between the two events or not, and this memory may need
to be held for many time steps. Of course, the larger the gap,
the easier it might be to recognize and remember the gap.
The confusion may increase if the temporal gap between
events is smaller. Not surprisingly, the network had some

The dynamic mental representations of events may
include the transitional states between events. For example,
Freyd (1987) showed that people tend to project the next
state of an event even if a picture they view does not contain
that anticipated subsequent state. What tasks in everyday
life have closer approximation to the fuzziness entailed in
the simulated event relation judgment task? It is not hard to
imagine that people routinely need to construct and
reconstruct something like, “what should I do while I am
doing this?” or “what should I do next?” The temporal
properties of everyday events are likely to be fuzzy, for
example, as a result of the intrinsic fuzzy nature of the
everyday events and memory retention loss.
In the current experiment, participants were presented two
events that were part of a routinely enacted activity and that
were classified theoretically as having one of Allen’s seven
temporal relations. Participants read the events in a context,
where the events occur, such as “imagine someone boarding
a plane.”, and made judgments on event temporal relations.
Consider the example stimulus below.
Context: Imagine someone boarding a plane.
Events: She went through airport security screening.
Her carry-on bags were X-rayed.
The two events in the above example have the DURING
relation. That is, the event of X-raying carry-on bags
typically occurs during the process of a person going
through security check. If humans represent the event
temporal frame in fuzzy regions, the probability of correctly
judging the event temporal relations would not be high.

1346

Table 2: Proportion of human judgments on everyday events.
Human Judgment
Events in the World
BEFORE
MEET
OVERLAP
START
DURING
FINISH
EQUAL

BEFORE
.415
.165
.092
.134
.129
.103
.024

MEET
.340
.471
.254
.199
.167
.245
.044

OVERLAP
.142
.230
.370
.188
.245
.287
.068

Method
Participants There were 68 college students at The
University of Memphis who participated for course credit.
Materials A sample of events from everyday activities were
collected. To ensure generality, the events were chosen from
a wide range of everyday activities that college students
routinely experience and perform. Three raters were trained
to understand Allen’s scheme, and made judgments on how
each two events were related in time separately. The
materials used in the experiment were the items agreed upon
by all three judges. There were 8 test items for each of the 7
temporal relations in Figure 1. Therefore, there were 56 test
items in total.
Procedure Participants were told that they would make
judgments concerning the temporal relations of everyday
events. Participants were shown a diagram similar to Figure
1, except that the word labels (e.g., BEFORE) were
stripped. Experimenter did not launch experiment until
participants understood all 7 relations.
Pairs of events along with their contexts were presented to
participants one at a time on the computer screen. The two
events were listed as two sentences in two rows separately.
Participants were told that the presentation order of the two
events was random and did not necessarily correspond to
the actual order in their daily activities. Participants were
instructed to read the two events and recall how they
normally performed the two events in the activity they read
and reconstructed. They proceeded to the next screen once
they felt they comprehended the events and reconstructed
the timing for enacting the events. The two events and the
seven-choice diagram were presented on the screen.
Participants made their judgments about the temporal
relation between the two events at the end of the trial.

START
.048
.046
.097
.156
.085
.096
.061

DURING
.007
.018
.017
.011
.033
.017
.024

FINISH
.013
.022
.013
.017
.028
.050
.020

EQUAL
.035
.048
.158
.296
.314
.204
.759

DURING (.033), FINISH (.050), and EQUAL (.759). The
confusion matrix for the human experiments is shown in
Table 2. Table 2 shows that humans clearly had preferences
toward EQUAL events and that humans frequently mistook
OVERLAP, START, DURING, and FINISH events as
EQUAL events.
Overall the network performance was significantly
correlated with the human performance (including both
correct judgments and errors), r = .67, p < .05. Two sets of
correlational analysis were performed on the correct human
judgments and correct network judgments. The Spearman
correlation showed that there were significant correlations
of the order of human judgments in the experiment with that
of the network judgments, r = .79, p < .05. The Pearson
correlations showed that there were one way significant
correlations between the proportions of correct human
judgments and the proportions of the network judgments, r
= .25, p < .05.

Discussion

Results

When humans recalled and reconstructed events based on
their routine activities, they appear to have remembered
more details of the transitional temporal properties. For
example, participants made correct judgments on four out of
seven event temporal relations significantly above the
chance level, and made correct judgments on START events
no lower than chance level (.14). DURING and FINISH
were the only event temporal relations that rarely got
constructed.
Compared with the network simulation, humans’ recall
and reconstructions of event temporal relations had lower
proportions of correct judgments on average (with a mean of
.32 versus .54). Such differences were partly due to the
extremely low recall of DURING (.033) and FINISH (.050)
in human judgments. The proportions of correct human
judgments on BEFORE, MEET and EQUAL events were
also lower than the proportions of correct network
judgments.
Overall, the network receiving fuzzy input
representations mimicked human judgments in everyday
events to a larger extent. The order in which seven temporal
relations received correct judgments is not the only index.

On average, the proportion of the correct judgments in
Experiment 2 was .322 (SD = .261). The proportional error
rates of the seven relations were the following: BEFORE
(.415), MEET (.471), OVERLAP (.370), START (.156),
1347

However, the task needs to be sufficiently different from
some temporal reasoning task. For example, event X occurs
before event Y, and event Z and event Y occur
simultaneously. When does event X occur in relation to
event Z?
The results reported in this paper suggested that temporal
representations of events are richer than previously
assumed. Events can occur one after another, immediately
follow one another, overlap with one another, and occur
simultaneously. The event temporal frames are often
represented in fuzzy regions.

For example, in both cases, OVERLAP, START, DURING,
and FINISH events were frequently mistaken as EQUAL
events. In addition, the pattern of confusions between
BEFORE and MEET were similar as well. There were two
exceptions worth noting. Unlike the network receiving
fuzzy events, humans made more correct judgments on
OVERLAP and more false alarms on OVERLAP events.
Furthermore, humans did not make as many correct
judgments and false alarm on START as the network did.

General Discussion
The SRNN networks and humans appear to have many of
the same strengths and weaknesses when performing event
temporal relation judgment tasks. Some event temporal
relations are very simple to represent and recognize,
whereas others are much more difficult. Humans and the
simulated networks consistently demonstrated three distinct
preferences in representing event temporal relations and
tended to mistake difficult temporal relations as one of the
three preferences. The results suggested that the event
temporal properties tend to be represented in a fuzzy
analogue manner and the beginning and the ends of events
are not crystal clear to observers.
While BEFORE and MEET were confused with one
another at times, in general both the networks and humans
tended to do well in recognizing these and distinguishing
between the two. EQUAL appeared to be particularly easy
as a temporal pattern that can be uniquely captured when it
occurred, both by the simulations and humans. Some
confusions can occur between START and/or FINISH with
EQUAL, but these appear to reflect the difficulty of
representing the START/FINISH relation. Events that have
asynchronous beginning and/or endings appear to be
particularly difficult for both SRNN networks and humans
to distinguish between.
These relations, OVERLAP,
START, FINISH and DURING, are prone to be confused
with one another and are difficult to recognize with any high
degree of accuracy.
The network performances also differed from humans in
some ways. When humans made judgments on connected,
everyday events that are part of an activity, humans failed to
outperform the network. The errors were distributed more
broadly. The OVERLAP relations received both higher hit
rate and false alarms when humans judged everyday events,
whereas the OVERALP relations received poor judgments
when the network received fuzzy events. This may suggest
that humans are able to construct a pattern that could
represent asynchronous events. Such results may be due to
some differences in the simulated task and the experiment
described. The everyday events are embedded in an
overarching event structure. There is possibly vagueness in
linguistic expressions of everyday events. In future studies,
it will be necessary to construct simulated events that have
events embedded in overarching higher order constituents
(e.g., schema) and systematically investigate the
representational changes and potential loss of temporal
properties in constructing the event temporal relations.

References

1348

Allen, J. F. (1984). Towards a general theory of action and
time. Artificial Intelligence, 23, 123-154.
Allen, J. F. (1991). Time and time again: The many ways to
represent time. International Journal of Intelligent
Systems, 6, 341-355.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Freyd, J. J. (1987). Dynamic mental representations.
Psychological Review, 94, 427-438.
Golding, J. M., Magliano, J., & Hemphill, D. (1992). When:
A model for answering “when” questions about future
events. In T. W. Lauer, E. Peacock, & A. C. Graesser
(Eds.), Questions and information systems (pp. 213-282).
Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., Kassler, M. A., Kreuz, R. J., & McLainAllen, B. (1998). Verification of statements about story
worlds that deviate from normal conceptions of time: What
is true about Einstein’s Dreams? Cognitive Psychology, 35,
246-301.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in flesh: The
embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought. New
York: Basic Books.
Linton, M. (1975). Memory for real-world events. In D. A.
Norman, & Rumelhart, D. E. (Eds.), Explorations in
cognition (pp. 376-404). San Francisco, CA: Freeman.
Lu, S. (2004). Perceiving, remembering, and describing
event temporal relations. Dissertation Abstracts
International, 65 (06), 3191. (UMI No. 3137799)
Loftus, E. F., Schooler, J. W., Boone, S. M., & Kline, D.
(1987). Time went by so slowly: Overestimation of event
duration by males and females. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 3-13.
Michon, J. A. (1993). Concerning the time sense: The seven
pillars of time psychology. Psychologica Belgica, 33, 329345.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic memory revisited. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Zadeh, L. A. (1975). Fuzzy Sets and Their Applications to
Cognitive and Decision Processes, Academic Press.

