UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representing Categorical Knowledge: A fMRI Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47b6g27g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hanson, Catherine
Hanson, Stephen Jose
Matsuka, Toshihiko
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representing Categorical Knowledge: An fMRI Study
Toshihiko Matsuka1 (matsuka@psychology.rutgers.edu)
Takashi Yamauchi2 (tya@psyc.tamu.edu)
Catherine Hanson1 (cat@psychology.rutgers.edu)
Stephen Jose Hanson1 (jose@psychology.rutgers.edu)
1.
RUMBA, Psychology Department, Rutgers University – Newark
2.

Department of Psychology, Texas A&M University

Abstract
This paper investigated the nature of mental representation of
categorical knowledge by examining the neural substrates that
support classification and feature inferences. The results from
one experiment suggest that frontal lobe regions were activated
when an inference task was given, while temporal lobe regions,
especially the fusiform gyrus, became active when a
classification task was given. These results are consistent with
the view that categorical knowledge is mediated by two
separate neural structures, and further indicate that two
interrelated functions of categories – classification and feature
inference – are processed by distinct brain regions.

Human knowledge is organized largely by categories that we
form in everyday situations. Many of man-made names, such
as “terrorists,” “fundamentalists” or names of natural objects
such as dogs and cats are all categorically arranged. Perhaps,
because of this generic characteristic of knowledge
representation, we are able to carry out many complex and
abstract tasks such as communication, reasoning, and solving
math problems relatively easily.
How do we represent categorical knowledge in our brain?
In this paper, we examined the neural structures that support
the representation of categorical knowledge. We addressed
this problem by comparing two basic functions of categories
– classification and feature inference. Classification and
inference are two of the most important functions of
categories (Smith, 1994). The very reason why human
concepts are organized categorically is said to license
inferential predictions (Anderson, 1990; Rosch, 1978). In this
regard, we consider that scrutinizing the underlying neural
structures of these two functions would provide a crucial clue
to understand the nature of mental representations of
categorical knowledge.
Despite the close relationship between classification and
feature inference, much research in concept formation in the
last 40 years has focused on the investigation of classification
(see Murphy 2002 for review). These studies suggest that
subjects acquire some form of “category-level knowledge”
after extended training of classification (see Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Posner & Keele, 1968). That is, (1) subjects
are able to classify new items accurately even though they
have never seen exactly the same items during a learning
phase; (2) their accuracy of classification transfer depends on
the degree of feature overlap between a transfer item and
studied items; (3) subjects generally classify non-studied
prototypes (average instances) as accurately as studied items.

A dominant theory of category learning explains that the
aforementioned effects of category learning arise because
participants in an experiment make classifications by
measuring similarities between a new target item and old
exemplars that were stored in memory. In this theory, the
mental representation of category-level knowledge consists of
the episodic memory trace of the instances that were
experienced during learning (Medin & Schaffer, 1978;
Nosofsky, 1986; Kruschke, 1992).
Although this theory has received an impressive amount of
support from a variety of studies, this view has met serious
challenge from two sources: (A) Patients who have severe
damage to hippocampus and the medial temporal lobe learn
to classify new items as accurately as normal control subjects,
while their recognition memory for training items is severely
impaired (Knowlton & Squire, 1993; Squire & Knowlton,
1995; but see also Nosofsky & Zaki, 1998; Palmeri &
Flanery, 1999; for an alternative explanation); (B) The extent
to which specific exemplar information affects category-level
representations depends on the task and the structure of
categories that are employed in a category learning task
(Smith & Minda, 1998; Maddox, et al., 2003; Markman &
Ross, 2003; Ross, 1997; Smith, Patalano, & Jonides. 1998;
Strange et al. 2001; Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). For
example, recent neuroimaging studies have reported
increased activities in the vicinity of the frontal lobe during
categorization tasks that require an application of abstract
rules (Smith et al. 1998; Strange et al. 2001), while the
temporal lobe is responsible for object recognition and
classification (e.g., Haxby et al. 2001)
These findings indicate that the mental representation of
categorical knowledge is likely to consist of multiple neural
substrates – one that processes similarity-based associative
information, and the other that assesses rule-based abstract
information (Ashby, et al., 1998; Erickson & Kruschke, 1998;
Smith et al., 1998).
Consistent with this suggestion, our studies have indicated
that different types of information are used for classification
and feature inference: Subjects often rely on the information
about concrete instances to make classifications, while they
use abstract rule-like information to make feature inferences
(Yamauchi & Markman, 2000).
On the basis of these findings, we reasoned that if
categorical knowledge in general is represented by multiple
neural substrates, then the category information acquired by a
particular single learning task should generate a mental
representation that encompasses separate brain regions;

1425

stimulus
A0
A1
A2
A3
A4
B0
B1
B2
B3
B4

Table 1: Category Structure
category form size color
A
1
1
1
A
1
1
1
A
1
1
0
A
1
0
1
A
0
1
1
B
0
0
0
B
0
0
0
B
0
0
1
B
0
1
0
B
1
0
0

cortical areas such as the medial temporal lobe should
become primarily active when a classification task is given.

position
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0

Experiment

Note. A “correct” response in an inference question is defined
as those consistent with the feature value of the
corresponding prototype stimulus (i.e., values 1 in Set A, and
values 0 in Set B).

Participants & Materials Participants were 34 students at
Rutgers University who participated in this experiment for
course credit. The data from 2 participants were lost for fMRI
analyses. In total, there were 16 participants in a classification
learning condition and 16 participants in an inference learning
condition.
The stimuli were geometric figures that were differentiated
with 4 feature dimensions of binary values – form
(circle/triangle), color (red/green), size (large/small), and
position (left/right). Each stimulus was bound by a
rectangular frame drawn with a solid black line on the
computer screen. These stimuli were equivalent to those
employed in the Medin and Schaffer (1978) study.
Table 1 shows the structure of the two categories. A single
stimulus set was produced from two prototypes by changing
one of the four feature values. For example, the prototype of
Category A was arbitrarily determined with the values of (1,
1, 1, 1) = (form=circle, color=red, size=large, position=left),
and the prototype of Category B was defined with values of
(0, 0, 0, 0) = (Form=square, color=green, size=small,
position=right). To produce a training stimulus, A1 (1, 1, 1,
0), the feature value of position in A0 was replaced with that
of B0. In this manner, no single feature deterministically
divides the two categories, and every stimulus used in
training possessed three features consistent with the prototype
of the corresponding category and one feature consistent with
the prototype of the opposite category. Hereafter, the feature
values that were consistent with the opposite prototypes were
called “exception-features.”
Procedure The basic procedure of the experiment consisted
of three phases – a learning phase, a filler phase, and a
transfer phase, which were given in sequence. The learning
phase was further subdivided into two between-subjects
conditions – the classification learning condition, and the
inference learning condition. The filler phase and the transfer
phase were identical in all participants.
Learning Phase In the classification learning condition,
participants were shown one of the eight training stimuli and
were asked to indicate the category to which it belonged by
pressing a specified response key (Figure 1a). In the inference
learning condition, participants made inferences of one of
four features while its category label and the remaining three
feature values were depicted in the stimulus frame. For
example, in Figure 1b, participants were presented with a
stimulus frame depicting the size, color, and position of the
item as well as its category label, and the form of the item
was left unspecified. Participants were asked to select one of
the two values of the unspecified feature. For each stimulus,
the location of the correct choice was determined randomly.
Initially, no information about the category was given, and
participants had to guess. Following each response, feedback
was provided together with the entire display of a stimulus
and its category label. The stimulus frames for feedback were

furthermore, such a representation should be selectively
accessed by a classification test and an inference test. We
tested this hypothesis in the following experiment.
In our experiments, participants learned two arbitrary
categories incrementally either in a classification task or in a
feature inference task (Nosofsky, 1986; Medin & Schaffer,
1978; Yamauchi & Markman, 1998). Stimuli were geometric
figures similar to those used in the Medin and Schaffer study
(1978) (Figure 1). In a classification task, participants
predicted the category membership of a stimulus on the basis
of the information about other four features; in an inference
task, participants predicted an unknown value of a feature on
the basis of the information about the other three features and
the category membership of the stimulus. After each trial,
participants received feedback.
Our main focus of investigation was concerned with the
characteristics of the mental representation thus formed after
classification learning or inference learning. Given the
hypothesis that category representation incorporates two
types of information – similarity-based exemplar information
and rule-based abstract information, we hypothesized that two
different brain regions should become primarily active in the
same subjects.
More specifically, we predicted that,
irrespective of the format of learning, the frontal lobe region
that supports rule-based abstract information becomes active
when an inference transfer task is given; in contrast other

1426

identical in the two learning conditions. In classification
learning, participants saw all eight exemplars except for the
two prototypes (i.e., A0 (1, 1, 1, 1), B0 (0, 0, 0, 0)). In
inference learning, participants answered all feature questions
for each stimulus except for the feature questions associated
with the two prototypes (e.g., A0 (?, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)). This
arrangement was made to equate the two learning conditions
as much as possible (see Yamauchi & Markman, 1998).
In the classification learning condition, each block
consisted of 8 different classification questions that
corresponded to 8 exemplar stimuli of the two categories. In
the inference learning condition, each block had 4 different
feature questions (form, color, size, and position) associated
with 8 different exemplars of the two categories. In this
manner, all 24 inference questions excluding exceptionfeature values of individual stimuli were carried in three
consecutive blocks of the inference learning condition. These
three blocks were presented in the same order throughout the
learning phase. Within each block, the order of presenting
individual questions was determined randomly.
The stimulus presentation schedule in the two learning
conditions was as follows: (1) a fixation point appeared for 2
seconds, (2) a stimulus (either a classification question or an
inference question) was presented for 6 seconds, (3) a
response frame, in which a response was solicited, appeared
for 4 seconds, (4) a feedback frame was shown for 4 seconds.
All participants carried out the learning phase with this
presentation schedule.
The learning phase consisted of a total of 96 trials (12
blocks). The learning phase was divided into four sessions of
24 trials. All participants received a short break after each
session.
Filler Phase Immediately at the completion of the learning
phase, all participants were given an anatomical scanning
(i.e., MP-RAGE) trial, in which the anatomical images of
individual participants were registered. This phase lasted
approximately 10 minutes.
Transfer Phase The stimulus presentation schedule of the
transfer phase, which was identical in all participants, was as
follows: (1) a fixation point appeared for 2 seconds, (2) a
stimulus (either a classification question or an inference
question) was presented for 6 seconds, (3) a response frame
appeared for 4 seconds. No feedback was given for the
transfer tasks.
Participants were first given 10 classification transfer
questions and then 32 inference questions. The 10
classification questions consisted of 8 classification questions
of the 8 exemplars of the two categories and 2 prototypes.
These 8 classification questions were “old” in the sense that
these stimuli were presented during the learning phase. The 2
other classification questions were “new” in the sense that
these stimuli were never presented during the learning phase.
The order of presenting classification transfer questions was
determined randomly. Immediately after completing all the
classification transfer questions, participants answered 32
inference transfer questions. These questions encompassed all
possible feature inferences of 8 stimuli (4 feature questions

for 8 stimuli). The order of presenting inference transfer
questions was determined randomly. The instructions
specifically asked participants to make their decisions based
on the categories learned during the learning phase.
fMRI data acquisitions The data consisted of 32 axial slices
(3.0mm thick, no gap) BOLD collected from a Siemens 3T
Allegra using a gradient echo EPI (TR = 2000ms, TE = 30
3.0mm thick axial images, field of view = 220mm, matrix
size = 64 x 64). We collected five BOLD data sets (four
during the learning phase and one during the transfer phase)
and two anatomical images were recorded twice for each
subject before the Learning phase and during the Filler phase.
All BOLD data collections lasted for the entire session for the
learning phase or the entire session for the transfer phase. No
data was acquired during 4 short breaks in the learning phase.
Design The experiment employed an one-between-factor
(learning condition: classification learning vs. inference
learning) repeated measure (transfer task: classification
transfer vs. inference transfer) design. The dependent measure
for the behavioral analyses was the proportion of “correct
classifications” and “correct inferences” (see Table 1 for the
definitions of “correct” responses). In order to account for
meaningful differences in brain activities associated with
classification and inference tasks, we screened out
participants who performed less than 80% accuracy in the last
3 blocks of the training trials. In addition, in order to find the
differences in brain activities associated with classification
and inference of category, but not particular learning
strategies, we were only concerned about within-subject
differences in those tasks and thus analyze only BOLD data
from the transfer session.
Our analysis was carried out using FEAT Version 5.4, part
of FSL (FMRIB’s Software Library). The following prestatistics processing was applied; motion correction using
MCFLIRT (Jenkinson 2002); non-brain removal using BET
(Smith 2002); spatial smoothing using a Gaussian kernel of
FWHM 5mm; mean-based intensity normalization of all
volumes by the same factor; highpass temporal filtering
(Gaussian-weighted LSF straight line fitting, with
sigma=12.5s). Low-level time-series statistical analysis for
individual subjects was carried out using FILM with local
autocorrelation correction (Woolrich 2001) with Gamma
convolution (SD = 3 and mean lag = 3.0s) for the
hemodynamic responses. Registration to high resolution and
standard images was carried out using FLIRT (Jenkinson,
2001 & 2002). Higher-level analysis was carried out using
FLAME (FMRIB’s Local Analysis of Mixed Effects)
(Beckmann, et al. 2003; Woolrich, et al., 2004).

Results

1427

Behavioral Analyses We first report the results from
behavioral data (see Table 2), and then form the fMRI data.
Learning Performance We first discuss participants’ learning
performance for the last 24 trials (3 blocks) of the learning
tasks and examine whether or not participants in the two
learning conditions reached approximately the same level of

learning performance. This analysis showed that participants
in the two learning conditions were equally accurate; t(30) =
0.15, p= 0.88. Cohen’s d = 0.05. Overall, 10 out of the 16
participants in the inference learning condition reached an
accuracy level of 80% or above (M = 0.83, SD = 0.20), and
10 out of the 16 participants in the classification learning
condition reached an accuracy level of 80% or above (M =
0.82, SD = 0.19). For our fMRI analyses we used the data
taken from these 20 participants (10 participants in each
condition) to make sure that the two groups of participants
were equivalent in their learning performance. The accuracy
of these selected sets of participants was statistically
indistinguishable; Inference condition, M = 0.958, SD =
0.071; Classification condition, M = 0.930, SD = 0.061; t(18)
= 0.95, p = 0.36, d = 0.43.
Transfer Performance Table 2 shows the transfer
performance of the participants in the two learning
conditions. Because our fMRI analyses were applied only to
the data obtained from the 20 selected participants (see
above), we will report behavioral results obtained from these
participants alone. First, participants in the two conditions
were generally able to generalize one mode of learning
procedure to another; yet their transfer performance was
better when their learning task and their transfer task matched
than when these two tasks miss-matched.
Overall, participants in the two conditions were able to
perform the classification transfer tasks and the inference
transfer tasks better than a chance level; t(9) > 4.28, p < 0.01
for all four dependent measures. A 2 (learning condition) x 2
(transfer task) ANOVA revealed that the two learning
conditions were not different in their overall transfer
performance, F(1, 18) = 1.07, MSE = 0.035, p = 0.31, η2 =
0.056; most importantly, the main effect of transfer task was
not significant; F =(1, 18) = 2.50, MSE = 0.009, p = 0.13, η2
= 0.122, suggesting that the overall accuracy of the two
transfer tasks was not statistically different. An interaction
effect of the two factors was significant; F(1,18) = 18.03,
MSE = 0.009, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.500. Given the inference
transfer task, participants in the inference condition were
more accurate than participants in the classification condition;
t(18) = 3.02, p < 0.05, d = 1.13. In the classification learning
condition, participants were significantly better in
classification transfer than inference transfer; t(9) = 4.13m p
< 0.05, d = 1.31.
Taken together, these results suggest that (1) the two
categories learned by one task (either classification or
inference) can give rise to a representation that can handle
both the classification transfer task and the inference transfer

task; (2) in general, transfer performance was better when the
learning task and the transfer task matched.
fMRI Analyses Table 3 shows the areas that exhibited
significant and differential activations for the classification or
inference tasks. Since the numbers of data points differ in the
two sets of transfer data, we used different threshold values
for those data sets. The voxels with Z-values larger than 3.50
and Z-values larger than 2.00 were plotted for the
classification and inference, respectively. Figure 2 shows the
areas that exhibited higher activations during the
classification transfer task as compared to the activations
observed during the inference transfer task. Most notable
activations occurred in the fusiform gyrus, Brodmann’s area
37 (BA37), the superior parietal gyrus (BA7); and the cuneus
(BA18) in the occipital lobe. In contrast, Figure 3 shows the
areas that exhibited higher activations during the inference
task as compared to the classification task. These areas
include the right inferior frontal gyrus (BA47), the medial

Table 2: Transfer Performance - Means and standard
deviations (enclosed in parentheses)
Training Condition
Transfer Task
Classification Inference
Classification
0.882 (0.153) 0.703 (0.109)
Interference
0.827 (0.145) 0.911 (0.124)
Average
0.854 (0.149) 0.807 (0.171)

Table 3: List of activation areas
Region of activation
BA
L/R
Z
Fusiform Gyrus
37
L&R 6.17
Cuneus
18
L&R 4.33
Superior Parietal
7
L&R 4.26
Inferior Frontal
47
R
3.13
Medial Frontal
10
L&R 2.60
Cingulate & Anterior 24/31 L&R 3.40
Cingulate
INF Superior Temporal
22/38
R
2.88
Note: CL=classification transfer task, INF=inference
transfer task, BA=Brodmann’s area, L/R=Left/Right
hemisphere

Task
CL
CL
CL
INF
INF
INF

Figure 2 Brain areas that have more activation in
classification tasks than inference tasks. The areas include
fusiform gyrus (left), cuneus (middle), and superior parietal
gyrus (right)

Figure 3 Brain areas that have more activation in inference
tasks than classification tasks. The areas include, right inferior
gyrus, right superior temporal lobe (left), medial prefrontal
gyrus (middle), and cingulate (right).

1428

frontal gyrus (BA10), the right superior temporal gyrus
(BA38), the cingulate (BA 24, BA31) and the anterior
cingulate (BA24).
Interpretations - Classification Task: It is widely accepted
that the fusiform gyrus is associated with object recognition
(e.g. Haxby et al., 2001). This may indicate that the
classification process was driven by some concrete
identification mechanism related to the recognition of
individual stimuli. The increased activity in the cuneus may
be explained by its role in memory retrieval. That is, in the
classification task participants probably tried to compare a
target stimulus (to be categorized) with previously
encountered exemplars in order to classify the target stimulus
correctly. This indicates that the classification process indeed
requires some form of memory-based process (e.g. Smith et
al., 1998; Nosofsky, 1986). However, it is uncertain what
sort of memory was retrieved in this process (e.g., exemplars
vs. prototypes). It is, however, as discussed below, less likely
to be a retrieval of rules. Another important function of the
cuneus is visual and spatial attention. A number of studies
have shown that classification learning increases attention to
the features that divide between categories (Goldstone, 1995).
The observed activation in the cuneus is likely to reflect this
attentional shift in classification. Similarly, the superior
parietal lobe is known to mediate selective attention.
Although, this observation is not consistent with the results of
a neuroimaging study by Smith et al. (1998), in which
increased activities in the superior parietal lobe was observed
during rule application, but not in memory based processes,
we find our result (involvement of attention process in
classification) to be consistent with the results of several
recent computational modeling studies; Some computational
models incorporating selective attention process (Nosofsky,
1986; Kruschke, 1992) have been successful in accounting
for many psychological phenomena, and thus it is highly
possible that this memory-based process requires selective
tuning of attention processes. However, we do not have a
clear interpretation why the classification task requires a
“greater” amount of (spatial) selective attention than the
inference task, given that the stimuli used in the present
experiment were qualitatively identical. Our hypothesis is that
classification tasks and inference tasks require or induce
different types of attention mechanisms recruited while
examining either stimulus features or category label.
Interpretations - Inference Task: We found that several
different brain areas were activated during the inference task,
namely the right inferior frontal gyrus (BA47, a part of
Broca’s area), medial frontal gyrus (BA10), superior temporal
lobe (BA38), cingulate (BA24 & BA31) and anterior
cingulate (BA24). In particular, increased activities in the
right inferior frontal gyrus and the medial frontal gyrus agree
with previous neuroimaging findings on rule-applying
categorization tasks. For example, Smith et al. (1998)
observed an increased activity in right dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (BA46), which is also part of Broca’s area. In addition,
Strange et al. (2001) observed an involvement of the Fronto-

polar prefrontal cortex (BA10) during rule learning. In
general these frontal lobe areas are suggested to be important
for executive functions. In addition, the right inferior frontal
gyrus is known to be related to language processing,
including abstract grammar computation (Sahin et al., 2004),
and the medial frontal gyrus is associated with working
memory (e.g., buffering & retrieval)
In addition to those “rule” areas, we observed a significant
activity in the right superior temporal lobe, which can be
considered as a part of Wernicke’s area, another area for
language processing. This area has further interesting
functions; for example, a study indicates that this area is
involved when a difficult exploratory search through feature
items was required (Ellison, et al 2004); and Jung-Beeman et
al. (2004) reported that this area is involved in solving verbal
problems insightfully (e.g., “aha!” moment)
Finally, we observed an increased activity in the cingulate
and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), probably playing an
important role as an executive attention system by relegating
tasks to achieve efficient usage of brain areas (Posner &
Raichle, 1994). The cingulate and ACC might have been
involved in switching attentional targets between category
label and visual features of stimuli during inference task.
In sum, for the inference task, we observed several brain
areas that are associated with language processing. This
finding perhaps indicates that despite their visual presentation
the stimuli were semantically processed as participants made
feature inferences.

General Discussion
Discussion on fMRI results: Our findings suggest that
multiple neural circuits mediate the representation of
categorical knowledge – one that supports abstract rule-like
information and the other that records concrete exemplar
information. The results from the present neuroimaging
study indicate that classification requires a process that is
oriented to perceptual information, while feature inference
relies on more abstract and semantically oriented processes.
Previous research showing distinctive neural circuits involved
in memory-based and rule-applying processes may be
described by these two differences.
Our findings further suggest there are more than one
attention systems involved in categorization processes. It is,
however, unclear what triggered different attention processes.
That is, it might have been the differential processes of
category label and stimuli feature, differences in memorybased and rule-applying processes, and/or difference in
perceptual and semantic processes.
This distinction between semantic and perceptual
information reflects the verbal and nonverbal distinction
suggested by Ashby et al. (1998). Category labels are most
typically expressed verbally, while other features are most
typically expressed visually. Furthermore, category labels,
which specify category membership, correspond to an object
as a whole, while features correspond to specific parts of an
object. Processing an overall aspect of an object and parts of
objects may require different neural mechanisms.

1429

References
Anderson, J. R. (1990). The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychological
Review, 3, 442-481.
Beckmann, C., Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S. M. (2003)
General multi-level linear modelling for group analysis in
FMRI. NeuroImage 20, 1052-1063.
Ellison, A., Schindler, I., Pattison, L. L., & Milner, A. D.
(2004). An exploration of the role of the superior temporal
gyrus in visual search and spatial perception using TMS.
Brain, 127, 2307-2315.
Erickson, M. A., & Kruschke, J. K. (1998). Rules and
exemplars in category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 107-140.
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Effects of categorization on color
perception. Psychological Science, 6, 298-304.
Haxby, J. V., Gobbini, M.I., Furey, M. L., Ishai, A.,
Schouten, J. L., & Pietrini, P. (2001). Distributed and
overlapping representations of faces and objects in ventral
temporal cortex. Science, 293, 2425-2430.
Jenkinson, M., Bannister, P., Brady, M., & Smith, S. (2002).
Improved optimisation for the robust and accurate linear
registration and motion correction of brain images.
NeuroImage 17:2 825-841.Jenkinson, M & Smith, S.M.
(2001). A Global Optimisation Method for Robust Affine
Registration of Brain Images. Medical Image Analysis 5:2
143-156.
Jung-Beeman M, Bowden EM, Haberman J, Frymiare JL,
Arambel-Liu S, et al. (2004) Neural Activity When People
Solve Verbal Problems with Insight. PLoS Biology, 2(4):
e97.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1993). The learning of
categories: Parallel brain systems for item memory and
category knowledge. Science, 262, 1747-1749.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99(1), 22-44.
Maddox, W. T., Ashby, F. G., & Bohil, C. J. (2003). Delayed
feedback effects on rule-based and information-integration
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 650-662.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592-613.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification. Psychological Review, 85, 207-238.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the

1430

identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Zaki, S. (1998). Dissociations between
categorization and recognition in amnesic and normal
individuals:
An
exemplar-based
interpretation.
Psychological Science, 9(4), 247-255.
Palmeri, T. J., & Flanery, M. A. (1999). Learning about
categories in the absence of training: Profound amnesia and
the relationship between perceptual categorization and
recognition memory. Psychological Science, 10, 526-530.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.
Posner, M. I., & Raichle, M. E. (1994). Images of mind.
New York: Scientific American Library. Rosch, E. (1978).
Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd
(Eds.), Cognition and Categorization (pp. 27-48).
Hillsdale, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ross, B. H. (1997). The use of categories affects
classification. Journal of Memory and Language, 37(2),
240-267.
Sahin, N. T., Halgren, E., Ulbert, I., Dale, A., Schomer, D.,
Wu, Julian, & Pinker, S. (2004). Abstract grammatical
processing in Broca’s area: Evidence from human in-vivo
electrophysiological and fMRI. Poster Presented at the 11th
Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain
Mapping. Budapest, Hungary.
Smith, E. E. (1994). Concepts and categorization. In E. E.
Smith & D. N. Osherson (Eds.), An invitation to cognitive
science (Vol. 3, pp. 3-33). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, E. E., Patalano, A. L., & Jonides, J. (1998).
Alternative strategies of categorization. Cognition, 65,
167-196
Smith, S. (2002). Fast Robust Automated Brain Extraction.
Human Brain Mapping 17:3 143-155.
Squire, L. R., & Knowlton, B. J. (1995). Learning about
categories in the absence of memory. Proceeding of
National Academy of Science, 92, 12470-12474.
Strange, B. A., Hension, R. N. A., Friston, K.J., Dolan, R. J.,
(2001). Anterior prefrontal cortex mediates rule learning in
humans. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 1040-1046.
Woolrich, M.W., Behrens, T.E.J., Beckmann, C.F., M.
Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S.M. (2004). Multi-level linear
modelling for FMRI group analysis using Bayesian
inference. NeuroImage 21:4 1732-1747
Woolrich, M.W., Ripley, B.D., Brady, J.M., & S.M. Smith, S,
M (2001) Temporal Autocorrelation in Univariate Linear
Modelling of FMRI Data. NeuroImage 14:6 1370-1386.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (1998). Category-learning
by inference and classification. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 124-148.

