UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Representational Effects in a Rule Discovery Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6gp475nf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Peshkin, Leonid
Savova, Virginia

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Representational Effects in a Rule Discovery Task
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau, Andrea Krüsi Penney and Teresa Payton
Psychology Research Unit, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames, UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE

f.vallee-tourangeau /a.kruesi /t.payton@kingston.ac.uk
Abstract
In the Wason (1960) rule discovery task reasoners must infer
a rule that governs the production of number sequences. The
task instructions are designed such that reasoners’ initial
hypotheses are invariantly narrower than the correct rule. The
inferential challenge lies in discovering the scope of these
initial hypotheses. The traditional task departs from realworld hypothesis testing in at least one significant respect:
The task is never presented in a manner that offers a rich
external representation of the problem. The study reported
here examined representational effects by developing task
isomorphs which offered either an external, physically
manipulable, representation of the problem space or a
graphical presentation of the simple linear relationships
between adjacent numbers in a sequence. Compared to a
control condition, these task isomorphs lead to a significantly
higher incidence of successful rule discovery, and encouraged
the creation of a significantly more heterogeneous set of
number sequences. Further, control participants had to
produce 50% more number sequences than participants who
worked with a rich external representation before discovering
the rule.
Keywords: Reasoning; distributed cognition.

Introduction
Wason (1960) created a simple inductive inference context
which cast light on reasoners’ ability to discard plausible but
overly narrow hypotheses. Wason’s 2-4-6 task consists of
discovering the rule that governs the production of
sequences of three numbers, or triples. To do so,
participants create new number sequences that are then
classified as either conforming or not to the rule. In Wason’s
original task the rule is ‘any increasing sequence’. Before
formulating their first test triple, participants are given the
following crucial but misleading piece of information: the
triple 2-4-6 conforms to the rule. This information implicitly
identifies a set of triples that is narrower and more
structured than the set of all conforming triples (Klayman &
Ha, 1987). The salient features of the 2-4-6 example,
namely evens and constant increments, constrain the initial
hypotheses formulated by reasoners just as Wason (1960)
intended. New sequences motivated by such initial
hypotheses (e.g., 8-10-12) will unfailingly receive positive
feedback since they are predicated on features that are
sufficient but not necessary to produce triples that receive
positive feedback. The challenge in this task thus lies in
discovering the boundaries of such initially plausible
hypotheses by formulating sequences that fall outside their
scope, such as 1-19-33 for example.

Solving the 2-4-6 task is hard. In Wason’s (1960) original
study, 80% of participants failed to announce the correct
rule at their first attempt. Subsequent replications have
reported similarly low rates of success (e.g., Mahoney &
DeMonbreun, 1977; Tweney, Doherty, Worner, Pliske,
Mynatt, Gross, & Arkkelin, 1980; Wason, 1968). Two
features characterise the hypothesis-testing output of most
participants: indolence and narrow-mindedness (ValléeTourangeau, Austin, & Rankin, 1995). That is, participants
produce few triples before announcing their best guess and
those triples form a very homogenous set, which includes
relatively few triples that increase by variable increments or
that receive negative feedback. This rather grim reasoning
profile has been consecrated into textbook wisdom (e.g.,
Poletiek, 2001; Schustack, 1988; Sutherland, 1992).
Two research avenues can be explored in an attempt to
shed light on the poor rule-discovery performance in the 24-6 task. The first focuses on properties internal to the
reasoners (cf. Stanovich & West, 2000). Wason himself
enjoined future researchers to identify reasoners with a
‘disposition to refute’ (1960, p. 139). Vartanian, Martindale,
and Kwiatkowski (2003) suggested that individual
differences in creativity predicted successful rule induction
in the 2-4-6 task. The second focuses on properties of the
external environment. The aim is to determine whether
variations in the physical presentation of the task encourage
different degrees of diligence and creativity, and hence
result in different degrees of success (Duncan, 1998). The
research reported here stems from this latter perspective.

Representational Effects
Despite the simplicity of the 2-4-6 task, the inferential
challenge of identifying the scope of a hypothesis and
establishing its generalizability mirror features of real-world
hypothesis-testing (Gorman, 1995). However, unlike realworld hypothesis testing the external representation of the
dimensions of the triple space and the actual number
sequences is nonexistent or impoverished. Rule discovery
behaviour proceeds primarily on the basis of the reasoner’s
internal representation of the problem. The extent to which
the representation of the problem is distributed between the
reasoner’s mind and the environment is limited to the
written record of triples tested and feedback received. In this
important respect the inferential context of the original
Wason task is relatively atypical of real-world hypothesis
testing. Scientific hypothesis testing, for example, is a
process shaped by artefacts and methodologies favoured by
researchers that encourage and constrain the nature of the

2236

hypotheses formulated and tested. Results of the scientific
tests are also analysed and illustrated through a choice of
representational media (e.g., a particular graphic format or
diagram) that facilitates interpretation and best stimulates
the formulation of new hypotheses (cf. Cheng, 1996). Thus,
real-world hypothesis testing often proceeds from a much
richer representation of the problem. The representation
through which the problem is investigated and analysed is
distributed over the reasoner’s mental representation of the
problem and its external representation structured by
artefacts, cognitive or otherwise.
The work of Norman (1993) and Zhang (1997; Zhang &
Norman, 1994) among others has clearly demonstrated that
the manner with which a problem is externally represented
shapes the cognitive strategies reasoners employ to solve it
and hence their success at doing so. For example, Zhang
(1997) looked at problem-solving behavior in the ‘game of
fifteen’, a problem isomorphic to tic-tac-toe, where two
players take turn selecting integers from 0 to 9 with the goal
of being first to select three that sum to 15 (Simon, 1996,
Ch. 5). While traditional tic-tac-toe offers a rich external
representation of the problem, the game of fifteen proceeds
primarily from an internal representation. As a result it
fosters a much poorer and slower appreciation of the
strategic imperatives for a draw than traditional tic-tac-toe.
Such representational effects illustrate that problems
isomorphic at some level of description may vary
significantly in terms of the richness of the information
embedded in their physical presentation. This variance can
lead to significant differences in comprehension and
problem-solving strategies.
Recently, Vallée-Tourangeau and Krüsi Penney (in press)
investigated representational effects in the 2-4-6 task by
offering a physically manipulable representation of the
dimensions of the triple space. In a first experiment these
dimensions were presented as three traditional 6-sided dice.
The triple space in this task isomorph was thus defined in
terms of 63 (or 216) triples composed of number sequences
made up exclusively of positive integers ranging from 1 to
6. The substantial reduction in the size of the triple space
might in itself have facilitated rule discovery. However, this
did not appear to be the case. In the 1-6 control condition of
Vallée-Tourangeau and Krüsi Penney’s first experiment,
21% (4 out of 19) of participants announced the correct rule
under such circumstances, compared to 20% in Wason
(1960). Further, the hypothesis-testing profile of these
participants gauged in terms of number of triples tested and
their homogeneity was indistinguishable from the profile of
the participants in Wason (1960). In contrast, participants in
the Dice isomorph tested more triples of a more varied kind,
including more nonincreasing triples, than in the 1-6
condition, and 66% (27 out of 41) announced the correct
rule.
An external representation of the dimensions of the triple
space made the number permutations perceptually salient
seeding the triple generation process. Additionally,

participants could physically manipulate these dimensions
by rotating the dice and could produce new triples by
moving the position of the dice. Alternatively, it could be
argued that the familiarity of the dice as random number
generating devices and their association with games of
chance might have primed reasoners to think of the 2-4-6
task in fundamentally different terms (cf. Vanderhenst,
Rossi, & Schroyens, 2002). However in Vallée-Tourangeau
and Krüsi Penney’s (in press) second experiment, reasoners
generated triples using three sets of six hexagonal chips,
each chip showing a circular array of open circles. A
number from 1 to 6 was represented by having a
corresponding number of shaded circles. None of the
resulting patterns of dots matched the familiar patterns on
any of the six sides of a traditional die. As with the Dice
isomorph, participants working on the 2-4-6 task with the
hexagonal chips tested a more heterogeneous set of triples
and were significantly more likely to discover the rule than
participants engaged in the traditional version of the task.
The research reported here extended the investigation of
representational effects in the 2-4-6 task. In the current
study, a larger triple space was employed by increasing the
number range to 1-8 defining a triple space composed of
512 possible triples. In a first experimental condition, 8sided role playing dice were employed to represent the
dimensions of the triple space (see Fig. 1). Unlike with
traditional 6-sided dice, each number on these 8-sided dice
was represented by a digit and not by a configuration of
dots.

Figure 1: Eight-sided die.
In a second experimental condition, participants were
asked to generate a triple, plot the three numbers on a
simple grid and then draw a line connecting the points. On
this grid the x axis coded the position of the three numbers
in the sequence (first, second, third) and the y axis
represented the dimension of the triple space, namely 1 to 8.
Figure 2 illustrates how triple 2-4-6 would be represented on
such a grid. In this manner, participants created a graphical
representation of the pattern inherent in the number
sequence. Such a graph visually exposed the linear
relationship between adjacent numbers, thus eliminating the
computational cost of inferring such a pattern from a
numerical representation alone, a concept Scaife and Rogers
(1996) refer to as computational offloading. A graphical
representation conveys the slope inherent to triples that
receive positive and negative feedback, as well as its
acceleration. For example, a positively accelerating curve
for triple 1-2-8 or a negatively accelerating curve for triple

2237

1-2-8

2-4-6

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

1-7-8

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1st

2nd

3rd

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1st

2nd

3rd

1st

2nd

3rd

Figure 2: Plotted triples. The left-panel ('2-4-6' triple) was shown to the participants as part of the task
instructions in the Graph condition.
1-7-8 (see Fig. 2). The inferential task in the Graph
condition is thus isomorphic to the one in the control
condition (and in the Dice condition). However, the Graph
condition offers a perceptually compelling representation of
the simple linear relationship between the consecutive
numbers that compose a given triple. Such a representation
may also direct the kinds of hypotheses formulated to
describe such simple incremental patterns. In other words,
examining plotted triples may ‘limit abstractions’ (Stenning
& Oberlander, 1995).
Both the Dice and the Graph conditions enrich the
distributed representation underpinning the hypothesistesting process. In the Dice condition, the representation in
enriched by the fact that reasoners can physically
manipulate the three dimensions of the triple space in
creating and selecting triples to test. In the Graph condition,
the external representation created by plotting the triple
affords ‘perceptual inferences’ (Larkin & Simon, 1987) that
might facilitate the rule-discovery process.

many or as few sequences as you wish, but proceed to tell me
your best guess only when you feel highly confident that you
have discovered the rule that I have in mind.

Participants wrote number sequences on the answer sheet
and the experimenter entered the feedback in the adjacent
column. Participants were not asked to formulate a
hypothesis before the production of any triple nor offer any
justification. When participants announced they were
sufficiently confident to stop producing new triples and state
their hypothesis they wrote their answer at the bottom of the
answer sheet. The task ended after participants wrote down
their answer; they did not continue with the task if they
announced an incorrect hypothesis.
In the Dice isomorph participants sat a desk on which was
placed three 8-sided dice and the same answer sheet. The
dice displayed the numbers 2, 4, and 6, in ascending order.
Instructions were the same as in the control condition but
for the third sentence that read:
In order to discover my rule, you should produce new
sequences using the three dice, each dice corresponding to
one of the numbers in the sequence, and for each sequence
you produce I will tell you whether or nor it fits the pattern I
am looking for.

Method
Design & Procedure
Participants were assigned, on a random basis to either the
control condition or one of the two enriched representation
conditions, Dice or Graph. Participants in all three
conditions were tested individually in a quiet room. In the
control condition, participants engaged in the 2-4-6 task in
the absence of an enriched external representation. In the
testing room participants sat down at a desk on which was
placed an answer sheet headed with a paragraph of
instructions followed by a table with two columns labelled
Number sequence and Feedback and 18 unnumbered rows.
On the first row the triple 2-4-6 and YES were printed in
their respective column. The instructions read:

Participants generated new number sequences by
manipulating the dice; they were not allowed to throw the
dice to generate a triple. The experimenter transcribed each
new triple on the answer sheet and provided feedback.
In the Graph condition instructions were on a separate
sheet. They informed participants how to plot their triples
on a small paper grid (4.5 cm by 6.5 cm) where the x axis
was labelled 1st, 2nd, and 3rd and the y axis ranged from 1 to
8. The instructions were the same as in the control condition
except for the following modifications:

The present task consists in discovering why certain numbers
go together in a sequence. To start you off, I can tell you that
2-4-6 is a sequence that satisfies the rule I have in mind. In
order to discover my rule, you should produce new sequences
and for each sequence you produce I will tell you whether or
nor it fits the pattern I am looking for. Number sequences can
only be made up from numbers 1 to 8. You can produce as

In order to discover my rule, you should produce new
sequences of three numbers. The new sequences can only be
made up using numbers from 1 to 8. Once you have produced
a new sequence, and before I tell you whether or not it fits the
pattern I am looking for, I would like you to draw the number
sequence on a grid, as illustrated below.

The grid shown to the subject was the triple 2-4-6 plotted as
in the left panel of Figure 2. Instructions as to when to stop
producing new sequences and announce a rule were the
same as in the Control and Dice condition. The instructions

2238

TABLE 1: Rule discovery performance in the Dice and Graph conditions (separate and combined) and in the control condition in
terms of number of participants who announced the correct rule (and in percent), mean number of trials before announcements,
mean number of triples that received positive and negative feedback, mean percentage of triples that received negative feedback,
and mean homogeneity ratio (s.e. = standard error)
Correct
N

n

Triples

Positive Triples

Negative Triples

Percent Negative

Homogeneity Ratio

%

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Dice

30

16 53%

6.77

0.58

5.07

0.46

1.70

0.23

22.55%

3.00%

0.58

0.05

Graph

30

15 50%

6.47

0.73

4.23

0.40

2.23

0.53

28.33%

4.00%

0.52

0.05

COMBINED

60

31 52%

6.61

0.47

4.65

0.31

1.97

0.28

26.87%

2.79%

0.55

0.04

CONTROL

61

19 31%

7.02

0.68

5.43

0.50

1.57

0.27

17.59%

2.33%

0.66

0.04

next summed up the three-step procedure: (1) produce new
sequence, (2) draw sequence on grid, (3) receive feedback.
Plotted triples remained in full view of the participants as
they produced new triples.

Measures
Performance in all three conditions was measured along six
dimensions: (1) the proportion of participants who
announced the correct increasing sequence rule; (2) the
number of triples tested before announcing the rule; (3) the
number of increasing or positive triples; (4) the number of
nonincreasing or negative triples; (5) the proportion of
tested triples that received negative feedback; (6) the
homogeneity of the set of triples produced as gauged by the
ratio of triples generated that increased by constant
increments over all triples tested. If a, b, and c represent the
first, second and third number in a triple, a constant
increment triple is one where (b – a) = (c – b). The higher
this ratio, the narrower and more homogeneous the set of
triples produced before announcing a rule.

Participants
One hundred and twenty one undergraduate students at
Kingston University were recruited to participate in this
study. Sixty one were assigned to the control group and 60
were assigned to one of two experimental conditions, 30 in
the Dice isomorph and 30 in the Graph condition.

Results
Sixteen participants (or 53%) and 15 participants (or 50%)
in the Dice and in the Graph conditions, respectively,
announced the correct ‘increasing sequence’ rule. In
contrast, 19 out of 61 (or 31%) announced the correct rule in
the control condition. A chi-square analysis revealed that
significantly more participants announced the correct rule in
the experimental conditions (31 out 60) than in the control
condition (19 out of 61), χ2 (1) = 5.25 (a .05 rejection
criterion was employed unless indicated otherwise).
Performance in the Dice and in the Graph conditions did
not significantly differ along any of the six dimensions
reported in Table 1, that is in terms of success rate (53% vs.

50%), triples tested before announcing the rule (6.77 vs.
6.47), number of triples that received positive (5.07 vs.
4.23) and negative (1.70 vs. 2.23) feedback, percentage of
triples that received negative feedback (22.6% vs. 28.3%)
and homogeneity ratio (0.58 vs. 0.52). In light of these
results, the data from the two experimental conditions were
combined and are reported as such in Table 1. Comparison
with the control condition revealed that experimental
participants produced a significantly greater percentage of
negative triples (mean of 26.9%) than control participants
(mean of 17.6%), t(119) = 2.30. The homogeneity ratio was
significantly smaller for experimental participants (mean of
0.55) than for control participants (mean of 0.66), t(119) =
2.03. Rule discovery performance as measured in term of
the triples produced before announcement and number of
positive and negative triples did not differ significantly
between the experimental and control conditions.
The rule discovery profile of participants who discovered
the correct rule in the Dice and Graph conditions is reported
in Table 2. The performance of these participants was
statistically indistinguishable and as a result the data from
both conditions were combined. Successful participants in
the control condition tested, on average, 11.6 triples before
announcing the correct rule whereas experimental
participants tested 7.7 triples on average before announcing
the correct rule, a significant difference, t(48) = 3.22.
Control participants also tested significantly more triples
that receive positive feedback than experimental participants
(respective means of 8.5 vs. 5.4), t(48) = 3.25. The rule
discovery profile of successful participants in the
experimental and control conditions did not differ
significantly in terms of negative triples tested, proportion
of negative triples tested, and homogeneity ratio.

Discussion

2239

In the study reported here the external component of a
distributed representation of Wason’s 2-4-6 inductive
inference task was enriched in two different ways. In the
Dice condition, the dimensions of the triple space were
presented as three 8-sided dice that afforded physical
manipulation. In the Graph condition, the simple linear

TABLE 2: Rule discovery performance by participants who announced the correct rule in the Dice and
Graph condition (separate and combined) and in the control condition in terms of mean number of trials before
announcements, mean number of triples that received positive and negative feedback, mean percentage of triples that
received negative feedback, and mean homogeneity ratio (s.e. = standard error)
Triples

Positive Triples

Negative Triples

Percent Negative

Homogeneity Ratio

N

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Mean

s.e.

Dice

16

7.75

0.75

5.50

0.72

2.25

0.23

30.55%

3.27%

0.47

0.06

Graph

15

7.73

1.02

5.33

0.64

2.40

0.50

29.87%

3.67%

0.46

0.06

COMBINED

31

7.74

0.61

5.42

0.48

2.32

0.26

30.22%

2.41%

0.47

0.04

CONTROL

19

11.58

1.14

8.53

0.94

3.05

0.48

26.61%

3.36%

0.42

0.06

relationship between numbers in each number sequence was
plotted. It seems likely that these two manipulations
influenced the triple production process differently, at least
in the earlier stages of the task. However, the hypothesistesting profiles they encouraged were statistically
indistinguishable on all measured dimensions.
In turn, reasoners who engaged in the 1-8 version of the
traditional 2-4-6 task (the control condition) were less likely
to discover the rule with a success rate of 31%, compared to
53% and 50% for the Dice and Graph conditions,
respectively. Diligence as gauged by the number of triples
tested was as high in the control condition as in the enriched
experimental conditions. However, in terms of relative
composition, the set of triples produced by the control
participants was more homogeneous (lower percentage of
negative triples, higher homogeneity ratio), reflecting a less
creative exploration of the space of triples.
The impact of a richer external representation was
particularly noteworthy when the performance profile of
successful participants was examined. Control participants
needed to test on average 11.6 triples before announcing the
correct rule whereas experimental participants needed to test
on average 7.7 triples. Thus, in the absence of a richer
external representation, the inferential challenge posed by
the Wason task was considerably harder to overcome. The
hard work put in by the successful control participants also
explain the relatively high mean number of triples tested in
the control condition overall.
The results reported here corroborate those of ValléeTourangeau and Krüsi Penney (in press). Across these two
studies, the success rate in the different experimental
conditions where the external representation was enriched
ranged between 46% and 66% in contrast to the success rate
in control, ‘impoverished’ conditions that ranged between
19% and 31%. Thus, configuring the external representation
of either the dimensions of the triple space or of the linear
relationships among numbers composing a triple,
significantly improves reasoners’ ability to infer the correct
rule.
These results support the notion that a fruitful research
program may result from the exploration of external or

contextual determinants of successful rule discovery
performance. This would represent, in our opinion, a more
productive shift away from the goal of explaining successful
rule discovery performance in terms of psychometric
individual differences as endorsed by Wason (1960) himself
and others (e.g., Baron, 2000; Vartanian et al., 2003).
People obviously vary along many a psychometric
dimension. There is hardly a less contentious fact in the
history of psychology. Apart from deflecting attention away
from the importance of external representation in reasoning
and problem solving, a focus on individual differences
implicitly endorses the representativeness of the hypothesistesting profile recorded with the traditional Wason task. The
current research programme is predicated, however, on the
notion that there are no inherent qualities to the Wason
original procedure that should make it such a privileged
window onto hypothesis-testing behavior. Such orthodoxy
in research practice and interpretation results from the very
narrow conceptual and methodological path trodden by two
generations of researchers since Wason originally published
his findings.
Better understanding of representational factors that
support sound reasoning informs and shapes pedagogical
intervention (Lowrie & Kay, 2001), effective information
dissemination (Kleinmuntz & Schkade, 1993), and the
design of cognitive artefacts (Norman, 1993). For example,
Sedlmeier and Gigerenzer (2001) demonstrated how sound
Bayesian reasoning can be taught and better elicited using a
graphical interface wherein probabilistic information is
presented in terms of natural frequencies. In a similar vein,
we have recently gathered data that illustrate how the
quality of causal inferences drawn from covariation
information depends critically on the presentation format of
that information (Payton & Vallée-Tourangeau, in
preparation). Uncovering representational effects in
inductive reasoning tasks alerts researchers, designers, and
teachers to the possibility of shaping sounder hypothesistesting behaviour through an active manipulation of the
external representation of the task facing reasoners.

2240

Acknowledgment
This research was supported by a grant from the Economic
and Social Research Council (UK) awarded to FVT.

References
Baron, J. (2000). Thinking and deciding (3rd Edition). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Cheng, P. C.-H. (1996). Scientific discovery with law
encoding diagrams. Creativity Research Journal, 9, 145162.
Duncan, S. (1998). Are there representational effects in a
rule discovery task? Unpublished manuscript, Bowling
Green State University.
Gorman, M. E. (1995). Hypothesis testing. In S. E.
Newstead and J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on
thinking and reasoning: Essays in honour of Peter Wason
(pp. 217-240). Hover, East Sussex: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Klayman, J. & Ha., Y.-W. (1987). Confirmation,
disconfirmation, and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.
Kleinmuntz, D. N., & Schkade, D. A. (1993). Information
displays and decision processes. Psychological Science, 4,
221-227.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-100.
Lowrie, T., & Kay, R. (2001). Relationship between visual
and novisual solution methods and difficulty in
elementary mathematics. Journal of Educational
Research, 94, 248-255.
Mahoney, M. J., & DeMonbreun, B. G. (1977). Psychology
of the scientist: An analysis of problem-solving bias.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 1, 229-238.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart.
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Payton, T., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (in preparation). The
impact of the format of covariation information on causal
inferences.
Poletiek, F. H. (2001). Hypothesis testing behaviour. Hove,
East Sussex: Psychology Press Ltd.
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: how do
graphical representations work? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Schustack, M. W. (1988). Thinking about causality. In R. J.
Sternberg and E. E. Smith (Eds.), The psychology of
human thought (pp. 92-115). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (2001). Teaching Bayesian
reasoning in less than two hours. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 380-400.

Simon, H. A. (1996). The sciences of the artificial (3rd
Edition). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
difference in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate? Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Stenning, K., & Oberlander, J. (1995). A cognitive theory of
graphical and linguistic reasoning: logic and
implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140.
Sutherland, S. (1992). Irrationality, the enemy within.
London: Penguin.
Tweney, R. D., Doherty, M. E., Worner, W. J., Pliske, D.
B., Mynatt, C. R., Gross, K. A., & Arkkelin, D. L. (1980).
Strategies of rule discovery in an inference task.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32, 109123.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S. (1995).
Inducing a rule in Wason’s 2-4-6 Task: A test of the
information-quantity
and
goal-complementarity
hypotheses. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 895-914.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & Krüsi Penney, A. (in press). The
impact of external representation in a rule discovery task.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., & New, M. (1998). Rational
hypothesis-testing strategies in a rule discovery task. In
M. A. Gernsbacher and S. J. Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1078-1083). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Vanderhenst, J.-B., Rossi, S., Schroyens, W. (2002). When
participants are not misled they are not so bad after all: A
pragmatic analysis of a rule discovery task. In W. D. Gray
and C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty
Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 902-908). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Vartanian, O., Martindale, C., & Kwiatkowski, J. (2003).
Creativity and inductive reasoning: The relationship
between divergent thinking and performance on Wason’s
2-4-6 task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 56A, 641-655.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129-140.
Wason, P. C. (1968). ‘On the failure to eliminate
hypotheses…’ – a second look. In P. C. Wason and P.
Johnson-Laird (Eds.), Thinking and reasoning (pp. 165174). London: Penguin.
Zhang, J. (1997). The nature of external representations in
problem solving. Cognitive Science, 21, 179-217.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

2241

