UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Role of Context in Memorability of Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14f2x90d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Upal, M. Afzal

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Role of Context in Memorability of Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts
M. Afzal Upal
Intelligent Agents & Multiagent Systems Lab
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science Department
University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, 43606
afzal@eecs.utoledo.edu
Abstract
A number of recent studies have shown that minimally
counterintuitive concepts are better recalled than intuitive and
maximally counterintuitive concepts. This paper presents a
computational model that relates memorability of a concept to
the amount of new information that the concept provides to a
rational agent seeking to build a more accurate model of its
environment. Given two different types of concepts (or same
type of concepts presented in two different contexts), the
model can be used to make strong predictions about which
concepts will be better comprehended, remembered, and
recalled by people. Free recall experiments with human
subjects provide strong support to the memorability
hypothesis.
Keywords: Comprehension; memory; concept acquisition.

Introduction and Background
Bartlett (1932) was one of the first to systematically study
how concepts embedded in stories are transformed as they
pass from person to person. He asked British university
students to read passages from various folk tales including
the Native North American folk tale “the war of the ghosts”
(Erdoes & Ortiz 1984) and retell it to others in writing who
then retold it to others. Bartlett analyzed the transformation
of various concepts over successive retellings.
He
concluded that culturally unfamiliar concepts were distorted
and replaced by more familiar concepts; for instance, a
canoe was replaced by a rowboat. In none of the series of
ten reproductions of, “the war of ghosts,” did a mention of
ghosts remain, even though the story’s title mentions ghosts.
Bartlett reasoned that culturally unfamiliar concepts such as
canoe and ghost are more difficult to represent in human
memory and therefore they are more likely to get distorted.
Even though, Bartlett did not systematically measure and
compare the recall rates of culturally familiar and unfamiliar
concepts, he argued that culturally unfamiliar concepts are
less likely to be remembered and recalled and hence less
likely to be transmitted than familiar concepts.
Kintsch and Greene (1978) selected an Apache tale
and a story from Brothers Grimm. Similar to Bartlett, they
found that five retellings of the Apache story introduced
more severe distortions than the Grimm story. They
concluded that this happened because the Grimm story
better conformed to the structure expected by their subjects.
Barrett and Nyhoff (2001) also repeated Bartlett’s
methodology using a larger set of Native North American
folk tales from Erdoes & Ortiz (1984). Six stories of about

500 words or less, containing both intuitive concepts such as
the river, mountain, and bird and expectation violating
counterintuitive concepts such as a talking bird and a
walking stone, were chosen. They found that recall rates for
counterintuitive concepts were significantly higher than
recall rates for intuitive concepts. Barrett and Nyhoff also
designed an artificial story to better control for the number
of intuitive and counterintuitive concepts, narrative
structure, and the amount of repeated exposure to a concept.
The futuristic story about a person visiting a museum to see
alien beings and artifacts was designed to contain six
concepts of each of the following three types:
1. intuitive concepts that conform to expectations such as
a being who is aware of its existence
2. minimally counterintuitive concepts that violate one
intuitive expectations such as a being who never dies,
and
3. bizarre concepts that do not violate any category
expectations but have an unusual feature value such as
a being who weighs 1000 pounds.
They found that after three retellings, counterintuitive
concepts were better recalled than bizarre concepts which
were better recalled than intuitive concepts.
Boyer and Ramble (2001) used a variant of Barrett
and Nyhoff’s (2001) alien museum story but did not use a
serial reproduction task. Instead, they had subjects read a
story and following a brief distraction task answer a
question requiring reproduction of as many intuitive,
counterintuitive and bizarre items mentioned in the story as
the subject could recall. Their results supported Barrett and
Nyhoff’s conclusion that minimally counterintuitive items
are best recalled and the intuitive items are worst recalled.
Atran and Norenzayan (2005) constructed three
lists of intuitive, minimally counterintuitive (such as a
nauseating cat) and maximally counterintuitive concepts
(concepts that violate two intuitive expectations such as a
chattering nauseating cat). Subjects were presented lists of
concepts without the narrative structure used by previous
researchers. Each subject saw a list containing an equal
number of all three types of concepts and was asked to
recall as many concepts as he/she could after a brief
distraction task. They found that subjects recalled intuitive
concepts better than minimally counterintuitive concepts
which were better recalled than maximally counterintuitive
concepts. Removing the narrative structure used by Barrett

2224

and Nyhoff (2001) and Boyer and Ramble (2001) had
resulted in the recall rates for counterintuitive concepts
being lowered. Atran and Norenzayan (2005) suggested
that recall for counterintuitive concepts increases only when
they are mixed in with a larger number of intuitive concepts.
This is in accordance with results from a number of studies
of visual stimuli that report an enhanced recall for distinct
and bizarre stimuli when surrounded by mundane stimuli
(see Waddill & McDaniel 1998 for an overview).
A major problem with the Atran and Norenzayan
explanation, however, is that it does not explain why the
maximally counterintuitive concepts, which are the most
distinctive ones, are recalled the least. This present paper
outlines a computational model that can explain why
counterintuitive concepts are remembered better than
intuitive concept when these concepts are embedded in
stories but not when they are presented as lists. The
proposed model is based on the insights derived from the
discourse analysis work on narrative comprehension.

ability to predict what comes next seems to require the
ability to generate expectations about the future (Schank &
Abelson 1977) using a generative process similar to
problem solving and planning (Newell & Simon 1972)
while the ability to find justifications seems to imply an
abductive process (Ng & Mooney 1990). In most situations,
predicting an outcome before its occurrence is more
computationally challenging than justifying an outcome
after it has happened. This is because in most common
sense reasoning situations, the space of possible worlds one
has to search through starting from a given state of the
world to find the state that is most likely to occur next is
larger than the space of explanations one has to search
through to find a justification that can explain an outcome
that is already known to have occurred.

The Memorability Hypothesis

Narrative Comprehension & Memorability

If cognitive processes underlying comprehension
of narratives are similar to the cognitive processes
underlying comprehension of everyday world events (as
Kintsch 1998 and others argue) then it makes sense for an
intelligent agent with limited cognitive resources (Simon
1982) inhabiting a dynamic world to devote more cognitive
resources (including memory) to comprehending those
objects whose existence it cannot predict using its existing
knowledge as these objects provide the agent with valuable
learning opportunities. Indeed, Schank (1979) and Kintsch
(1980) argue that people find the low predictability concepts
more interesting than mundane everyday concepts that are
easily predictable and hence convey little new information.
However, if a concept is too hard i.e., one cannot explain it
even after having seen it then one may not find that concept
very interesting either. In a chaotic world where (a)
accidents, i.e., truly random events, seem to happen every
now and then, and/or (b) the possibility exists that a
message may have become corrupted or distorted during
communication or reception (e.g., due to noisy sensors), it is
rational to ignore concepts that have low postdictability i.e.,
concepts that are so counterintuitive that they are very hard
or impossible to justify even post hoc. Similar to high
predictability concepts, low postdictability concepts do not
add much to an agent’s understanding of the world. This
paper argues that an agent’s memory should evolve to
preferentially process those concepts that add most to an
agent’s understanding of the world. If we define gain in
understanding as the difference between postdictability and
predictability of a concept then memorability of a concept
should be directly proportional to the gain in understanding
i.e.,
Memorability α (postdictability − predictability)

There is overwhelming evidence to indicate that when
reading to comprehend stories (as Barrett et al., 2001, and
Boyer et al., 2001, instructed their subjects to do) people
primarily attempt to answer ‘why’ questions as opposed to
answering the how, where, when, and what happens next
questions (see Graesser et al. 1994 for an overview). People
create such justifications to explain why the author mentions
a particular piece of information in the text1. These
explanations help people integrate disparate textual units
into coherent higher level representations; the highest level
representation being an overall coherent theme for the story.
The more disparate a textual unit, the more cognitive effort
is required to process it. Following Kintsch (1980), I define
postdictability of a textual unit as the ease with which a
concept’s inclusion in the text is justified after the textual
unit containing that concept has been read. This can be
contrasted with the predictability of a textual unit as the
ease with which the occurrence of the concept can be
predicted prior to the concept having been read. Clearly, the
two are not completely independent of each other. Let us
define the prior context of a concept as the text that
precedes the occurrence of a concept and the posterior
context of a concept as the text that immediately follows2
the concept. While posterior context has no impact on the
predictability of a concept, both prior and posterior context
affect a concept’s postdictability. Prediction and postdiction
seem to require two different reasoning processes. The
1

Various theories differ on the mechanisms of generating such
explanations and on the extent of inferences that are generated
online.
2
At this point, it is not clear to me what that immediate context is.
Clearly, it must include the rest of the sentence that the concept is a
part of but it is not clear whether it should also include the rest of
the paragraph or not?

2225

The hypothesis that memorability of a concept is
directly proportional to the difference between its
postdictability and predictability explains a number of
seemingly contradictory findings.
Intuitive concepts
embedded in narratives have low memorability because they

concepts with contradictory knowledge added to them. For
instance, Figure 1 shows the minimally counterintuitive
concept flying cow with contradictory and supportive
context added. Similarly, S-INT and C-INT items were
obtained by adding supportive and contradictory posterior
context to intuitive concepts. Only supportive context was
added to maximally counterintuitive concepts to obtained SMXCI concepts.
Contradictory Context

Supportive Context

Flying cow. Flying cow is an
example of the empty set, said
Professor Pythagoras. Cows
cannot fly or even jump very
high in the air. Cows are very
heavy animals and they do not
have strong leg muscles required
to jump high like Michael
Jordan.

Flying cow. The old Lapp
goddess Mittshwafen is also
known as the ‘flying cow’
because of her miraculous
ability to fly in the air
bestowed by the Lapp’s patron
Saint, St. Arthur after the
cow’s generosity in offering
the poor free milk during the
famine of 1429.

Figure 1: A minimally counterintuitive (MCI) concept with
contradictory and supportive posterior context added.

0.59
0.54
0.49
0.44
Recall

have
high
predictability
while
the
maximally
counterintuitive concepts are less memorable because they
have low postdictability. The minimally counterintuitive
concepts are a cognitive optimal because they have high
postdictability and low predictability.
An important
contribution of the memorability hypothesis is that it allows
us to understand that there is nothing inherently magical
about minimally counterintuitive concepts. Minimally
counterintuitive
concepts
only
have
a
higher
(postdictability – predictability) value than intuitive and
maximally counterintuitive concepts in a given context.
Indeed, our hypothesis predicts that memorability for
various concepts (whether they are minimally
counterintuitive, maximally counterintuitive, or intuitive in
the Barrett et al. 2001 and Boyer et al. 2001 sense of
violating or following some intuitive expectations) can be
increased or decreased by varying their postdictability and
predictability. This can be done by changing the context in
which these concepts are embedded, by varying the amount
of time subjects have to devote to processing each concept,
or by directly instructing them not to comprehend a story.
Our hypothesis predicts that if all else remains the same and
1. if a concept is made more predictable (e.g., by changing
its prior context) then its memorability should decrease,
2. if a concept is made less predictable (e.g., by changing
its prior context) then its memorability should increase,
3. if a concept is made more postdictable (e.g., by
changing its posterior and prior contexts but without
affecting its predictability) then its memorability should
increase, or
4. if a concept is made less postdictable (e.g., by changing
its posterior and prior contexts but without affecting its
predictability) then its memorability should decrease.
A number of experiments have been carried out to
test various predictions of our hypothesis (Owsianiecki,
Upal, Slone, & Tweney 2005; Upal, Owsianiecki, Slone &
Tweney 2005). Using concepts similar to those previously
employed by Atran and Norenzayan (2005), Owsianiecki et
al. (2005) conducted a series of experiments to study the
impact of varying context on recall of maximally
counterintuitive (MXCI), minimally counterintuitive (MCI),
and intuitive (INT) concepts.
Unlike Atran and
Norenzayan, however, posterior context was added to each
concept in order to vary the concept’s postdictability. Two
types of posterior context were added to obtain items with
different amounts of postdictability: supportive context that
attempted to make counterintuitive concepts more
believable in order to increase their postdictability, and
contradictory context that attempted to make concepts
harder to justify to decrease their postdictability. Two
versions of minimally counterintuitive concepts with
context were created: S-MCI are the minimally
counterintuitive concepts with supportive context added to
them and C-MCI are the minimally counterintuitive

0.39
0.34
0.29
0.24
0.19
0.14
0.09
Experiment I

MXCI

MCI

INT

0.368

0.474

0.579

Experiment II

0.229

0.259

0.516

Experiment III

0.108

0.158

0.158

Figure 2: Mean recall rates of maximally counterintuitive
(MXCI), minimally counterintuitive (MCI), and intuitive
(INT) concepts presented as lists.
Similar to Atran and Norenzayan (2005), Owsianiecki et
al.’s results for items without lists (shown in Figure 2)
indicate that maximally counterintuitive items are least
recalled while intuitive items are best recalled. This is what
the memorability hypothesis predicts since subjects,
readings equal number of different types of randomly
ordered concepts without context, do not have any strong
expectations about the type of concepts they are likely to see
next hence memorability of concepts in such lists depends
on postdictability values alone. However, things change
when posterior context is added (as shown in Figure 3). As
expected, supportive context increases the postdictability of
minimally counterintuitive concepts causing the recall rates

2226

for S-MCI concepts to be higher than C-MCI concepts in all
three experiments. In fact, the minimally counterintuitive
concepts with supportive posterior context are best recalled
in two out of three experiments. There was no clear trend,
however, for the recall rates for intuitive concepts.
1
0.9
0.8

Prior context added to
“the adventures of Mr.
Wurg”
Razonians love smart
object
technology.
Most Razonian objects
have digital sensors and
artificial
intelligence
chips embedded in them
to allow them to
perceive
their
environment and act
intelligently.

0.7
0.6

Experiment I

0.5

Experiment II

0.4

Experiment III

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Experiment I

SC-MCI S-MCI C-INT S-INT
MXCI
0.55

0.725 0.775

0.9

0.8

Experiment II 0.422 0.689 0.733 0.667 0.667
Experiment
III

0.558 0.642 0.725

0.45

The opening paragraph of the journey home story was
modified to add that the narrative to be followed was the
boy’s dream and that the boy had a history of dreaming
about things divorced from reality. The opening paragraph
of, “the adventures of Mr. Wurg,” was changed to state that
the alien galaxy possessed advanced technology to cause the
readers to expect to see devices such as intelligent robots on
the planet Razon.

0.517

Figure 3: Mean recall rates of concepts presented with
posterior contexts. S-X denotes X type of contexts in a
supportive context and C-X denotes X type of concepts in a
contradictory context.

Prior Context added to “the
journey home”
I have always been fascinated by
dreams. I have always wondered
as to why some of our dreams
are so different from our
everyday experience; why are
the laws of nature violated so
often in our dreams even though
that never happens when we are
awake. I remember that in some
of my childhood dreams, our
childhood puppy Jack would talk
to me. In others, I would fly
through the air.

Figure 4: The prior context added to the stories to make the
counterintuitive ideas to follow more predictable and
thereby decrease their memorability.

The results of Owsianiecki et al.’s experiment support one
of the predictions of the our hypothesis, namely, that
varying postdictability by changing the posterior context
affects the concept memorability in a measurable way. Next
section reports on an experiment designed to test another
aspect of our hypothesis, namely that varying concept
predictability by changing the prior context also affects
concept memorability.

Participants
Eighty four University of Findlay students ranging in age
from 18 to 35 years, 29 male, and 55 female with a mean
age of 20.6 years participated in the study as a part of their
undergraduate course work.

Materials and Procedure

Experiment
Variants of two stories used by Barrett & Nyhoff (2001),
namely the alien museum visit story and a story about the
journey of a brother and sister from school to home, were
used in this experiment. The alien museum story called,
“the adventures of Mr. Wurg” was rewritten to contain six
minimally counterintuitive and six intuitive concepts. The
version of the “journey home” story we used contained six
minimally counterintuitive concepts and twelve intuitive
concepts. Two versions of the stories were created: in the
counterintuitive-concepts supportive version the prior
context of the counterintuitive concepts was modified to
make them more predictable while the intuitive-concepts
supportive version used the prior context employed by
Barrett and Nyhoff (2001).
In the counterintuitive
supportive version, the opening paragraphs of both stories
were modified to prepare the reader to expect some of the
counterintuitive concepts to follow (as shown in Figure 4).

Eighty four packets each containing either counterintuitive
supportive stories or intuitive supportive stories were
designed. “Adventures of Mr. Wurg,” was the first story in
half of the packages while “the journey home” was the first
story in the remaining packages.
Four versions of
“Adventures of Mr. Wurg” story were designed by changing
the order in which Mr. Wurg observes the museum objects
to avoid order effects among the objects. Half of the
students (42) were randomly selected to receive the
counterintuitive supportive version of both stories while the
other half received the intuitive supportive versions.
Subjects were instructed to carefully read each
story with the aim of comprehending it by trying to imagine
each situation described in the story. Once all subjects had
read the story, they were given a distraction task involving
simple arithmetic for the next three minutes. This was
followed by a question asking them to write down as many
of the items from the story as they could recall. The whole

2227

process was repeated for the second story. At the end of the
study, subjects were told about the aims of the study.

Results and Discussion
Two responses were discarded because subjects were unable
to complete the task. The remaining 82 responses were
scored by a hypothesis-blind coder. Six counterintuitive
and twelve distinct intuitive concepts were identified in the
original journey home story. A conservative strategy
suggested by (Barrett and Nyhoff 2001) for counting
intuitive concepts was used to control the number of
intuitive concepts. The coder compared the items recalled
by the subjects with the items given in the story and counted
the number of intuitive and counterintuitive concepts
faithfully recalled by the subjects. This number was then
divided by the total number of intuitive and counterintuitive
concepts present in the original story to measure the
proportion of intuitive and counterintuitive concepts
recalled by each participant. The mean proportion of the
intuitive and counterintuitive concepts recalled and their
variance were calculated and compared using t-tests. Table
3 shows the mean recall rates and associated variances.
Table 1: The mean proportion of counterintuitive concepts
recalled when the counterintuitive-supportive and the
intuitive-supportive versions of the stories were presented to
the subjects. Variance is shown in the parenthesis.

Counterintuitive
Concepts
Intuitive
Concepts

Intuitivesupportive
Counterintuiti
ve-supportive
Intuitivesupportive
Counterintuiti
ve-supportive

Adventure
s of Mr.
Wurg
0.65.2
(0.07)
0.504
(0.08)
0.599
(0.06)
0.406
(0.05)

The
Journey
Home
0.813
(0.04)
0.723
(0.04)
0.677
(0.05)
0.541
(0.02)

Total
0.733
(0.06)
0.610
(0.07)
0.569
(0.03)
0.474
(0.06)

Similar to Boyer and Ramble (2001) and Barrett
and Nyhoff (2001), subjects who read the original intuitive
supportive versions of the two stories recalled a
significantly larger proportion of counterintuitive concepts
than intuitive concepts t(82) = 4.89, p < 0.025. As predicted
by the memorability hypothesis, subjects who read the
counterintuitive supportive versions of the two stories
recalled significantly fewer counterintuitive concepts than
subjects who read the intuitive supported versions, t(41) =
3.10, p < 0.025. Further, differences between recall rates of
counterintuitive concepts for counterintuitive supportive and
intuitive supportive versions were statistically significant for
both stories. This is what is predicted by the memorability
hypothesis.
The results also show that subjects who read
counterintuitive supportive versions of the two stories

recalled significantly fewer intuitive concepts than the
subjects who read the intuitive supportive versions of the
two stories, t(41) = 2.95, p < 0.025. The differences
between recall rates of intuitive concepts for
counterintuitive-supportive and intuitive supportive versions
were significant for both stories. This may indicate that the
changes in the prior context, though only intended to
increase the predictability of the counterintuitive concepts
by prompting the user to expect counterintuitive concepts,
also affected the intuitive concepts. The changes may have
made have intuitive concepts harder to justify (e.g., the
subjects may have found it more difficult to explain the
occurrence of, ordinary objects such as, “object made by
people as a hobby” in a story about objects belonging to a
high tech civilization than they did in the original version
of, “the adventures of Mr. Wurg”) thereby decreasing the
postdictability of intuitive concepts and lowering
memorability for these concepts in the counterintuitivesupportive version. This change in prior context may also
have decreased the predictability of intuitive concepts
somewhat but the memorability hypothesis predicts that if
decrease in postdictability was larger than the decrease in
predictability then the memorability for concepts embedded
the counterintuitive-supportive context should be lower.
This hypothesis can be tested by measuring changes in
predictability and postdictability of intuitive concepts that
result from varying the prior context.
Another result I did not anticipate when designing
the experiment is that there is no statistically significant
difference in the proportion of intuitive and counterintuitive
concepts recalled by the subjects who read the intuitivesupportive version of “adventures of Mr. Wurg.” This may
mean that counterintuitive concepts I embedded in that story
were not as “counterintuitive” as those used by Barrett and
Nyhoff (2001) and Boyer and Ramble (2001). This also
suggests that results regarding better recall for
counterintuitive concepts may not be as robust as originally
expected. This is especially noteworthy since the results
regarding the impact of context on recall are robust and
appeared consistently across all conditions.
The results of the above experiment when
considered together with Owsianiecki et al.’s experiments,
strongly suggest that context in which concepts appear has a
significant impact on recall of those concepts. This role is
not accounted for by previous theories that attempt to
explain better recall for counterintuitive concepts as an
intrinsic property of such concepts. The computational
model proposed here explains that at least some of that
difference between recall is due to the differences in
predictability and postdictability of intuitive and
counterintuitive concepts.

Conclusion

2228

This paper has presented a computational model that
attempts to explain differences in memorability of various

concepts by focusing on the role that the context in which a
concept appears plays in making the concept more or less
memorable.
To the extent that predictability and
postdictability of various concepts can be measured reliably,
the memorability hypothesis presented here can be used to
make precise predictions about the extent to which various
concepts will be comprehended, remembered, and recalled
by people. Experiments conducted to date provide strong
support for the hypothesis. We are currently working to
confirm other aspects of this model. This involves
designing ways to measure predictability and postdictabilty
of various concepts, using the memorability hypothesis to
make predictions about recall rates of various types of
concepts and comparing them to the actual recall rates
observed with human subjects. We are also studying other
factors that are known to affect memorability such as
imagery, and concreteness (Sadoski and Pavio 2001) and
see how they may be impacting memorability of intuitive
and counterintuitive concepts. Imagery and concreteness
are known to be positively correlated with each other as
well as with memorability. However, it is not known as to
how these variables relate to counterintuitivess and how
imagery, concreteness, and counterintuitivess relate to
memorability. Several studies are underway to explore
these issues.
Plans are also in the works to instantiate the model
presented here in a computer program using a cognitive
architecture such as ACT-R (Anderson & Labiere 1998) and
to design a multiagent system of cognitively rich agents for
simulating the propagation of information through a society
of intelligent agents. This will allow us to embed our theory
in an overall general unified theory of cognition, further
refine the model, and to better understand all its
implications. I am keen to understand the implications of
the memorability hypothesis not just for the spread of
religious ideas but also for marketing, public education,
innovation diffusion, and for writing fiction and non-fiction
books such as school and college textbooks. It is hoped that
this work can lead to techniques for designing more
effective strategies for communicating a variety of
messages.

Acknowledgement
This work would not have been possible without the help of
other members of the ‘I-75 Cognition and Culture Group’.
Jason Slone conducted the experiment reported here.
Kristin Edwards coded the results. Lauren Owsianiecki and
Ryan Tweney helped with the analysis.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Labiere, C. (1998). The Atomic
Components of Thought, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Atran, S. & Norenzayan, A. 2005. Religion’s evolutionary
landscape: Counterintuition, commitment, compassion,
communion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Barrett, J. L. & Nyhof, M. A. (2001). Spreading Non-natural
concepts: the role of intuitive conceptual structures in
memory and transmission of cultural materials. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Bartlett, F C. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Boyer, P. & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Erdoes, R. & Oritz, A. (1984). American Indian Myths and
Legends, New York, NY: Pantheon Books.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M. & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101(3), 371-395.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm For
Cognition, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W. (1980). Learning from text, levels of
comprehension, or: why would anyone read a story
anyway, Poetics, 9, 89-98.
Kintsch, W. & Greene, L. (1978). The Role of Culturespecific schemata in the comprehension and recall of
stories, Discourse Processes, 1, 1-13.
Ng, H. and Mooney, R. (1990) On the role of coherence in
abductive explanation. In Proceedings of the 8th National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pages 337342, Menlo Park, CAL: AAAI Press.
Owsianiecki, L., Upal, M., Slone, J. & Tweney, R. (2005).
Role of context in recall of counterintuitive concepts,
forthcoming, available at
http://www.eecs.utoledo.edu/~aupal/res/papers/
Sadoski, M. & Paivio, A. (2001). Imagery and text : a dual
coding theory. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
R C Schank and R P Abelson (1977). Scripts, plans, goals,
and understanding : an inquiry into human knowledge,
Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Schank, R. (1979). Interestingness: Controlling Inferences.
Artificial Intelligence, 12 (3), 273-297.
Schank, R. and Abelson, R. 1977. Scripts, plans, goals, and
understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge,
Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates
Simon, H. (1982). Models of Bounded Rationality,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Upal, M. A.(2004). Computational Modeling of the
Acquisition of Counterintuitive Concepts in Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling, pages 392-393, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Upal, M., Owsianiecki, L., Slone, J. & Tweney, R. (2005).
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context affects
comprehension and memorability of counterintuitive
concepts, forthcoming.
P. J. Waddill & M. A. McDaniel (1998). Distinctiveness
effects in recall: differential processing or privileged
retrieval, Memory and Cognition, 26, 108-120.

2229

