UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic, Phonological, and Lexical Influences on Regular and Irregular Inflection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rv157h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Huang, Yi Ting
Pinker, Steven

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic, Phonological, and Lexical Influences on Regular and Irregular Inflection
Yi Ting Huang (huang@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Steven Pinker (pinker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Abstract
Regular and irregular inflections have become an important
tool for understanding mechanisms underlying human
language and cognition. Regular-irregular homophones such
as rang the bell/ringed the city challenge connectionist
models in which phonological information is the only input to
the inflection process. Models of language that differentiate
between lexicon and grammar attribute these inflectional
differences
to
distinct
lexical
or
morphological
representations while connectionist models distinguish them
by semantic features. Ramscar (2002) argued for the semantic
account by showing that people extend irregular inflection to
novel words similar in sound and meaning to existing
irregulars, however generalizations may have been based on
analogy to those exact words rather than overlap of semantic
features. We presented people with novel words that
independently varied in phonological and semantic similarity
to existing irregulars and found that semantics only had an
effect when the level of similarity was high and when it was
accompanied by high phonological similarity—the
combination that evokes a particular existing verb. Results are
problematic for a model that appeals both to semantic and
phonological similarity and supports theories that posit
distinct lexical representations.

Introduction
The English past tense has become a battleground for the
nature of cognitive representations and processes. The
Words and Rules (WR) theory (Pinker & Ullman, 2002;
Ulman, 1999; Pinker, 1991) holds that irregular past tense
forms (sing-sung) are stored in associative memory,
whereas most regular past tense forms (walk-walked) are
generated by an operation concatenating a suffix with a
stem. The Single Pattern Associator (SPA) theory (Ramscar,
2002; MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991; Rumelhart &
McClelland, 1986) holds both regular and irregular forms
are generated in a pattern associator network in which
weighted connections associate phonological and semantic
features of stems with phonological and semantic features of
their past-tense forms.
The stakes of this debate encompass not only linguistic
theory but also cognition in general. The WR account
asserts that the distinction between regular and irregular
verbs reflects the two ways language is represented and
processed in the mind. Irregular past tense forms are stored

in the lexicon, a subdivision of associative memory, and as a
result, demonstrate strong effects of word frequency and
phonological similarity. Regular past tense forms, in
general, are relatively insensitive to these variables because
they may be assembled by a productive suffixing rule,
which in this case adds –ed to the stem. The rule applies
when memory fails to retrieve an irregular form, such as in
the case of novel or low-frequency verbs. These rules
belong to a grammatical system responsible for the
construction of complex words and sentences. This theory
contrasts with an account where both kinds of past tense
forms are generated by weighted connections in a
connectionist pattern associator (Rumelhart & McClelland,
1986). All processing is accounted for using weighted
phonological units (e.g. –ing to –ung for sing, –k to –kt for
walk) that are strengthened with exposure and shared across
phonologically similar stems, resulting in automatic
generalization by similarity. This model contains no lexical
entries or grammatical representations.
Empirically, these two theories make different predictions
in the case of homophonous verbs (e.g. rang the bell versus
ringed the city, broke the vase versus braked the car). Since
phonological input units remain identical, these cases are
problematic for an SPA model that incorporates only
phonological features (e.g. Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986),
because two items with identical input representations must
be systematically mapped onto distinct output
representations. In WR and other theories in which words
have representations apart from their sounds, homophones
with distinct past-tense forms are unproblematic because the
irregular past tense form is associated with a word and not
simply a set of sounds. Moreover, novel verbs that are
homophonous with irregular forms can receive a regular
form as well whenever they are derived from a noun (e.g.,
ringed the city) or adjective (e.g., righted the boat), because
every irregular verb form is stored with a verb root, not with
a set of verb sounds, and a verb based on a noun is not
represented as having the same root as its homophonous
pure verb (Pinker & Prince, 1988; Kim et al, 1991; Marcus
et al., 1995).
Modifications of the SPA theory have attempted to
overcome the homophone problem by adding features for
meaning to the input representation. For example, break and
brake mean different things, and thus are represented by

1001

cannot account for inflection” (pg. 85). Unfortunately,
Ramscar’s manipulation confounded semantic similarity
with lexical similarity. A lexical item, in traditional
grammatical theory, is an entry in memory that links a
semantic representation, a phonological representation, and
a grammatical representation (e.g., information about a partof-speech category and subcategory). Ramscar’s items were
so similar to existing verbs (they were nearly identical in
phonology, semantics, and grammar) that subjects may have
directly mapped the new lexical item to an existing lexical
item, rather than being sensitive to semantic overlap. That
is, they may have based their generalization on lexical
entries (eschewed in pattern-associator models) rather than
semantic feature overlap.
To fully explore the interaction between phonology and
semantics in inflectional morphology, it is necessary to vary
them independently. Ramscar examined novel verbs that
displayed both high phonological and high semantic
similarity to an existing verb. This likely had the effect of
activating the lexical representation for that very verb,
possibly leading to the unwarranted conclusion that
semantics itself plays a major role in the generalization of
past tense. However, in order to resolve whether verb
meaning plays a direct role in inflection, we must also
examine the effect of semantic similarity in cases where
there is low and moderate phonological similarity between
novel verbs and the existing verbs to which they are similar.
By expanding comparisons to cases in which both
phonological and semantic similarities are manipulated, one
can see whether semantic similarity elicits a generalization
gradient analogous to the generalization gradient already
known to exist for phonological similarity (e.g., Bybee &
Moder, 1983; Prasada & Pinker, 1993).
Figure 1: Predicted pattern for WR theory
Low Phonological Similarity

100

Moderate Phonological Similarity
High Phonological Similarity

Proportion of irregularization

different subsets of semantic features; the phonological
features for the irregular past tense form broke become
associated with the semantic features for break and not
brake (MacWhinney & Leinbach, 1991). The prediction is
that just as verbs tend to form families defined by shared
phonological features (e.g. throw, blow, grow; sing, ring,
sting), verbs should form families defined by shared
semantic features: verbs with similar meanings should tend
to have similar past-tense forms. Similarly, other cognitive
models have tied the likelihood of irregularization to how
the particular use of a verb in a context fits with its central
meaning (Lakoff, 1987). As the degree of sense of extension
increases, the probability of regularization increases. Both
these hypotheses attempt to solve the homophone problem
without positing distinct lexical entries or representations of
a verb’s grammatical structure.
Previous experimental evidence
indicated that
grammatical structure, rather than sheer semantic similarity,
determines subjects’ judgments of past-tense forms. Kim et
al (1991) presented existing and novel verbs that are
homophonous with irregulars and found that verbs derived
from nouns (e.g., to shed the tractor = “put in the shed”)
were judged as requiring regular past-tense forms (shedded
the tractor) whereas verbs that were merely metaphorically
extended from their central sense did not (to shed the tractor
= “get rid of possessions”). Although denominal verbs also
happen to differ semantically from their irregular
homophones, a regression analysis showed that only
denominal status, not semantic similarity, predicted the
degree of preference for regular or irregular forms.
Ramscar (2002) defended the SPA theory by appealing to
semantic features, noting that while irregular words (drink,
shrink, and stink) dominate the phonological family of
words incorporating “-ink,” the two regular exceptions—
blink and wink—share not only phonological similarities but
also semantic ones as well. This raises the possibility that
semantics may be involved in past-tense formation after all.
To examine interactions between the two kinds of features,
he elicited the past-tense form of novel verbs that were
semantically and phonologically similar either to a regular
or an irregular verb. For example, subjects saw sentences
where frink meant either “eyelids opening and closing
rapidly and uncontrollably” (similar to blink) or
“consuming vast quantities of vodka and pickled fish”
(similar to drink). He found that when frink was introduced
in the context of a semantically similar regular verb,
subjects produced the regular past tense form (e.g. frinked),
but when it was introduced in the context of a semantically
similar irregular verb, subjects produced the irregular form
(e.g. frank). Ramscar concluded that “semantic similarity
could affect the inflections of the past tense of nonce
English verbs when phonological similarity constraints were
satisfied” (pg. 59). Furthermore, since “both regular and
irregular past tense inflections can be modeled using a
uniform mechanism . . . this evidence undermines both the
claim that a rule is necessary to model past tense inflection
and concomitant in principle claim that single-route models

80

60

40

20

0
Low

Moderate
Level of semantic similarity

High

The Words-and-Rules theory predicts that when people
are asked to generate past tense forms of novel verbs that
vary in similarity to existing verbs, semantic similarities

1002

Table 2: Example of the novel verb rating

should have limited consequence on generalization of
irregular past tense patterns (e.g. -ing Æ -ung) in cases of
low and moderate phonological similarity, and only lead to
greater generalization in the case of high phonological
similarity, where the combination of phonological and
semantic similarity evokes a particular existing verb (see
Figure 1 ). Conversely, the Single Pattern Associator Theory
predicts that increases in semantic similarity would lead to
greater generalization of an irregular past tense across all
levels of phonological similarity.

Introduction: Professional golfers can spling a golf club up to 50
miles per hour when teeing off. Of course, when they are putting,
they spling the club much more gently.
a. Test (Irregular): Yesterday, Tiger Woods broke the
record when he splung his club at 60 miles per hour
b. Test (Regular): Yesterday, Tiger Woods broke the record
when he splinged his club at 60 miles per hour

Table 3: Example of the judgment strategy

Methods
We presented 72 native English-speaking Harvard
undergraduates with sentences containing novel verbs that
systematically varied in phonological and semantic
similarity to existing irregular verbs. The novel verbs were
based on eight known verbs (e.g. swing, sink, lead, blow,
bear, throw, read, cling) and varied across three levels of
phonological and semantic similarities (i.e. low, moderate,
and high) to create nine different trial types (see table 1 for
an example). These were divided among three
counterbalanced conditions to ensure that each subject only
saw each novel verb in a single combination of conditions.
The materials were compiled in a web-survey accessible at
http://pinker.wjh.harvard.edu/research/yi_ting_survey/main
page/index.html.

Target Sentence: Yesterday, Tiger Woods broke the record
when he splung his club at 60 miles per hour.
a. The novel word reminded of a specific word I
already knew, so I simply borrowed the past-tense form
from that verb. If so, please indicate which verb you
had in mind.

Table 1: Example of semantic similarity

b. The meaning of the novel word made one form seem
better than the other.
c. The sound of the novel word made one form seem
better than the other.
d. I didn’t really think of any particular strategy or
reason for my choice: one of the past-tense forms just
seemed better than the other
e. Other

Results

Level of Similarity (to “throw”)

Results are shown in Figure 2. A 3 x 3 analysis of variance
(ANOVA) testing the effects of phonological and semantic
similarity (i.e. low, moderate, high) on naturalness ratings of
irregular past tense patterns revealed a significant main
effect of phonological similarity (F(2, 206) = 81.04, p <
.001), replicating Bybee and Moder (1983) and Prasada and
Pinker (1993). Subjects demonstrated a strong monotonic
increase in naturalness rating of an irregular past tense as
phonological similarities increased. Post-hoc analysis
revealed that differences were significant between all three
levels of phonological similarity (p’s < .001, Bonferonni
corrected). There was also a main effect of semantic
similarity, F(2, 207) = 9.317, p < .001. However, post-hoc
analyses revealed that while verbs with high similarity were
significantly different from verbs with moderate similarity
(p < .01), neither group was significantly different from
verbs with low semantic similarity (p > .05).
While the interaction between the two variables failed to be
significant (p > .05), planned comparisons revealed a
difference between the effects of semantic similarity on
subjects’ ratings in the low and moderate phonological
similarity groups compared to the high phonological
similarity group. In both the low and moderate phonological
similarity groups, there was no significant difference in
ratings between the low versus moderate semantic similarity
groups (p > .05) and the moderate versus high semantic
similarity groups (p > .05). However, in the high
phonological similarity group, despite no significant
difference in ratings between the low versus moderate

Low

Moderate

Mike loved to froe
elaborate meals for
the most ordinary
occasions.

The star goalie
could froe the
puck with any part
of his body

High
Sam spent the
whole summer
practicing how to
froe a baseball.

Subjects read sentences introducing the meaning of each
novel verb (e.g. spling) and subsequently asked to rate the
acceptability of regular (splinged) and irregular (splung)
past tense forms (see table 2). Each item was judged using a
scale of 1 to 7, where 1 means ‘very unnatural’ and 7 means
‘very natural.’ Subjects were told to focus on both “the way
the new verb is used in the example and on the way it
sounds.”
After subjects completed all the sentence ratings, they
were asked to go back and indicate the basis by which they
formed their judgments. They were told to select among
four multiple-choice items and/or indicate their own
strategy (see table 3). These justifications provided a means
to test our hypothesis that subjects in the condition
corresponding to Ramscar’s experiment (high semantic/high
phonological similarity) literally thought of the exact verb
with that meaning and with an equivalent sound to the test
item, and simply analogized the known verb to the test item.

1003

3 x 3 ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of
phonology (F(2, 207) = 43.78, p < .001) and semantics (F(2,
207) = 5.04, p < .01), but no significant interaction between
the two (F(4, 207) = 1.392, p > .05). However, closer
examination of simple main effects revealed that the effect
of semantics was again limited specifically to a difference
between moderate and high semantic similarity in the high
phonology (p < .05).

semantic similarity groups (p > .05), there was a significant
difference between the moderate versus high semantic
similarity group (p < .01).
Figure 2: Effects of similarity on Irregular past tense ratings
Low Phonological Similarity

7

Moderate Phonological Similarity
High Phonological Similarity

Figure 4: Effects of similarity on Regular past tense

5

Low Phonological Similarity

7

4

Moderate Phonological Similarity
High Phonological Similarity

6

3

Mean rating (7=natural)

Mean rating (7=natural)

6

2
1
Low

Moderate

High

Level of semantic similarity

5
4
3
2

To summarize, the results from the phonological
manipulation suggest that subjects’ tendency to accept an
irregular past tense increased as similarities to known
irregular verbs increased. Results from the semantic
manipulation suggest that subjects’ tendency to accept an
irregular past tense remained resistant to variation in
semantic similarity unless the meaning of novel verbs
highly resembled that of known irregular verbs (figure 3).

1
Low

Phonological

Figure 5 reports the strategies subjects recruited to form
their judgments, in particular, their use of analogy to a
known word. A 3 x 3 ANOVA testing the effects of
phonological and semantic similarity revealed significant
main effects of phonological (p < .001) and semantic (p <
.001) similarity as well as a significant interaction between
the two factors (p < .001). Tests of simple main effects
revealed that while subjects failed to make reference to the
known word in all levels of semantic similarity in the low
phonological similarity group (p > .05), in both the
moderate and high phonological similarity groups, there was
a significant effect of moderate to high semantic similarity
(p < .01).
The frequency with which subjects actually listed the
target word we had in mind when constructing the stimuli
(figure 6) reveals a similar trend: the highest counts were
found in the high phonology/high semantic similarity group
(N=136) and moderate phonology/high semantic similarity
group (N=53). Furthermore, within this latter group, we
found that subjects’ reference to the correct known word
differed greatly between two groups of novel words. Among
the items ending in –ing or –ink (e.g. fring, frink, ning),
subjects reported using the target word almost twice as often
(n=28) than in all the other phonological families (e.g. cleef,
jare, poe, preek, zoe) combined (n=15).

Semantic

Mean rating (7=natural)

6
5
4
3
2
1
Low

Moderate

High

Level of semantic similarity

Figure 3: Effects of similarity on Irregular past tense

7

Moderate

High

Level of Similarity

Subjects’ regular past tense judgments demonstrated
parallel effects (though with the sign reversed)—ratings
decreased as novel verbs increased in phonological, but not
semantic, similarities to known irregular verbs (figure 4). A

1004

and semantics (p < .001), and the predicted interaction
between the two factors (p < .05). This confirms that high
phonological and semantic similarity to a known verb will
lead subjects to analogize a novel item to that word; without
this combination, semantic similarity has little or no effect.

Figure 5: Selection of Target Word strategy
Low Phonological Similarity

100

Moderate Phonological Similarity
High Phonological Similarity

Mean Percentage

80

Figure 7: Irregular past tense ratings of recoded verbs

60

Low Phonological Similarity

7

Moderate Phonological Similarity

40

High Phonological Similarity

6
Mean rating (7=natural)

20
0
Low

Moderate
Levels of semantic similarity

High

Figure 6: Production of Target word

3

1

Moderate Phonological Similarity

140

4

2

Low Phonological Similarity

160

5

Low

High Phonological Similarity

Moderate
Level of semantic similarity

High

Total Frequency

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Low

Moderate
Levels of semantic similarity

High

This difference suggests that items we had classified as
“moderate phonological similarity,” which were not
intended to evoke the target word, in fact were perceived as
similar enough to the target word to evoke it a large
percentage of the time. This motivates separating the
-ing/ink family from the rest of the items. As noted by
Pinker & Prince (1988), the –ing/ink family is unusual
among irregulars in being dominated by irregular friends
(i.e. phonologically similar irregular verbs) but very few
regular enemies (i.e. phonologically similar regular verbs).
With verbs outside the ing/ink phonological family, a 3 x
3 ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of phonology
(p < .001) and semantics (p < .001), and in addition, the
predicted interaction between phonology and semantics (p <
.001). A similar pattern emerges when the –ing/ink family
items are reclassified from “moderate” to “high”
phonological similarity (see figure 7). A 3 x 3 ANOVA here
revealed a significant main effect of phonology (p < .001)

We performed a series of regression analyses to examine
how well subjects’ reported strategies (i.e. analogy known
word, use of similarity in sound, use of similarity in
meaning) predicted their likelihood to irregularize novel
verbs as measured by their ratings. The regression analysis
revealed that while all three variables together significantly
explained 16% of unique variance (p < .001), only the use
of a known word had a significant beta coefficient (p < .01).
This was confirmed with individual regressions on each
variable, which revealed large differences in the variance
explained. Known word significantly explained 16.8% of
unique variance (p < .001) and sound significantly
explained 5.8% of unique variance (p < .01). However,
meaning accounted for a very small (1.6%) and nonsignificant proportion of the variance (p > .05).

Discussion
This study examined the extent to which phonological,
semantic, and lexical factors influence the way people
inflect a novel past tense form. This question is relevant to
the controversy over whether regular/irregular homophones
such as ring-rang, wring-wrung, and ring-ringed are
differentiated by differences in meaning, as claimed by
advocates of models consisting of a single connectionist
pattern associator, or by having distinct lexical entries, as
claimed by advocates of models distinguishing lexicon from
grammar. Both theories can account for the monotonic
increase in the acceptability of irregulars as a function of
phonological similarity to existing irregulars, because both
acknowledge that words are stored in a memory system that
generalizes the phonological relationships in past-tense

1005

forms (e.g., i-u) according to phonological similarity (Bybee
& Moder, 1983; Pinker & Prince, 1988; Prasada & Pinker,
1993).
These two theories make different predictions, however,
on the role of semantic similarity in generalization. In a SPA
model,
distributed
semantic
and
phonological
representations play a similar role in generalization and are
the only kinds of information represented. In contrast,
models positing lexical entries containing grammatical (as
well as semantic and phonological) information can
distinguish words that have distinct grammatical properties
(such as irregular inflection) without requiring such
differences to track gradations in semantic features.
Replicating Ramscar (2002), we found that people extend an
irregular inflection to a word that sounds like and means the
same as an existing irregular verb. However, we found that
this extension was limited to cases where the new verb was
a near-doppelganger of an existing one (i.e., being similar to
it both in sound and in meaning), which leads people to treat
the new verb as the existing one in disguise. Mere semantic
similarity, unless it was both extreme in magnitude and
accompanied by high phonological similarity, was not
enough to evoke the stored irregular patterns.
Our results extend previous research demonstrating strong
influence of phonological similarity in irregular past tense
formation of novel verbs, but little or no direct influence of
semantic similarity (Kim et al., 1991; Marcus et al., 1995).
Subjects’ patterns of ratings and strategies suggest that
unlike phonological features, which have distributed
representations across families of verbs, semantic
information is encapsulated at the lexical level when it
comes to inflectional morphology. As a result, semantic
similarity has an impact on irregular past tense formation
only to the extent that these similarities cause subjects to
believe that a novel verb is in fact a variant of a known
irregular verb. This confirms the traditional characterization
of language as consisting of a lexicon of entries and a set of
operations that combine them.

References

Acknowledgements

Bybee, J. L., & Moder, C. L. (1983). Morphological classes
as natural categories. Language, 59, 251-270.
Kim, J. J., Pinker, S., Prince, A., & Prasada, S. (1991).
Why no mere mortal has ever flown out to center field.
Cognitive Science, 15, 173-218.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Connectionist explanations in
linguistics: Some thoughts on recent anti-connectionist
papers. Unpublished electronic manuscript, ARPAnet,
University of California, Berkeley.
MacWhinney, B., & Leinbach, J. (1991). Implementations
are not conceptualizations: Revising the verb learning
model. Cognition, 40, 121-157.
Marcus, G. F., Brinkmann, U., Clahsen, H., Wiese, R., and
Pinker, S. (1995). German inflection: The exception that
proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 189-256.
Pinker, S. & Ullman, M. T. (2002). The past and future of
the past tense. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6, 456-463.
Pinker, S. (1991). Words and rules. New York: Basic
Books.
Pinker, S. & Prince, A. (1988). On language and
connectionism: analysis of a parallel distributed
processing model of language acquisition. Cognition, 28,
73-193.
Prasada, S., & Pinker, S. (1993). Generalization of regular
and irregular morphological patterns. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 8, 1-56.
Ramscar, M. (2002). The role of meaning in inflection:
Why the past tense does not require a rule. Cognitive
Psychology, 45, 45-94.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). On learning
past tenses of English verbs. In D. E. Rumelhart, & J. L.
McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing. Vol 2:
psychological and biological models. MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Ullman, M. T. (1999). Acceptability ratings of regular and
irregular past tense forms: Evidence for a dual-system
model of language from word frequency and phonological
neighborhood effects. Language and Cognitive Processes,
14, 47-67.

Supported by grant NIH HD 18381. We were grateful to
Jeff Birk for assistance in programming and to Jesse
Snedeker for her helpful comments.

1006

