UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sentence Understanding Engages Motor Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zw9s7m4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bergen, Benjamin K.
Wheeler, Kathryn B.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sentence Understanding Engages Motor Processes
Benjamin K. Bergen (Bergen@Hawaii.Edu)
Kathryn B. Wheeler (Kwheeler@Hawaii.Edu)
Department of Linguistics, 569 Moore Hall, 1890 East West Road,
Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Abstract

running a mental simulation of a described scene, wherein
an understander activates motor representations
corresponding to what participants in the scene might do
and perceptual representations of images they might
perceive. The reasoning behind this is straightforward.
Perceptual and motor imagery are known to play critical
roles in higher cognitive functions like memory (Wheeler et
al. 2000, Nyberg et al. 2001). By extension, they may well
be integral to language understanding as well. On this view,
viable communication involves the successful evocation of
an aligned set of perceptual and motor images in the mind of
a hearer (Glenberg & Robertson 1999, Bergen & Chang
2005). Recent evidence from neuroscience suggests a
mechanism by which the internal imagination of a scene
described by language may be effected.
Two studies provide evidence that processing motion
language associated with particular body parts also results in
the activation of areas of motor and pre-motor cortex
involved in producing motor actions associated with those
same effectors. Using both behavioral and
neurophysiological evidence, Pulvermüller et al. (2001)
found that verbs associated with different effectors (mouth,
hand, leg) were processed at different rates and in different
regions of motor cortex. More recently, Tettamanti et al.
(m.s.) have shown through an imaging study that passive
listening to sentences describing mouth versus leg versus
hand motions activate different parts of pre-motor cortex (as
well as other areas, specifically BA 6, BA 40, and BA 44).
From a broader perspective, to the extent that evidence is
found indicating that imagery plays a role in language
understanding, this bolsters an embodied view of meaning,
in which the particular experiences a language user has had
in their life, in their body, create the substantive basis for
language production and understanding, as suggested by a
number of authors, like Barsalou (1999), Zwaan (1999),
Glenberg and Robertson (2000), Bergen, et al. (2003),
Feldman and Narayanan (2004), Bergen and Chang (2005),
and Matlock (To Appear), and MacWhinney (In Press).
While important and productive lines of research are
beginning to gain momentum in the area of mental
simulation and language understanding, there has been
insufficient focus thus far on the exact linguistic
mechanisms that trigger mental simulation.
More
specifically, there are two questions that have yet to be
addressed in previous studies. The first concerns the types
of language that trigger simulation and the second concerns
the degree of detail involved in simulation.
It is of critical theoretical importance to determine how
prevalent language-triggered motor simulation is – whether
it occurs only when people process language about

Processing sentences describing actions performed by the
hearer (e.g. You gave Andy a pizza) primes actually
performing a motor action compatible with the one described
(Glenberg & Kaschak 2002), This result has been interpreted
as indicating that processing meaning involves the activation
of motor control circuitry to prepare the language
understander for situated action. A complementary view
(Bergen & Chang 2005) argues that motor control structures
are automatically and unconsciously engaged during motion
language processing irrespective of whether that language
pertains to the understander, because the meaning of action
language is inherently grounded in motor control circuitry. To
distinguish between these views, we must determine whether
motor activity results from processing language about actions
performed by and on third persons (e.g. Andy gave Sara a
pizza.) Two experiments tested the scope of compatible action
facilitation during sentence understanding, where sentences
either encoded motion in a particular direction (e.g. John
opened the drawer) or using a particular handshape (e.g.
Mary grabbed the marble.) Both studies yielded significant
Action-sentence Compatibility Effects, demonstrating that
whether language is about the understander or not, it engages
their motor system.
Keywords: sentence processing, mental simulation, motor
control, Action-sentence Compatibility Effect

Introduction
Language use integrally involves perceptual and motor
processes, since the production of language requires the
control of facial, manual, and other effectors, and language
processing begins with the detection of visual, auditory, and
other perceptual cues. However, language appears to engage
perceptual and motor systems and the neural structures
dedicated to them in another, less obvious way. Just as
performing imagery about action (Porro et al. 1996, Lotze et
al. 1999) and perception (Kosslyn et al. 2001) makes use of
action and perception systems, so it now appears that
processing language about perceptual or motor content
results in the activation of neural structures overlapping
with those that would be used to actually perceive or
perform the described content. The mental (re)creation of
perceptual and motor experiences (among others) in order to
deeply understand language goes under the rubric of mental
simulation (Barsalou 1999).
The notion that language understanding makes significant
use of perception and action imagery has been proposed in a
variety of contexts (Barsalou 1999, Zwaan 1999, Glenberg
& Robertson 2000, Feldman & Narayanan 2004, Gallese &
Lakoff 2005, Bergen & Chang 2005). What these various
views share is the idea that language understanding entails
238

Materials

themselves, or whether it is used to process sentences
describing motor actions regardless of who the described
actor is. Motor simulation has been argued to serve as the
basis for understanding language about actions in general
(e.g. by MacWhinney In Press, Feldman & Narayanan 2004,
Gallese and Lakoff 2005, and Bergen and Chang 2005).
This perspective views the internal (re)creation of motor
control events as critical to processing language about
actions. This claim cannot be evaluated solely on the basis
of language involving the interlocutor as a participant
because this language is precisely the type of language most
likely to induce motor imagery. Rather, the case must be
made by demonstrating that language not about the
interlocutor nevertheless results in activation of the specific
motor control systems that would perform the described
actions.
While both motor and perceptual imagery have been
shown in various experiments to be automatically and
unconsciously activated by language, the level of detail of
that imagery remains in question. While motor imagery
appears to include the direction of motion of a particular
action (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002), it is not known whether
finer details like hand-shape are also (re)created. A fine
level of detail in mental simulations is critical to an account
of language understanding based on imagery if imagery is to
account for inference and disambiguation.
In order to flesh out these remaining questions, the
research reported here first modified a study by Glenberg
and Kaschak (2002) that demonstrated simulation effects in
language by replacing first-person with third-person
referents in the stimuli. If understanders are in fact
activating the specified neural structures while processing
the language, they should display the same effects with
language that does not directly involve them, from which
we can infer that they are indeed activating a mental
simulation in order to understand the language input.
The second experiment addressed the level of detail
involved in simulation. Subjects were asked to perform a
slightly modified version of the same forced-choice task,
which this time required the execution of a pre-assigned
hand-shape, that was either compatible or incompatible with
the hand-shape implied in the critical sentences. Based on
the idea that simulation involves fine-motor details (e.g.
Bergen & Chang 2005, Gallese & Lakoff 2005), we
hypothesized that subjects would be faster at responding
when the hand-shapes implied by the verb and required to
respond were compatible.

A total of 160 sentences were created, 60 meaningful
critical stimuli, 20 meaningful filler stimuli, and 80 nonmeaningful filler stimuli. The 60 critical stimuli were
composed of 30 pairs of sentences, with one sentence
denoting motion forwards, away from the body and the
other denoting motion backwards, towards the body. These
stimuli were of three types. One set of 20 consisted of 10
pairs of transitive sentences that differed only in terms of
their object noun phrase (1a). The second set consisted of 10
pairs of transitive sentences that differed only in their main
verb (1b). The final set was composed of 10 pairs of abstract
caused-motion sentences that varied in their main verb and
preposition in a final prepositional phrase (1c). All
sentences were in the present tense with progressive aspect,
and all referents were third-person. It was predicted that an
Action-sentence Compatibility Effect would be observed in
response to sentences denoting literal motion (1a,b), and
possibly also to abstract sentences, like (1c).
(1) a. Jane is wringing {her hands, Mary's neck.}
b. John is {opening, closing} the drawer.
c. Vincent is {donating, accepting} a kidney {to,
from} the biology department.
Sentence pairs were drawn (with some modifications)
from the stimuli used by Glenberg and Kaschak (2002), in
addition to newly generated ones conforming to the above
described criteria. These were then submitted to a norming
study in order to choose pairs whose members encoded the
appropriate direction of motion. In the norming study, 12
subjects were instructed to decide if the described action
required movement of the hand toward or away from the
body. To respond, they pressed buttons labeled toward and
away or, neither. Only verb pairs each of whose members
received a majority of scores in the appropriate direction
and had no more than one half as many in the opposite
direction were included in the critical stimuli.

Design and Procedure
Each subject saw all 160 sentences. Each critical pair was
split into two blocks, as were each of the three types of
stimuli. The design fully crossed the two blocks (1 and 2)
with the two sentence directions (toward the body and away
from the body) and the two response directions (yes is away
or yes is toward). Response direction ordering was fixed
with yes-is-away and no-is-toward in the first half and was
reversed halfway through the experiment. Thus, half of the
subjects answered each sentence in the yes-is-away
condition and half in the yes-is-toward condition.
Small colored labels were created and attached to the keys
on a computer keyboard such that the green “Yes” and red
“No” were equidistant from a blank yellow middle button.
The keyboard was also rotated such that it was
perpendicular to the subject allowing these three buttons to
be in a straight line with four keys separating each.
When presented with a fixation cross, subjects pressed
and held the yellow button (the “h” key) to reveal the
stimulus until they had decided if (yes) the sentence made

Experiment 1
This study tested whether sentences that describe actions
performed only by third persons yield a significant ActionSentence Compatibility Effect - facilitatory priming of
manual actions by sentences denoting similar actions.

Subjects
54 students at the University of Hawai’i Manoa participated
for either course credit or five dollars. All subjects were
right-handed native English speakers.

239

Discussion

sense or (no) it did not, whereupon they released the yellow
button and pressed either the “yes” or the “no.” Subjects
were instructed to use only their right hand during the
experiment. A training session preceded each half of the
experiment.

As expected, sentences denoting motion away from the
body were responded to faster when the subject’s physical
response involved actually moving the hand away from the
body, and similarly for towards sentences and toward
motions. However, unexpectedly, this effect was observed
not on the length of time it took subjects to read the
sentence and release the button keeping the sentence on the
screen, but rather on the time between release of this button
and pressing of the response button – that is, in the time it
took to actually execute a response. We discuss this
difference in the General Discussion, below. Interestingly,
the away responses show a smaller effect than the toward
responses, which may be due in part to the relatively shorter
response times in this condition.
A second notable finding from this experiment is that
sentences denoting abstract motion did not yield a
significant compatibility effect in the way that the literal
motion sentences did. This stands in potential contrast with
the results of Glenberg & Kaschak (2002) who found a
significant compatibility effect with a set of stimuli that
included abstract sentences like these. One explanation that
immediately presents itself is the possibility that when
processing language not about oneself, an understander
performs less detailed motor imagery in general. As a
consequence, the motor imagery in response to language not
literally describing motion, which by all accounts would
tend to be less intense than motor imagery evoked by literal
language, would decrease below the level of detection by
this particular instrument.
Regardless of these differences, the fact remains that
reading literal sentences denoting motion towards or away
from the body yielded a significant compatibility effect on
the time it took subjects to press a button indicating
meaningfulness of the sentence. We can conclude from this
that not only sentences describing the interlocutor as a
participant but also sentences describing only third persons
can result in the activation of motor control functions.

Results
Three subjects were eliminated: two because they responded
to the critical stimuli with less than 80% accuracy, and one
because their mean reaction time surpassed 2.5 s.d. greater
than the grand mean. One sentence item was removed from
analysis for the same reason. All responses greater than 2.5
s.d. from the mean per subject were replaced with the value
2.5 s.d. from the mean for that subject. This resulted in
modification of less than 1% of the data.
The two sets of literal sentences - those in pairs that
differed in terms of the just object noun (1a) or just the verb
(1b), were pooled together for analysis, since the prediction
that they would yield a motor compatibility effect applies to
both of them. Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) found that
subjects were faster to remove their finger from the button
keeping the displayed sentence on the screen when the
sentence and the action they had to perform to identify it as
meaningful were in the same direction. In the current study,
release times on the same button did not show the predicted
effects. In contrast with the results reported by Glenberg
and Kaschak (2002), there was no significant interaction
effect between sentence direction (away, toward) and
response direction (away, toward), p=0.27.
However, the time subjects took to press the response
button indicating that the sentence was meaningful did show
the predicted effects (Figure 1). A significant interaction
effect was observed, in which subjects took longer to
respond to sentences when the direction of their response
was incompatible with the direction of described motion: in
a subject repeated-measures ANOVA, F(1,51)=4.31;
p<0.05. The two main effects (response direction and
sentence direction) were not significant.

Experiment 2

370
360

In order to establish the stability of this Action-sentence
Compatibility Effect with third person participants, we
designed another ACE experiment in which subjects once
again read sentences denoting motion of one of two types.
As in the previous study, the response action could be
compatible or incompatible with the described action. Since
sentences only involved third-person participants, the results
would help assess first, whether motor activation in
response to sentences not involving the understander is
indeed a replicable effect, and second, whether finding the
expected interaction effect on the button press, rather than
release time was a reliable product of sentences like this.
Moreover, we were interested in investigating the depth of
motor detail contained within the motor imagery that
subjects appeared to be performing, so the particular design
we adopted manipulated not the direction of motion, but
rather the handshape used to perform described actions.
The design of this experiment was quite similar to that of
Experiment 1, described above. Subjects were asked to push

Sent.
Away

350
340

Sent.
Toward

330
320
Away

Toward

Response Direction

Figure 1: Response times as a product of toward and away
sentences, when manual responses were toward or away
from the body.
Like the sentences denoting literal motion of the hand
towards or away from the body, abstract sentences yielded
no significant interference effect in the button release
measure, but unlike literal sentences they also displayed no
interaction effect in the response measure: in a subject
repeated-measures ANOVA, F1(1,51)=0.08; p=0.78. Neither
of the main effects was significant.

240

Design and Procedure

down a button to display a sentence they had to read, and
decide as quickly as possible whether the sentence made
sense or not. The critical sentences described an action
performed either with an open palm handshape or a closed
fist handshape, depending on the condition. Subjects then
responded by pushing a large flat foot pedal with their hand,
using either an open palm or closed fist. Response actions
could thus be compatible or incompatible with the
handshape of the action described in the sentence. We
predicted that subjects would take longer to press the button
when they had to do so with an incompatible handshape –
that is, that we would observe an ACE for handshape.

Each trial began with a fixation cross in the center of the
computer screen that remained until the subject pressed the
“Enter” key in order to initiate the visual presentation of the
stimulus sentence. The sentence remained until the subject
released the “Enter” key in order to press the response
button with either of the pre-assigned hand shapes (closed
fist or open palm). Once the subject had responded by
pressing the button, the fixation cross would appear in
preparation for the next trial. Subjects were instructed to
use only their right hand during the experiment. Subjects
had a training session before each half of the experiment (16
and 20 trials, respectively) in order to familiarize them with
the task.
Subjects read sentences that were either meaningful or
not, and were asked to make a sensibility judgment – 'yes, it
makes sense, or 'no, it does not make sense'. They indicated
their judgment by pressing a button, using a pre-assigned
hand-shape, either a flat, open palm or a clenched fist. (This
methodology is similar to Ellis and Tucker 2000 and Tucker
and Ellis 2001, which required responses using different
types of grip.) The response pattern (fist means ‘yes’ and
palm means 'no; or fist means ‘no’ and palm means 'yes')
was randomly assigned to each participant and was reversed
midway through the experiment.
In order to check accuracy of response, subjects were
video-recorded and answers (palm or fist) were coded by a
naïve assistant with no knowledge of which condition was
assigned to each half for a given subject. If a subject failed
to respond to a trial, or didn’t hold down the Enter key such
that the sentence stimulus flashed on the screen and the
subject chose to guess the answer, the response was noted
and eliminated from analysis.

Subjects
88 students at the University of Hawaii participated for
either course credit or five dollars. All subjects were righthanded native English speakers. The data from four
subjects were excluded for having lower than 80% accuracy,
one due to experimenter error, and eighteen subjects for
performing the task incorrectly. The task in this experiment
proved to be difficult for subjects and incorrect performance
included pressing the wrong “Enter” key on the keyboard
not switching the response hand-shapes in the second half,
answering with the opposite hand-shape than that assigned,
or using different hands to press the “Enter” key and the
response button.

Materials
16 critical sentences were created, half with verbs encoding
a palm hand-shape (2a) and half with a fist hand-shape (2b).
Another 16 critical sentences were created using 8 verbs that
variably encoded actions performed with either a fist (3a) or
palm hand-shape (3b), depending on the direct object. In
order to mask any possible relation between the physical
responses subjects had to perform and the semantics of the
critical verbs, a large number of fillers were also created to
make the total number of sentences 160. All critical trials
were sensible and transitive (since they encoded hand
actions on objects) but fillers were divided such that half of
all stimuli were non-sensible, and orthogonally, half of all
stimuli were intransitive.
As mentioned above, we used critical stimuli of two
types. The first (fixed) type had a verb strongly implying the
use of a fixed hand-shape (e.g. The nanny patted the
cushion; The singer gripped the microphone) – see also the
examples in (2). The second (variable) type contained a
verb whose action could be performed with one hand-shape
or the other depending on the sentential context (e.g. The
busboy lifted the plate; The bartender lifted the bottle ), as
seen as well in (3). The use of these two types of stimuli
was meant to evaluate whether any action compatibility
effects resulted just from the lexical semantics of the verbs,
or whether they resulted from the generation of a mental
simulation of the event described by the entire sentence.
(2) a.
b.
(3) a.
b.

Results
As discussed earlier, previous work with sentences
describing actions involving the understander (Glenberg and
Kaschak 2002) has shown that subjects are faster to read a
sentence when it is compatible with the action they have to
perform. In the current study, just as in Experiment 1,
release times on the same button indicating reading time did
not show the predicted interaction effect. A three-way
(sentence type [fixed, variable] by handshape [fist, palm] by
sentence shape [fist, palm]) repeated-measured subjects
ANOVA showed a main effect of sentence type (fixed or
variable): F1(1,65)=7.473; p<.01, and a strong two-way
interaction between sentence type and sentence hand-shape
(fist or palm): F1(1,65)=27.698, p<.001. However, the
critical interaction between the response hand-shape and the
sentence hand-shape was not significant: F1(1,65)=.011,
p=.916.
Instead, as in Experiment 1, the time subjects took to
press the response button indicating that the sentence was
meaningful did show the predicted effect. With response
button press times, there was a main effect of sentence
hand-shape (fist or palm), F1(1,65)=9.189; p<.01, which is
not unexpected since the palm and fist sentences were
different and not intended to be matched for response
latency. There was also a two-way effect between sentence

The waiter smoothed the tablecloth.
The tourist punched the wall.
The waitress carried the platter.
The lawyer carried the briefcase.

241

type (fixed or variable) and sentence hand-shape,
F1(1,65)=5.903; p<.05, which we did not predict.
Critically, the interaction effect between response handshape (fist or palm) and sentence hand-shape (the ACE) is
significant, and in the predicted direction: F1(1,65)=6.294;
p<.05 (Fig. 2). A repeated-measures item analysis also
confirmed the significance of the ACE for these sentences:
F2(1,30)=6.35, p<0.05. As expected, subjects were much
quicker to press the response button when the hand-shape
required to respond was compatible with the hand-shape
implied by the sentence. This can be interpreted as evidence
that action language comprehension has an effect on action
performance to the level of fine motor detail, despite the fact
that the effect was much stronger for fist than palm
sentences.
590
580
570
560
550
540
530
520
510

demonstrate that motor action is facilitated even when
language describes actions involving only third-person
participants, in which case they are less likely to be
preparing to perform the described actions. This finding
demonstrates that motor imagery is much more pervasive
than previously known. An interpretation of this effect is
that language comprehension in general engages cognitive
mechanisms responsible for motor performance in order to
perform a mental simulation of language content (Feldman
& Narayanan 2004, Bergen & Chang 2005, Lakoff &
Gallese 2005).
Not only have we seen that language not about an
understander will nevertheless lead them to perform mental
motor imagery, but in addition, Experiment 2 showed that
this simulation includes detail as to the handshapes that
would be required to perform the described action. By
demonstrating that subjects found it easier to respond when
sentential semantics and an executed handshape were
compatible, Experiment 2 provides behavioral evidence that
this kind of mental simulation of action performance in
language understanding includes detailed motor
information.
Both of these findings serve to strengthen an embodied
theory of meaning wherein experiences of action and
perception provide the basis for the subsequent mental
recreation of these experiences such that they can be
recruited for the purposes of interpreting and acting on the
basis of upon linguistic input.
One interesting sidenote relates to the measurement on
which the Action-sentence Compatibility Effect was
observed. As noted above, in their original work, Glenberg
& Kaschak (2002) found a significant compatibility effect
on the time it took subjects to read the sentence and release
the button keeping it on the screen. By contrast, in each of
the studies described above (like in Tseng & Bergen 2005),
the effect was observed instead on the time it took subjects
to perform the compatible or incompatible action that
indicated their meaningfulness judgment.
Here is a possible explanation. The main difference
between the two experiments was in whether the sentence
stimuli described actions involving the experimental subject
or not. It could thus be the case that when language is about
an understander (compared with when it only pertains to
third persons), they more immediately engage motor
imagery, as they are preparing for situated action. This
would explain why in Glenberg & Kaschak's (2002) study,
which used second-person participants in sentences, the
motor compatibility effect was observed as early as the
release time - when subjects are still planning their motor
response. By contrast, in the current studies, where
sentences did not involve the experimental subject, motor
activation occurred later, and therefore showed up on the
motor response times, rather than the reading button release
times. If this explanation is correct, such a difference in
timecourse of simulation would constitute a dramatic
demonstration of the intricate nature of mental access to
semantic content during language processing, and would
highlight the importance of attending to the details of
linguistic stimuli in language processing.

Sent.
Fist
Sent.
Palm
Fist

Palm

Response Shape

Figure 2: Response Hand-shape by Sentence Hand-shape
If there was a significantly different effect for fixed handshape verbs versus variable hand-shape verbs, we should
expect a three-way interaction between sentence type,
response hand-shape, and sentence hand-shape. However,
there was no such significant effect, which fails to
disconfirm the null hypothesis that these two sentence types
yield the same effect: F1(1,65)=.346, p=.559.

Discussion
These results demonstrate that sentences denoting actions
performed using a particular handshape prime the
performance of a physical response using the same
handshape. This effect is produced by processing sentences
denoting actions performed by third persons, confirming the
finding reported in Experiment 1 that a sentence need not
involve the understander for it to yield motor activity. This
level of motor detail has not been previously demonstrated
in sentence processing research on language not involving
the understander. Finally, the observed effect here
measured the time it took subjects to respond by pressing a
button using the target response handshape, further
reinforcing the finding in Experiment 1 that response time,
and not reading time, is the critical measure of motor
activity in third-person-participant sentence comprehension.

General Discussion
Previous studies have shown that language about a hearer
leads them to perform motor imagery about the described
actions. It has been argued that this motor activation arises
due to the need on the part of the language understander to
prepare for situated action (Glenberg & Kaschak 2002).
While this may be correct, results from the current studies
242

Conclusion

Kosslyn, S. M., G. Ganis, and W. L. Thompson. 2001.
Neural foundations of imagery. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 635 -642.
Lotze, M., P. Montoya, M. Erb, E. Hülsmann, H. Flor, U.
Klose, N. Birbaumer, and W. Grodd. 1999. Activation of
cortical and cerebellar motor areas during executed and
imagined hand movements: An fMRI study, Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(5): 491-501
MacWhinney, B. (in press) The emergence of grammar
from perspective taking. In Pecher, D and Zwaan, R.
(Eds.) . The grounding of cognition.
Matlock, T. To appear. Fictive motion as cognitive
simulation. Memory and Cognition.
Porro, C. A., M. P. Francescato, V. Cettolo, M. E. Diamond,
P. Baraldi, C. Zuian, M. Bazzocchi, and P. E. di
Prampero. 1996. Primary motor and sensory cortex
activation during motor performance and motor imagery:
a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal
of Neuroscience 16:7688–7698.
Nyberg, L., K. M. Petersson, L. G. Nilsson, J. Sandblom, C.
Åberg, and M. Ingvar. 2001. Reactivation of motor brain
areas during explicit memory for actions. NeuroImage,
14, 521-528.
Pulvermueller, F., Haerle, M., & Hummel, F. 2001.
Walking or Talking?: Behavioral and Neurophysiological
Correlates of Action Verb Processing. Brain and
Language 78, 143–168.
Rizzolatti, G., F. Luciano, G. Vittorio, L. Fogassi. 1996.
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research, 3:131-141.
Stanfield, R. A. and R. A. Zwaan. 2001. The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psych Science, 12, 153-156.
Tettamanti, M., Buccino, G., Saccuman, M.C., Gallese, V.,
Danna, M., Perani, D., Cappa, S.F., Fazio, F., &
Rizzolatti, G. Unpublished Ms. Sentences describing
actions activate visuomotor execution and observation
systems.
Tseng, Meylysa and Benjamin Bergen. 2005. Lexical
Processing Drives Motor Simulation. This volume.
Tucker, M. and R. Ellis. 2001. The potentiation of grasp
types during visual object categorization. V i s u a l
Cognition, 8 (6), 769-800.
Wheeler, M. E., S. E. Petersen, and R. L. Buckner. 2000.
Memory’s echo: Vivid remembering reactivates sensory
specific cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, USA 97: 11125–11129.
Zwaan, R.A. (1999). Embodied cognition, perceptual
symbols, and situation models. Discourse Processes, 28,
81-88
Zwaan, R. A., R. A. Stanfield and R. H. Yaxley. 2002. Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.

The body, and our experiences in it, matter to language in a
trivial and a non-trivial way. Trivially, without a body, we
could obviously not produce or perceive language, nor for
that matter would we have much of interest to talk about.
But less trivially, it seems that the act of communicating
through language about action uses the ability to call up
mental representations of how one moves one's body. The
integration of language processing with the mental
simulation of motor action is yet another in an increasingly
long list of important ways in which the embodiment of
human beings critically structures the higher-order cognitive
behaviors they engage in.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks to Art Glenberg for invaluable consultation
throughout, to Kristin Ciano for her help coding the data
and running subjects, as well as to Meylysa Tseng and other
members of the Cognitive Linguistics Research Group at the
University of Hawai`i for feedback on the design. All errors
and omissions are of course our own.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Bergen, B. & N. Chang. (2005). Embodied Construction
Grammar in Simulation-Based Language Understanding.
In J.-O. Östman & M. Fried (Eds.), Construction
Grammars: Cognitive grounding and theoretical
extensions. John Benjamins.
Bergen, B., S. Narayan, and J. Feldman. 2003. Embodied
verbal semantics: evidence from an image-verb matching
task.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Buccino, G., F. Binkofski, G. R. Fink, L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi,
V. Gallese, R. J. Seitz, K. Zilles, G. Rozzolatti, and H. J.
Freund. 2001. Action observation activates premotor and
parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 13 (2): 400-404.
Ellis, R., and M. Tucker. 2000. Micro-affordance: The
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British Journal of Psychology, 91, 451-471.
Feldman, J. & S. Narayanan. 2004. Embodied Meaning in a
Neural Theory of Language. Brain and Language 89,
385-392, 2004.
Gallese, V., L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, and G. Rizzolatti. 1996.
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain 119:
593-609.
Gallese, V. & G. Lakoff. 2005. The Brain’s Concepts: The
Role of the Sensory-Motor System in Reason and
Language. Cognitive Neuropsychology.
Glenberg, A. and M. Kaschak. 2002. Grounding Language
in Action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9 (3), 558565.
Glenberg, A. & D. Robertson (2000). Symbol Grounding
and Meaning: A Comparison of High-Dimensional and
Embodied Theories of Meaning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43, 379-401.

243

