UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shedding Light on the Graph Schema

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84s8j4db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Reifers, Andrew L.
Ritter, Frank E.
Schenck, Ian N.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shedding Light on the Graph Schema
Raj M. Ratwani
(rratwani@gmu.edu)

J. Gregory Trafton
(trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)

George Mason University

Naval Research Laboratory
different types (i.e. bar graphs and line graphs). In the pure
blocks, it is thought that because the stimuli are of the same
type, each stimulus primes or activates the next and thus
people are quick to respond to the stimuli. However, stimuli
only prime or activate other stimuli that rely on the same
mental representation. Thus, in the mixed blocks, because the
stimuli are of different types, they may rely on different
representations and result in a slower response as compared to
the pure blocks. There are several other interpretations to
mixing costs, but this interpretation is very prevalent (Los,
1996, 1999).

Abstract
The current theories of graph comprehension have posited the
graph schema as providing us the necessary knowledge to
interpret any graph type. Yet, little is known about the nature of
the graph schema, and no empirical data exist showing that
there actually is a graph schema. In experiment 1 we show
evidence that a graph schema does exist, and that graph
schemas are not specific to each and every graph type. In
experiments 2 and 3 we show that there is a different graph
schema for typical and atypical graphs. We interpret these
findings as evidence for a prototypical graph schema.

Introduction
When looking at Figure 1a and attempting to read-off the
number of Widgets in Tray B, how does one have the
necessary knowledge to be able interpret this specific type of
graph? Given the large number of graph types (e.g. bar, line,
dot, scatter, box plot, etc.) and the fact that the same symbol
can represent completely different information in each of
these graph types, how do we activate and use the
information specific to each graph type? For example, the
“dot” in a scatter plot as compared to the “dot” in a box plot
mean very different things and in order to be able to interpret
these different graph types, we have to be able to activate the
appropriate knowledge.
The current theories of graph comprehension solve this
problem by positing a “graph schema.” Pinker (1990)
suggests it is the graph schema that allows us to recognize
specific types of graphs and allows us to find the desired
information in a graph. Lohse (1993) suggests that the graph
schema contains standard, learned procedures for locating
information in the graph. Thus, when reading-off specific
information from a graph, the current theories would suggest
the following operations: (1) Early visual processes construct
all possible relationships among graph elements, (2) Build a
propositional representation of the graph, (3) Activate graph
schema, (4) Devise the conceptual question, (5) Associate
location of bar with each tray, (6) Associate each bar with
values for each tray (7) Devise the conceptual message
(Carpenter & Shah, 1998; Lohse, 1993; Pinker, 1990;
Trickett, Ratwani, & Trafton, under review). The graph
schema (step 3) is central to all current theories of graph
comprehension. What is interesting is that there has been no
empirical work to establish whether a graph schema really
exists, and, if so, what its features are.
Our research goal was to use the mixing costs paradigm
(Los, 1996, 1999) to investigate the nature of graph schemas.
In the mixing costs paradigm there are blocks of pure stimuli,
composed of items of the same type (i.e. all bar graphs), and
blocks of mixed stimuli, which are composed of items of

Figures 1a-d. (clockwise from upper left corner) Graphs used
in experiments 1-3: bar graph, line graph, dot chart, scatter
plot.
By using the mixing costs paradigm, we will be able to
show which graphs share a similar mental representation.
This internal representation, we believe, is what most graph
comprehension theorists call the graph schema. We will
describe in some detail exactly what we think a graph schema
is in the general discussion. Assuming a graph schema or
representation does exist, there appear to be several
possibilities as to how the graph schema accounts for our
ability to interpret different graph types. First, the schema
may be graph specific; each and every graph type may have
its own unique mental representation (when we say
representation, we mean internal, mental representation). For
example, a bar graph may have its own representation and a

1815

line graph may have its own representation. In terms of
priming, if each graph type relies on an entirely different
representation, one graph type should not prime the other.
Switching between graph representations takes time, and
since the particular graph representation is not primed, there
is a time cost. Thus, graph readers should be slower at
responding to a particular graph type in the mixed condition
as compared to the pure condition. A second possibility is that
there is a general graph schema; we have one single graph
representation which is used for each and every graph type. If
this is the case, any given graph type should prime any other
graph type since they rely on the same graph representation.
This means graph readers reaction times to pure conditions of
one graph type should be the same as their reaction times to
mixed conditions of two graph types, since the same
representation is being primed in both conditions. A third
possibility, which we believe, is that there are two
prototypical graphs – bar and line graphs. These prototypes
are activated any time there is a graph, but if the graph type is
not a bar or line graph, additional time is needed to interpret
the graph and change the mental representation.
In these experiments we examine different graph types
which vary in their prototypicality to determine the nature of
the graph schema.

activated. The response to bar graphs in the mixed condition
of bar graphs and line graphs should be slower since the bar
graph representation has to be activated each time a bar graph
is viewed.
If these two graph types rely on a general graph schema, we
would expect that bar graphs would activate line graphs and
line graphs would activate bar graphs. Because each graph
type may rely on the same representation, we would not
expect to find differences in the pure graph conditions and the
mixed bar graph and line graph conditions. Regardless of the
graph type, the graph representation will remain activated in
both the pure and mixed conditions of graphs resulting in no
time costs. The prototypical graph view makes the same
predictions as the general graph view– we will explore less
prototypical graph types in later experiments.

Method
Participants
Twenty-one George Mason University undergraduate
students participated in this experiment for course credit.

Materials

Experiment 1

The materials consisted of eighty bar graphs, eighty line
graphs and forty text sentences. Each of the graphs depicted
the number of Widgets, ranging from 0-9, in three different
trays: A, B, and C (see Figure 1a and 1b for examples); each
sentence contained a number ranging from 0-9. We chose to
use text sentences because we wanted non-graphical and nonspatial stimuli. All of the graphs and text were randomly
generated, and the locations of trays A, B, and C were
randomly assigned. For each of the graphs in the experiment
the participant was asked the same question, “How many
Widgets are there in Tray B?”, in order to minimize working
memory load of remembering the question (Peebles & Cheng,
2003). For each of the text sentences, the participants were
asked what number appears in the sentence. For example, the
sentence may be “There were two cars in the driveway”;
subsequently, the participant would enter “two”. While the
text sentences are of a different subject matter than the
graphs, the primary goal was to examine whether some kind
of graph schema exists.

In experiment 1 we used three stimuli types: bar graphs, line
graphs, and text. We had pure blocks of each graph type (e.g.
pure bar graphs and pure line graphs) and mixed blocks of
each stimulus type (e.g. mixed bar graphs and text). First,
based on the fact that there has been little research on graph
schemas, we wanted to find empirical evidence that a graph
schema exists. If a graph schema exists, we would expect that
the conditions of pure graphs would be faster than the
conditions of graphs and text. In the pure conditions, this
graph representation would remain highly activated since it is
being primed. However, in the mixed conditions, if there is a
graph representation, it would not be primed by the text,
resulting in slower reaction times as compared to the pure
condition. In the case of no graph schema, there should be no
priming in the pure condition or the mixed graph and text
condition, resulting in the same reaction times to the graphs in
both conditions.
Second, to examine the nature of the graph schema, we
began by examining whether the graph schema was graph
specific or graph general by using two prototypical graphs. If
a specific graph schema exists, we would expect a time cost
associated with activating the correct graphical representation
in the mixed bar graph and line graph condition as compared
to the pure graph conditions. Because each of these graphs
relies on a different representation, each time either graph
type is viewed, that specific representation for that graph type
must be activated; however, in the pure conditions the graphs
are of all the same type, so the representation remains
activated and thus there is priming and no time cost. For
example, because a bar graph may have a specific bar graph
schema, the reaction times to the condition of pure bar graphs
should be fast since the representation remains highly

Design

1816

Five different conditions were setup in this experiment, with
each condition containing forty stimuli. There were two pure
conditions: pure bar graph and pure line graph. Each of these
conditions consisted of 40 similar graph types, for example,
the pure bar graph condition consisted of 40 bar graphs. There
were three mixed conditions: mixed bar graphs and line
graphs, mixed bar graphs and text, mixed line graphs and text.
Each of these conditions also contained 40 stimuli, 20 of each
respective type. The stimuli order in each condition was
randomly assigned. Throughout this paper, we refer to the
pure conditions as follows: line (pure); this means we are
referring to the average reaction time in the pure line graph
condition. We refer to the mixed conditions as follows: bar
(mixed bar/line); this means we are referring to the average

reaction time for the bar graphs in the mixed bar graph and
line graph condition.

Procedure
The order in which the five conditions were presented to each
participant was randomly assigned according to a Latin
squares design. The stimuli were presented to the participants
over the computer. Each participant was instructed to respond
to the number of Widgets in Tray B when viewing a graph,
and to respond to the number in the sentence when viewing a
sentence, by entering the numerical value into the computer
by using the keypad on the keyboard. Before each condition,
the participant performed three practice trials to ensure they
understood the graph type, the interface, and the task. Each
participant was instructed to go through each graph or text as
quickly and accurately as possible. Once the participant
entered the value, the next stimulus automatically appeared
for the participant to respond to. After the condition was
completed, the experimenter entered the room and loaded the
next condition for the participant.

Figure 2. Average reaction times and difference scores.

Results and Discussion

We first wanted to find evidence of the existence of any
kind of graph schema. The existence of a graph schema was
evident by the significant difference in the bar (pure)
condition and the bar (mixed bar/text) condition as evident in
Figure 2, Tukey p < .05. This suggests that the text does not
activate the bar graph representation since participants are
slower at responding in the bar (mixed bar/text) condition, as
compared to the bar (pure) condition. In the bar (mixed
bar/text) condition, the bar graph representation has to be
activated each time a bar graph is viewed, resulting in a time
cost as compared to the bar (pure) condition. The line (pure)
as compared to the line (mixed line/text) condition trended in
the same direction; however, this difference was not
significant. These comparisons suggest there is a graph
schema, but is the schema graph specific or graph general?
If the graph schema is general, both bar graphs and line
graphs should prime the same graph representation, so bars
(mixed bar/line) should be as fast as bar (pure). If the graph
schema is specific, bar graphs and line graphs should not
prime the same representation, so bar (mixed bar/line) should
be slower than bar (pure).
The reaction times for the bar (pure) condition were not
significantly different from the bars (mixed bars/line)
condition, p = .67. Likewise, the line (pure) condition was
not significantly different from the line (mixed bars/line)
condition, p = .80 (see Figure 2). Because the line graphs
activated the bar graphs and the bar graphs activated the line
graphs equally as well as each graph type was activated in
their respective pure conditions, this suggests that both bar
graphs and line graphs rely on the same graph representation.
If the schema was graph specific, we would expect the mixed
conditions to be slower than the pure conditions, since a
different representation would have to be activated each time
a different type of graph appeared.

The reaction times for incorrect responses and reaction times
that were three standard deviations away from the average
were removed from all analyses. In the pure conditions, the
participant’s reaction times were averaged across all stimuli.
In the mixed conditions the participant’s reaction times were
averaged across similar stimuli. For example, in the mixed
bar graph and line graph condition, the reaction times of all
the bar graphs were averaged, and the reaction times for all
the line graphs were averaged. This was done for each of the
mixed conditions.
An omnibus ANOVA showed there was a significant
difference among the conditions, F (8, 160) = 6.6, p < 0.0001,
MSE = 33538. Specific comparisons were conducted using
pairwise t-tests with the Tukey HSD adjustment for multiple
comparisons. Figure 2 shows the difference scores between
conditions based on stimuli type.
The pure conditions serve as a baseline for comparison to the
mixed conditions. For example, the first set of three numbers
on the far left of the figure represents average reaction times
for bar graphs. “Pure” is the condition of bar (pure), “Line” is
the condition of bar (mixed bar/line), and ‘Text” is the
condition of bar (mixed bar/text). The average response time
to the condition of bar (pure) was 1791 ms, the average
response time to the bar (mixed bar/line) was 1810 ms, and
1964 ms for the bar mixed (bar/text). The bars above the
numbers represent the difference in reaction times between
the pure conditions and the mixed conditions. The “*”
indicates a significant difference between the pure condition
and the marked mixed condition via Tukey HSD. Thus, the
difference between the bar (pure) (1791 ms) and the bar
(mixed bar/text) (1964 ms) is shown graphically as 173 ms,
which is a significant difference.

Experiment 2

1817

In experiment 1, each graph type primed the other, suggesting
they rely on the same graph representation. We did not find
mixing costs between the conditions of pure graph types and

the conditions of mixed graph types; this is evidence against
the specific graph schema view, but does not differentiate
between the general or prototypical graph schema views. The
general graph schema view predicts that there will never be
mixing costs between any different graph types since they all
rely on the same mental representation. The prototypical
graph view, however, predicts that there will be mixing costs
for less prototypical graph types. Thus, we chose both a very
typical (line graph; Figure 1a) and a very atypical graph type
(Cleveland’s dot chart; Figure 1c) for experiment 2. In the dot
charts (Cleveland, 1985), the numerical scale appears on the
x-axis and the labels appear on the y-axis.
According to the prototypical based graph schema view,
since dot charts are very atypical, they should have a different
representation than the line graphs. Based on this view, in the
dot (mixed dot/line) condition, the dot chart representation
must be activated each time the dot chart appears, whereas in
the dot (pure) condition this representation should remain
activated. Thus, participants should be faster at responding in
the dot (pure) condition as compared to the dot (mixed
dot/line) condition, indicating that line graphs do not activate
dot charts.
The general graph schema view would suggest there should
be no mixing costs between these two different graph types;
participants should be equally fast in the pure graph
conditions as they are in the mixed graph conditions. Since all
graph types rely on the same graph representation, it should
be equally activated, and there should be no differences
between conditions. If no mixing costs are found between the
pure graph conditions and the mixed graph conditions, this
would be further evidence for the general graph schema view.

Results and Discussion
The statistical analyses conducted were the same as in
experiment 1. The omnibus ANOVA was significant, F (8,
160) = 17.5, p < 0.0001, MSE = 31023, indicating that there
was a significant difference in the conditions. Figure 3 shows
the average reaction times by condition and also shows the
difference scores. Consistent with experiment 1, the dot
(pure) condition was significantly faster than the dot (mixed
dot/text) condition, Tukey p < .05. The line (pure) condition
as compared to the line (mixed line/text) condition trended in
this direction, but was not significant. These results were
consistent with previous experiments and indicate that there is
a graph schema.

Figure 3. Average reaction times and difference scores.

Method
Participants
Twenty George Mason University undergraduate students
participated in this experiment for course credit.

Materials
The materials were similar to those used in experiment 1,
except eighty dot charts replaced the eighty bar graphs (see
Figure 1c for an example); the line graphs and text remained
the same. The same questions asked in experiment 1 were
asked in this experiment as well.

Design
The design was similar to experiment 1. The two pure
conditions were: pure dot chart and pure line graph. The three
mixed conditions were: dot chart and line graph, dot chart and
text, and line graph and text.

Procedure
The procedure was the same as experiment 1.

As the prototypical graph schema view would suggest, the
dot charts are not primed by the line graphs. The dot (pure)
condition was significantly faster than the dot (mixed
dot/line) condition as illustrated in Figure 3, Tukey p<.05. In
the dot (pure) condition, because the stimuli are all dot charts,
this representation remains activated since each dot chart
primes the next. However, in the dot (mixed dot/line)
condition, because the dot charts and line graphs rely on
different representations, the dot chart representation is not
activated by the line graphs. Thus, each time a dot chart
appears, its representation has to be activated, resulting in a
slower reaction time to the dot charts in the mixed condition
than in the pure condition.
Because the line graph is a prototypical graph type, there
are no mixing costs between the line (mixed dot/line)
condition and the line (pure) condition, p = .65. Importantly,
these asymmetric mixing costs show that the time cost
associated with the dot charts was not simply due to a switch
cost associated with the different stimuli types. If the mixing
costs were due to a switch cost, we would see a similar time
cost in the line (pure) as compared to line (mixed dot/line).
These results suggest there is a different graph schema for
dot charts and line graphs. Thus, there is not a true general
graph schema, and there also seems to be a prototypical graph
schema.

1818

While experiment 2 demonstrates that there is not a general
graph schema, it could be that the reason that there are mixing
costs between dot (pure) and dot (mixed dot/line) is that the
dot chart is not only atypical, but also that it has a completely
different orientation of axes from the line chart. That is, the
dot chart is read in a completely different manner: the
participant has to look at the y-axis to find the “B” label. This
switching of the labels on the axes between graph types could
be responsible for the mixing costs, not the a-prototypicality
of the dot chart.
Experiment 3 thus used an atypical graph type (a scatter
plot) that had the same axis orientation as the line graphs.

three mixed conditions were: scatter plot and line graph,
scatter plot and text, and line graph and text.

Procedure
The procedure was the same as experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The statistical analyses conducted were the same as
experiment 1. The omnibus ANOVA was significant, F (8,
160) = 2.2, p < 0.05, MSE = 64059, indicating that there was
a significant difference in the conditions. We first wanted to
replicate the findings in experiments 1 and 2, which
suggested that there was some kind of graph schema based on
the fact that the text did not activate the graphs. Similar to
experiment 1, the scatter (pure) condition was significantly
faster than the scatter (mixed scatter/text) condition as
illustrated in Figure 4, Tukey p < .06. The line (pure)
condition as compared with the line (mixed line/text)
condition trended in the expected direction, but as in
experiments 1 and 2, this relationship was not significant.
These findings are consistent with experiment 1 and lend
further support to the existence of a graph schema.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 compared a prototypical graph type (line
graph; Figure 1a) and an atypical graph type (scatter plot;
Figure 1d). According to the prototypical graph view,
participants should be faster to respond to a scatter (pure)
condition than a scatter (mixed scatter/line) condition. This
mixing cost would be attributable to the fact that in the mixed
condition, the scatter plot representation has to be activated
each time a scatter plot is viewed, resulting in an additional
time cost, whereas in the pure scatter plot condition, the
activation of the scatter plots remains high. The activation of
the line graphs, on the other hand, may not be as influenced
by the scatter plots since the line graph is a prototypical graph
type.
The general graph schema view would suggest there should
be no mixing costs between these two different graph types;
participants should be equally fast in the pure graph
conditions as they are in the mixed graph conditions. Since all
graph types rely on the same graph representation, it should
be equally activated and there should be no differences
between conditions. If no mixing costs are found between the
pure graph conditions and the mixed graph conditions, this
would be evidence for the general graph schema view; the
results of experiment 2 could be attributed to the fact that the
orientation of the graphs was different, not the prototypicality
of the graphs.

Figure 4. Average reaction times and difference scores.

Method
Participants
Twenty-one George Mason University undergraduate
students participated in this experiment for course credit.

Materials
The materials were similar to those used in experiment 1;
except eighty scatter plots replaced the eighty bar graphs (see
Figure 1d for an example); the line graphs and text remained
the same. The same questions asked in experiment 1 were
asked in this experiment as well.

Design
The design was similar to experiment 1. The two pure
conditions were: pure scatter plot and pure line graph. The

Next we compared the scatter (pure) condition to the scatter
(mixed scatter/line) condition, and also the line (pure)
condition to the line (mixed scatter/line) condition. Consistent
with the prototypical graph schema view, the scatter (pure)
condition was significantly faster than the scatter (mixed
scatter/line) condition, as illustrated in Figure 4, Tukey p <
.05. This time cost in the scatter (mixed scatter/line) condition
suggests that the default representation has to be changed to
fit the scatter plot representation, resulting in this greater time
cost as compared to the scatter (pure) condition. The line
graphs apparently did not prime the scatter plots as the
general graph schema view would suggest.
Interestingly, the line (pure) condition was not significantly
different from the line (mixed scatter/line) condition, p = .94.
Participants were just as fast at reading line graphs in the line

1819

(pure) condition as compared to the line (mixed scatter/line)
condition. These asymmetric mixing costs suggest that our
findings are not due to switch costs associated with the
differences in the stimuli. The line graphs do not incur a cost,
once again suggesting that the prototypical graph schema
includes a line graph.

General Discussion
There are many different graph types which use similar
symbols in different ways to represent data. The current
theories of graphs comprehension (Carpenter & Shah, 1998;
Lohse, 1993; Pinker, 1990) rely on the notion of a graph
schema to account for how graph readers have the necessary
knowledge to be able to interpret any given graph type. We
outlined three possibilities for the graph schema: the graph
specific view, the graph general view and the prototype view.
Experiment 1 demonstrated, first, that a graph schema does
exist, and second, that the graph schema is not graph specific.
The bar graphs and line graphs primed each other in the
mixed conditions, suggesting that these graph types rely on
the same representation.
Experiment 2 sought to examine whether the graph
representation was graph general or prototypicality based.
Participants were slower in the dot (mixed dot/line) condition
than the dot (pure) condition, suggesting that the dot chart
relies on a different graph representation. Importantly, there
was no difference in the line (pure) condition and the line
(mixed dot/line) condition, suggesting that the prototypical
graph schema includes a line graph. These asymmetric
mixing costs also show that our findings are not due to switch
costs from different stimuli types.
Experiment 3 further supported the prototypicality based
view. We manipulated prototypicality with the graphical
pattern and kept the orientation of the axes the same, which
resulted in faster response times in the scatter (pure) condition
as compared to the scatter (mixed scatter/line) condition.
However, similar to experiment 2, the line graphs did not
incur a mixing cost.
How do people use a graph schema? According to our view,
any time that someone sees a graph, the prototype graph
schema is retrieved. If the graph type being examined is a
line or bar graph, the comprehension and usage of that graph
proceeds smoothly because the default values already match
the graph type. If, however, the graph type being examined is
not a line or bar graph – it is a scatter plot or a dot chart or a
box plot – the default values of the graph schema must be
changed to fit that graph type. Alternatively, a graph specific
schema must be activated.
What exactly is the graph schema? We believe the graph
schema is our mental representation of how to read a graph
type; it is the graph schema that gives us the necessary
knowledge to interpret a specific graph. Prototypical graphs
like line and bar graphs are activated more easily than

atypical graphs. Note that prototypicality does not necessarily
mean that it is an easier, better or faster graph to use – it just
means that that representation is the default when we see a
graph. Prototypicality could vary, as it does in other domains
(Medin & Atran, under review). In addition, our participant
population was composed of undergraduate students; it is
likely that more experienced graph users have a more
elaborate schema.
This research does not focus so much on the other default
values, or even what the other slots could make up the graph
schema; future research will be necessary for that question.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by ONR grants M12439
and N0001403WX3001 to the second author. We thank Chris
Kello for many helpful suggestions.

References

1820

Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the
perceptual and conceptual processes in graph
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 4(2), 75-100.
Cleveland, W. S. (1985). The elements of graphing data.
Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Lohse, G. L. (1993). A cognitive model for understanding
graphical perception. Human Computer Interaction, 8,
353-388.
Los, S. A. (1996). On the origin of mixing costs: Exploring
information processing in pure and mixed blocks of
trials. Acta Psychologica, 94(2), 145-188.
Los, S. A. (1999). Identifying stimuli of different perceptual
categories in pure and mixed blocks of trials: evidence
for stimulus-driven switch costs. Acta Psychologica,
103(1-2), 173-205.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (under review). The native mind:
biological categorization, reasoning and decision
making in development across cultures. Psychological
Review.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2003). Modeling the Effect
of Task and Graphical Representation on Response
Latency in a Graph Reading Task. Human Factors,
45(1), 28-46.
Pinker, S. (1990). A theory of graph comprehension. In R.
Freedle (Ed.), Artificial intelligence and the future of
testing (pp. 73-126). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Trickett, S. B., Ratwani, R. M., & Trafton, J. G. (under
review). Real World Graph Comprehension: HighLevel Questions, Complex Graphs, and Spatial
Cognition.

