UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Some Empirical Results Concerning Deontic Reasoning: Models, Schema, or Both?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bd85156

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bello, Paul
Yang, Yinguri

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Some Empirical Results Concerning Deontic Reasoning:
Models, Schema, or Both?
Yingrui Yang (yangyri@rpi.edu)
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Department of Cognitive Science; 110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Paul Bello (Paul.Bello@rl.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory - Information Directorate
Information Systems Research; 525 Brooks Rd.
Rome, NY 13441 USA

have been successful at describing human performance
data on a number of different inferential tasks, including
syllogistic reasoning, they have yet to provide a sufficiently general explanation for the frequent content effects which occur during the reasoning process.
While we are particularly interested in deontic1 effects
on inference, it has been shown that both causal and relevance (thematic relationships between antecedents and
consequents) effects are abundant in everyday reasoning. In this paper, we present a natural logic based on
the formal framework in (Tan & van der Torre, 1994)
which provides a generalization of previous results on the
psychology of deontic reasoning, and harnesses modeltheoretic ideas to neatly represent and reason about deontic paradoxes.

Abstract
Herein, we explore the psychology of deontic reasoning through the presentation of a heterogeneous natural logic combining inference schemas with a preferencebased model-theoretic semantics such as those typically
found in various formalisms for nonmonotonic reasoning. We conjecture that the heterogeneous approach is
a generalization of various other hypotheses concerning
deontic reasoning, and provides a robust framework for
explaining semantic intricacies which are present in socalled “deontic paradoxes.” As an initial investigation,
two theories were tested: The first hypothesis states that
people represent an obligation as a conditional statement which explicitly includes the concept of violation,
and the other postulates that people not only prefer
deontically perfect situations to less-than-perfect situations, but also have preference between these sub-ideal
situations. Two sets of experiments were conducted in
order to gain some insight regarding these two ideas, and
the results show strong evidence supporting our initial
intuitions.

Previous Research

Introduction
The psychology of reasoning has generally been divided
on a number of issues which are germane to the development of an adequate theory of human thinking. While
it is almost universally accepted that there is a deviance
between human performance on various reasoning tasks,
and normative solutions to the same; the cause of this deviance is still under debate. On the one hand, the model
theory of reasoning (Johnson-Laird 1983) proposes that
when a human subject interprets a reasoning problem,
they utilize a set of procedures for modeling the initial
relationships between propositions throughout the problem and various methods for manipulating the contents
of the models in order to reach putative conclusions concerning possible states of affairs. The construction of a
model depends on the interpretation of various linguistic terms (quantifiers, in particular), and the retrieval
of general knowledge from memory. The model theory
is domain-independent, and is related to the formal semantics of both first-order logic, and alethic modal logic,
which is the logic of possibility and necessity. On the
other hand, there exist a number of mental logics (Rips
1990; Braine 1978) which propose that humans possess
a repertoire of inference schemas similar to those found
in various formal systems of natural deduction. Inclusion of specific schemas varies between systems, as does
the property of domain specificity. While these theories
2393

Perhaps the most hotly debated of these content effects
is given by deontic interpretations of Wason’s Selection
Task (WST) (Wason & Johnson-Laird, 1972), which asks
subjects to perform a meta-inferential analysis of the
material conditional. Briefly, in the classical non-deontic
version of WST, subjects are presented with four cards,
each one showing the letter A, the letter D, the number
2, and the number 7 respectively2 . The subjects are also
given a rule stating “if there is a vowel on one side of
a card, then there is an even number on the other side
of it”, and are asked which cards would be necessary to
flip in order to demonstrate the validity of the rule. As
it turns out, performance on the WST is not very good.
Less than 10% of untrained reasoners are able to give the
answer: A and 7, which is the only combination usable
for falsifying the conditional.
However, it has been shown in a number of studies
that when the WST is presented with thematic content
which expresses a deontic character, facilitation occurs,
and subjects manage to correctly identify the correct
items (Cheng & Holyoak 1985). A number of explanations have been put forth in order to account for this
strange phenomena, perhaps the most famous of these
being the social contract algorithm (Cosmides & Tooby
1989) in the context of evolutionary psychology, and the
1
Deontic reasoning concerns norms, obligations, permissions, and forbiddance.
2
Any combination of a vowel, a consonant, an even number and an odd number may be used in the presentation of
the task.

pragmatic reasoning schemas theory (Cheng & Holyoak
1985).
We hypothesize that the mechanisms underlying deontic reasoning are necessarily both model-theoretic and
proof-theoretic, and that there are specific interactions
which take place between these two modes of representation which facilitate complex reasoning about obligations. This hypothesis is consistent with the theory
of Mental MetaLogic, developed in (Yang & Bringsjord
2005).

1. (K): O(p → q) → (Op → Oq)
2. (D): ¬O⊥ or equivalently ¬(Op ∧ O¬p)
3. (MP): from p and p → q, derive q
4. (NEC): from p derive Op

A Brief Introduction to Deontic
Reasoning
Deontic reasoning concerns the representation and formal manipulation of obligations, permissions, and prohibitions. Traditionally, deontic logic has been developed
against the backdrop of classical modal logic, reasoning
about what ought to be the case; with obligations and
permissions as analogues of necessities and possibilities.
However, in its original form, as given by Georg Henrik von Wright in his seminal 1951 article (von Wright
1951), deontic logic was developed as a logic of agency,
being concerned with what an agent ought to do. This
issue aside, we shall briefly introduce standard deontic
logic, and an appropriate possible world semantics, describing the classical model-theoretic interpretation of
deontic statements. The general form of statements in
standard deontic logic (SDL) is as follows:
• Obligation: p is obligatory for agent a if and only if
p is necessary for a′ s being a good person. Formally:
Oa p iff (G(a) → p).
• Permission: p is permissable for agent a if and only if
p is possible and a is a good person. Formally: Pa p iff
♦(G(a) ∧ p)
• Forbiddance: p is forbidden if and only if an agent is
obligated to ¬p. Formally: Fa p iff Oa ¬p.
The concept of permission is related to obligation in the
following intuitive way: P p iff ¬O¬p. Through the rest
of this section, we will briefly present so-called “standard
deontic logic” in order to introduce two notorious paradoxes which have been the catalyst for almost all of the
work done on more advanced deontic logics since their
inception. The impetus, of course, is to show that these
deontic paradoxes are far from being esoteric constructions born of mind of philosophers; rather, they represent
commonplace dilemmas in which all of us have found
ourselves in, and which deserve an accounting for from
the standpoint of the psychology of reasoning.

Standard Deontic Logic: Syntax
Briefly, SDL is composed of the smallest S ⊆ L3 such
that it contains all of propositional logic, and the following four axiom schemas:

From these four basic axioms, all of the machinery of
SDL can be built. We now move our discussion onward
into the realm of deontic semantics.

Standard Deontic Logic: Semantics
Deontic semantics can be interpreted as the standard
possible-worlds semantics of normal modal logic (Chellas
1980). A Kripkean interpretation of deontic semantics is
a triple M = hW, I, Ri, where W is the universe of possible worlds, I is an interpretation such that it assigns
a subset of W to each sentence (all possible worlds at
which the sentence is true, written w |= p if w is a subset of possible worlds, and p is the sentence), and R is
a binary relation among the worlds. A deontic sentence
is valid if and only if it is true at every world w ∈ W
for any interpretation M . A sentence q is a logical consequence of another sentence p if and only if there is no
interpretation M and world w such that w |= p and not
w |= q for any interpretation M . In the style of normal
modal logic, necessitation (obligation) of a sentence is
understood as truth of that sentence in every accessible
world (via the binary relation R, and possibility (permissibility) of a sentence is understood as truth of that
sentence in at least one accessible world. Formally:
• w |= Op iff w′ |= p for every w′ ∈ W such that wRw′
holds.
• w |= P p iff w′ |= p for some w′ ∈ W such that wRw′
holds.
• Additionally, for every w ∈ W , there is a w′ ∈ W such
that wRw′ holds (serial property of R).
It should be made clear that SDL only makes the distinction between ideal and non-ideal states of affairs. As
we shall see, the proper treatment of deontic paradoxes4
requires an intuitive semantics capable of distinguishing
between ideal and sub-ideal worlds along with adapting
techniques from non-monotonic logics to deal with ordering these worlds in a reasonable way to generate a representation of the differences between sub-ideal worlds
which are necessary in resolving the paradoxes we shall
present. We have chosen to investigate DIODE (Tan &
van der Torre 1994), which is a framework for deontic
evaluation.
4

3

Where L is comprised of an infinite number of propositional variables, together with the usual connectives, defined
in their usual way: ¬, →, and O

2394

The two most famous deontic paradoxes, Forrester’s
Paradox and Chisholm’s Paradox, will be presented in the
next section, and shown to be representable within the formal framework which we are investigating.

DIODE: A Diagnostic Framework for
Defeasible Deontic Evaluation

DIODE defines a notion of contextual obligation as those
sentences of L which are true in preferred models of a
deontic theory T . More clearly, if some fact of the matter (f ∈ F ) defined in the deontic theory T induces a
preference ordering among models of T , those sentences
of L which are true in the preferred models of T become
obliged in the deontic context induced by f .

Let us begin by formally specifying the logical language to be used as the basis of the DIODE theory.
DIODE is especially designed for the formulation of conditional obligations (which are premises in the paradoxes) through the following construction: “if α is the
case then β ought to be the case ≡ α∧¬Vi → β. The constant Vi represents a unique violation constant, indexed
specifically to obligation i. The conditional obligation
presented above can be read as “if α is the case, and this
obligation is not violated, then β is the case. Unconditional obligations can be represented in this manner as
well. For example, the obligation to not kill O(¬k) is
represented as ¬Vi → ¬k, stating that in the absence of
the violation of this obligation, it ought to be that no
killing occurs.
Definition 1: DIODE Language: Let L be a propositional logic. LV is extended with a number of
violation constants Vi . We use |= to represent entailment.

Definition 7: Contextual Obligations in DIODE:
Let T be a theory of LV . T provides a contextual
obligation for α if and only if T |=⊏ α and α ∈ L.
Let’s examine these semantic principles at work by taking a look at some of the deontic paradoxes which motivated our discussion in chapter three.

Forrester’s Paradox
Forrester’s paradox is easily represented within the
DIODE framework. Recall that the symbolization of the
paradox amounts to the following:
1. It is obligated that one doesn’t kill: O(¬k).
2. If one kills, it is obligated that one kill gently: k →
O(g).

Definition 2: Deontic Theories: Let T be a deontic
theory of L. T is a collection of factual sentences
F (referring to what is actually the case), a set of
background knowledge sentences of L, and a set of
conditional and unconditional norms of the form α∧
¬Vi → β or ¬Vi → β respectively where α, β ∈ L.

3. Gently killing logically implies killing: g → k 5 .
4. One kills: k.

We now introduce the preferential semantics which defines a partial pre-ordering on the models of T . This
semantics is used for ordering all of the ideal and subideal situations according to how many violations occur
within each model.
Definition 3: Partial Pre-Order: Let T be a theory
of LV and M1 and M2 two models of T . M1 is
preferred over M2 , written M1 ⊑ M2 , if and only if
M1 |= Vi then M2 |= Vi for all i. We write M1 ⊏ M2
(M1 is strictly preferred over M2 ) for M1 ⊑ M2 and
not M2 ⊑ M1 .

A problem arises here which is caused by the status of
premise number three as a theorem. In particular, stan⊢p→q
dard deontic logic admits the inference rule ⊢O(p)→O(q)
,
which states that a tautologous conditional yields a conditional consisting of an obligated antecedent and an obligated consequent. From premises 2 and 4, we derive
O(g), which taken with O(g) → O(k) yields O(k) which
contradicts premise number 1.
The Forrester paradox represented as a deontic theory in
the DIODE language is composed of the following sets:
• A set of facts F = {k}.
• A set of background knowledge sentences B = {g →
k}.

Definition 4: Preferential Satisfaction: A model
M preferentially satisfies A (written as M |=⊏ A) if
and only if M |= A and there is no other model M ′
such that M ′ |= A and M ′ ⊏ M . This grants M
the status of a preferred model of A.

• A set of norms N = {¬V1 → ¬k, ¬V2 ∧ k → g}.

Definition 5: Preferential Entailment: A preferentially entails B if and only if for any model M , if
M |=⊏ A then M |= B.
The notion of preferential entailment can be used to
identify minimal violation sets for a given deontic theory.
Definition 6: Minimal Violation Sets: Let T be
a theory of LV and M a preferred model of T , i.e.
M |=⊏ T . The set {Vi |M |= Vi } is a preferred
violation set of T.

The reasoning process is relatively simple once the problem has been converted to propositional form. It requires
no special knowledge of deontic inference rules, and allows for a relatively easy-to-understand presentation of
results. In general, there are 2n models generated by
n propositions in a particular reasoning problem. Forrester’s paradox only contains two propositions: g and
k. Four models are generated for these propositions, but
in our graphical presentation, we only depict three of
5

This is the interesting caveat which makes the paradox
work. The background fact that gentle killing logically implies killing is taken to be an analytical truth (tautology)
here.

2395

derive O(t). From premises 3 and 4, we derive O(¬t).
The D axiom in SDL states that ¬(O(α) ∧ O(¬α)), thus
leaving us in a bit of a conundrum.
Representing the Chisholm set within DIODE is natural,
as well. Following our algorithm for the generation of a
deontic theory, we obtain:
• A set of facts F = {¬h}.
• A set of background knowledge sentences B = { ∅ }.
• A set of norms N = {¬V1 → h, ¬V2 → (h → t),
¬h ∧ ¬V3 → ¬t}.

Figure 1: The Forrester Paradox

them6 . The circles given in the visual depictions of the
paradoxes denote equivalence classes of models. Only
models which are preferred for some factual situation are
given. The dashed box collects those equivalence classes
which pertain directly to the fact of the matter (given
by the satisfaction of k within a class), and is informally
called “zooming in” on the facts. The preference ordering runs from left to right, with the leftmost set of models denoting ideal situations, just like those discussed in
standard deontic logic. Instead of all non-ideal situations
being clumped together into one equivalence class, they
are separated in two ways: by what the facts are, and
by the number of violations which are entailed by the
facts. As can be seen in figure 1, taking propositions k
and g to be the case yields violation V1 through a simple
application of modus tollens. Taking k and ¬g to be the
case yields the same violation of premise 1, but also a
violation of premise 2, allowing us to always prefer the
situation where if it’s the case that I am forced to kill, I
kill gently, to a situation where if I am forced to kill, I
kill savagely. In fact, g becomes a contextual obligation
under the theory T which represents Forrester’s paradox.

Chisholm’s Paradox
As in the case of Forrester’s paradox, we are able to
represent Chisholm’s paradox intuitively and examine
its’ features. Recall that the Chisholm set consists of
the the following premises:
1. It ought to be that Jones helps his neighbor: O(h)
2. It ought to be that if Jones goes to help his neighbors,
that he tells them he is coming: O(h → t)
3. If Jones does not help his neighbors, he ought to not
tell them he is coming: ¬h → O(¬t)
4. Jones does not help: ¬h
The Chisholm paradox analyzed in standard deontic
logic yields counterintuitive results. Since SDL admits
, from premises 1 and 2 we
the inference ⊢O(α),O(α→β)
⊢O(β)
6

Models containing ¬k and V1 are not shown because
those models would never be preferred in any circumstance,
according to definition 3 of the partial pre-ordering over models.

2396

Figure 2: The Chisholm Paradox
Similar to our treatment of Forrester’s paradox, we first
develop an ordering on the equivalence classes of the
models generated by the two propositions h and t, followed by “zooming in” on the fact of the matter, represented by ¬h. Any violation of premise 1 produces the
violation V1 . Furthermore, if Jones tells his neighbors
that he is coming, but never shows up, a violation of the
third premise is generated, resulting in V3 . What’s interesting is that if Jones helps, but doesn’t tell his neighbors
he is coming, a violation of premise 2 ensues, satisfying
V2 . This violation holds the same deontic status as the
state of affairs represented by not helping and not telling,
yet is represented in a different preference order relative
to the ideal situation, since h is contrary to the fact of
the matter. It should be clear that a contextual obligation to not tell (¬t) is generated in the case where ¬h is
the fact of the matter.

Some Testable Features of DIODE
In order to demonstrate that deontic reasoning consists
of both model-theoretic and proof-theoretic components,
we have chosen two particular features of the DIODE
framework to investigate. The first feature concerns the
representation of obligations, and the second concerns
the semantic ordering principles which have been utilized
in the presentation of the examples we have looked at
thusfar.
In DIODE, obligations are represented via the explicit
representation of a violation constant assigned to each
statement capturing a normative proposition. While the
particular version of the DIODE framework which we

have chosen to investigate does not provide explicit recommendations for what a reasoner ought to do, it does
allow the reasoner to make judgments concerning what
ought to be the case. In this respect, DIODE gives an
analogous explanation of so-called “cheater detection,”
or the phase of reasoning concerned with looking for
violations, and therefore predicts similar treatment of
the deontic conditional presented in both (Cosmides &
Tooby 1989) and (Cheng & Holyoak 1985).
Moreover, we predict that reasoners presented with
paradoxical situations are able to both grossly classify
worlds as being ideal or non-ideal, and in the case of
non-ideal worlds, are also able to consistently order them
based on the semantic principles presented in the DIODE
framework. The interaction between these two phenomena is due to a relationship between the schema-like inference of violation, and the model-based ordering principles which result after such violations have been inferred.

Experiments
Two sets of experiments were conducted to test the hypotheses set forth in the previous section. Twelve experimental items were used to substantiate these claims,
and can be provided upon request. Experiments 1-4 used
between-subjects design, while experiments 5 and 6 used
within-subjects design.
Materials: Twelve experimental problems are given.
Problems 1-4 are propositional deontic problems, which
were designed to test if subjects represent an obligation in the conditional form which we have described.
Two items are of the form modus ponens (if p then
q, p; therefore, q) and two of the form modus tollens
(if p then q, not q; therefore, not p). For each form,
the correct answer for one problem is “true”, and for
the other is “false”. Problems 5-8 are quantified counterparts to items 1-4. We predict that the quantified
versions function as their propositional deontic counterparts. Problem 9 is the Forrester Paradox, and problem
10 is Chisholm’s paradox, both of which we have previously analyzed. These two problems were used to test
the prediction that people not only prefer the ideal situation to sub-ideal situations, but also make preference
between sub-ideal situations. Again, problems 10 and
11 are the quantified counterparts of problems 9 and 10.
We also predict that the quantified versions function as
their propositional deontic counterparts.
Subjects: 163 Rensselaer undergraduates participated
in experiments to earn extra course credits.
Results and Discussion:
Data Set 1 : 18 subjects did problems 1-4. The overall
accuracy is 92%, which is consistent with psychological
literature in two ways. First, this high accuracy is consistent with that of ordinary modus ponens, as presented
by a number of researchers. Second, though people have
difficulty with modus tollens, deontic content may suppress these errors, and lead to facilitation. Thus, this
result supports the hypothesis that people do mentally
represent obligations in conditional form.
2397

Data Set 2 : 17 subjects did problems 5-8. The overall accuracy is 93%. This result supports our prediction that the quantified versions function as their deontic
counterparts. In comparison with result of Data Set 11, the correlation of performances between two versions
is significant (r = .89), accounting for about 79.5% of
variance.
Data Set 3 : 15 subjects did problems 9 and 10, of
which, problem 10 has a more complex structure, yielding unclear results. The result from Problem 9 is informative. 53% of the answers made the preference order
1>2>3, which is the predicted ordering. Note that this
percentage is reliably more frequent, in comparison with
13% for the second frequent chosen order (Wilcoxon test,
z = 3.22, p < .01).
Data Set 4 : 17 subjects did problems 11 and 12. For
problem 11 (which is the quantified version of problem
9), 47% of answerers made the preference order 1>2>3,
which is dominant in comparison with 18% for the second most frequently chosen order order (Wilcoxon test,
z = 2.49, p < .05). This result supports again the prediction that the quantified version functions as its deontic
counterpart. Similar to problem 10, the complexity inherent in problem number 12 forces further analysis, due
to unclear results.
Data Set 5 : 50 subjects did Problems 1-8, which is a
within-subjects design. Similar to the results from Data
Sets 1-1 and 1-2, the overall accuracy on Problems 1-4 is
94%, and accuracy on problems 5-8 is 94.5%. As in the
case of between-subject design, the correlation between
the performances of the versions is again significant (r =
.91), accounting for about 80% of variance.
Data Set 6 : 46 subjects did problems 9-12. For problem 9 and its quantified counterpart (problem 11), 63%
answers made the predicted preference order 1>2>3,
which is significantly more frequent than the second chosen order (16%) (Wilcoxon test, z = 3.71, p < .001).
Interestingly, 83% of answerers made the same preference order between the models given in problem 9 and
problem 11.
General Discussion: The results from Data Sets 1, 2,
and 5 have provided empirical evidence for the hypothesis that people are likely to present obligations as conditional statements. The results from Data Sets 3, 4, and 6
support the hypothesis that not only do people prefer the
ideal situation to sub-ideal situation, but they also make
preference between sub-ideal situations when the obligation principles are violated: they prefer a situation with
less violations than more violations. These results seem
to indicate that the DIODE framework is likely to be
psychologically plausible. As for the problems requiring
further study, it has been repeatedly stated within the
literature on mental models that subjects often have difficulty reasoning about more than three models at once.
In the cases of problems 10 and 12, subjects must reason
about 4 models, which are semantically separated by two
different preference orderings, further complicating matters. We believe that more detailed instruction will yield

a set of responses similar to those generated in problems
9 and 11.

Future Work
There are several other features of the DIODE framework which we feel to be psychologically plausible, and
informative in coming to an account of a natural logic for
deontic reasoning. Firstly, we wish to determine if contextual obligations are consistently picked out by subjects, after having identified the best non-ideal situation. This insight will provide us a clue as to whether
certain kinds of conditional obligations may be derived
only through semantical (model-based) reasoning, further supporting our contention that deontic reasoning is
necessarily heterogeneous. Secondly we wish to lend empirical support to the extensive analysis in (Tan & van
der Torre 1994) concerning exceptions, and their relationship to obligations. As a logical framework, DIODE
is designed for defeasible deontic reasoning, clarifying
notions of when obligations are overridden by facts (as
shown in this presentation) or when they are overridden
by more specific/important obligations (which are called
“exceptions”).

Acknowledgments
The work presented in this paper was funded by the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research through the auspices
of the National Research Council under a visiting summer faculty appointment for Dr. Yang at Rome Laboratory.

2398

References
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rips, L.J. (1990). Reasoning. Annual Review of Psychology, 41, (pp. 321–353).
Braine, M.D.S. (1978). On the relation between the natural logic of reasoning and the standard logic. Psychological Review, 85, (pp. 1–21).
Tan, Y-H., & van der Torre, L.W.N. (1994). MultiPreference Semantics for a Defeasible Deontic Logic.
Proceedings of JURIX’94, Amsterdam, Holland.
Wason, P.C. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1972). Psychology
of Reasoning: Structure and Content. Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cheng, P. & Holyoak, K. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning
schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, (pp. 391–416).
Cosmides L. & Tooby, J. (1989). Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture, Part II. Case study:
A computational theory of social exchange. Ethology
and Sociobiology, 10, (pp. 51–97).
Yang, Y. & Bringsjord, S. (2005). Mental MetaLogic: A
New Unifying Theory of Human and Machine Reasoning. Mahwah NJ: Erlbaum.
von Wright, G.H. (1951). Deontic Logic. Mind, 60, (pp.
1–15).
Chellas, B. (1980). Modal Logic: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

