UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Frames of Reference for Temporal Relations: A Conceptual Analysis in English,
German, and Tongan

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mm9740x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Beller, Sieghard
Bender, Andrea
Bannardo, Giovanni

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Frames of Reference for Temporal Relations:
A Conceptual Analysis in English, German, and Tongan
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

Giovanni Bennardo (bennardo@niu.edu)
Department of Anthropology and Cognitive Studies Initiative, Northern Illinois University
DeKalb 60115, Illinois, USA

Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract

languages as closely related as German and English. This
variation points towards a complex relationship between the
two domains of time and space at the conceptual level.
Such a conceptual link between time and space is not only
explicated in science but also in folk theories of various
indigenous cultures (Ascher, 1998). In Navajo and Inuit conceptions of the universe, for instance, space and time are
interwoven, with the focus of interest on motion, changes,
and interrelationships (e.g., Carpenter, 1968; Pinxten, van
Dooren & Harvey, 1983). The etak concept used by Micronesian navigators to estimate their course and progress can be
interpreted both as a spatial and a temporal model (Gladwin,
1970; Hutchins, 1983, 1995). And psychological studies
suggest that spatial moves affect the way in which temporal
tasks are interpreted (Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002;
McGlone & Harding, 1998).
In general, it seems to be space that provides the frame for
cognitions concerned with time (e.g., Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2003). Accordingly, spatial frames of reference
(FORs) may be used to organise temporal orientation. With
regard to spatial relationships, the use of FORs in various
languages and cultures has been extensively studied (e.g.,
Bennardo, 2000, 2002; Haviland, 2000; Levinson, 2003;
Senft, 1997; Wassmann, 1994). How much of what we know
about cultural differences in spatial FORs is applicable to
temporal FORs? Are the same FORs preferably used for spatial relationships also used for temporal relationships?
Mandarin speakers, who habitually use both horizontal
and vertical prepositions for temporal relations, also show a
tendency to “think vertically” about time (Boroditsky, 2001).
English, German, and Tongan vary in terms of usage of spatial FORs, but do they vary correspondingly in their usage of
temporal FORs? Or more generally: Is the conceptualization
of space and spatial relationships homologous to that of time
and temporal relationships?
We explore these questions by providing first of all a short
overview of spatial and temporal FORs. The conceptual
analysis reveals similarities and differences between the spatial domain and the temporal domain. We then look at examples of spatial prepositions used to express temporal
relationships in English, German, and Tongan. Finally, we
show how in Tongan a unique usage of a spatial FOR is

People tend to think about time in terms of space, in some languages even with identical vocabulary. It is therefore plausible
to assume that the frame of reference (FOR) preferred for spatial descriptions also helps to organize temporal descriptions.
Further still: If languages differ with regard to the FORs that
they prefer in the one domain—as is indeed the case—then
they might also differ in the other domain. This paper presents
a conceptual analysis of spatial and temporal FORs and
describes how the former could be mapped onto the latter.
Instances from English, German, and Tongan are provided in
order to scrutinize the relationship of relevant prepositions and
underlying concepts. The analysis reveals that the rare type of
spatial FOR used in Tongan is indeed reflected in the temporal
domain. A homology between the two domains is thus very
likely.
Keywords: Time perspectives; spatial frames of reference;
cross-linguistic analysis.

Introduction
When a German says “der Tag vor der CogSci” (the day
before the CogSci), a preposition—vor (before)—is used to
express the temporal relation. This preposition is borrowed
from the domain of spatial lexemes. In fact, one would also
say “der See vor der Stadt” (the lake in front of the city). The
same is not, at least not to the same extent, valid for the
opposite: The temporal relation “after” is expressed with
nach, the spatial relation “behind” with hinter.
The dual meaning of vor in German resembles that of
“before” in English, used both temporally and spatially; “in
front of”, on the other hand, is used only spatially. However,
it is the case that in many languages the same metaphors and
lexemes are used for temporal and spatial relations (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2000; Gentner, 2001; Gentner, Imai &
Boroditsky, 2002; Kita, Danziger & Stolz, 2001; McGlone &
Harding, 1998; and references cited there). One clear example is provided by the Austronesian language spoken by
about 100,000 people in the Kingdom of Tonga: In Tongan,
prepositions are identical in both domains.
The extent to which spatial language is used to express
temporal relations varies across languages, even between
220

reflected in the temporal domain. In conclusion, we suggest
that a homology between the domains of space and time is
plausible.

Frames of Reference (FORs)
When describing relations between and movements of
objects or events, we inevitably have to take perspective and
choose one particular FOR. In order to obtain coherence, the
description needs to stick to this FOR, and in order to enable
communication within a group, conventions are required
with regard to which FOR should be preferred. These
options and preferences have been extensively studied for
both the spatial and the temporal domain, albeit applying different categorizations and terminology. Our attempt here is
to relate the two domains more closely to each other.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: “The ball is in front of me / of the tree” in the three
subtypes of the relative FOR: (a) basic, (b) translation, and
(c) reflection.
that is in front of the speaker is considered “in front of” the
tree (cf. Figure 1b). Or the front and back assignment can be
flipped so that the front of the oriented object faces the
speaker, thus yielding the reflection subtype of the relative
FOR: A ball between the speaker and a tree is considered “in
front of” the tree (cf. Figure 1c). In both subtypes, the
assignments of the left and right sides are perfectly congruent with those of the speaker. In other words, the oriented
object is not yet considered as having an oriented field of its
own; rather, it is still tied to the field of the speaker.
Both English and German speakers are habitual and preferential users of the relative FOR, specifically the basic and
the reflection subtypes (see Levinson, 2003). Tongan speakers represent a more complex scenario, and both relative and
absolute FOR are habitually used. In addition, Tongan
speakers constitute one of the only two documented cases—
the first is Hausa (Hill, 1982)—of frequent users of the translation subtype of the relative FOR (Bennardo, 2000).

Spatial FORs
A spatial FOR is a set of coordinates (three intersecting axes:
vertical, sagittal, and transversal) used to construct an oriented space within which spatial relationships among objects
are identified. The three types encompass an absolute, an
intrinsic, and a relative FOR (see Levinson, 2003, for a
typology of FOR, and Bennardo, 2004, for a revision of that
typology).
An absolute FOR uses fixed points of reference chosen
within the speaker’s field, as in “The town is south of the
river.” These points are socially agreed upon and culturally
handed down. Good examples are the well-known cardinal
points (north, south, east, west), but also the sea, sacred
mountains, or sacred cities like Mecca. In Oceania, a singleaxis (land-sea) subtype of the absolute FOR is frequently
used (Bennardo, 2002). Tongan employs a radial subtype of
the absolute FOR that uses only one fixed point of reference.
Movement or location of objects are established by means of
centripetal or centrifugal expressions (Bennardo, 2002).
An intrinsic FOR is centered on an object and remains so
when the speaker or the object moves, as in: “The ball is in
front of the car.” In the intrinsic FOR, the oriented field is
thus independent from the field of the speaker—it is a new
field.
A relative FOR is centered on a speaker and remains so
when the speaker moves, as in: “The ball is in front of me.”
This type of relative FOR provides the ‘basic’ subtype (cf.
Figure 1a).
The presence of a second object in the speaker’s field creates the alternatives of treating both objects in direct relationship with the speaker, thus continuing to center the axes
on the speaker, or of relating one object to the other. In the
latter case, orienting axes can be assigned to one object (now
the “reference object”). The reference object assumes the
same function that the speaker had hitherto performed. In a
conservative fashion, the axes mapped onto this object are
exactly the same as the ones that the speaker had mapped
onto him or herself.
In dividing the speaker’s front or ‘away’ axis in two parts
by the remaining (or target) object, a new possibility is created. This object’s front-back axis may keep exactly the orientation of the speaker’s field, thus yielding the translation
subtype of the relative FOR: A ball positioned beyond a tree

Temporal Perspectives
How far can we go in a comparison of spatial and temporal
systems? What do they have in common, and where are crucial differences?
Basing our analysis on the Western conceptualization of
time, we start with a description of time as ‘something’ that
flows in one direction; it is extended in one dimension, it can
be intersected, and events can be ‘localized’ on this dimension. One important difference is that time extends in one
dimension only, while space has three. A second difference
is that time has a direction, which is not reversible.
With regard to the direction of time, it is possible to take
two contrary perspectives. For the sake of simplicity, let us
assume that time were like a river (for a similar distinction
with different terms see Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002;
McGlone & Harding, 1998). If we take the perspective of the
water running down from the spring to the sea, everything
passed by is regarded as back or past or temporally “after”,
while everything that lies ahead is regarded as future or front
or “before” (cf. Figure 2a). However, a quick look into
everyday use of the prepositions reveals that this is not the
perspective typically taken in English or German. The day
“before” today is yesterday, the day “after” today is tomorrow, and not vice versa.
If we take instead the perspective of a fish heading
upstream (as most fish are), the water that is still to come
221

Past

Present

Future

(a)
Past

(a)

Present

“before”
Back:
“after”

Front:
“before”

“after”

Future
“after”

PoR

“before”

PoR

(b)
(b)

Front:
“before”

Back:
“after”

Past

Present
“after”

“before”

PoR

Future
“before”

“after”

PoR

Figure 3: (a) The translation subtype of a relative FOR.
(b) The reflection subtype of a relative FOR. (PoR stands for
“point of reference”.)

Figure 2: (a) “Water perspective”: The time that lies ahead is
considered the front. (b) “Fish perspective”: The time that is
yet to be confronted is regarded as the front.

The mapping done so far leaves the “water perspective” of
time as an equivalent to the (basic) relative FOR, and indeed,
it resembles its main characteristics. In this system, it is not
beginnings and endings of events that determine which part
of time is perceived as front and back, but rather the position
of the observer: The time that still lies ahead is regarded as
the front, and the time that lies behind as the back. Since,
worldwide, the relative FOR is the most commonly used to
express spatial relationships, we feel justified in assuming
that some languages might have adopted the relative FOR
instead of the intrinsic one to express temporal relations.
As we have seen, the relative FOR used for spatial
relationships has three subtypes: the basic subtype, the
reflection one, and the translation one. The latter two require
the introduction of an additional object (or event) as point of
reference, and even these can be identified in the onedimensionality of temporal relationships.
In a translation subtype, we expect the observer to transfer
his or her own position into the point of reference and thus to
‘translate’ this perspective (cf. Figure 3a). Accordingly,
“after” should be used for events that fall between the
speaker and the point of reference (irrespective of where in
time the point of reference itself is), while “before” should
refer to events beyond. When applying the reflection subtype, the observer’s perspective is reflected and the prepositions are swapped (cf. Figure 3b). In this case, “before”
should be used for events that fall between the speaker and
the point of reference, while “after” should refer to events
beyond.
With these definitions in mind, we can now unambiguously determine which FOR is applied with regard to temporal relations in the languages in question. Apart from the
absolute system, which does not require prepositions, the
remaining FORs are characterized by specific and distinct
patterns (cf. Table 1).

would be the part that is the front or the future and thus
“before”, while the waves that have already passed by are the
back or past and therefore “after” (cf. Figure 2b). Accordingly, the perspective taken in English and German prepositions is the fish perspective rather than the water perspective.
While the flow of time can be conceived from these two
perspectives, events cannot. They have an intrinsic beginning
and end, symbolized by the fish’s head and tail respectively.
A single point in time, like a gunshot or a crash, can be
regarded as an extremely condensed event with zero extension, yet retaining direction.

Mapping Spatial FORs onto Temporal Perspectives
Given these substantial differences between temporal and
spatial characteristics, are spatial FORs applicable for temporal relations? We propose that it is possible to map the
former entirely onto the latter because the directionality of
time, allowing for two perspectives, compensates for the
deficiency in dimensions.
The absolute FOR for spatial relations localizes an object
independent of its own character or the observer’s position,
for instance by using cardinal points or landside vs. seaside
(e.g., Bennardo, 2000; Levinson, 2003). An equivalent absolute determination of events is given by a calendar. This is
not an absolute positioning in universal terms as it is still
relying on cultural conventions, but the same is true for the
spatial “absolute” FOR (e.g., use of local geographical features such as mountains, sea, etc.).
The intrinsic FOR depends on the shape or function of the
object concerned. If it has an intrinsic front and back—like a
dog, a car, or a TV—then prepositions will most likely be
used with regard to this front or back (e.g., Bennardo, 2000;
Levinson, 2003). A similar notion can be attached to events.
Without exception they have an intrinsic beginning and end.
In a language that applies the intrinsic FOR, the time beyond
the beginning should thus be referred to with “before”, and
the time beyond the end with “after”. As all events have such
an intrinsic beginning and end, it might even seem ‘natural’
to apply this FOR for temporal relations.

Indicators of Temporal FORs
in English, German, and Tongan
The usage of prepositions is taken as the main indicator of a
particular FOR. Prepositions explicate not only relations but
also movements. And particularly in Tongan, directionals are
222

Table 1: Prepositional pattern for the intrinsic and relative
FORs.
Type of FOR
Intrinsic
Relative
• Basic
• Translation
• Reflection

Past
before
after
before
after

after
before

(5) Der Tag vor heute ist gestern,
der Tag nach heute ist morgen.
Note that the day before yesterday is even termed vorgestern.
And the last instance, with an additional point of reference:

Future
after

(6) Der Tag vor der CogSci ist der Tag
vor Beginn der CogSci,
der Tag nach der CogSci ist der Tag
nach Ende der CogSci.

before
after
before
before
after

Tongan. When phrasing spatial relationships, Tongans prevalently use the relative FOR in small-scale space (small
objects very close to the speaker), but prefer the absolute
FOR to refer to large-scale space (objects of any size at some
distance from the speaker). Tongan speakers are also frequent users of the translation subtype of the relative FOR in
both types of space (Bennardo, 2000)—a unique feature.
With regard to temporal relations, a first analysis seems to
suggest that the intrinsic FOR is preferred in simple settings:

habitually used to emphasize direction both in spatial and
temporal expressions. The two directionals relevant here are
mai (“towards the speaker”) and atu (“away from the
speaker”) (Bennardo, 1999, 2002; Broschart, 1995, 1997).
We assume that movements are expressed in a way that
reflects the preferred temporal FOR. If, for instance, in an
intrinsic FOR we refer to the time before an event as its
“front”, the move towards the present will make use of the
same vocabulary: From “Next Wednesday’s meeting will be
moved forward two days”, we should therefore conclude that
it will be moved to Monday. Although theoretically conclusive, this link is empirically questioned, at least for English
(e.g. Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002; McGlone & Harding,
1998). A closer look at formulation preferences for temporal
movements will therefore have to complement our analysis
of FORs.

(7) Ko e taimi ki mu'a 'i he taimi ni ko e taimi kuo 'osi.
(lit. ‘The time before / to the front of now is the time
that is over / the past.’)
(8) Ko e taimi ki mui 'i he taimi ni ko e taimi kaha'u.
(lit. ‘The time after / to the back of now is the time
that is still to come / the future.’)
(9) 'Aneafi ko e 'aho ki mu'a he 'aho ni.
(‘Yesterday is the day before today.’)
(10) 'Apongipongi ko e 'aho ki mui he 'aho ni.
(‘Tomorrow is the day after today.’)

Prepositions for Temporal Constellations
For the description of spatial relations, both English and
German speakers can choose from all three basic types of
FOR. Except for objects with strong intrinsic front and back,
which call for the intrinsic FOR, however, the relative FOR
(and in particular the reflection subtype) is usually preferred
and cognitively dominant (cf. Majid et al., 2004).
English. For temporal relations, the system applied in
English is the “fish perspective” or the intrinsic FOR. Prepositions are referring to the intrinsic beginning or end of an
event and the imaginary beginning or end of a point in time:

However, if we look at expressions that require an additional
point of reference, we find these patterns:
(11) Ko e Falaite Lelei na'e hoko 'i he 'aho 'e ua ki mu'a
'i he 'Aho Sapate Toetu'u.
(‘Good Friday happened two days before Easter
Sunday.’)
(12) 'E 'alu 'eku faiako 'i he 'aho 'e tolu ki mu'a 'apongipongi.
(‘My teacher will go three days after tomorrow.’)
Note that in both sentences the same preposition, mu'a (“to
the front”), is used for each time beyond the point of reference, just as was predicted for the translation subtype.

(1) The time before now is the past,
the time after now is the future.
(2) The day before today is yesterday,
the day after today is tomorrow.

Prepositions and Directionals for Temporal
Movements

Or, to pick up the example chosen in the introduction,

With regard to the lexemes used for movements in time, the
findings are somehow puzzling, even for closely related
English and German.
English and German. In spite of the fact that English
speakers apply the intrinsic FOR when talking about something “before” an event, they seem to have no such preference with regard to a sentence like “The meeting will be
moved forward two days” (Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002;
McGlone & Harding, 1998).
The same does not hold for German speakers. In a replication1 of Experiment 1 from Boroditsky and Ramscar (2002),
inducing either a time-moving or an ego-moving perspective
did not affect the preference for the intrinsic FOR. Across all

(3) The day before the CogSci is the day
before the beginning of the CogSci,
the day after the CogSci is the day
after the end of the CogSci.
German. The same is true for German speakers, who also
typically adopt the intrinsic FOR. Due to the partial overlap
in lexemes, the resemblance of temporal and spatial prepositions is even stronger in German than in English (the following examples are equivalent to (1)–(3)).
(4) Die Zeit vor jetzt ist die Vergangenheit,
die Zeit nach jetzt ist die Zukunft.

223

three conditions convergence was close to total, with 95 %
preference for the option with intrinsic FOR (the relative one
was chosen in no case).
Tongan. In Tongan, we also find some variance in sentences
that relate to movements in time. The Tongan verbs used to
express temporal motion are matolo (“to move or be moved
along or back or forward [from where it was] in place or
time”) and toloi (“to put off, postpone, defer, adjourn”).
When we check the Tongan dictionary (Churchward,
1959) and grammar (Churchward, 1953), we find at least
some indicators for a similar perspective. Both sources state
that the preposition mu'a not only means spatially “in front”,
“first” in a row, and temporal “before”, but also the time that
is yet to come. The opposite preposition mui correspondingly indicates both “behind” and “after”, but also the times
gone. Further still, with regard to moves in time, the grammar suggests a switch in meaning for the prepositions/nouns.

The pattern here basically corresponds to the one given by
Churchward (cf. 13 and 14), except for the indiscriminately
used directional mai, and reveals again a translation subtype
of the relative FOR.
These informants also indicated a fundamental difference
in formality between the use of matolo and toloi (both meaning “move”). The former, driving the translation relative
FOR, is more formal, and the second, driving the intrinsic
FOR, more informal and colloquial.

Discussion
Is it possible to map spatial FORs onto temporal relations?
Our conceptual analysis suggests that it is, because the direction of time and the intrinsic character of events compensate
for the deficiency in dimensions. Accordingly, we can also
analyze whether a preference for spatial FORs is reflected in
temporal usage.
Since speakers of all three languages may, generally
speaking, choose from all three types of FOR, a clear indication is only possible with regard to the translation subtype of
the relative FOR that is nearly exclusively used in Tongan.
An instance of the translation FOR in temporal descriptions
in Tongan would therefore provide a strong argument supporting the homology of the temporal and spatial domain.
Such an indication could not be found with constellations
(except for sentence (13)), for which all three groups apply
the intrinsic FOR—as they do for spatial constellations when
referring to an object with intrinsic orientation.
However, with regard to movements in time, the findings
are more heterogeneous. While English speakers seem to
have no clear preference for either the intrinsic or relative
FOR, German speakers still exclusively apply the intrinsic
FOR. Tongan speakers make use of two different FORs, each
depending on the verb: the intrinsic FOR is driven by toloi,
the translational relative by matolo.
However, our Tongan informants did not entirely agree
either with each other or with the Tongan grammar (Churchward, 1953) with regard to the correct interpretation of a sentence like (13). What could be the reason for these diverging
opinions?
One reason might be that Boroditsky and Ramscar’s
(2002) findings for English speakers also hold for Tongan
speakers: In temporal movements, the two perspectives may
be used ambiguously and could be open to contextual influences as much as they are open to experimental manipulation. However, German speakers do not fall victim to this
kind of influence, and whether Tongans do so, will have to be
further scrutinized.
Another reason could be that Churchward was simply
wrong. We cannot exclude this option, but we regard it
implausible as he is usually a very reliable source and we
consider it unlikely that he would have misunderstood a relation contrary to his own cognitive concepts.
A third explanation could be that within the last 50 years
(since the publication of the Tongan grammar), linguistic
conventions may have changed, probably under the influence
of English school curricula. This might have resulted in more
heterogeneous patterns of expressions. This hypothesis is

(13) Kuo matolo atu ki mu'a.
(lit. ‘It has been moved away from me to the front.’
dict. ‘It has been put off to a later date.’)
(14) Kuo matolo mai ki mui.
(lit. ‘It has been moved towards me to the back.’
dict. ‘It has been moved to an earlier date.’)
This seems to be a clear indication of the switch from an
intrinsic FOR to a relative FOR, and this relative perspective
is even emphasized by the directionals mai (towards the
speaker) and atu (away from the speaker).
However, some of our informants did not apply this perspective but used the spatial nouns the other way around.
They did not even consider the translation suggested by
Churchward as valid but phrased his sentences instead as:
(15) Kuo matolo atu ki mui.
(lit. ‘It has been moved away from me to the back.’
i.e., ‘It has been put off to a later date.’)
(16) Kuo matolo mai ki mu'a.
(lit. ‘It has been moved towards me to the front.’
i.e., ‘It has been moved to an earlier date.’)
While these informants stated that (13) and (14) are comprehensible, they interpreted them contrary to the meaning as
given in the dictionary. Their interpretation of the spatialtemporal nouns (mui and mu'a) in that case even overrode
the meaning of the directionals.
Contrary to this, other informants gave us the following
instances:
(17) Ko e fakataha toloi mai ki mui mei he 9 ki he 7.
(‘The meeting was moved back from 9 to 7.’)
(18) Ko e fakataha toloi mai ki mu'a mei he 7 ki he 9.
(‘The meeting was moved forward from 7 to 9.’)

1

44 undergraduates from the University of Freiburg participated
in the experiment. The material of the original study was translated into German, using the term vorverlegen for “moving forward”. A control condition was added in order to obtain preferences in neutral contexts, and a second question was added to
obtain preferences in the past.
224

supported by the fact that different informants provided different (yet consistent) answers to the same question.
This hypothesis is also supported by the difference in formality between the use of matolo and toloi that corresponds
to a different usage of FORs. The translation subtype of the
relative FOR is used with the formal matolo (preferred in traditional Tongan), while the intrinsic FOR (as in English) is
used with the informal toloi. And this is true only for educated speakers whose use of English in everyday life is very
frequent.
The proportion of Tongan speakers that still applies the
rare translation subtype of the relative FOR has yet to be
established. However, we did find evidence that it is used. As
this usage reflects the use of the translation subtype in spatial
descriptions, we may thus conclude that habitual uses of specific FORs for spatial relationships are indeed homologous
to and generative of the FORs used for temporal relationships.

Broschart, J. (1995). The social perception of space. Nonspatial determinants of the use of directionals in Tongan
(Polynesia). In A. Frank & W. Kuhn (Eds.), Spatial information theory. Berlin: Springer.
Broschart, J. (1997). Locative classifiers in Tongan. In G.
Senft (Ed.), Referring to space: Studies in Austronesian
and Papuan languages. Oxford: Clarendon.
Carpenter, E. S. (1968). The timeless present in the mythology of the Aivilik Eskimos. In V. F. Valentine & F. G.
Vallee (Eds.), Eskimo of the Canadian Arctic. Toronto:
McClelland and Stewart Ltd.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2003). Do we think about
time in terms of space? Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Boston, MA:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Churchward, C. M. (1953). Tongan grammar. Nuku'alofa,
Tonga: Vava'u Press.
Churchward, C. M. (1959). Tongan dictionary. Nuku'alofa,
Tonga: Government Printing Press.
Gentner, D. (Ed.) (2001). Spatial metaphors in temporal reasoning. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time goes
by: Evidence for two systems in processing space time metaphors. Language & Cognitive Processes, 17, 537-565.
Gladwin, T. (1970). East is a big bird. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Haviland, J. B. (2000). Pointing, gesture spaces, and mental
maps. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hill, C. (1982). Up/down, front/back, left/right: A contrastive
study of Hausa and English. In J. Weissenborn & W. Klein
(Eds.), Here and there: Cross-linguistic studies on deixis
and demonstration. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hutchins, E. (1983). Understanding Micronesian navigation.
In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Kita, S., Danziger, E., & Stolz, C. (2001). Cultural specificity
of spatial schemas, as manifested in spontaneous gestures.
In M. Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas and abstract thought.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., &
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8,
108-114.
McGlone, M. S., & Harding, J. L. (1998). Back (or forward?)
to the future: The role of perspective in temporal language
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1211-1223.
Pinxten, R., van Dooren, I., & Harvey, F. (1983). The anthropology of space. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Senft, G. (Ed.) (1997). Referring to space: Studies in Austronesian and Papuan languages. Oxford: Clarendon.
Wassmann, J. (1994). The Yupno as post-Newtonian scientists: The question of what is ‘natural’ in spatial description. Man, 29, 645-666.

Acknowledgments
Data collection in Tonga took place during fieldwork that
was funded for the first author within a project by a DFG
grant to Hans Spada and Stefan Seitz (Sp 251/18-x) and for
the second author by an NSF grant (#0349011). We thank
the Government of Tonga for granting us permission to conduct our research. We are grateful to Sione Faka'osi, Fonongava'inga Kidd, Lisita Taufa, and Langilangi Vi for being
patient and never-failing sources of information, and to Miriam Bertholet, Sabine Hauser, Julia Kern, Sarah Mannion,
Josef Nerb, and Stefan Wahl for assistance, discussion, and
valuable comments.

References
Ascher, M. (1998). Ethnomathematics: A multicultural view
of mathematical ideas. Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole Publ.
Bennardo, G. (1999). The conceptual content of Tongan
directionals: Mental representations of space in Tongan.
Rongorongo Studies, 9, 39-61.
Bennardo, G. (2000). Language and space in Tonga: “The
front of the house is where the chief sits”. Anthropological
Linguistics, 42, 499-544.
Bennardo, G. (2002). Mental images of the familiar: Cultural
strategies of spatial representations in Tonga. In G. Bennardo (Ed.), Representing space in Oceania: Culture in
language and mind. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Bennardo, G. (2004). Linguistic untranslatability vs. conceptual nesting of frames of reference. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? English
and Mandarin speakers’ conceptions of time. Cognitive
Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of mind and
body in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13, 185188.

225

