UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Perspective in Spoken Descriptions of Real World Environments at Different Scales

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84j2h76r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Hegarty, Mary
Kriz, Sarah

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Perspective in Spoken Descriptions of Real World Environments at Different
Scales
Sarah Kriz (kriz@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Mary Hegarty (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Abstract
This study analyzed the linguistic features found in spoken
descriptions of two spatial layouts; participants’ homes and
the continent of Europe. Specifically, we were interested in
whether these environments would be described from
different perspectives by the same individuals. We
hypothesized that the lexical features and discourse structure
of the descriptions would reflect the perspective from which
these two environments are most commonly learned—an
embedded perspective in the home and an external
perspective in the Europe descriptions. The results supported
these hypotheses, suggesting that the choice of perspective in
linguistic descriptions seems to be affected by the mode of
acquisition and environmental features, rather than by a
speaker’s general preference for one perspective over another.
Keywords: Linguistics, Cognitive Science

When describing how points or landmarks are distributed
throughout an environment, a speaker must decide on a
perspective or vantage point from which the layout can be
described. For example, a description of two adjacent rooms
along a hallway can be described from a viewpoint within
the environment or from a point external to the
environment. A description such as, “You walk out of a
doorway into the hallway, and the first door on your right
will be the entrance to the next room,” places an embodied
agent within the environment and describes the layout with
verbs of locomotion and terms that indicate landmarks’
locations in relation to the agent. On the other hand, a
description such as, “There is a hallway with a north-south
orientation that has two adjacent rooms on the east wall,”
describes the same layout, but there is no sense of a person
embedded within the environment. Instead, cardinal
directions indicate the location of the landmarks, and static
verbs mark the existence of the rooms and hallway. In this
paper, taking a perspective from within the environment
will be called an ‘embedded’ perspective, while viewing an
environment from a point outside of the environment will be
called an ‘external’ perspective.
Linde and Labov (1975) were the first to report these two
different styles of describing spatial layouts. They asked
participants to describe the apartments in which they
resided, and found that two different manners of description

occurred—the “tour” description, in which the speaker
seemed to move through the environment, giving a tour of
the layout, and the “map” description, in which the speaker
described the environment from a stationery point external
to the layout. Although both description types were present
in their data, embedded (i.e., tour) descriptions accounted
for 97% of the data they collected. It seems, then, that there
may be some features of an apartment environment that are
particularly conducive to an embedded description.
In fact, many empirical studies have shown that aspects of
the environment and the manner in which spatial
information is acquired can affect the perspective that one
uses to encode and describe the layout. For instance, the
number of possible paths present in an environment has
been found to influence written descriptions of the
environment, such that layouts containing a single path are
more likely described from an embedded perspective and
environments that have multiple paths are usually described
using an external perspective (Taylor & Tversky, 1996).
Furthermore, Taylor and Tversky (1996) found that
embedded descriptions occurred more often when the
environment contained landmarks on a single size scale,
whereas external descriptions were used to describe layouts
that contained landmarks of various sizes. These results
suggest that aspects of the environment affect the
perspective from which the layout is described.
The manner in which information about an environment is
acquired has also been found to have an effect on
perspective. Experiment 3 of Taylor and Tversky’s (1996)
study analyzed the perspective from which students
described two areas of the Stanford campus, as well as their
home neighborhoods. These three layouts were
environments that the students had learned via selflocomotion, and accordingly, the students tended to explain
all three environments from an embedded perspective.
The mode of information acquisition has been found to
affect the perspective taken not just in spatial descriptions,
but spatial memories as well. In a study by Taylor, Naylor,
and Chechile (1999), participants were asked to either study
a map or navigate through an environment. The participants
who studied the map were better able to answer questions
tapping external perspective knowledge, whereas
participants who directly navigated through the environment

1196

were more accurate in measures testing embedded
perspective. Taken together, these results suggest that both
features of the environment and the mode of information
acquisition have an effect on how perspective is chosen.
Many other findings, however, suggest that the choice of
perspective in spatial descriptions may be influenced by
factors not related to the environment. For instance, the
language of a speaker may affect whether an environment is
described from an embedded or external perspective.
Emmorey, Tversky, and Taylor (2000) found that American
Sign Language signers were more likely to use survey
perspective to describe a convention center layout whereas
English speakers preferred to use a route perspective to
describe the same layout. Second, Taylor and Tversky’s
(1996, Experiment 2) data suggest that individual
preferences may also affect perspective choice. In their
experiment, 48 participants were given 4 maps to study and
then describe, and of those participants, 27% described all
four maps from a single perspective. This finding indicates
that some individuals may prefer to describe a variety of
spatial layouts from a single perspective.
Although the findings on individual differences reported
by Taylor and Tversky (1996) suggest the possibility of
preference for a certain perspective, their data must be
interpreted with caution. The four environments they used
in their experiment shared many of the same features, thus,
we cannot be sure whether those shared features influenced
participants’ consistent use of perspective, or if individual
preferences accounted for the consistency. Therefore, one
of the main objectives of this study was to test whether
descriptions of two very different environments varied
within participants. If we find that the two descriptions
exhibit different perspectives within single participants we
may conclude that properties of the environments encourage
different perspectives. However, if the participants use the
same perspective to describe both environments, this may
indicate that individuals have a certain preference for the
perspective they take in spatial descriptions, regardless of
the features of the environment.
The second objective of this study was to evaluate how
speakers linguistically structure their descriptions of realworld environments learned outside of the laboratory from
different experiences (maps vs. direct navigation). Because
many previous studies on perspective have evaluated
descriptions of layouts learned for the purpose of a
laboratory study, we were interested in using environments
that participants learned through different naturalistic
experiences. Although some experiments have been
conducted on naturalistic environments, such as an
apartment or neighborhood (Linde & Labov, 1975; Taylor
& Tversky, Experiment 3, 1996; Ullmer-Ehrich, 1982), they
have focused on environments learned from direct
navigation. Larger-scale environments learned via
experiences outside the laboratory have received little
attention.
Our third goal was to assess how perspective may be
signaled on a larger discourse level. Previous research

evaluating linguistic features of perspective has focused on
a lexical level of analysis (Emmorey, Tversky, & Taylor,
2000; Taylor & Tversky, 1996). However, differences at the
discourse level would indicate that the overall organization,
not just individual word choice, is influenced by the
perspective from which a speaker describes an environment.
Therefore, discourse analyses may be able to uncover how
perspective choice affects higher-level linguistic planning,
such as the organization of clauses.
In this experiment we chose to evaluate two environments
that college-educated adults know fairly well—their
childhood homes and the continent of Europe. These two
environments differ drastically in the scale of space in
which they exist, and also in the manner in which spatial
information about the layout is acquired. According to
Montello’s (1993) classes of psychological space, the
continent of Europe is considered geographical space, as it
is too large to be apprehended through direct locomotion
alone. Such spaces are typically apprehended from maps. A
house, on the other hand, exists in environmental space and
its spatial layout is able to be learned through direct
locomotion.

Method
Procedure
Seventeen students from the University of California, Santa
Barbara were asked to talk about the layouts of two
environments—the house in which they were raised and the
layout of Europe. Participants were specifically asked by the
investigator, “Please describe the layout of (the house you
grew up in/Europe) so that I will know where the most
important places are.” The order of elicitation for the two
environments was counterbalanced and participants were
given as much time as they needed to describe the
environments. Participants were also asked to describe the
layout of the UCSB University Center. In this task
participants were instructed to describe the layout from
either an embedded or external perspective. Due to length
limitations, we are not able to include the analysis of this
task in this paper. All spatial layout descriptions were
videotaped.
After providing the layout descriptions, participants were
asked to complete various measures of spatial visualization
ability. They were first given the Paper Folding Test
(Ekstrom et al., 1976), in order to measure spatial ability.
Second, participants completed a questionnaire about their
mental imagery preferences and cognitive style. Third, they
completed the Santa Barbara Sense-of-Direction Scale
(Hegarty et al., 2002), and finally the participants filled out
a questionnaire asking about their familiarity with the
environments they described.

Language Coding

1197

Participants’ spoken responses were transcribed and the
language was coded following Taylor and Tversky’s (1996)
language coding system. Relational terms, which are used to

locate a landmark in relation to another point, were coded as
being either viewer-centered (e.g., left, right), environmental
(e.g., north, south), or landmark-based (i.e., below France is
Spain). Second, the type of referent used to specify the
spatial relation of a newly mentioned landmark was coded
as well. For example, a proposition such as, “The kitchen is
on your left,” suggests an embodied agent1 as the referent of
the relation. A proposition such as, “And then you have
England up in the north,” relates the location of the item to a
cardinal direction, and a proposition that names another
landmark as the referent (e.g., “On the other side of Belgium
you have Switzerland”) was coded as ‘other landmark.’
Finally, the verbs of each proposition were coded according
to Taylor and Tversky’s (1996) system. Only the copula (the
verb ‘to be’) was considered to be stative, whereas active
verbs were any verbs that described motion, including
fictive motion (Talmy, 1996).
To augment Taylor and Tversky’s (1996) coding, we
added two additional coding schemes. The first was a
variation of Taylor and Tversky’s (1996) verb coding. In
our system, four types of verbs were counted: static,
including all static verbs such as ‘to have’; dynamic, which
was restricted to all verbs that signal movement of an
animate being; fictive, including all verbs used to describe
fictive motion, as described by Talmy (1996), and seeverbs, which included verbs of perception such as ‘to see.’
The second coding system counted whether each clause
specified a landmark’s relation to a physical point, to an
embodied agent, or specified no relation. Because counting
only specific word types regardless of their function brings
some ambiguity into a language analysis, we adopted a
coding system that evaluated the use of language on a
clausal level. By doing this, we were able to evaluate
whether a landmark’s location was specified in terms of the
location of an agent or a physical point using the overall
meaning of the clause rather than a single lexical item.
At the discourse level the number of choice points and
action-existence chains were coded in each description.
Choice points, according to Linde and Labov (1975), are
junctions in the environment where a person can choose to
move in more than one direction. For instance, a “T”
intersection allows two choices, a turn to the right or a turn
to the left. Choice points in our study were coded as any
instance in which a speaker went back to a landmark
previously mentioned and presented an alternative route.
For example, after describing the upstairs floor of his house,
one speaker said, “And then if you instead of going up the
stairs, if you make a right, you’ll go into the kitchen.”
Action-existence chains were considered to be a series of
two or more clauses in which the first clause(s) specify the
action of an agent, and the final clause specifies the
existence of a landmark (e.g., “If you turn right, there will
be the dining room.”).
1

We use the term ‘embodied agent’ in place of Taylor and
Tversky’s (1996) ‘addressee.’

Results
Knowledge of the Environments
All 17 participants reported they had seen a map of Europe,
and 12 participants had traveled to Europe at least once. On
a scale of 1-7, with 7 being very good knowledge,
participants’ mean rating of how well they knew European
geography was 4.2 (range 2-6).
Three of the 17 participants reported having seen
blueprints of their homes. When asked how vivid their
memories of their homes were, all participants reported a 6
or 7 rating, indicating their memories were extremely clear.
The mean rating was 6.8.
These data suggest that both environments were fairly
well-learned, although information about them was acquired
via different modalities. Participants’ knowledge of Europe
was obtained mostly through map learning. Although a
number of participants had traveled to Europe, the scale of
the environment does not allow one to acquire full spatial
knowledge from direct locomotion. The home environment,
on the other hand, was learned via direct locomotion,
although three participants had seen blueprints of their
homes as well.

Relational Terms
The number of environmental, viewer-relational, and
landmark-based relational terms were counted for each
description and then divided by the number of total
relational terms found in each description. This yielded a
proportion for each relational term. Proportions, rather than
raw numbers, were evaluated to control for possible length
differences across the two conditions. The proportions
calculated for each term were then submitted to a paired
samples t-test in order to assess whether the use of each
term significantly varied across the two layouts2.
As Figure 1 illustrates, viewer-relational terms (left, right,
front, back) were used significantly more often in the Home
descriptions than in the Europe descriptions (M=37% v.
M=1%; t(16)=5.294, p<.001), whereas the Europe
descriptions contained significantly more environmental
terms (M=58% v. M=1%; t(16)=8.025, p<.001). There was
no significant difference in the use of landmark-based
relational terms across the conditions.

Verbs
The number of verbs considered stative and active, using
Taylor and Tversky’s (1996) coding system, were counted
for each description and then divided by the total number of
verbs coded. The resulting proportions were not found to be
significantly different across the two conditions. The top
portion of Table 1 shows the mean percentage of stative and
active verbs used in each of the two description types.
2

For ease of discussion the proportions will be reported as
percentages.
1198

70

60

Mean percent usage

50

40

Viewer-centered
Environmental
Landmark-based

30

20

10

0

Europe

Home
Condition

Figure 1: Mean percent usage of relational terms.

However, when active verbs were divided into dynamic
motion of an agent and fictive motion, as they were in our
coding scheme, a significant difference across the two
conditions was found. As the bottom half of Table 1 shows,
verbs that expressed dynamic motion of an agent were used
more often in the Home descriptions (M=30%) than the
Europe descriptions (M=12%; t(16)=2.573, p=.020).
However, fictive motion was more prevalent in the Europe
descriptions (M=17%), and used fairly infrequently in the
Home descriptions (M=6%; t(16)=2.246, p=.039).
Table 1: Distribution of Verb Types.
Taylor & Tversky’s Scheme
Stative
Active
Kriz & Hegarty’s Scheme
Static
Dynamic*
Fictive*
See
*significant at p < .05

Europe

Home

62%
38%

60%
40%

reference by cardinal direction was significantly different
across the two conditions. As Table 2 shows, specifying a
landmark’s relation to a cardinal direction occurred more
often in the Europe descriptions (M=30%) than in the Home
descriptions (M=1%; t(16)=4.000, p=.001). Conversely,
using an embodied agent to specify the location of a
landmark was more frequent in Home descriptions
(M=38%) than in the Europe descriptions (M=4%;
t(16)=4.788, p<.001). Relating the location of one landmark
to that of another landmark within the environment was the
most frequent method of specifying landmark locations, but
the relative frequency of using another landmark as a
referent did not differ between the two conditions.
Table 2: Distribution of Referents Used to Specify Location.

67%
12%
17%
4%

Taylor & Tversky’s Scheme
Other landmark
Embodied Agent *
Cardinal Direction *
Kriz & Hegarty’s Scheme
Physical Point *
Embodied Agent *
*significant at p < .05

63%
30%
6%
1%

Referents
The first mention of a landmark within each description was
coded for the manner in which it was located within the
environment, either by reference to a cardinal direction, an
embodied agent, or in relation to another landmark. Again,
each referent type was counted and divided by the total
number of referent occurrences in the discourse, and these
proportions were used to test for significant differences
across the two conditions. T-tests revealed that the use of

Europe

Home

74%
4%
22%

61%
38%
1%

53%
3%

39%
20%

1199

We created a second method of coding the locations of
landmarks specified within participants’ layout descriptions.
In this system, we coded the relationship specified in each
clause as either relating a landmark’s location to a physical
point in the environment or to the position of an embodied
agent. All clauses that did not specify a relation were not
included in the analysis. The results closely patterned with

the differences described above. Fifty-three percent of the
clauses in the Europe descriptions related the location of a
landmark to a physical point within the environment,
whereas only 39% of the clauses in the Home descriptions
were physical point relations (t(16)=2.267, p=.038).
However, clauses relating a landmark’s location to the
position of an embodied agent were infrequent in the
Europe descriptions (M=3%), but significantly more
frequent in the Home descriptions (M=20%; t(16)=4.448,
p<.001). These differences are illustrated in Table 2.

Discourse
As Table 3 illustrates, both of the discourse features were
used significantly more often in the home descriptions than
in the Europe descriptions. On average, speakers structured
their home descriptions with more choice points than their
Europe descriptions (M=.75 v. M=0, t(15)=2.666, p=.018).
Their home descriptions also contained significantly more
action-existence chains than the Europe descriptions
(M=3.06 v. M=.69, t(15)=4.173, p=.001).
Table 3: Mean Number of Discourse Features by
Description Type.

Choice points*
Action-Existence Chains*
*significant at p<.05

Europe
0
.69

Home
.75
3.06

Individual Differences
Neither the Paper Folding Test scores (Ekstrom et al., 1976)
nor Sense of Direction measure (Hegarty et al., 2002),
correlated with the frequency of any linguistic features
measured in this study. Furthermore, participants’ selfreported knowledge of European geography did not
correlate with the use of any linguistic features in their
Europe descriptions. Because the all participants reported
having extremely vivid memories of the homes they
described, correlations with linguistic output in the Home
descriptions were not performed.

Discussion
This study was designed to examine how people describe
two environments that they have learned via different
experiences outside of the laboratory. We were interested in
determining whether these environments would be
described using linguistic features that reflect the way in
which the spatial information was acquired. While there
have been previous studies evaluating the descriptions of
people describing the homes in which they reside (Linde &
Labov, 1975; Ullmer-Ehrich, 1982), very few studies have
analyzed the descriptions of naturalistically-acquired
geographic-scale spaces, such as the layout of countries on a
continent.
One objective of this study was to evaluate whether
speakers generally prefer to structure linguistic spatial
descriptions from only one perspective. Many previous

studies have suggested that the type of environmental
features and the manner of information acquisition may
affect whether a speaker formulates an embedded or
external description about a layout. However, because these
experiments used a between-subjects design, they could not
rule out the possibility that certain speakers may prefer a
certain perspective. Thus, our study tested how the same
speakers talked about these two different environments.
The results clearly indicate that speakers change their
descriptions in order to convey an embedded perspective in
the Home descriptions and an external perspective in the
Europe descriptions. Many linguistic features were used
significantly more often in the Home descriptions—
dynamic verbs, viewer-centered relational terms, clauses
relating a landmark to the location of an embodied agent, as
well as larger discourse features such as choice points and
action-existence chains. On the contrary, fictive motion,
environmental terms, and clauses relating a landmark to a
physical point in the environment were significantly more
frequent in the Europe descriptions.
While the trend of linguistically differentiating between
layouts was found to be present in the data, this does not
suggest that all speakers gave external descriptions of
Europe and embedded descriptions of their homes. In fact,
two of the 17 participants of the participants structured their
Europe descriptions from an embedded perspective. For
both of these participants, dynamic verbs occurred
frequently in their descriptions, and one of the participants
used an embodied agent to specify location in 36% of the
clauses in his Europe description. This number is extremely
high, compared to the mean of 3% shown in Table 2. These
data suggest that while most participants show a clear
distinction between the two layouts, there are participants
who chose an embedded perspective for both of their
descriptions. In sum, we feel that while the general trend
shows a preference towards differentiating between these
two layouts, the participants who do not follow the trend
should not be dismissed. Unfortunately, none of the data we
collected can explain why these two participants chose an
embedded perspective for both of their layout descriptions.
Further studies researching this point more carefully may be
able to assess whether a small number of participants rely
on describing layouts from only one perspective.
A second objective of this study was to evaluate how
speakers structure their descriptions of environments
learned outside of the laboratory, in particular whether the
different manners in which the information was acquired
affected perspective choice. The results of the study suggest
that participants clearly distinguished between the two
environments in the linguistic devices they employed, and
their descriptions mirrored the way in which they acquired
information about the space, either by locomoting within the
environment or by reading a map.
It is essential to note that the way in which spatial
information was acquired cannot be the only factor that
determines which perspective is used in spatial descriptions.
Both Emmorey, et al. (2000) and Taylor and Tversky (1996)
found that participants used route perspective in some
environmental descriptions although they learned about
these environments from maps. Therefore, we propose that

1200

it is not the acquisition process, per se, that affects the
linguistic structure of the description, but rather the
speaker’s assumption about how to best package
information for an addressee. One way in which a speaker
may assess an addressee’s need for the information is by
evaluating how the information is acquired in a nonlinguistic learning situation.
In using naturalistic environments that were learned
outside of the laboratory, we encountered some confounds
that may make our results harder to interpret. Because the
scale of space and mode of learning were confounded in this
study, we cannot conclude that mode of acquisition alone
determined the type of spatial perspective used. Features of
the environment may promote a certain acquisition method,
thus the two are not inseparable in studies conducted on
learning “in the wild.” In laboratory studies, the two factors
can be untangled, and future laboratory studies may be able
to provide more conclusive findings regarding the effect of
mode of acquisition and environmental features on
perspective choice.
Another shortcoming of this experiment is the difference
in participants’ familiarity with the two environments.
These speakers, although very familiar with Europe, had
much more exposure to their childhood homes. Thus, the
differences found between the two types of descriptions
may have been due to speakers’ familiarity with the
environment. However, the fact that participants’ reported
knowledge of European geography did not correlate with
any of the linguistic features found in their descriptions
suggests that familiarity of the environment did not
influence how participants structured their descriptions. If
the use of embedded perspective is simply a function of
high familiarity, we would expect speakers with better
knowledge of European geography very well to structure
their descriptions in a more embedded manner. That was not
the case.
Our final objective was to analyze how embedded and
external descriptions are structured on a larger discourse
level. Previous studies of perspective in spatial descriptions
have only evaluated the use of language on a lexical level.
By extending our analysis to discourse, we provide even
stronger evidence that these two types of perspective are
differentiated in linguistic descriptions. Moreover, the
discourse organization of the two description types suggests
that speakers structure their descriptions in a manner that
mirrors the information acquisition process. Actionexistence chains structure language so that information is
presented as it was perceived, in a series of agent
movements followed by noting the existence of a landmark.
It is not surprising that these were common in the Home
descriptions, but few were found in the Europe descriptions.
In comparison with previous studies, our data corroborate
most of the linguistic findings. However, there was one
difference between our data and descriptions from previous
studies that should be brought to light. Landmark relational
terms and the use of other landmarks as referents occurred
frequently across both environment descriptions in our data.
Taylor and Tversky (1996) reported that landmark relational
terms and other landmark referents were used very rarely in
the written descriptions they collected.

It is possible that the well-known nature of the
environments caused speakers to use more landmark
relational terms. Every culture has shared knowledge about
what landmarks are expected to be included in a home or a
continent. The reliance on relating one landmark to another
may be due to the perceived ease in which the addressee is
able to understand what types of landmarks are likely
contained within the environment. The difference in the use
of landmark relations between our study and previous
studies may be due to the environments that were evaluated.
However, the majority of our findings support previous
work in this area, and the discourse analyses bring a novel
contribution to the field of perspective in spatial
descriptions.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a University of California,
Santa Barbara, Humanities and Social Sciences Research
Grant awarded to Sarah Kriz.

References
Ekstrom, R., French, J., Harman, H., & Derman, D. (1976).
Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests. Princeton, NJ:
Educational Testing Service.
Emmorey, K., Tversky, B., & Taylor, H. (2000). Using
space to describe space: Perspective in speech, sign, and
gesture. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2, 157-180.
Hegarty, M., Richardson, A., Montello, D., Lovelace, K., &
Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a self-report measure
of environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30, 425-447.
Linde, C. & Labov, W. (1975). Spatial structures as a site
for the study of language and thought. Language, 51, 924939.
Montello, D. (1993). Scale and multiple psychologies of
space. In A. Frank & I. Campari (Eds.), Spatial
Information Theory: A theoretical basis for GIS. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science 716.
Talmy, L. (1996). Fictive motion in language and “caption.”
In P. Bloom, M. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.),
Space and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Taylor, H., Naylor, S., & Chechile, N. (1999). Goal-specific
influences on the representation of spatial perspective.
Memory & Cognition, 27(2), 309-319.
Taylor, H. & Tversky, B. (1996). Perspective in spatial
descriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 371391.
Ullmer-Ehrich, V. (1982). The structure of living space
descriptions. In R. J. Jarvella & W. Klein (Eds.), Speech,
place, and action (pp. 219-249). New York: Wiley.

1201

