UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5xz2w7h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Daniel, Marie-Paule
Ding, Jing Jing
Gattis, Merideth
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought
Merideth Gattis (gattism@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building
Cardiff, Wales CF10 3AT UK

Simone Schnall (simone@virginia.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, P.O. Box 400400
Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA

Barbara Tversky (bt@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Introduction

Polarity in Reasoning
Merideth Gattis and Jing Jing Ding

Humans and other animals depend on their ability to
perceive and represent spatial aspects of the world. This
symposium addresses the question of whether abstract
cognition is related to the ability to perceive, represent, and
reason about spatial information. We discuss whether the
spatial schemas that humans learn by observing the
locations and movements of objects and the configuration of
our environment might provide mechanisms for cognition,
or whether spatial schemas are simply metaphors that help
us to understand cognitive processes. Three talks from
social, cognitive, and developmental perspectives present
new data on the abstract use of spatial information.

People frequently create correspondences between the
positive ends of two dimensions, as for instance, in the
association between “more” and “up.” In this talk, I propose
that polarity, an organizational structure present in both
language and perception, may account for many of these
consistent mappings between dimensions. Dimensions that
are polar in organization have one end that is “more” and
one end that is “less.” Mappings based on polarity align the
two positive ends and the two negative ends. Such mappings
can take place not only between two linguistic dimensions
(as argued by Clark, 1969) but also between two perceptual
dimensions (as argued by Smith and Sera, 1992), and
between a linguistic and a spatial dimension. I will present
data from young children and adults indicating that
reasoning with spatial representations is constrained by the
polar structure of perceptual and linguistic dimensions.

Evaluative Consequences of Conceptual and
Spatial Congruence
Simone Schnall

Conveying Spatial and Abstract Information
in Diagrams and Gestures
Barbara Tversky, Sandra Lozano, Julie Heiser,
Paul Lee, and Marie-Paule Daniel

A recent theory of conceptual structure proposes that bodily
processes constrain cognitive processing, and that the
resulting knowledge is structured in a metaphorical way
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999). According to this view
basic spatial concepts (e.g., UP, DOWN) are mapped onto
abstract concepts. We investigated the match (or mismatch)
of different conceptual relations (e.g., good vs. bad) with
their metaphorical spatial relation (UP vs. DOWN). Stimuli
were presented in either an UP location, or a DOWN
location. Participants’ evaluations of how good or bad the
stimuli were was influenced by the extent to which stimulus
content was consistent with spatial location. The results
suggest that evaluations are more positive when explicit
spatial representation fits with implicit conceptual structure.

How is spatial and non-spatial information conveyed in
diagram and gesture? Diagrams are ideal for conveying
structure; they use elements in space and spatial relations in
diagram space to convey elements and relations in actual
space. Conveying abstractions, even changes in space and
spatial relations, require extra-pictorial elements. In contrast
to diagrams, gestures leave no observable traces. They are
ideal for conveying movement, change, but rely on other
devices to convey structure. A review of several projects on
diagrams and gesture will provide examples.

25

