UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Starting Over: International Adoption as a Natural Experiment in Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9p4518pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Geren, Joy
Snedeker, Jesse

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Starting Over:
International Adoption as a Natural Experiment in Language Acquisition
Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Joy Geren (geren@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland St.
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract
Language development is characterized by predictable shifts
in the words that children learn and the complexity of their
utterances. Because language acquisition typically occurs
simultaneously with cognitive development and maturation, it
is difficult to determine the causes of these shifts. We
explored how acquisition precedes in the absence of possible
cognitive or maturational roadblocks, by examining the
acquisition of English in internationally-adopted preschoolers.
Like infants, and unlike other L2 learners, these children
acquire a language from child-directed speech in the home,
without access to bilingual informants. Parental reports (CDI2) and speech samples were collected from 14 preschoolers, 3
to 18 months after they were adopted from China. These
children made rapid progress in acquiring English and showed
the same developmental patterns as monolingual infants
(matched for vocabulary size). Early on, their lexicons were
dominated by nouns, their utterances were short, and function
morphemes were almost entirely absent. Children at later
stages of development had more diverse lexicons and
produced longer utterances with more closed-class
morphemes.

Introduction
Language development is marked by a series a qualitative
shifts. Infants speak in single-word utterances for several
months before beginning to combine words. Young
children learn a disproportionate number of nouns before
acquiring a balanced complement of verbs, adjectives and
prepositions. Young English speakers typically omit
function morphemes from their early word combinations,
and then gradually begin to add them in. A central question
in language acquisition is what causes children to move
through these phases (Lenneberg, 1967, Bloom, 1973,
Gleitman & Newport, 1995, Ganger, Pinker, Chawla &
Baker, 2004). Are the early stages reflections of cognitive
immaturity or do they represent necessary steps in decoding
the target language? Is the emergence of new linguistic
abilities driven by maturation or by the child’s growing
knowledge of the language? These questions are difficult to
answer because language acquisition is confounded with
cognitive development and maturation in typically
developing children.
However much of what we know about language
development comes from studies of atypical populations.
Research on aphasics suggested there might be a critical
period for language acquisition (Lenneberg, 1967), a
hypothesis confirmed by studying adults deprived of

linguistic experience in childhood (Newport, 1990).
Research on blind children (Landau & Gleitman, 1985),
linguistic isolates (Goldin-Meadow & Feldman, 1977), and
children with limited language models (Singleton &
Newport, 2004) has been central in demonstrating the
resilience of children’s linguistic abilities. These natural
experiments allow us to explore the effects of variables that
are impossible or unethical to manipulate.
International adoption provides the opportunity for just
such a natural experiment. Over 20,000 internationallyadopted children enter the U.S. each year. While most are
infants or toddlers, thousands of older children are also
adopted. Typically these children rapidly lose their birth
language (Glennen & Masters, 2002). By adulthood, they
fail to distinguish speech in their birth language from an
unknown language and show no cortical activations that
distinguish them either (Pallier et al., 2003). Most of these
children are adopted well within the sensitive period for
language acquisition (Newport, 1990) and become fluent
speakers of their new language (Pallier, et al., 2003). But we
know almost nothing about how they get there. Recent
studies show that internationally-adopted infants make rapid
progress in acquiring English (Glennen & Masters, 2002).
But there is no existing data on older adoptees.
The learning problem faced by these children is broadly
similar to that of infants learning their first language: they
are exposed to child-directed speech in the context of daily
routines; they must learn the new language to communicate
with their families; they have little access to text or bilingual
informants; and they lack many of the metalinguistic
abilities available to older children and adults (Gombert,
1992). However, these children are more cognitively and
physically mature than their infant counterparts and have
already started to learn one language.
The current study compares language acquisition in
internationally-adopted preschoolers and monolingual
infants. Our goal is to explore the role that cognitive
development and maturation play in shaping the course of
first-language acquisition by examining how acquisition
proceeds when these road blocks have been removed. By
doing this we hope to tease apart two very broad kinds of
explanation for systematic changes during language
acquisition:
1) Maturational-Cognitive Hypotheses: Theories of
this kind attribute the order of acquisition or the
emergence of new abilities to changes in the learner
which are independent of the child’s experience with

2038

a given language. Immaturity constrains language
acquisition, limiting the kinds of words that a child
can learn, the kinds of representations she can create
or the kinds utterances she can produce. When these
roadblocks are removed, either by maturation or
cognitive development, children can acquire new
linguistic abilities.
2) Contingent Acquisition Hypotheses:
These
theories attribute the order of acquisition to the
interdependence of different linguistic elements,
representations, or processes. The emergence of new
abilities is driven by the child’s growing knowledge
of the language. If knowledge of form A is necessary
for acquiring form B, then the acquisition of B will
have to await the acquisition of A.1
Critically, this distinction is completely orthogonal to the
nativist/empiricist and domain-specific/domain-general
dichotomies that organize theoretical discourse in this field
Contrast, for example, Wexler’s maturational theory (1998)
with the cognitive theory of Shore (1986) or the nativist
contingent acquisition hypothesis of Snedeker & Gletiman
(2004) with the proposal of Bates & Goodman, (1997).
This paper explores just two patterns in early language
development that could be explained by either maturationalcognitive hypotheses or contingent acquisition. We begin by
describing these two patterns, then we briefly examine why
prior research on second-language acquisition has not
resolved these issues.

Changes in Vocabulary Composition
Children’s early vocabularies are dominated by nouns that
refer to people, animals, and moveable objects. Although
adults speak to children in full sentences, complete with
verbs and function words, these elements are massively
underrepresented in children’s early vocabularies (Gentner,
1982, Bates, Dale & Thal, 1995) This is true not only in
English but also in languages like Mandarin and Korean
where verbs frequently occur in perceptually salient
positions (for review see Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001). This
input-output disparity can be plausibly attributed to the
conceptual limitations of young children (Macnamara,
1972; Huttenlocher, Smiley & Ratner, 1983). Perhaps the
relative dearth of verbs and adjectives is attributable to the
infant’s inability to conceive of relations, states or actions,
while the overabundance of nouns is attributable to the
conceptual primacy of object categories.
However, the changing composition of children’s lexicons
could reflect linguistic rather than conceptual growth
(Gillette, Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999; Snedeker &
Gleitman, 2004). An infant who is just breaking into
language has to learn the meanings of words by observing

the situational contexts in which they are used. Older
children, who have already acquired sizeable vocabularies,
can also use the sentence in which the word appears.2 To
simulate the effects of linguistic development in the absence
of cognitive limitations, Gleitman and her colleagues have
asked adults to identify words from different representations
of the contexts in which they occurred in child-directed
speech (Gillette et al., 1999; Snedeker, Li & Yuan, 2003;
Snedeker & Gleitman, 2004). When the adults were limited
to situational cues, they could only identify the concrete
nouns. But when given information about the linguistic
context, they were able to learn the verbs as well.
These human simulations demonstrate that changes in
vocabulary composition are not necessarily attributable to
changes in the learner’s conceptual repertoire. But there are
several differences between these studies and the
experiences of young language learners which might limit
the validity of the simulations. In contrast, the task and input
of internationally-adopted children appear to closely parallel
those of infant learners. Like infants, adopted children get
prolonged exposure to their new language in the context of
meaningful social interactions. Like infants they must
simultaneously isolate the words and determine what they
mean. However, like the adults in Gleitman’s simulations,
adopted children are more cognitively mature than infants.
If shifts in vocabulary composition primarily reflect the
changing cognitive capacities of the learner, then adopted
children should acquire words from a variety of categories,
much like their monolingual age mates. If vocabulary
composition is largely a function of the input and children’s
linguistic knowledge, adopted children should initially be
restricted to the types of words learned by infants.

Early Grammatical Development

1

Similar questions have been raised about the role of
maturation and cognitive development in children’s early
combinatorial speech.
For months after they begin
speaking, infants are typically limited to one-word
utterances. The appearance of word combinations has been
attributed to motor and cognitive development and linguistic
maturation, as well as the accumulation of linguistic
knowledge (Bloom, 1973; Shore, 1986, Bates, et al., 1995).
At around 24 to 30 months, children show a second burst of
syntactic activity, adding determiners, auxiliaries and
inflectional markers to their formerly sparse utterances
(Brown, 1973).
Both of these shifts are strongly correlated with
productive vocabulary size raising the intriguing possibility
that lexical growth is causally related to syntactic
development (Bates & Goodman, 1997). In support of this
hypothesis, Bates and her colleagues demonstrated that
2

The contingent acquisition hypotheses under consideration make
the weaker claim that one type of knowledge is needed for efficient
acquisition or utilization of another type. This is desirable since
the phenomena under consideration under consideration are strong
but violable. For example, children do learn some verbs early on
(Bates, Dale & Thal, 1995).
2039

Note we are not drawing a contrast between conceptual and
linguistic explanations for early noun-dominance. Both hypotheses
claim that verbs are difficult to learn because of the kinds of
concepts that they encode. The theories differ in their explanations
for why this conceptual difference impedes acquisition and how
this changes over development.

Comparing first and second language acquisition
Many other researchers have explored the parallels between
first and second language acquisition, finding both
similarities and discrepancies (see Clahsen, 1990; Ellis,
1994; Freeman & Freeman, 2001 for discussions). But none
of this existing work addresses the questions that motivate
this study. L2 researchers have typically focused on the
development of specific syntactic constructions that appear
somewhat later in first-language development (e.g.,
negation). There is little work on the composition of the
lexicon in L2 learners and no work that examines the
relationship between early lexical and grammatical
development. Furthermore, the most commonly studied
populations, students receiving formal instruction or
immigrants learning a language in the workplace or
playground, are in language environments that are radically
different from infants, making it unclear whether differences
in acquisition are due to maturity or to differences in the
learners’ input and motivations.
Finally, most L2 studies have examined adults or children
over six. Our goal is to find out whether cognitive changes
occurring between 16 and 30 months of age shape early
language acquisition. When we compare infants with adults
we cannot isolate these effects from age-related changes that
occur during middle childhood and adolescence. Since
these later changes are known to alter acquisition (see e.g.,
Johnson & Newport, 1989), we have chosen to limit our
study to children who begin acquiring English before 6.

Development Inventory 2 (CDI-2) (Fenson, et al., 1993) and
recorded a language sample in their home. The CDI-2
includes a 680-item vocabulary checklist and a 37-item
forced-choice sentence-complexity measure, which asks
about the child’s use of inflectional morphemes and closedclass words. The CDI-2 is normed for children 16-30
months (Fenson, et al., 1993), but has also been used with
older children with limited English language skills
(Berglund, Eriksson & Johansson, 2001). The language
sample consisted of an hour-long recording of the parent
and child playing with a standard toy set.
Parental reports for the adopted preschoolers were
compared with those of monolingual infants who
participated in earlier studies. Each session from an adopted
child was matched to an infant with the same vocabulary
size (±7%) on the parental report. The infant controls were
1;7 to 2;6 (M = 2;2).

Results
Children’s Spontaneous Speech
The speech sample from the first session was transcribed,
and the first 100 utterances meeting standard criteria were
analyzed using CLAN (MacWhinney, 2000).
These
analyses validate the use of the CDI-2 with this population.
The number of word types in the speech sample is highly
correlated with CDI-2 vocabulary size (R2=.56, p <.001).
Parental reports also accurately reflect the kinds of words
that the children use; the number of different nouns, verbs,
and closed class items used by each participant correlates
with the number that their parent endorsed on the CDI-2
(R2=.28, p=.053 for nouns; R2=.43, p <.05 for verbs; and
R2=.66, p <.001 for closed-class words). Furthermore, the
children’s MLU is correlated with their score on the CDI-2
sentence-complexity metric, demonstrating that parents
were sensitive to differences in the children’s syntactic
abilities (R2=.37, p < .05).

Methods
14 families with children adopted from China participated.
The children were adopted between 2;7 and 5;1 (M = 4;2).
Length of residence at the first session was 3 to 16 months
(M = 8.1). Parents were invited to participate every 3
months until their child had been in the U.S. for 18 months.
Thus each child participated in 1 to 5 sessions (M=2.5) and
a total of 35 data points were collected. Children were
excluded from participation if they had sensory, motor, or
developmental disorders that might affect language.
Materials for the study were mailed to the parents who
completed
the
Bates-MacArthur
Communicative
2040

700
CDI-2 Vocabulary Size

these correlations hold up in atypical populations such as
early-talkers, late-talkers and children with Williams
Syndrome (Bates & Goodman, 1997). However, these
studies cannot rule out the possibility that both lexical and
syntactic acquisition depend upon the development of some
other cognitive ability, one which is accelerated for earlytalkers, delayed for late-talkers, and selectively spared in
Williams Syndrome (e.g., auditory memory). We can test
this hypothesis by examining the relation between lexical
and grammatical development in adopted preschoolers. If
they are causally linked, then the relationship should persist
in maturationally-advanced learners. In contrast if the
correlation is created by rate-limiting development in
another domain, then it should be possible to find
disassociations in older learners.

600
500

30 m
28 m

400

26 m
24 m

300

22 m

200

20 m
18 m
16 m

100
0
0

3

6

9

12

15

18

Time in the U.S. in months

Figure 1: Vocabulary Growth in Internationally-Adopted
Preschoolers

Rate of Acquisition

Adoptees

Infants

times the rate of infants. This suggests that development or
prior experience with a language can accelerate the initial
pace of word learning. But we have no evidence that this
advantage persists. Between month 3 and month 9, adopted
children make as much progress as the average infant does
between 24 and 30 months, though ceiling effects in both
groups make this finding difficult to interpret.

Vocabulary Composition
When children are near the ceiling of the CDI-2, vocabulary
composition necessarily reflects the composition of the
checklist. To ensure this did not unduly influence our
findings, we removed observations where children had
acquired over 90% of words from the analyses of all
sessions. The remaining sample included 23 observations.
The adopted preschoolers show the same shifts in
vocabulary composition as the infant learners (Figures 2-4).
The proportion of nouns decreases linearly as the children’s
vocabularies grow (R2=.49, p <.005 first session, R2=.54, p
< .001 all). In contrast the proportion of verbs increases
Adoptees

Log. (Adoptees)

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

Linear (Adoptees)

0

0.65

0

0.6
Noun Proportion

Infants

0.3

Verb Proportion

Since the number of sessions varied across participants, we
conducted the CDI-2 analyses on the first data point
contributed by each child, as well as on the entire data set.
The results of the two analyses were quite similar and
statistics for both are presented below.
Unsurprisingly, vocabulary size increased with the length
of time that the child had spent in the U.S. As Figure 1
suggests, one participant was an outlier in this analysis,
acquiring reliably fewer words than would be predicted at
both observation sessions. With this participant removed,
there is a robust logarithmic relation between time and
vocabulary (R2=.64, p < .001 first session, R2=.61, p <.0001
all).3 Age of arrival was not a significant predictor of
vocabulary size (R2‘s <.01, p’s >.25) indicating that older
adoptees did not learn words any faster than young ones.
This logarithmic, or decelerating, growth curve contrasts
sharply with the accelerating curve observed in infant
learners (Fenson et al., 1994). We suspect that this reflects
properties of the instrument rather than an actual
deceleration in vocabulary growth. After 12 months many
adoptees have developed beyond the point where the CDI
provides an accurate estimate of their vocabulary size; in
54% of these sessions the children knew over 90% of the
words and had presumably reached the ceiling of this
instrument. The secondary y-axis of Figure 1 allows us to
compare vocabulary growth in the adopted children to the
CDI-2 norms for infant learners (Fenson et al., 1993). After
3 months in the U.S., adopted preschoolers have vocabulary
scores that rival 24-month-olds, who have been speaking for
about a year. Thus, internationally-adopted preschoolers
initially acquire a productive vocabulary at roughly four

200
400
600
CDI-2 Vocabulary Size

Figure 3: Verbs as a Proportion of the Child’s Total
Vocabulary on the Parental Report

0.55
0.5

Adoptees

0.45

Infants

Linear (Adoptees)

0.2
Closed Class Proportion

0.4
0.35
0

200
400
600
CDI-2 Vocabulary Size

Figure 2: Nouns as a Proportion of the Child’s Total
Vocabulary on the Parental Report
3

When this participant is included, her observations have
standardized residuals less than -2 and the logarithmic relation
between time and vocabulary is considerably weaker (R2=.21,
p=.06 first session, R2=.24, p <.005 all). This child did not appear
to have any perceptual limitations, cognitive delays, or background
characteristics that might explain her relatively slow acquisition of
English. We suspect she may have a language impairment.
2041

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

200
400
600
CDI-2 Vocabulary Size

Figure 4: Closed Class Words as a Proportion of the
Child’s Total Vocabulary on the Parental Report

logarithmically with vocabulary size (R2=.39, p < .05 first,
R2=.50, p <.001 all) and the proportion of closed-class items
increases linearly (R2=.72, p <.001 first, R2=.69, p <.001
all). For each lexical class we compared the adoptees and
controls with a paired t-test and a stepwise regression with
vocabulary size, group, and group * vocabulary as
predictors. We found no reliable differences between the
adoptees and infant controls in vocabulary composition or
its relation to vocabulary size (t’s< 1.1, p’s >.25).

Grammatical Development
Infants typically begin combining words when they have a
vocabulary of 50 to 200 words (Bates & Goodman, 1997).
Since all of our participants had vocabularies over 150
words and were combining words, we were unable to
examine whether these events were linked in the adopted
preschoolers. Instead, our analyses focused on the relation
between vocabulary size and sentence-complexity scores,
which are robustly correlated in infants when CDI-2
Adoptees

Infants

Linear (Adoptees)

CDI-2 Complexity Score

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0

200
400
CDI-2 Vocabulary Size

600

Figure 5: Total Score on Sentence Complexity Measure as
a Function of Vocabulary Size
vocabulary is between 300 to 500 words (Bates &
Goodman, 1997). As Figure 5 illustrates, this correlation
was confirmed in both the adopted children (R2=.60, p
<.001 first, R2=.67, p <.001 all) and the controls and there
were no reliable differences between the two groups (t’s< 1,
p’s >.25).

Discussion
We found that internationally-adopted preschoolers go
through many of the same shifts in early language
development as typically-developing infants. Like infants,
these preschoolers initially learned a disproportionate
number of nouns, developing a more balanced lexicon over
time. Like infants, their early utterances lacked inflectional
morphemes and closed-class words, which were gradually
added in as vocabulary grew. In infants we can credit these
shifts to general cognitive or maturational changes. The
preschoolers however, have passed the developmental
milestones that typically coincide with early language

development.4 Thus our results strongly suggest that at
least some features of early language production are due to
the nature of the learning problem rather than the limitations
of infant learners.
For over twenty years, research on early vocabulary
composition has largely centered on Gentner’s noundominance hypothesis (1982). Thus it is reasonable to ask
how this work bears on that hypothesis. We chose not to
frame the study in this way, primarily because we believe
that the noun-dominance hypothesis lives a dual life. Many
readers, including most text-book writers, have interpreted it
as a maturational-cognitive hypothesis. For example, Hoff
states (2001, p.157): “According to Gentner the relational
meanings encoded in verbs are less available to young
children through nonlinguistic experience. Thus, children
acquire nouns before verbs because the concepts encoded by
nouns are earlier cognitive developments than the concepts
encoded by verbs.” Our results clearly speak to this
interpretation of the noun-dominance hypothesis.
Presumably preschool-aged children with prior linguistic
experience have developed the concepts encoded by verbs
that are typically learned by toddlers. Yet they go through
the same shifts in vocabulary composition, suggesting that
there is no need to invoke cognitive change to explain this
phenomenon.
In subsequent writings, however, Gentner herself has
clearly rejected this maturational/cognitive account and has
argued instead that the shift in vocabulary composition is
caused by the child’s growing knowledge of the languagespecific conflation patterns that organize verb meanings
(Gentner & Boroditsy, 2001). While this is clearly a
contingent acquisition hypothesis, it is not clear what
predictions it makes for second-language acquisition in
childhood. If children simply attempt to map secondlanguage labels onto the conceptual conflations provided in
their first language, then we would expect to see precocious
verb learning, to the degree that verb semantics in the two
languages are aligned. We found no evidence of this in the
adopted children, despite the fact that many of the common
verbs in English and Chinese languages appear have similar
meanings (Snedeker, Li & Yuan, 2003). On the other hand,
if child learners attempt to map second-language label
directly to prelinguistic representations of event
components, then the noun-dominance hypothesis would
predict that second-language verb learning, like first
language verb learning, should initially be slow and
effortful, accelerating as the child learns more about the
language and its conflation patterns. The current data are
consistent with this reading of noun-dominance hypothesis
as well as Gleitman’s informational-change hypothesis.
Our ongoing research extends this work in several ways.
First, we are collecting data from Eastern-European

2042

4

We confirmed this by having some families complete parental
reports of developmental milestones that typically coincide with
language acquisition. The internationally-adopted preschoolers
(n=9) passed 88% of these milestones, while the vocabularymatched infants (n=9) passed only 49%.

adoptees to explore whether the child’s birth language
affects the acquisition of English. Second, we are
conducting a longitudinal study of the first 6 months after
arrival, so we can learn more about the earliest phases of
acquisition and track the development of individual
children. Finally, we are conducting fine-grained transcript
analyses to get a more detailed picture of the children’s
syntactic development.

Acknowledgments
We thank Isabel Martin and Laura Ax for assistance in
recruitment and parent contact; Caroline Whiting, Nicole
Gavel and Rachel Springer for help with transcription and
data entry; and Lila Gleitman for conversations which led to
this study. Data collection was supported by the Roger
Brown Fund. Preparation of this paper (and the ongoing
work) is funded by National Science Foundation (BCS0418423). Finally, we thank the families who participated
for being so generous with their time.

References
Bates, E., Dale, P.S., and Thal, D. (1995). Individual
Differences and Their Implications for Theories of
Language Development. In Fletcher, P. & MacWhinney,
B. (Eds.), The handbook of child language (pp. 96-151),
Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers.
Bates, E. & Goodman, J. C. (1997). On the inseparability
of grammar and the lexicon: Evidence from acquisition,
aphasia, and real-time processing. LCP. 12, 507-584.
Berglund, E., Eriksson, M., & Johansson, I. (2001). Parental
reports of spoken language skills in children with Down
Syndrome. JSLHR, 44, 179–191.
Bloom, L. (1973) One word at a time: the use of singleword utterances before syntax. The Hague: Mouton.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Clahsen, H. (1990). The comparative study of first and
second language development. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 12, 135-54.
Ellis, R. (1994). The Study of Second Language
Acquisition. Oxford University Press.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Thal, D., Bates, E.,
Hartung, J. P., et al. (1993). MacArthur Communicative
Development Inventories: User’s guide and technical
manual. San Diego, CA: Singular.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznick, J.S., Bates, E., Thal, D., &
Pethick, S. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development. 59(5), v-173.
Freeman, D.E., & Freeman, Y.S. (2001). Between worlds:
Access to second language acquisition (2nd ed.).
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Ganger, J., Pinker, S., Chawla, S. & Baker, A. (2004). The
Heritability of Early Milestones of Vocabulary and
Grammar: A Twin Study. Unpublished ms.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.A.

Kuczaj, II (Ed.), Language development: Vol 2. language,
thought, and culture (pp. 31-53). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. England: Cambridge University Press.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulation of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73, 135-176.
Gleitman, L.R. & E.L. Newport. 1995. The invention of
language by children. In L.R. Gleitman & M. Liberman.
An invitation to cognitive science. Vol. 1: Language. MIT
Press. (p. 1-25).
Glennen, S., & Masters, M. G. (2002). Typical and atypical
language development in infants and toddlers adopted
from Eastern Europe. American Journal of SpeechLanguage Pathology, 11, 417–433.
Goldin-Meadow, S. & Feldman, H. The development of
language-like communication without a language model.
Science, 1977, 197, 401-403.
Gombert, J.E. (1992). Metalinguistic development. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hoff, E. (2001). Language development. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth Thomson Learning.
Huttenlocher, J., Smiley, P., & Ratner, H. (1983). What do
word meanings reveal about conceptual development? In
T. Wannamacher & W. Seiler (Eds.), The development of
word meanings and concepts. Springer. (pp. 210-233).
Johnson, J., and Newport, E. (1989). Critical period effects
in second language learning. Cog Psych, 21, 60-99.
Landau, B. & Gleitman, L.R. (1985). Language and
experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language.
New York: Wiley.
Macnamara, J. (1972). Cognitive basis of language learning
in infants. Psychological Review, 79, 1-13.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newport, E. (1990). Maturational constraints on language
learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11–28.
Pallier, C., Dehaene, S., Poline, J., LeBihan, D., Argenti, A.,
Dupoux, E. & Mehler, J. (2003). Brain imaging of
language plasticity in adopted adults. Cerebral Cortex,
13, 155-161.
Shore, C.M. (1986). Conceptual development and early
multiword speech. Dev Psych, 22, 184-190.
Singleton, J.L., & Newport, E.L. (2004). When learners
surpass their models: The acquisition of ASL from
inconsistent input. Cog Psych, 49, 370-407.
Snedeker, J., Li, P. & Yuan, S. (2003). Cross-Cultural
Differences in the Input to Early Word Learning.
Proceedings of the 25th Ann Cogsci Conference. Mahwah,
NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Snedeker, J. & Gleitman, L. (2004). Why it is hard to label
our concepts. In Hall, G. & Waxman, S. (eds), Weaving a
Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wexler, K. (1998). Maturation and growth of grammar. In
W.C. Ritchie & T.K. Bhatia (eds.), Handbook of
Language Acquisition, Academic Press.

2043

