UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Stimulus Generalization in Category Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80g257zb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Jones, Matt
Love, Bradley C.
Maddox, W. Todd

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Stimulus Generalization in Category Learning
Matt Jones, W. Todd Maddox, and Bradley C. Love
[mattj,maddox,love]@psy.utexas.edu
University of Texas, Department of Psychology, 1 University Station A8000
Austin, TX 78712 USA

representations and the distinction between integral and
separable dimensions. We conclude by discussing the
broader applicability of this new methodology as well as its
implications for the nature of perceptual and category
representations, attentional learning, and the roles of shortand long-term memory in categorization.

Abstract
Stimulus generalization is often regarded as a fundamental
component of category learning, yet it has not been directly
studied in this context. Here we develop a technique for
measuring generalization based on sequential effects in
subjects’ responses. We find that patterns of generalization
can adapt to global properties of the task, but only when the
category structure is defined by perceptually primitive and
separable dimensions.
Implications are discussed for
attentional learning and the nature of both perceptual and
category representations.

Recency effects and stimulus generalization

Perhaps the most fundamental task facing the brain is to use
past experience to determine useful behavior in novel
situations. For example, in deciding whether a particular
snake is poisonous, one might draw on knowledge of other,
similar snakes whose toxicity was known. The details of
this process can be critical: Basing one’s response on other
snakes of similar color and markings may be effective, but
relying on irrelevant properties such as length could have
disastrous consequences.
In other words, successful
generalization depends critically on knowledge of which
variables are relevant to the current prediction.
One task in which stimulus generalization is believed to
play an important role is category learning (Medin &
Schaffer, 1978). However, in contrast to the rich body of
data in conditioning (see Shepard, 1987), stimulus
generalization in category learning has yet to be directly
investigated. Often it is assumed that generalization
operates the same in these two tasks, and generalization
functions that have been empirically supported in
conditioning studies are incorporated into the similarity
functions of categorization models (Kruschke, 1992; Love,
Medin, & Gureckis, 2004; Nosofsky, 1986). However, the
richer nature of representations involved in category
learning (e.g., Maddox & Ashby, 1993; Rosch et al., 1976;
Sloman, Love, & Ahn, 1998) suggests that generalization in
this domain may be far more complex than is currently
assumed.
The primary aim of this paper is to develop and explore a
method for directly assessing stimulus generalization in
category learning. The technique, described in more detail
below, is based on a close connection between
generalization and recency effects (Jones & Sieck, 2003).
Here we present two experiments designed to validate this
approach and to relate it to previous findings on attentional
learning. Our results show good support for the approach
and illustrate how it can provide insight into perceptual
1066

Proportion “A” responses

Introduction

Recency effects are a robust phenomenon in repeated
judgment tasks. For example, in studies of probability
learning (repeated uncued forced-choice tasks), it has been
regularly found that subjects are biased to select whichever
response was reinforced on the previous trial (see Myers,
1970, for a review). Jones and Sieck (2003) found that this
same effect occurs in cued categorization: Once the identity
of the current stimulus is controlled for, subjects tend to
choose the category that was correct on the previous trial.
This marginal effect of learning from the previous trial can
be interpreted as generalization from one stimulus to the
next, because it reflects the belief that the current stimulus is
likely to belong to the same category as the previous
stimulus. Consistent with this interpretation, Jones and
Sieck found that the magnitude of the recency effect
depends on the similarity between the present and previous
stimuli, as shown in Figure 1. Stimuli in these experiments
were hypothetical medical patients varying in the presence
or absence of three symptoms. The recency effect was
greatest when successive stimuli were identical and
decreased with each cue mismatch, fully disappearing for
cases of complete mismatch. The approximately exponential
decrease is similar to the functional form of generalization
commonly found in conditioning (Shepard, 1987).
0.75

Previous
Category
0.5

A
B

0.25
0

1

2

3

Number of M ismatching Cues

Figure 1: Recency effects as a function of number of
mismatching cues between present and previous stimuli.
(From Jones and Sieck, 2003, Expt. 2, control condition.)

This phenomenon offers a potentially powerful tool for
measuring stimulus generalization during category learning.
The basic idea is to measure generalization from the
previous stimulus by measuring the influence of that
stimulus’ category membership on the current response.
For example, generalization from stimulus X to Y can be
defined as the difference in category A responses between
trials on which Y follows X and X was in category A and
trials on which Y follows X and X was in category B.1 By
determining how this generalization effect depends on the
relationship between pairs of stimuli, we can gain important
information about the nature of the representations
underlying categorization.
To be clear, we do not mean to claim that recency effects
and stimulus generalization are the same thing. Presumably
stimulus generalization occurs from many or all previous
stimuli, but this generalization is far stronger for the
stimulus presented most recently. This latter fact is what is
meant by the recency effect. The existence of the recency
effect is in fact irrelevant to the theoretical issues addressed
in this paper. However, it is critical to the practicality of the
empirical investigation, as it causes information from the
previous trial to account for a large proportion of the
variance in subjects’ responses, thus allowing for
statistically reliable estimates of generalization behavior.

Measuring stimulus generalization
in category learning
The present study aims to extend the above findings to a
more detailed investigation of stimulus generalization in
category learning.
We present the results of two
experiments designed to verify the viability of the approach
by testing hypotheses about how generalization changes
with learning. In the concluding section we describe
ongoing research using our technique to address a range of
other issues.
One important issue in studies of category learning is
selective attention. A number of models assume that the
similarity metric underlying generalization can adapt, such
that certain dimensions receive more weight than others
(Kruschke, 1992; Love et al., 2004; Nosofsky, 1986). The
standard prediction (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986) is that attention
will shift to those dimensions that are most predictive of the
category outcome. This implies that the generalization
gradient for these dimensions will be sharper; that is,
generalization will be weaker between stimuli that differ on
a diagnostic dimension as compared to an irrelevant
dimension. This adaptive generalization effect makes sense
from a normative standpoint, as illustrated by the
introductory example. However, empirically it is not
entirely clear when adaptive generalization should be
expected to occur, and approaches based on fits of the
aforementioned models have failed to yield consistent
1

Note that this approach requires a probabilistic category structure,
i.e. one in which every stimulus appears with some non-zero
frequency in every category.
1067

conclusions (Maddox & Ashby, 1998). The present
experiments address this issue using the recency effectbased technique for measuring generalization.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigates stimulus generalization during
category learning, and in particular how the pattern of
generalization changes with learning. Stimuli were visual
images that varied along two continuous and separable
dimensions. Three category structures were used: two in
which only one stimulus dimension was relevant, and a third
in which both dimensions combined additively to predict the
outcome (Fig. 2A-C). The principle questions were whether
similarity-based generalization occurs with these continuous
stimuli, and if so whether generalization adapts to the
category structure.
Our primary hypothesis regarding adaptive generalization
was that subjects in the unidimensional conditions would
weight the diagnostic dimension more heavily, so that
generalization between stimuli would be selectively
sensitized to discrepancies on this dimension.
The
prediction for the integration condition was less certain.
One possibility was that there would be no effect on
generalization because both dimensions must be attended to.
This is the prediction made by most attentional learning
models, which assume that input dimensions are processed
separately each with its own attention weight. However, a
second possibility was that subjects would learn to
selectively attend to the diagonal dimension; that is,
generalization would adapt relative to the category structure
just as in the unidimensional conditions. Thus a comparison
between the two types of category structures allows a test of
how closely generalization is tied to perceptual
representation.

Method
Participants. Sixty-five members of the University of
Texas, Austin, participated for payment or course credit.
Stimuli. Stimuli were 6-cm square Gabor patterns (sinewave gratings within a Gaussian envelope), varying in the
frequency and orientation of the grating. There were 100
stimuli present in each condition, arranged in a 10×10 grid
in stimulus space.
Design. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
three conditions. In the Frequency (F) and Orientation (O)
conditions, category outcomes depended only on frequency
or orientation, respectively. In the Integration (I) condition,
both frequency and orientation were predictive of category
membership. More precisely, the probability that a stimulus
S would belong to category A on any particular presentation
was given by P[S∈A] = [1+e-σf(S)]-1, with f(S) defined by
frequency (condition F), orientation (O), or the difference
(frequency – orientation) / 2 (I).
In computing this
probability, the two stimulus dimensions were
parameterized so as to have equal ranges centered on 0
(between ±4.5 in conditions F and O and ±4.5 2 in
condition I). The scaling parameter σ was set such that

80

B

80

10

10
-.4

1.2

D

3
2

4
1

10
-.4

Frequency (log[cyc/cm])

C

Orientation

A

Orientation

Orientation (degrees)

80

1.2

Frequency

-.4

1.2

Frequency

Figure 2: Category structures for both experiments. Panels A-C show Experiment 1 conditions F (frequency), O
(orientation), and I (integration), respectively. Each circle represents a stimulus, with shading indicating probability of
membership in category A. Panel D shows Experiment 2. Dotted lines indicate category bounds for conditions 1 through
4 (these bounds are probabilistic, as in Panels A-C). Axes are rectangular coordinates derived from the Hue-Chroma
polar coordinates of the Munsell system.
P[S∈A] ranged between .05 and .95. The three category
structures are illustrated in Figure 2A-C.
Procedure. On each trial, a stimulus was randomly
selected and presented in the center of a 43-cm computer
monitor. The subject responded by pressing one of two
keys on the keyboard. The correct answer for that trial was
sampled according to the formula given above and
displayed below the stimulus for 1s. Subjects were not
informed of the category structure in advance. The
experiment consisted of 600 trials.

Analysis
The data from each subject were analyzed separately to
obtain measures of long-term cue use as well as patterns of
generalization. Specifically, we fit each subject’s responses
to a logistic regression model with predictors given by the
feature values of the current and previous stimuli along with
a term representing generalization:

logodds( Rn ) ≈ β 0 + ¦ wi S n,i + ¦ vi S n −1,i + C n −1Γn,n −1 . (1)
i

i

Here Rn represents the response on trial n; Sn,i gives the
value of stimulus n on dimension i; Γn,n-1 is the strength of
generalization from Sn-1 to Sn; and Cn-1 is the correct
category on trial n-1, coded as +1 for A and -1 for B (so that
Cn-1 determines the direction of the generalization effect).
The remaining variables are regression weights. The critical
variables in this model are wi, which gives the strength of
association from cue i to category A, and Γn,n-1, which is
discussed below. The purpose of the model is to allow
measurement of generalization effects between successive
stimuli as a function of their similarity, while controlling for
the identity of each stimulus.2
2
The functional form of the terms involving Sn and Sn-1 is intended
to be agnostic about the nature of long-term stimulus-category
associations. The additive form used here matches that of the
category structures, i.e., all 3 conditions can be written as
logodds(C n ) = ¦iWi S n,i . Controlling for the previous stimulus is
necessary due to the possibility of perceptual contrast effects.

1068

Three forms were investigated for the generalization
function:
− α S −S
Γn,n −1 = ke ¦ i n , i n −1, i

(2A)

− α (S −S
)2
Γn,n −1 = ke ¦ i n , i n −1,i

(2B)

Γn ,n −1 = k − ¦ α i S n ,i − S n −1,i

(2C)

Each of these functions has a value given by k when Sn and
Sn-1 are identical and decreases with increasing dissimilarity
between these stimuli.
The first corresponds to an
exponential function of inter-stimulus distance with distance
given by a city-block metric. The second corresponds to a
Gaussian function of distance with distance given by a
Euclidean metric. Both of these generalization functions
have been proposed previously (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986;
Shepard, 1987). The third version is a linear function that
we consider for sake of generality and because it does not
assume a priori that generalization decreases with distance
(i.e., the α parameters were allowed to be negative in this
model but not in the other two). Because the GaussianEuclidean model provided significantly better fits than the
exponential–city-block and linear models, the results
presented here are based on that model. The other two lead
to the same conclusions.
A further property of the generalization functions in
Equation 2 is that each stimulus dimension is weighted by
the corresponding α parameter. Larger values of α
correspond to increased attention and steeper generalization
gradients. Thus comparing estimated values of α1 and α2
gives a measure of selective generalization. For this
purpose a generalization bias parameter, β, is defined as
α1
β=
.
(3)
α1 + α 2
This variable measures the relative influence of the two
dimensions in determining strength of generalization, and is
constrained to lie between 0 and 1 (when α1, α2 ≥ 0).

Generalization (Γ)

Table 1: Primary measures for Experiment 1
Condition wfrequency worientation k
β
Performance
F
.735
-.056
1.419 .712 69.0%
O
.024
.377
1.629 .444 61.1
I
.474
-.304
1.070 .652 64.7
Notes: Condition F is frequency-relevant; O is orientationrelevant; I is integration (both relevant). Values of k are
medians because of skew; all other values are means.

1.5

Dimension
Diagnostic

1

Irrelevant
0.5

0
0

5

10

Distance

Results
The generalization model given by Equations 1 and 2B was
fit to each subject’s data, with frequency and orientation
represented on a common scale as described above. Mean
values for primary measures are displayed in Table 1.
Recency effects and similarity-based generalization. The
baseline strength of the recency effect, given by the
parameter k, was positive for every individual subject. Thus
the recency effect is quite robust in this task. To test
whether the recency effect declined with stimulus
dissimilarity, values of αfrequency and αorientation were examined
from the linear model (Eq. 2C; the Gaussian model is
inappropriate for this question because it assumes a
negatively sloped generalization function a priori).
Estimates were positive for 61 of 65 subjects for αfrequency
and 55 subjects for αorientation. Wilcoxon signed-ranks tests
(used because both distributions were heavy-tailed) showed
both effects to be highly significant, ps < 10-6. Therefore
generalization depends positively on stimulus similarity.
Selective generalization.
Mean values of the
generalization bias parameter β indicate that generalization
in both unidimensional conditions shifted to depend more
heavily on the task-relevant dimension (see Table 1).3 The
difference among conditions was confirmed by analysis of
variance, F(2,62) = 3.72, p < .05. A planned comparison
contrasting conditions F and O was also significant, t(62) =
2.59, p < .02. Therefore generalization patterns were
reliably affected by the category structure.
Figure 3 illustrates this selective generalization effect.
Shown are the average generalization functions for the
diagnostic and irrelevant dimensions, based on combined
data from both unidimensional conditions. Curves are
based on median values of k, αdiagnostic, and αirrelevant, with
αdiagnostic equal to αfrequency for condition F and αorientation for
O; αirrelevant is defined similarly. The graph shows how
generalization drops more rapidly with deviations along the
diagnostic as compared to the irrelevant dimension.
Selective generalization and long-term cue use. This
analysis addressed whether selective generalization is
3

The overall bias towards frequency is just a scaling effect
presumably due to greater salience of this dimension given the
amount of variation present in this experiment. This salience
difference also explains the ordering of performance in the three
conditions.

1069

Figure 3: Average generalization curves for relevant and
irrelevant dimensions in Experiment 1 (conditions F and
O combined). Distance refers to the difference between
successive stimuli on the dimension in question.
learned directly or is based on the strength of cue-category
associations. A decisional attention measure, analogous to
the generalization bias β, was computed for each subject as
γ=

|wfrequency|
|wfrequency| + |worientation |

.

(4)

This parameter measures the relative strengths of long-term
cue-category associations and is constrained to lie between
0 and 1. Next the ANOVA comparing β across conditions
was re-run with γ included as a covariate. The effect of
condition remained significant, F(2,59) = 4.69, p < .05. The
effect of γ was also significant, partial r = .468, F(1,59) =
10.26, p < .01. The interaction was nonsignificant, F(1,59)
= .26. Therefore adaptive generalization is mediated by
both the true category structure and actual learning of cuecategory associations.
Diagonal selective generalization. In condition I, the
“diagonal” dimension d – = (frequency – orientation) / 2 is
maximally diagnostic of category membership and the
orthogonal dimension, d + = (frequency + orientation) / 2 ,
is irrelevant. Therefore the recency-generalization model
was refit to the condition I data using d – and d + in place of
frequency and orientation. Analyses based on this model
are formally equivalent to analyses presented above for the
unidimensional conditions, with the entire design rotated by
45 degrees in stimulus space.
Under the (d – , d + ) coordinate system there are no scaling
concerns, because the two dimensions necessarily have the
same perceptual scale (even if frequency and orientation do
not). Therefore values of β can be directly compared to .5.
The mean value of β obtained under this model was .473
(which is in the direction opposite of that predicted by
adaptive generalization) and was not significantly different
from .5, t(22) = .418. Thus subjects appear unable to adapt
their generalization patterns to the diagonal category bound.

Discussion
Recency effects in this experiment were robust and declined
with dissimilarity between successive stimuli, consistent
with previous findings on stimulus generalization. In
addition, comparison of generalization patterns across

The fact that stimulus generalization can become sensitized
to primitive perceptual dimensions but not arbitrary
combinations of these dimensions suggests a close
connection between adaptive generalization and selective
attention.
Therefore Experiment 2 investigated
generalization with stimuli defined by integral dimensions,
in which selective attention is known to be difficult (Garner,
1974). Specifically, stimuli in Experiment 2 were color
patches varying in hue and saturation. The prediction was
that, in contrast to the findings of Experiment 1, subjects
would be unable to adapt their generalization behavior so as
to selectively attend to either of these dimensions.

The recency-effect parameter k was positive for 55 of the
60 subjects, indicating a robust recency effect. Mean values
of α obtained from the linear version of the model were
significantly negative for both the diagnostic and irrelevant
dimensions (Wilcoxon signed-ranks test, ps < 10-9).
Because the model was fit using the category-specific
axes, the adaptive generalization hypothesis predicts a mean
value of β greater than .5. Contrary to this prediction, the
mean β was .430, with the difference from .5 nonsignificant, t(59) = 1.64, p > .1. A more direct test of
adaptive generalization was obtained by comparing pairs of
conditions with orthogonal category structures (1 vs. 3 and 2
vs. 4). The models for these conditions were based on the
same axes with their labels reversed; thus a direct contrast
of β between groups was obtained by subtracting one
group’s values from 1 (e.g., β for condition 1 was compared
to 1-β for condition 3). This contrast is the same as that
performed in Experiment 1 between conditions F and O,
which provided the primary evidence for adaptive
generalization in that experiment.
In the present
experiment, both contrasts were in the direction opposite of
that predicted, and neither was significantly different from
zero: t(28) = 1.57, p > .1 for conditions 1 vs. 3; t(28) = .77,
p > .4 for conditions 2 vs. 4. Therefore generalization
appears to have been unaffected by category structure.
A final analysis compared generalization to long-term cue
use, as defined by the decisional attention parameter γ (Eq.
4). The correlation between γ and β across subjects was
.074, which is nonsignificant, p > .5.

Methods

Discussion

Participants. Sixty members of the University of Texas,
Austin, participated for payment or course credit.
Stimuli. Stimuli were 5-cm circular color patches. The
same 76 stimuli were used in all conditions. These colors
formed a regular grid in Munsell color space under the
rectangular coordinate system derived from the polar
coordinates of Hue and Chroma (saturation), as depicted in
Figure 2D. Hue ranged from 4.3RP to 1.4R and Chroma
from 12.9 to 20.5; Value (luminance) was constant at 7.
Design. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions. The category structure for each condition
was defined analogously to the structures in Experiment 1,
with outcome probabilities for the individual stimuli again
ranging from 5 to 95%. Orientations of the four category
structures were all separated by 45 degrees, with each bound
offset by 22.5 degrees from the stimulus grid (see Fig. 2D).
Procedure. The procedure mirrored that of Experiment 1
and consisted of 500 trials.

Subjects in Experiment 2 exhibited recency effects and
similarity-dependent generalization comparable to what was
found in Experiment 1. Average performance was also
matched (64.9% in Experiment 1, 64.3% in Experiment 2).
However, this time there was no evidence for adaptive
generalization. Analysis of weights in the similarity metric
showed no effect of either objective category structure or
actual cue use, both of which were seen to have significant
effects in Experiment 1. Our use of four category structures
all varying by 45 degrees eliminates the possibility that
selective generalization is possible along some unspecified
perceptual axes. Whatever these axes might be, they would
have to have to be within 22.5 degrees of one of the
structures used here, in which case that condition should
have exhibited some degree of selective generalization.
Therefore it appears that for the integral dimensions of hue
and saturation people are unable to selectively attend to any
one dimension for the purposes of adaptive generalization.

conditions showed clear effects of category structure.
Specifically, generalization in each unidimensional
condition was selectively dependent on the task-relevant
dimension. This adaptation effect appears to be due to both
the objective category structure and subjects’ learning of
that structure.
In contrast to the unidimensional conditions, the
integration condition showed no evidence of adaptive
generalization. When generalization was measured with
respect to the diagnostic and irrelevant diagonal dimensions,
no difference in the weighting of these two dimensions was
found. Therefore it appears that stimulus generalization can
adapt to the structure of a categorization task, but that this
adaptation is constrained by the nature of the perceptual
representations involved.

Experiment 2

General Discussion

Results
Data were again analyzed by fitting the generalization
model (Eqs. 1 & 2B) to each subject’s data. Because there
are no canonical perceptual axes for color space, the model
for each subject was fit using the diagnostic and irrelevant
dimensions for that subject’s category structure.

1070

Stimulus generalization has long been acknowledged as an
important component of category learning, but has not
previously been studied directly. The present experiments
demonstrate how variability in sequential effects can be
used to obtain a straightforward measure of generalization
from one stimulus to the next. Subjects’ tendency to extend

the previous category to the current case was seen to
decrease as a function of the dissimilarity between
successive stimuli, in a manner similar to established
findings in studies of conditioning (Shepard, 1987).
Furthermore, generalization was seen to adapt to the
category structure, such that task-relevant features were
weighted more heavily. However, when the category
discrimination was based on combining information from
multiple dimensions or filtering one integral dimension
from another, selective generalization did not occur.
The pattern of generalization behavior found here is
largely in agreement with many models of category
learning, including the GCM (Nosofsky, 1986), ALCOVE
(Kruschke, 1992), and SUSTAIN (Love et al., 2004). This
correspondence helps to validate our approach and also
provides empirical support for these models. However, the
present results bear only on generalization from the most
recent stimulus. Considering categorization tasks in light of
the distinction between short- and long-term memory raises
the possibility that information from trials further back is
used in a qualitatively different way. Therefore questions
about the nature of long-term category representations (e.g.,
exemplars, prototypes, decision bounds, clusters) might be
more fruitfully answered if the contributions of short-term
memory (i.e., stimulus generalization from recent trials)
were also taken into account. We are currently working to
expand the present methodology to address this issue.
Another important question raised by our results concerns
the learning process underlying adaptive generalization.
Process models of attentional learning such as ALCOVE
and SUSTAIN assume that attention weights are learned via
error correction, and thus depend directly on the category
structure. The results of Experiment 1 partially support this
hypothesis, but they also indicate that attentional learning is
related to learning of cue-category associations.
Unfortunately the relation found here is only correlational
and could be due to some third variable such as individual
variation in relative feature salience. Therefore a more
direct test is needed to determine the relative contributions
of direct learning versus perceived feature relevance to
adaptation of generalization. Research currently in progress
that manipulates sequential dependencies between cues and
categories will hopefully shed light on this question.
A final conclusion from this study regards the close
relationship between adaptive generalization and perceptual
representation. It might have been reasonable to expect that
subjects in the integration condition of Experiment 1 would
recognize when changes in frequency and orientation were
mutually reinforcing versus offsetting and generalize more
in the latter case. The fact that generalization did not adapt
in this way implies that generalization is closely tied to and
constrained by the nature of perceptual representations.
Adaptive generalization thus provides a useful indicator
of what types of stimulus variation constitute primitive
perceptual dimensions.
Under this interpretation,
Experiment 2 suggests viewing integral dimensions as
single dimensions from a perceptual standpoint, even

1071

though physically they have multiple degrees of freedom. It
also seems possible that some spaces, for example those
defined by multiple dimensions of spatial location, admit
selective generalization in any direction. We are currently
evaluating this possibility. Through this sort of systematic
investigation we hope to develop a better theory of the
varieties of perceptual spaces, and address one of the more
fundamental questions in cognitive science of what
constitutes a perceptual dimension.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NRSA F32-MH068965 from
the NIH to MJ, NIH Grant R01-MH59196 to WTM, and
AFOSR Grant FA9550-04-1-0226 and NSF CAREER Grant
0349101 to BCL.

References
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Oxford, England: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gluck, M. A., & Bower, G. H. (1988). From conditioning
to category learning: An adaptive network model. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 227–247.
Jones, M., & Sieck, W. R. (2003). Learning myopia: An
adaptive recency effect in category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition,
29, 626-640.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22–44.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Maddox, W.T., & Ashby, F.G. (1993). Comparing
decision bound and exemplar models of categorization.
Perception & Psychophysics, 53, 49-70.
Maddox, W.T., & Ashby, F.G., (1998). Selective attention
and the formation of linear decision bounds. Commentary
on McKinley and Nosofsky (1996). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 301-321.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M.M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207-238.
Myers, J. L. (1970). Sequential choice behavior. In G. H.
Bower & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Vol. 4. New York: Academic Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W.D., Johnson, D.M., &
Boyes-Braem. P. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-349.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science, 237,
1317-1323.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. K. (1998). Feature
Centrality and Conceptual Coherence. Cognitive Science,
22, 189-228.

