UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Mediating Role of Artefacts in Deductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/63r4f2fw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Payton, Teresa
Krusi Penney, Andrea
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Mediating Role of Artefacts in Deductive Reasoning
Antonio Rizzo (rizzo@unisi.it)
University of Siena, via dei Termini 6
Siena, SI 53100 ITALY

Marco Palmonari (marco.palmonari@exitconsulting.it)
Exit Consulting, via Malaga 4
Milano, MI 20143 ITALY

Abstract

Syllogistic Reasoning

We present the results of an experiment designed to
investigate the mediating role of artefacts in syllogistic
reasoning. The aim of the experiment is to compare a new
form of representation of the premises, designed according to
the Models Theory, with two “classical” representations
(Euler circles and Propositions).
The results provide preliminary empirical evidence for both
hypothesis of the experiment:
•
the representation designed according to the principles of
mental Models Theory supports the activity of subjects
performing a syllogistic reasoning task better than the two
“classical” representations;
•
subjects’ performance depends also on the specific
syllogism to be solved. Each form of representation offers
specific constraints and affordances for the production of
the mental models that need to be manipulated to produce
an answer.

According to Johnson-Laird and Byrne (1991), syllogistic
reasoning is a particular kind of deductive reasoning in
which two premises containing a single quantifier (all, none
and some) and describing the relation among classes of
elements (for instance “As” and “Bs” for the first premise
and “Bs” and “Cs” for the second premise) are combined to
obtain, when possible, a valid conclusion that describes the
relationships among the “As” and the “Cs”. A valid
conclusion describes a state of the world that is true when
the states of the world described by the premises are true.
Different theories have proposed to explain human
performance on such tasks (e.g. probability heuristic model,
formal rules, mental models). Among these approaches,
mental Models Theory is the one that has received most
empirical support to date. The basic tenet of this theory
states that syllogistic reasoning is a semantic (non syntactic)
process based on mental representations that are structurally
isomorphic to the state of the world they describe.
According to the theory, syllogistic deductions are the result
of a three stage process:
1. flesh out the content of the premises;
2. combine the first and the second premises;
3. modify the model of the two premises to search for
counterexamples.
The theory allows one to formulate detailed predictions
about subjects’ performance that have received strong
empirical confirmation. For instance, it has been shown that
the difficulty of a particular syllogism is a function of the
number of different models of the premises the subject must
flesh out and take into account to formulate valid
conclusions. Although mental Models Theory assumes that
there can be different sources of external information one
could use for building mental models (Bucciarelli &
Johnson-Laird, 1999), the experiments carried out so far on
syllogistic reasoning have used mainly one kind of artefact,
propositions, to represent the premises of syllogisms.
Propositions, as mediating artefacts, have properties that
intervene in the elaboration of the information they provide.
The mental Model Theory has to some extent overlooked
the role played by the specific kinds of representations the
subjects are provided with. What would be the impact of
different representations of the premises on subjects’
performance and errors? What would be the impact of a
representation of the premises designed according to mental

Keywords: Syllogistic reasoning, Representations, Cognitive
Artefacts, Mental Model Theory.

Artefacts and Human Cognition
Recent developments within Cognitive Science (Zhang &
Norman, 1994; 1995) have provided empirical support to
the long lasting thesis that human cognition is mediated by
artefacts (tools, rules, models, representations), which are
both internal and external to the mind (Vygotsky, 1978).
According to these findings, human activity cannot be
investigated without taking into account the mediating
artefacts.
In the present paper our aim is to investigate the design of
a new external representation developed according to some
of the assumptions of the Model Theory and to compare it
with other forms of external representations (propositions
and Euler circles) in order to test i) the mediating role of
artefacts in reasoning and ii) the potential advantages
offered by an external representation that is in keeping with
the assumptions of the Model Theory. The study focuses on
a special kind of deductive reasoning i.e. syllogistic
reasoning. The choice of syllogistic reasoning is due, on
one hand, to the long tradition in designing representations
that could support this task (Stenning, 2002) and, on the
other hand, to the rich empirical evidence supporting Model
Theory for such cognitive activity.

1862

Models Theory in an effort to support the subjects’ search
for alternative models of the premises?
The experiment described below has been designed to test
the impact that different representations of the premises
have on the subject performance and errors in syllogistic
deduction.

Despite the explicitness of relationship representation, Euler
circles do not support the combination of the premises in a
single model because the representations of all the possible
relations between the elements of a given premise are made
up of disparate entities and not “integrated” in a single
configuration or model. Instead, for each premise, a
different system of 1 to 4 models is provided, each
representing possible relationships in keeping with the
premise. It follows that for most syllogisms the number of
combinations of possible relationships between the elements
of the two premises that one must consider in order to build
a single solution is often very high.

Experiment
The first aim of the experiment was to provide further
evidence to the hypothesis that subjects using different
representations of the premises would have different
performances in solving the same syllogisms (Rizzo and
Palmonari, 2000). The second aim was to explore how
different types of syllogisms interact with the different
representations. With these aims, three different
representations of the premises were used in the experiment:
Propositions, Euler circles, and the new representation
(Valence, henceforth) created for this experiment according
to the three stage process put forward by the mental Models
Theory.

Third representation: Valence
The Valence representation was designed on the basis of the
three steps process put forward by mental Models Theory.
Following is a description of its representation properties for
each of the three steps
1) Fleshing out the states of the world. Unlike
propositions, which do not explicitly represent elements
which can or cannot exist, and like Euler circles, which
represent all the possible states of the world described by
the premise, Valence models explicitly represent (see fig. 2)
in a single representation both the entities which are certain
to exist (black colour) and the entities which may or may
not exist (in grey).

First Representation: Proposition
Propositions (strings of symbols close to natural language)
are the “standard” way to represent premises. In spite of
this, propositions are just one of the possible representations
which can be used. Propositions are particularly not well
suited to support subjects’ activity in any of the three stages
of the process. Indeed, unlike Euler circles and Valence
representations (see below), propositions do not explicitly
represent the possible states described by a premise and
unlike Valence representation they do not support the
combination of the elements of the premises in a model and
its revision.

Second Representation: Euler Circles
Euler circles, a geometrical representation named after the
mathematician Leonhard Euler, represent premises using a
circle as a model of a set of elements; the advantage of this
representation is that it explicitly represents all the possible
relations between two entities contained in a single premise
(see fig. 1).
B
A

A

B

B

A

A
B

A
B

All A are B

A

B

A
B

subjects in understanding the relationship between the “As”
in the first premise and the “Cs” in the second by means of
the “Bs” which can be combined according to an atomic
metaphor: As depicted in fig. 3, the “Bs” in the first
premise have positive valence, the “Bs” in the second have
negative valence. According to the atomic principle,
different valences attract each other, and equal valences
repel each other. When a black “B” has a double valence
(“+ +” or “- -“), it represents all of the “Bs” that exist in one
of the premises. When a black “B” has just a single valence

B
A

All A are B

Some A are B

No A are B

Some A are not B

2) Build a model representing the content of the
two premises. A metaphor is introduced to support

A

B

No A are B

Fig. 2. The Valence representation of the 4 premises. The
elements of the premise are clustered in semicircles to
indicate relationships of association and separation. In the
premise “Some A are B,” the bold A and B indicate that the
existence of associated As and Bs is certain, while the
separated A and B in grey indicate the possible existence of
As and Bs outside the association. The “+” and “++”
symbols are used for combining premises.

B

A

Some A are B

Some A are not B

Fig. 1. Representation of the four possible kinds of premises
using Euler circles

1863

it means that in the premise there are other possible “Bs” (in
grey) which may or may not exist. In this case, one cannot
be certain that the black “B” represents all the “Bs” in the
premise. The possibility of building a model of the two
premises that do not have a counterexample depends on the
way “Bs” of the first and second premise combine: when
(as shown in fig. 3) it is not possible to group the “Bs” in a
single stable configuration, there is no definite link between
“As” and “Cs” because there isn’t any definite identity
between the “Bs” in the first and the “Bs” in the second
premise. In this case, the answer to the syllogism is always
“no conclusion”.

from the combination of the two premises. To assist in this
task the Valence representation uses two additional symbols
(fig. 5).

Fig. 5. Some A are B, No C are B.
Conclusion: “Some A are not C”
The black horizontal line indicates the disjunction between
the elements placed above and below it, whereas the dashed
line indicates a possible but not certain conjunction among
the elements placed below the horizontal line. According to
the atomic metaphor, “Bs” can combine in three different
configurations; when, as depicted in fig. 3, they do not
group into a single and stable configuration, they might be
linked to different sets of “Bs”. In this case it is not possible
to get any permanent state across configurations, and the
correct answer is “no conclusion”, as the attempt to combine
the premises immediately produces two conflicting models.
When, as depicted in fig. 5, “Bs” combine in a single
configuration, the relationships among “As” and “Cs”
determine the conclusion. In this case, it is sometimes
possible to draw immediate valid conclusions about the
black “As” and “Cs”, the elements that are certain to exist,
by looking at their location in the representation. To
understand the relationship among black “As” and black
“Cs” subjects can read the emergent configuration using the
same syntax used to represent the premises. In particular,
the meaning of the notation is the following:
• when they are separated by the horizontal line,
there is disjunction among them;
• when both are below the horizontal line, their
relationship is not certain (they are separated by the
dashed line) .
The grey elements in the representation play a critical role
in that, by explicitly representing entities that might or not
exist, they can support subjects in deducing alternative
models of the premises. Again, we believe that this is a
crucial property of the representation: if, according to
mental Models Theory, the difficulty in solving syllogisms
is related to the numbers of models representing the state of
the world described by the premises, a representation which
includes the entities which might or might not exist should
support subjects in taking into account all the possible
models of the premises. In fig. 5, for instance, the black “A”
does not represent the whole set of “As” because of the grey
“A” below the line, which stands for the possible existence
of some other “As” which may or may not have a
relationship of identity with the black “Cs”. In this case the

Fig. 3. “Bs” do not form a single stable configuration;
there are two “Bs” with a single valence “+” and two with a
single valence “-“. Thus, it can be immediately seen that
there is no certain relationship between the As and the Cs: if
the positive B associated with the A connects with the upper
negative B it could be that No A are C; if the same positive
B connects with the lower negative B it could be that All A
are C. Further models are possible if we consider the grey
As and Cs, but already the two possible models no A are C
and All A are C are enough to deduce “no conclusion.”
On the contrary, when “Bs”, according to the atomic
metaphor, can be grouped into a single stable configuration,
it is possible to look at the relations among the “As” and
“Cs” because the “Bs” mentioned in the first and second
premises can be visually identified as a single set of “Bs”
that bridge between “As” and “Cs” (fig. 4). When this
relationship exists, there is known to be a defining identity
among the sets of “Bs” in the first and second premise.

Fig. 4. According to the atomic metaphor, Bs can be
grouped in a single stable configuration, there is a B with a
double valence ++ and two “Bs” with a single valence -. Yet
no valid conclusion can be drawn (see text).
3) Search for counterexamples. A conclusion can be
drawn by analyzing the single, stable configuration resulting
1864

valid conclusion one can draw is “Some A are not C”
instead of “All A are not C”.
When different models are in conflict, no valid conclusion
can be drawn. In the case shown in fig. 4, the possible
existence of a set of “As” and a set of “Cs” (in grey)
prevents one from drawing any conclusion: all possible
relationships between A and C could be true.
Thus, summarizing the differences among Propositions,
Euler circles and Valence we have three representations that
support in different ways the three-stage process of the
mental Model Theory (Table1).

Dependent measures
The subjects’ performance was evaluated by means of two
dependent measures, accuracy (the percentage of syllogisms
properly solved) and time (the amount of time, in seconds,
employed by each subject to solve each syllogism).

Procedure
The subjects met individually with a research assistant and
received a 30 minute session on syllogistic reasoning
(explanation of the premises and their combination),
including a supervised trial on 6 syllogisms to provide every
subject with the basic knowledge needed to understand the
syntax of the type of representation s/he would have to
interact with. In the experimental session the subjects faced
a computer screen where the syllogisms were randomly
presented one at time in one of the modalities (Proposition,
Euler, Valence). At the bottom of the screen there was a set
of possible conclusions represented in the same modality,
except for “No Conclusion,” which was represented by a
simple NO. The subject could select any number of
conclusions s/he thought to be valid, and the time was
recorded when the “Next” button was pressed.

Table 1: Differences among representations in supporting
syllogistic reasoning according to Models Theory

Fleshing out the premises
Combination of the premises
Search for counterexamples

Propos
NO
NO
NO

Euler
YES
NO
NO

Valence
YES
YES
YES

Hypotheses
The design of the experiment was a 3 (Representation) X 3
(Syllogism), and we expected:
A main effect due to the kind of representation. Subjects
provided with the Valence representation should show, in a
trial of 24 syllogisms (the same as Rizzo and Palmonari,
2000), a better overall performance than the subjects
provided with Euler circles and Propositions.
A main effect due to the Type of Syllogism. The 24
syllogisms used in the experiment were grouped into three
classes, distinguished by their relationship to the processes
of generation of a model and search for counterexamples
indicated by Bara & Johnson Laird (1984):
One Model syllogisms (n = 5), with conclusion requiring
the generation of only one model to be solved (such as All
A are B / All B are C);
More Models syllogisms (n = 7) with conclusion requiring
more than one model (two or three) to be solved (such as
All B are A / All B are C);
No Conclusion syllogisms (n = 12) requiring the generation
of at least two incoherent models (such as All A are B / All
C are B).
An interaction between Representation and Syllogism.
Different syllogisms require the generation of a different
number of models to be solved. However, the three
representations might have a different impact on the number
and type of mental models generated by subjects when
solving syllogisms. The subjects’ performance should
depend on the interaction between the provided
representation and the kinds of syllogisms they face.

Results
An analysis of variance was performed for each dependent
variable (accuracy and time), considering as independent
factors Representation and Syllogism.
A main effect due to Representation was found for the
dependent variable accuracy
(F= 18.7, p<.001): in
particular, (see table 2) the score for subjects in the Valence
condition was significantly better than the score for subjects
in the Euler circles condition (p<.001) and in the
Proposition condition (p<.001). In addition, the score in the
Proposition condition was significantly better than in the
Euler circles condition (p<.001).
Table 2: Summary of results for accuracy (left) and for
time (right)
% of correct
answers
Valence
.79
Proposition
.69
Euler
.55

Std
Error
.683
.760
1.222

Mean Time Std
(sec.)
Error
42
2.4
81
5.2
95
6.0

A main effect for Representation was also found for the
dependent variable time (F= 39.4, p<.001). Post-hoc
analysis revealed a significant difference between the
Valence and Euler circles conditions (p<. 001) as well as the
difference between Valence and Propositions (p<.001) and
Propositions and Euler circles (p<.001).
An analysis of variance was also performed for each
dependent variable (accuracy and time), considering as an
independent factor Type of Syllogism. The main effect of
Type of syllogism was found to be significant with respect to
both the dependent variables accuracy (F=5.9, p<.001) and
time (F=1.8, p<.025). Finally, the interaction between

Subjects
26 subjects, all students in Communication Sciences at the
University of Siena, took part in the experiment. Each
subject was randomly assigned to one of the three
experimental conditions (8 subjects for Euler circles and
Proposition and 10 subjects for Valence). Each subject faced
the same 24 syllogisms, which were randomly presented.
1865

Representation and Type of syllogism was also found to be
significant (F= 1.86, p<.001) for accuracy and (F=1.5,
p<.025) for time.
Here for reason of space only the post-hoc analysis (Fisher
test, p<.01) of the interaction for accuracy will be reported
(time presents a close pattern of result).
Within Representation levels: For Euler Circles a significant
difference was found for the class “One Model” vs “More
Models” and “No Conclusion” (see Table 3) . For Valence,
the significant difference found was for “No Conclusion” vs
“More models” while no difference has been found for
“More models” vs “One Model”. Finally, for Propositional,
a significant difference for “More Models” vs “One model”
and “No conclusion” was found.
Within Syllogism levels: Euler had a better performance
than Proposition and Valence for “One Model,” while
Valence had a better performance for “More Models” with
respect to Proposition and Euler. Finally, Euler had a worse
performance in respect to Proposition and Valence for “No
Conclusion”.
Table 3. Summary of results for accuracy for the three
representations with respect to Type of Syllogism
One Model

Valence
Proposition
Euler
average

.78
.85
.95
.86

More Models

.67
.42
.42
.50

No Conclusion

.87
.78
.45
.70

DISCUSSION
Data provided by the experiment support the main
hypothesis concerning the mediating role of representations
in syllogistic reasoning. Subjects using different
representations of premises show different performances
both in terms of accuracy and time. In particular, subjects
using Valence representation, the representation explicitly
designed to support all these three phases proposed by
Models Theory show an overall better performance (more
accuracy and less time) than subjects using Propositions (no
phases supported) and Euler circles (supporting just the first
phase, the fleshing out of the properties of the premises).
However, the mediating role of the different representations
cannot be demonstrated solely by the type of support
provided by the representations to the three phases of the
syllogistic reasoning (see table 1). The results indicate, for
instance, that Euler Circles, which supports the fleshing out
of the properties of the premises, do not induce a better
performance (in terms of accuracy) with respect to the
Propositional representation. Furthermore, if one considers
the dependent variable “Time”, Euler Circles induce a
significantly worse performance than Propositional.
If the mediating role of the representations is not a linear
function of the support provided by those representations for
the three phases of deduction, neither can it be shown to be
a simple external mnemonic support in the deductive
1866

process elicited by representations. Indeed, if the external
representations functioned as mnemonic support, the
assistance provided for the deductive process should be
constant independent of the content (the specific syllogisms)
that subjects have to elaborate in order to generate accurate
model(s) of the conclusion. This hypothesis is clearly
contradicted by the results concerning the interaction
Representation x Type of Syllogism which indicates that the
effectiveness of each representation varies across
syllogisms.
The main hypothesis put forward in the present paper is that
the principal property of artefacts is their simultaneous
affordance and constraint of the manipulation and
recombination of their constituent elements. The data
support this hypothesis: it is the form of each representation
(the way in which the content is represented and the
manipulation of the content afforded) which, by interacting
with the process of generation and falsification of models,
facilitates or makes difficult the resolution of different
syllogisms.
The data concerning the post-hoc analysis and the subjects’
errors allow more detailed hypotheses to be made about the
roles played by the different representations in syllogistic
reasoning. Since the results related to the distinction
between One model – More models – No conclusion of
subjects using Propositional are in line with data of mental
Models Theory, only data about Valence and Euler Circles
will be discussed.
In Valence the “one model” syllogisms and the “more
model” syllogisms are represented in the same way and
afford the same manipulations: in both cases subjects can
isolate different models associated with the conclusion.
Even for “one model” syllogisms (as depicted in fig. 6) it is
possible to isolate up to four different models of the
relationships between the “As” and the “Cs”. Obviously,
those models have to be integrated in order to generate the
correct answer. The “All B are A – Some B are C” is, in
fact, among the “One model” syllogisms the one shown to
be the most difficult to solve using Valence representation.
On the contrary, subjects did not generate any wrong
conclusions for syllogisms such as “All A are B – No B are
C” (see fig. 7) for which Valence representation “presents”
just one relationship between the “As” and the “Cs”. At the
same time “more models” syllogisms can be solved as
simply as “one model” syllogism (see, for example, the
syllogism “Some A are B – No C are B” reported in Figure
5 and compare it with the Euler representation for the same
syllogism reported below in Figure 8 right).
To summarize, subjects’ performance with Valence
representation for “one model” and “more models”
syllogisms is related to the number of different conclusion
models the representation allows the subject to immediately
isolate (the most difficult being syllogisms which allow to
isolate more than three different models). The good
performance shown by subjects for “no conclusion”
syllogisms can be explained again by the properties of

Valence representation, which allows, in most cases, to
immediately isolate two incompatible conclusion models.
The performance of subjects using Euler Circles can be
explained also by the form of the representation. As shown
in Figure 8 on the left, for “one model” syllogisms, Euler
Circles allows to isolate one of the models describing the
relation between elements (i.e; “A” and “B”) in one of the
premises and to directly map the model onto all the models
representing the relationship between elements in the other
premise (i.e; “B” and “C”). Once the relationship between
the elements described by one premise is directly mapped
onto the relationship between the elements described in the
other premise, then a conclusion can be easily drawn. This
strategy, strongly afforded by the representation and which
appears to be optimal for “one model” syllogisms, leads
subjects to errors in the cases of “more models” and “no
conclusion” syllogisms. Since the appropriate strategy in
these cases would be, unlike for “one model” syllogisms, to
consider all the possible combinations of different models of
the premises, subjects generate either a conclusion when no
conclusion exists (for “no conclusion” syllogisms) or a
“wrong conclusion” that does not integrate all the possible
relationships between premises (for “more models”
syllogisms). See for example the syllogism “Some A are B No C are B” reported in Figure 8 right, where even though
one of the premises is represented by one model the
manipulation it affords produce several models that are
difficult to be integrated.

or more difficult to solve are the number of models one
must generate and compare to draw the appropriate
conclusion. The experiment provides empirical support to
the main claim of the Model theory, yet it also supports the
hypothesis that representations play a central role in
activating and structuring those basic processes that the
Mental Model theory proposes.

Figure 8. Left “All A are B – Some B are C”;
Right “Some A are B - No C are B”
To some extent, Model theory has overlooked the role
played by the specific representations used to present the
content to be manipulated. These findings indicate that each
representation modifies the content subjects must
manipulate in order to generate the appropriate models of
conclusion. The number of mental models generated for a
specific syllogism is not solely a function of its formal
properties but additionally depends on the form of
representation assumed by the syllogism. Thus, the critical
property of representations lies in the way they represent the
content (the properties of syllogisms) and afford and
constrain the manipulation and recombination of their
constituent elements in relation to the basic process
underlying the elaboration of this content. External
representations do not modify these processes; rather they
modify the ways in which content can be manipulated.

Figure 6. All B are A - Some B are C

REFERENCES
Bara, B.G. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1984). Syllogistic
inference. Cognition, 16, 1-61.
Bucciarelli, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1999). Strategies in
syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive Science, 23 (3), 247-303
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Rizzo, A., Palmonari, M. (2000). External representations
and deductive reasoning. In J. Garcia Madruga and N.
Cariedo (Eds.) Mental Models in Reasoning. Madrid,
UNEA Ediciones, pp 99-118.
Stenning, K.(2002). Seeing reason. Oxford,UK: Oxford UP.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Zhang, J., Norman, D.A. (1994). Representations in
Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science,18,87-122
Zhang, J., Norman, D. A. (1995). A representation analysis
of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.

Figure 7. All A are B; No B are C
According to the Models Theory, the resolution of
syllogisms involves the same basic process underlying
human thought and what makes different syllogisms easier
1867

