UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Nature of the Suppression Mechanism in Reading: Insights from an L1-L2 Comparison

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0zj898d3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Frey, Linet

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Nature of the Suppression Mechanism in Reading:
Insights from an L1-L2 Comparison
Linet Frey (lf236@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English and Applied Linguistics, 9 West Road
Cambridge CB3 9DP United Kingdom

Abstract

Automaticity and Control in Reading

According to the Structure Building Theory (Gernsbacher,
1990), comprehension is understood as a process of building
mental representations. Gernsbacher and Faust (1991)
suggested that central to this process is the general cognitive
mechanism of suppression, the efficiency of which is
responsible for individual differences in comprehension skill.
Poor comprehenders have an inefficient suppression
mechanism due to which they are unable to inhibit irrelevant
information. This would cause shifting more often in structure
building and constructing smaller and less coherent
representational structures. The present paper argues that poor
comprehenders’ difficulties in ignoring irrelevant information
could reflect a more general problem of controlling information
in working memory. Inefficient suppression could be due to
inefficiency of some other processes, which drain resources e.g.
inefficient decoding. The study reported here looked at
suppression of contextually irrelevant meanings of homonyms
in L1 vs. fluent L2 using Gernsbacher and Faust (1991)
homonym task. The results suggest immediate meaning
activation in both L1 and L2, but delayed suppression of
irrelevant meanings in L2 with respect to L1. This could mean
that suppression in L2 is compromised by less efficient
processing elsewhere in the system, or by low quality of lexical
representations.
Keywords: inhibition;
individual differences.

L2

reading;

lexical

Reading skill models fall into two distinguishable groups:
theories that attribute reading skill to the degree of
automatization of the word-reading processes (e.g. Perfetti,
1985) and suppression models. The former are based on
resource theory (e.g. Kahneman, 1973) assuming that there
are limited processing resources available to the cognitive
system, and these resources are shared by the different tasks.
Perfetti (1985) formulated a verbal efficiency hypothesis,
which suggests that fast word decoding is crucial for skilled
reading as it frees up limited resources for higher-level
processes. Poor readers have not fully automatized their
word-reading processes, and these low-level processes use up
too much of the limited resources leaving too little resources
for higher-level processes such as sentence and discourse
comprehension.
Any type of skilled performance is often associated with
automaticity. Meiran (1996) argues, however, that
”attributing reading ability only to the degree of
automatization rests on the false premise that automatic and
skilled performance are synonymous”. Although automatic
processes are effortless and unconscious, they are also
described as involuntary, which means that such processing
cannot be fully suppressed and its outputs are hard to ignore.
The classic example of automaticity of word reading is the
Stroop task where subjects are asked to ignore the meaning,
and name the ink colour of words, some of which are colour
words incongruent with their ink colour. The Stroop effect i.e.
interference from incongruent colour words, evident in slower
response times demonstrates that automatic processes have
the cost of being uncontrollable.
Although automaticity is important, skilled performance
also involves control. Rafal and Henik (1994) argue that
control of processing, manifested in “the ability to ignore a
word or inhibit its processing” when it is necessary for the
task, is an important aspect of skilled reading. They suggest
that the ability to control reading would be manifested in a
reduced Stroop effect and hypothesise that skilled readers
should show less of a Stroop effect than unskilled readers.
Developmental studies indeed show that the effect first
increases and then decreases with increasing age and reading
experience. This is explained by word reading becoming
automatic gradually and, when certain proficiency is
achieved, this automaticity may be reduced subject to will.
Dempster (1992) suggests that one of the hallmarks of
developmental change in cognitive processes is an increase
through childhood in the efficiency of inhibitory processes,

ambiguity;

Introduction
Crucial to any type of coherent cognitive function is the
ability to ignore potential interference or inhibit distractor
processing in order to focus on stimuli that are relevant to the
task at hand (Lavie, 2005). Inhibitory accounts have been
proposed in various cognitive domains from visio-spatial
orienting to long-term memory retrieval. In language
processing, empirical evidence has established the importance
of inhibition (i.e. the ability to suppress active but irrelevant
information) in many comprehension processes such as
lexical disambiguation, syntactic parsing or metaphor
comprehension. Not much research has been done into the
nature of the inhibitory mechanism in language
comprehension, however, or how it relates to other processes
and cognitive resources involved in complex cognitive skills
such as reading - decoding efficiency or working memory
capacity, for example. It is not clear to what extent inhibition
is to be understood as a domain general or a domain specific
function, an automatic or a controlled process. This is an
important point though as it has implications for language
teaching.

714

while the reversal of this trend is believed to underline
cognitive decline in old age. Although both automaticity and
control are clearly important, “the more advanced phase of
skilled performance is not automaticity but control” (Rafal &
Henik, 1994).
Suppression theories of reading skill are based on the
notion of control of activation. In the framework of Structure
Building Theory (Gernsbacher, 1990) for example, reading
comprehension skill is explained via a model in which
inhibition of irrelevant information (suppression) has a crucial
role. The theory proposes that comprehenders construct an
on-line mental representation of a text by laying a foundation
to the mental structure on the basis of first pieces of
information, and then linking every incoming proposition to
the structure of the mental representation already built. If the
incoming piece of information allows for multiple
connotations, the contextually irrelevant ones must be quickly
deactivated to avoid failing to attach the information to the
current representational structure. Such failure would cause
forming a new structure and forgetting the old one. The
suppression mechanism has a crucial role in this process as it
is responsible for decreasing interference caused by
contextually irrelevant information so that contextually
relevant information could be incorporated into the
developing mental structure.
Meiran (1996) suggests a similar model in which “reading
ability is related to the speed of dumping activation in
system(s) performing low-level analysis of words”.
Lexical ambiguity resolution provides an example of the
role of inhibition in language processing. It is generally
agreed that interpretation of words is always affected by the
sentence, but whether contextual influence occurs only after
the semantic information about the word has been accessed in
the mental lexicon, or whether it can have an effect even
earlier in the process is debatable. However, the bulk of the
many studies with ambiguous words have found evidence that
all meanings are initially activated (e.g. Swinney, 1979).
After exhaustive meaning access, some sort of selection has
to take place as only one of the meanings can be integrated
into the interpretation. In the framework of Gernsbacher’s
Structure Building Theory, this selection is done by lexical,
semantic, syntactic, pragmatic and other constraints, which
affect the level of activation of different meanings. The theory
describes the building blocks of mental structures that
comprehenders build as ‘memory nodes’. These nodes are
activated by the incoming stimuli and, once activated, they
transmit processing signals, which control the structure
building process by either enhancing or suppressing other
nodes’ activation. Memory nodes are enhanced if the
information they represent is necessary for further structure
building, and suppressed if it is not (Gernsbacher, 1990).
Moreover, ‘suppression and enhancement signals are
transmitted as a function of the strength of the activated
memory nodes that transmit them’ (Gernsbacher, submitted).

The Suppression Hypothesis
Gernsbacher, Varner and Faust (1990) found that poor
comprehenders lose access to surface information faster than
good comprehenders do in visual, auditory and picture stories.
They explain the results via claiming that good
comprehenders build bigger and more coherent structures,
which help to keep more information in a readily available
state. Poor comprehenders on the other hand are believed to
shift too often in mental structure building producing smaller
and less connected representational structures.
Gernsbacher and Faust (1991) carried out a series of
experiments to explore why poor comprehenders shift more
often in structure building. In one of the experiments they
presented subjects with experimental sentences ending in
homographs and followed by a target related to the
contextually irrelevant meaning of the homograph (1), and
control sentences followed by the same target word (2):
(1) He dug with a spade
(2) He dug with a shovel

ACE
ACE

The subjects’ task was to decide whether the target was
related to the sentence. The authors found that poor
comprehenders are less able to deactivate irrelevant meanings
of homographs. The same pattern of results was found in
several other tasks involving inhibiting some types of
information in order to concentrate on others: such as
suppression of incorrect forms of homophones (e.g. rose
when reading rows), typical-but-absent members of visual
scenes (e.g. tractor in a farm scene), and information across
modalities (e.g. suppressing the activation of related pictures
when reading words). On the basis of these findings,
Gernsbacher and Faust (1991) propose what will be referred
to as the Suppression Hypothesis – namely, that inhibition of
contextually irrelevant meanings/connotations/structures
plays a central role in the comprehension process, and the
efficiency of the general cognitive mechanism of suppression
is responsible for individual differences in comprehension
skill.
So, poor comprehenders are believed to have an inefficient
suppression mechanism due to which they are unable to
inhibit irrelevant information. This would cause shifting more
often in structure building as this less relevant information
remains activated but cannot be mapped onto the developing
structure and, thus, may lay the foundation for a new
substructure.

Resource demands
Poor comprehenders’ difficulties in ignoring irrelevant
information and their tendency to shift too often do not have
to be causally related though. Instead both could reflect a
more general problem of controlling information in working
memory. Resource theories (e.g. Kahneman, 1973; Navon
and Gopher, 1979) assume that there are limited processing
resources available to the cognitive system, and these
resources are shared by the different tasks. According to this
line of thought, it is possible that inefficient inhibition is in
715

and Shlesinger (1997) demonstrated variable efficiency in
suppression by showing that expertise in simultaneous
translation affects the efficiency of suppression during
sentence comprehension.
Tzelgov, Henik and Leiser (1990) studied inhibition of
word reading in fluent bilinguals in order to determine the
influence of language proficiency on inhibitory and
facilitatory aspects of the Stroop effect. They manipulated the
expected language and congruency in two separate groups of
bilinguals with reverse patterns of preferred language. In one
session the ratio of stimuli in one or the other language was
80% and 20%, the second session had the reversed proportion
of trials. It was found that subjects were able to inhibit the
Stroop effect in the expected language only if it was their
native/preferred language. The fact that it was possible to
suppress automatic word reading processes in the L1 but not
in L2 seems to indicate that suppression efficiency of word
reading processes is dependent on the level of language
proficiency, and, thus, may be related to resource drains in the
system.
The present study aimed to investigate possible language
proficiency effects in suppression further to see if similar
effects could be obtained using Gernsbacher’s methodology.
The study explored the nature and functioning of the
suppression mechanism and its place in cognitive architecture
through comparing native (L1) and fluent non-native
language (L2) suppression efficiency. It is possible that
suppression, like other processes, is dependent for resources
on some central capacity pool and, thus, its efficiency may be
compromised by processing/storage drains elsewhere in the
system. Processing drains in the L2 may occur due to extra
demands on L2 word decoding and/or meaning retrieval for
example (e.g. Favreau & Segalowitz, 1983). Inefficient
suppression may thereby be a consequence of inefficient
word decoding/meaning retrieval, which in turn may be due
to lack of high quality lexical representations as the Lexical
Quality Hypothesis suggests (Perfetti & Hart, 2001). There
may be complex links between different aspects of the
reading process such that small deficits in lower-level
processing may become amplified through their consequences
for higher-level processes such as sentence or discourse
comprehension.

fact due to the inefficiency of some other processes (e.g.
inefficient decoding) that drain resources. This relates to Just
and Carpenter’s (1992) model of working memory in which
the processing and storage components compete for the same
pool of resources.
Rosen and Engle (1998) claim that working memory and
inhibition are both functions of executive control and propose
that the ability to suppress irrelevant information is directly
related to working memory capacity. Working memory
capacity, however, has been shown to be lower in a person’s
L2 than their L1, and the correlation between L1 and L2
working memory increases with increasing L2 proficiency
(Walter, 2000). This suggests that inefficient lower level
processes in the L2 reduce working memory capacity. The
present paper argues,
however, that inefficient
decoding/meaning retrieval might not just drain resources
reducing working memory capacity but it may also reduce
resources available to the suppression mechanism itself. This
would then increase the tendency to shift too often in the L2
and build less coherent, smaller structures, which would, in
turn, impose greater demands on working memory.
The complex links between the different processes would
help to explain the phenomenon of L2 reading threshold
effect (e.g. Carrell, 1991) whereby people who are skilled
comprehenders in their L1 appear to be unable to transfer
their L1 reading comprehension skills to L2 until they reach a
certain level of proficiency. Walter (2000) suggests that it is
the building of mental representations that fails to be
transferred in the L2 reading threshold effect. This makes
sense if the building of mental representations was crucially
dependent on the suppression mechanism and the suppression
mechanism shared resources with lower level processes that
are potentially less efficient in the L2.

Domain knowledge- and task effects
A study by McNamara and McDaniel (2004) found a
correlation between knowledge of the specific topic of
sentence and suppression efficiency. Their experiment
provided evidence that regardless of reading skill, subjects
with better knowledge of baseball were faster at suppressing
contextually inappropriate meanings of homographs in
baseball-related sentences, but not in general-topic sentences.
Subjects with greater general knowledge, however, were
faster at suppressing irrelevant meanings of ambiguous words
in general-topic sentences.
In addition to domain knowledge, specific task demands
and proficiency may have an effect on inhibition efficiency.
Tzelgov, Henik, and Berger (1992) showed that subjects’
expectations can change the patterns of the Stroop effect.
They manipulated the proportion of neutral trials (i.e. trials
with no colour words) to induce certain expectations, and
found that when the proportion of neutral trials was small,
subjects were able to reduce the interference effect. The larger
the proportion of neutral trials, the greater was the
interference effect. Gernsbacher and Faust (1995) also found
an effect of task demands showing that suppression of
homonyms is susceptible to strategic control. Gernsbacher

Experiment
In order to explore these ideas, a computer-based responsetime (RT) experiment was carried out following the
methodology of Gernsbacher and Faust’s (1991) homonym
experiment but making L1-L2 comparisons. The experiment
aimed to study the time-course of interference from
contextually inappropriate meanings of homonyms and
suppression of these inappropriate meanings in native vs.
non-native language.

Method
Subjects saw a sentence on computer screen with the final
word missing. After reading the sentence in their own time,
they pressed a key to get the sentence-final word. In the
716

critical condition the sentence-final word was a homonym (1),
in the control condition the final word was a non-homonym
of similar length and plausibility (2):

Results
Figure 1 plots the results of the experiment. The y-axis
presents reaction time differences between the Related and
Unrelated condition in milliseconds at different critical wordtarget SOAs on the x-axis. The figure shows that at 200ms
critical word-target SOA both the natives and non-natives
show slower response times in the experimental condition
(Related) with respect to the control condition (Unrelated).
This indicates interference from the irrelevant meaning of
homonyms, and is in line with the multiple access view of
word recognition (e.g. Swinney, 1979). Student’s t-test shows
that response times for the Related condition are significantly
slower (p<0.01) from the Unrelated in the non-native group,
and marginally slower (p=0.05) in the natives. At SOA 450
the natives do not experience interference, which indicates
that they have suppressed irrelevant meanings of homonyms,
while the non-native group still experiences significant
interference (p<0.01). The non-natives show successful
suppression of irrelevant meanings at SOA 800. Surprisingly,
the native group behaves differently at SOA 800 experiencing
marginally significant interference again (p<0.1). At SOA
1000 the interference effect seems to return in the non-native
group as well (p<0.05), whereas the effect becomes more
robust in the native group (p<0.01). The return of interference
could be explained in terms of meta-linguistic processing
having an effect at longer SOAs.

(1) The rain stopped them from playing tennis on the court
(2) The rain stopped them from playing tennis on the grass
Reading time for the sentence-final word was controlled.
When the sentence disappeared, a target word appeared.
Subjects’ task was to judge whether the target was related to
the sentence meaning. The target (‘JUDGE’ in this example)
was related to the contextually inappropriate meaning of the
sentence-final homonym in the critical condition (1) and,
thus, the same target was unrelated to both the sentence and
the sentence-final neutral word in the control condition (2).
Differences in judgement time for the target following a
homonym vs. neutral control, both requiring a ‘no’ response,
were taken to reflect semantic interference from the irrelevant
meaning of the homonym.

Design, subjects and materials
The experiment had a 2x4x2 mixed factorial design, the
between-subject variables being group type (native and nonnative), and critical word processing time (SOA 200, 450,
800 or 1000ms), the within-subject variable was relatedness
(Related and Unrelated). Subjects were native English
speakers (native group) and Estonian fluent L2 English
speakers (non-native group). All subjects were university
students and volunteered to participate for a £2 honorarium.
All in all there were 128 subjects in 8 groups (4 native and 4
non-native) with 15-17 subjects in each group.
Forty critical items were constructed, 20 in the Related
(experimental) and 20 in the Unrelated (control) condition.
The former consisted of sentences biased towards the
secondary meaning of an ambiguous sentence-final word with
a target word related to the primary meaning1. Unrelated
trials differed from Related in that the sentence-final
ambiguous word was replaced by a non-ambiguous word of
similar length that was equally plausible in the context.
Items were divided into groups A (items 1-10) and B (items
11-20), and two presentation lists were formed rotating the
item groups around conditions. 30 fillers were also
constructed, 25 of them were items where the test word was
related to the general meaning of the sentence but unrelated to
the final word, thus requiring a ‘yes’-response, while 5 were
items where the sentence and the test word were clearly not
related. Items were presented in a pseudo-random order three different random orders of items were generated,
checked for neighbouring effects and modified if necessary to
avoid any influence of adjacent items.

Interference effect
200.0

RT difference R-UR (ms)

***
150.0

***
*

100.0

**

**
50.0

***

0.0

-50.0

200

450

800

1000

Estonian

199.3

English

94.0

144.2

-17.4

89.8

-3.9

113.1

76.5

Critical word-target SOA

Figure 1: Interference and suppression in L1 vs. L2.
(*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)

1

The primary and secondary meanings were decided from the
viewpoint of the L2 speaker, not the native speaker.

717

The results suggest that the time course of suppression
may be different in L1 and L2 reading. Independent samples
t-test on the priming effects shows that at SOA 450 and 800
the difference between interference experienced by natives
and non-natives is statistically significant at p<0.01 and
p<0.05, respectively. At SOA 200 the difference is marginal
(p<0.1). The time course of initial meaning activation seems
similar though as the non-native group showed statistically
significant interference from irrelevant meanings at a very
short SOA of 200ms just like the natives did. Also,
independent samples t-test shows that at SOA 200, 450 and
800, where there are statistical differences in the amount of
interference experienced by the native and non-native groups,
there are no statistical differences in average RTs for the
Unrelated condition. In fact, at SOA 450 and 800ms the mean
RTs for the Unrelated condition are virtually the same in both
groups (984 vs. 999ms at SOA 450 and 1052 vs. 1064ms at
SOA 800 in the non-native and native group, respectively)
suggesting that the differences in suppression are not just
caused by overall slowing in semantic processing for L2 over
L1 readers.
The claim of similar general task performance in the
native and non-native group is further supported by RT data
to ‘Yes’ response fillers (Figure 2). As Figure 2 shows, mean
reaction times to ‘Yes’ fillers are very similar in the native
and non-native group at SOAs 200, 450 and 800ms. Thus,
the differences in interference between the native and nonnative group in the experimental condition cannot be just
due to slower semantic processing in the non-native group.

Discussion
Suppression of contextually inappropriate meanings of
homonyms seems to be delayed in L2 compared to L1 while
meaning activation does not seem to be slowed. Why this
delay in suppression may be is not easy to explain. Since the
Estonian and English subjects who participated in the
experiment were all randomly selected university students
and, thus, had similar levels of education, it seems likely that
the two groups did not differ in suppression efficiency in their
L12. Assuming that, the finding that suppression is delayed in
the L2 may suggest that the mechanism responsible for
inhibiting irrelevant meanings shares resources with some
other processes that are less efficient in the L2.
As there were no general differences between response
speed in L1 and L2, it could be the case that L2 meanings are
just harder to maintain in working memory. This hypothesis
is based on a study by Miyake, Just & Carpenter (1994) who
found in the L1 that maintaining word meanings in working
memory imposes extra high demands when these meanings
are of low frequency. However, if the frequency information
and strength of a lexical representation is based on how many
times it has been previously encountered, then L2 meanings
would, in that sense, be of much lower functional frequency
for the reader than L1 meanings, which could cause a
potential drain on resources specific to L2.
This suggestion relates to the Lexical Quality Hypothesis
proposed by Perfetti and Hart (2001), which emphasizes the
importance of knowledge about word forms and meanings –
the ‘quality of lexical representations’, as opposed to
processing speed. A high quality representation is a fully
specified and ‘tightly bonded set of word constituents’, which
are its orthographic, phonological, and semantic
specifications. Thus, L2 representations may just have lower
quality than L1 representations and, hence, be harder i.e.
more resource-demanding to maintain in working memory.
This L2-specific resource drain could have important
consequences only in situations where task demands are
especially high e.g. in cases of response competition like in
the experimental condition of the experiment.
Gernsbacher’s account does not make it very clear what a
“less efficient" suppression mechanism actually means. Does
it entail that suppression is slower, shallower or
dysfunctional? Although Gernsbacher and colleagues suggest
that suppression may be slower in less skilled readers, from
their results it remains unclear whether less skilled readers
ever suppress irrelevant information: “In our experiments, we
waited what seemed like an eternity in mental chronometry –
one full second. However even after a second, less skilled
comprehenders had still not suppressed the inappropriate or
irrelevant information” (Gernsbacher & Faust, 1991). The
results of the present study suggest that ‘less efficient’
suppression can indeed mean just slow. Of course, the nature

RT (msec)

General task performance: 'Yes' fillers
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

SOA200

SOA450

SOA800

SOA1000

EST

1072

937

948

1251

ENG

1065

981

990

854

Figure 2: General task performance in L1 vs. L2
At SOA 1000, however, RTs differ significantly between
the native and non-native group both in the control condition
and in ‘Yes’ response fillers. This may indicate differences in
confidence or meta-linguistic processing between natives
and non-natives when there is more time to analyse items.

2

In future studies I hope to make direct L1-L2 comparisons within
the same individual. It was not possible to do this experiment both
in English and Estonian as the Estonian language has rich
morphology, which makes lexical ambiguity in sentence context
rare.

718

of suppression inefficiency could be different in L1 and L2 i.e.
being non-existent in L1 but slow in L2.
Although the findings reported here are not convincing
enough to claim that the suppression mechanism in reading
shares resources with other processes, the results suggest at
least that there are effects in suppression that have not been
addressed or explained comprehensively, and thus further
research is needed in this area. The present author aims to
further investigate task- and language proficiency effects in
suppression via comparing native and non-native
performance on a simpler picture-word interference task, and
via manipulating task demands directly in native speakers in
the hope of establishing a direct link between processing
drains and suppression efficiency. The Lexical Quality
Hypothesis (Perfetti & Hart, 2001) seems to suggest that
manipulations with low frequency words may yield nonnative like suppression patterns in native speakers.

and Language (pp. 53-113). San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Just, M.A., & Carpenter, P.A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working memory.
Psychological Review, 99(1) 122-149.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Pentice-Hall.
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted or confused?: Selective attention
under load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences Vol. 9, No. 2.
(www. Sciencedirect.com).
McNamara, D., & McDaniel, M. A. (2004). Suppressing
irrelevant information: knowledge activation or inhibition?
J. of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory , and
Cognition, Vol. 30, No. 2, 465-482.
Meiran, N. (1996). Is reading ability related to activation
dumping speed? Memory and Cognition 24 (1), 41-59.
Miyake, A., Just, M.A., & Carpenter, P.A. (1994). Working
memory constraints on the resolution of lexical ambiguity.
Journal of memory and Language, 33, 175-202.
Navon, D. & Gopher, D. (1979). On the economy of the
human information processing system. Psychological
Review, 86, 214-255.
Perfetti, C.A. (1985). Reading Ability. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Perfetti, C.A., Hart, L. (2001). The Lexical Basis of
Comprehension Skill. In David S. Gorfein (Ed.) On the
Consequences of Meaning Selection. Perspectives On
Resolving Lexical Ambiguity. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association, 67-86.
Rafal, R., & Henik, A. (1994). Inhibitory mechanisms in word
processing. In Dale Dagenbach and Thomas H. Carr (Eds.)
Inhibitory Processes in Attention, Memory, and Language
(pp. 30-43). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rosen, V., & Engle, R.W. (1998). Working memory capacity
and suppression. Journal of Memory and Language , 39,
418-136.
Swinney, D. A. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprehension: (Re)consideration of context effects. J. of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour 18. 645-659.
Tzelgov, J., Henik, A., & Berger, A. (1992). Controlling
Stroop effects by manipulating expectations for colour
words. Memory & Cognition, 20, 727-735.
Tzelgov, J., Henik, A., & Leiser, D. (1990). Controlling
Stroop interference: Evidence from a bilingual task. J. of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 16, 760-771.
Walter, C. (2000). The involvement of working memory in
reading in a foreign language. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, RCEAL, Cambridge University.

Acknowledgments
The author is grateful to her supervisor Dr. John N. Williams
for guidance and support. This research was supported by a
Gates Cambridge Scholarship to L. Frey.

References
Carrell, P.L. (1991). Second language reading: reading ability
or language proficiency? Applied Linguistics, 12, 159-179
Dempster, F. N. (1992). The rise and fall of the inhibitory
mechanism. Developmental Review, 12, 45-75.
Favreau, M. & Segalowitz, N.S. (1983). Automatic and
controlled processes in the 1st and 2nd language reading of
fluent bilinguals. Memory and Cognition, 11, 565-574.
Gernsbacher
(submitted).
(http://psych.wisc.edu/lang/RD%20Files/RD-CMSE.html)
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Faust, M. E. (1995). Skilled
suppression. In F. N. Dempster & C. N. Brainerd (Eds.),
Interference and inhibition in cognition (pp. 295-327). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Faust, M. E. (1991). The mechanism
of suppression: A component of general comprehension
skill. J. of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition 17, 245-262.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Varner, K. R., & Faust, M. (1990).
Investigating Differences In General Comprehension Skill.
J. of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 16, 430-445.
Houghton, G., & Tipper, S. P. (1994). A model of inhibitory
mechanisms in selective attention. In D. Dagenbach and T.
H. Carr (Eds.) Inhibitory Processes in Attention, Memory,

719

