UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Universal Theory Model of Concepts and the Dissolution of the Puzzle of Concept
Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8xc008xr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Noelle, David C.
Phillips, Joshua L.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Universal Theory Model of Concepts and
the Dissolution of the Puzzle of Concept Acquisition
Sourabh Niyogi
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
niyogi@mit.edu
Abstract

29 blocks are introduced to the subject in a staging
area in 5 phases (9 in phase 1 and then 5 for each
phase thereafter). Subjects engage in free-form play
with the objects to discover the above laws, and
end up organizing the blocks spatially into clusters,
shown in Figure 1(a) for 3 kinds of subjects.
Moreover, subjects are also given cues to the
meaning of 3 new verbs – gorp, pilk, and seb in a
Word Cue area (see Figure 1(a)) for a subset (onethird) of the blocks:

I present a Universal Theory Model of Concepts
(UTMC) that helps dissolve a well-known Puzzle of Concept Acquisition: how can a person ever acquire a “new”
concept? The key state variables of the UTMC are illustrated in an microgenesis experiment where adult subjects attempt to learn the meaning of 3 new verbs in a
“Causal Blocksworld” computer application. The puzzle is dissolved by recognizing the 2 viewpoints that one
can take on the UTMC.

The Microgenesis of New Concepts
In this paper I help dissolve a long-standing dispute between the nativist Jerry Fodor and the developmentalist concerning a fundamental Puzzle of
Concept Acquisition: (Fodor 1975, Laurence and
Margolis 2002)
How can a person acquire a genuinely
new concept?
I dissolve the puzzle by describing an experiment
concerning the microgenesis of a set of “new” concepts that adults acquire in a single experimental setting. To make sense of the microgenesis (or
lack thereof), a new model of concepts is required.
I call it the Universal Theory Model of Concepts
(UTMC). I believe this model is latent in the dispute, and that it is possible to lay the dispute to rest
by showing that the source of the dispute is due to
the choice of viewpoint enabled in this model.
In this experiment, subjects try to discover the 3
laws that govern the behavior of 29 blocks within a
computer application called “Causal Blocksworld”.
Ten adult subjects participated in this experiment.
Unknown the subjects at the beginning of the experiment, there are four kinds of blocks: As, Bs, Cs
and Ds. All four kinds of blocks are perceptually indistinguishable except an alphabetic label; for each
of the 4 kinds, a block is the kind of block it is because of what it can activate, and what can activate
it. Three laws govern block activation:

• lawab: When an A block labeled x activates a B block
labeled y, subjects are shown “x is gorping y”
• lawc: When a C block labeled x activates a C block labeled
y, subjects are shown “x is pilking y”
• lawd: When a D block labeled x activates a D block labeled
y, subjects are shown “x is sebbing y”

In each of the 5 phases, subjects are asked questions to test whether they have learned the meaning of the 3 verbs. I tested them with two methods:
getting their plain text definitions of the 3 verbs
and giving them a forced-choice naming condition
test for each of the 3 verbs. Plain text definitions
were requested in the following way. At the end
of phase 1 and at the end of phase 5, subjects are
asked 1 question of each of the 3 verbs within the
application: “What do you think (gorp/pilk/seb)
means?” and type in plain text responses. After
phase 1, subjects uniformly give responses that do
not indicate knowledge of more than one kind, saying e.g. “... it means an object lights up another
object” or more often “no idea”. But after phase
5, some subjects, but not all, differentiate between
the 4 kinds of blocks:
• “gorp means to light up one of the group OUYVI”
• “seb means for one of the object group in RFIDRPEM to light up another of the same group.”

• lawab: When an block of kind A touches a block of kind B,
the B block lights up
• lawc: When a block of kind C block touches another block
of kind C, the one with a lower “power” α will light up,
where each C block’s power α is unchangable.
• lawd: When a block of kind D touches another block of
kind D, one of them will light up (or not), consistently,
across different activations.

1654

Naming conditions were tested in the following way.
After every phase, subjects are required to touch
one block (labeled x) to another (labeled y), where
one of the blocks lights up. No Word Cue is given.
Instead, subjects answer a naming condition question, by choosing which of 6 descriptions best describe what happened:

(1) x gorped y
(2) x pilked y
(3) x sebbed y

(a)

(4) y gorped x
(5) y pilked x
(6) y sebbed x

The combination of the 2 measurements give a
coarse view into the concept underlying each verb.
Subjects arrive at three qualitatively different
kinds of states (Figure 1a), which I clustered into
“T3 subjects” (only 1 subject), “T2 subjects” (2
subjects) and “T1 subjects” (7 subjects) based on
the snapshot of their Causal Blocksworld clustering
at the end of the experiment:
• The one T3 Subject discovered the full structure,
organizing the blocks into 4 kinds. Blocks of kind
C were organized in a vertical line such that each
block would activate all the blocks below it. This
subject scored perfectly in the last 2 phases and
described pilk with “...having a stronger block in
one group light up a block in the same group
which is weaker than it.”
• T2 Subjects discovered that there were 4 kinds,
but did not discover that the C blocks had an
internal attribute α. This is also evident by their
description of pilk being just like seb at the end
of phase 5. Responses to the naming condition
question in the last 2 phases of the experiment
were well above chance, however.
• T1 Subjects did not discover that there were several kinds of blocks. At the end of the experiment,
for each of the 3 verbs their descriptions were similar, e.g. “...it means a block is causing another
block to light up”, and their performance on the
naming condition questions in the last 2 phases
were near chance.

(b)
Figure 1: (a) Subjects try to learn the laws and word
meanings in a “Causal Blocksworld” computer application
by dragging and dropping blocks onto each other. Cues to
the meaning of 3 verbs (gorp, pilk and seb) are given in a
Word Cue Area (middle). Shown is how T 3 Subjects, T 2
Subjects and T 1 Subjects clustered the blocks; the clusters
for the kinds A, B, C and D (boxed) are clear for T 3 Subjects
and T 2 Subjects; (b) When T ∗ = T 1, all 3 verbs can only be
mapped to a single concept in G(T 1) = {Q} (dashed arrows);
When T ∗ = T 3, gorp, pilk and seb can be mapped to 3 new
concepts AB, C and D in G(T 3) (solid arrows). Also shown is
G(T 2), which overlaps with G(T 3) in concepts AB and D.

The 3 kinds of subjects internalized a different theory T ∗ of how the blocks work – the system of kinds,
attributes, relations and laws. Since most subjects
(7 of 10) were T 1 subjects, I had each undergo an
intervention intended for them to undergo “conceptual change”: The intervention was the experiment
of Tenenbaum and Niyogi (2003), where 18 blocks
(9 of kind A and 9 of kind B) are introduced in
3s; subjects are required to make predictions about
when blocks light each up, before and after a critical
observation that is sufficient to determine a block’s
kind. All 7 subjects, by the end of this intervention,
learn that there are two kinds of blocks, A and Bs.
I then asked all 7 subjects to repeat the original experiment. The intervention worked: All 7 subjects
organized the blocks like Figure 1(b) and their performance on the naming condition questions in the
last two phases was well above chance. Thus 7 “T1
subjects” became “T2 subjects”.
In what follows, I will show how the Puzzle of
Concept Acquisition can be understood by illustrating T ∗ and the lexicon for each of the 3 kinds of
subjects using the UTMC.

1655

(a) Universal Theory Model of Concepts
Theory
/ Acquisition
/ Theory T ∗
primitives
Device
O

/

Concept
Generator G

space of possible

/ word meanings
∗

H = G(T )

experience
(b) Standard Picture Model of Concepts
primitives

/

Concept
Generator G

Vocabulary

/ Acquisition
Device
O

/ lexicon

experience
Vocabulary

/ space of possible

/ Acquisition

word meanings H

/ lexicon

Device
O
experience

Figure 2: (a) The Universal
Theory Model of Concepts: from one viewpoint, a learner can get a “new” concept in H with a
∗
change in TAD state T ; (b) The Standard Picture Model of Concepts: a learner can never get a “new” concept in H.

The Universal Theory Model of Concepts
This microgenesis study simulates in 30 to 60 minutes essential aspects of theory change that takes
years in child development (c.f. Carey 1985, Keil
1989) and mirrors similar efforts to induce conceptual change in science education (c.f. Chi et al
1994). Subjects in Causal Blocksworld can be understood to change state from theory T 1 to T 2 or
T 3:

• A Vocabulary Acquisition Device (VAD) uses
G(T ∗ ) to learn a lexicon. Figure 1(d) shows the
changing mapping of the 3 verbs for subjects who
move from T 1 to T 2 or T 3. Critically, in the
UTMC, subjects cannot learn to distinguish the
3 verbs until T ∗ = T 2 or T ∗ = T 3, when 3 “new”
concepts emerge in G(T ∗ ).
T ∗ generates the possible internal states the
learner’s mind may have of a set of observable and
unobservable variables in various domains; it is an
explicit representation that attempts to explain the
law-like regularities of kinds, attributes, relations,
part-whole structures, and laws hypothetical and in
the world. The TAD has an initial state T ∗ (t = 0),
and a set of possible states it may assume. The theory of the initial state of TAD, I will call Universal Theory (UT), analogous to Universal Grammar
(Chomsky 1981). Universal Theory constrains the
set of possible states that the TAD can be in.
The Puzzle of Concept Acquisition can be dissolved by understanding that there are two viewpoints we can take:

• T 1: there is just 1 kind of block, with 1 law lawq
governing that kind - every block can potentially
activate any block
• T 2: there are 4 kinds of blocks, with 3 laws: lawab
(As activate Bs), lawc0 (Cs activate each other)
and lawd (Ds activate each other)
• T 3: there are 4 kinds of blocks, with 3 laws: lawab
(same as in T 2), lawc (Cs will activate Cs with
lower α), lawd (same as in T 2)
Critically, there is a mapping from a theory (T 1
or T 2 or T 3) to a set of lexicalizable concepts that
form possible hypotheses for the meanings of the
novel verbs gorp, pilk and seb. With T 1, lawq cannot differentiate between the 3 verbs. With the 3
laws in T 2 and T 3, however, new concepts become
accessible that were not available with T 1.
A Universal Theory Model of Concepts, diagrammed in Figure 2(a), shows the minimal model
that captures the above phenomena:
• A Theory Acquisition Device (TAD) outputs a
state T ∗ that describes a learner’s naive theory
(e.g. T 1 or T 2);
• A Concept Generator G maps T ∗ to a set of lexicalizable concepts G(T ∗ ). The simplest model
for G is one where each law generates one verb
concept. Since T 1 has only 1 law while T 2 has 3,
G(T 1) = {Q} contains only 1 possible verb concept while G(T 2) = {AB, C0 , D} contains 3.

• Viewpoint 1: Nativist. The hypothesis space of
possible word meanings is exhausted by the union
of G(Ti ) for all possible Ti that may be output
by the TAD. This position completely abstracts
away the state of the TAD, to reach the conclusion that the set of lexicalizable concepts cannot
change.
• Viewpoint 2: Developmentalist. The hypothesis
space of possible word meanings is exhausted by
G(T ∗ ) for just the current state T ∗ . The position
does not abstract away the TAD state so as to
reach the conclusion that the set of lexicalizable
concepts can change.

1656

Viewpoint 1 is appropriate when concerned about
the set of concepts reachable by the species; Viewpoint 2 is appropriate when concerned about the set
of concepts reachable by the individual at specific
moment in time.

The Universal Theory Model of Concepts should
be compared the Standard Picture Model of Concepts, shown in Figure 2(b). The Standard Picture
of the set of hypothesizable word meanings H is that
they are spanned by a fixed set of primitives. This
Standard Picture model underlies much work in lexical semantics (Jackendoff 1983, Pinker 1989) and
much work in computational models of vocabulary
acquisition (c.f. Siskind 1996, Niyogi 2002, Regier,
in press). Once the set of primitives are known,
the consequences are grim, as Fodor (1975) points
out: the hypothesis space of possible word meanings
is fully determined, and it is a logical impossibility
for H to change, thus the Puzzle. Rather than assume H is spanned by a fixed set of primitives, in
the UTMC, a changable TAD state T ∗ generates a
changable hypothesis space of possible word meanings H = G(T ∗ ) (c.f. Niyogi 2002). The primitives
in the UTMC concern theories and not the lexicon.

cross product x×y also in S, thus making S infinite.
The set of elements in S form the possible ranges
for attributes A and relations R.
I illustrate a set of TAD states modeling the T1
Subjects, T2 Subjects and T3 Subjects TAD state
T ∗ . We first start with purely “sensory” theory T0:
K0

• a set S of nS spaces S1 , . . . SnS – we give a few
examples below

{BLOCK}

Theory T 0
position

lit

A0

=

{BLOCK −→ boolean, BLOCK −→ r × r}

R0
L0

=
=

{BLOCK × BLOCK −→ boolean}
{}, O0 = {}

contact

The above is a technical way of encoding that
there is one kind BLOCK. Every individual of that
kind has a lit attribute (mapped to true or false),
and a position attribute (mapped to a point in 2-d
space). Moreover, for every two blocks, there is a
contact(x, y) relation (also mapped to true or false).
However, T0 has no model of how the blocks interact with one another.
T1 Subjects have a slightly richer TAD state.
This state includes an arbitary activates relation between any two blocks, governing whether one block
will activate another:

A Candidate Illustration of UT
The key state variables (T ∗ and G(T ∗ )) can be fully
illustrated in the simplest UT needed to model the 3
kinds of Causal Blocksworld subjects. Quantitative
and qualitative relationships between kinds, parts,
attributes, relations, and laws that interrelate them
appear necessary in any metalanguage for theories.
These sets of theoretical entities can be conceived
as analogous to a grammar; a grammar models a set
of sentences while a theory models a set of observations. Taking the well known context-free grammar’s sets of grammatical categories as a model, we
could hope to model these sets in the same way:

=

K1
A1

=
=

K0
A0

R1
L1

=
=

R0 ∪ {BLOCK × BLOCK −→ boolean}
L0 ∪ {lawq}, O1 = O0

Theory T 1
activates

A law lawq in L specifies that if activates(x2 , x1 )
is true between two blocks, then when all enabling
conditions in γ = {contact(x2 , x1 )} are true, then
lit(x1 ) is mapped to true (B1 ). This is schematized in (a), following the general format of (b):
(a) Specific law lawq
activates(x2 : BLOCK, x1 : BLOCK)

• a set K of nK kinds K1 , . . . KnK
• a set A of nA attributes, each element a map
a
k −→ s from an element k in K to an element
s in S
• a set R of nR relations, each element a map
r
ki × kj −→ s from two elements ki , kj in K to
an element s in S
• a set L of nL laws (described below)
• a set O of nO kind relations, each element a map
ki → kj representing an inclusion relation from ki
in K to kj in K
• a set P of nP part relations (not pursued here)
This is just one possibility and not intended to
be a comprehensive model of UT. The specific elements of S may include a handful of general purpose
spaces, such as boolean (2 points), r (an infinite set
of ordered continuous points), and r0 (same but one
point is minimum). In addition, we may consider
that any two elements x and y of S may have their



B1 ,γ={contact(x1 ,x2 )}

lit(xi : BLOCK)

(b) General format
causeattr(xj : kj , . . .)



possiblepath,γ

effectattr(xi : ki , . . .)

where there is some causeattr attribute (or relation)
that is a potential “force” for the effectattr attribute
(or relation) to be driven to the path possiblepath –
if there is only one force acting, then the effectattr
will be driven along the specified path. This model
is derived from Talmy (1988)’s force dynamic models, but related ideas are found in diSessa (1993).
We assume there is a generative model to map elements of S into a set of natural possiblepath – for
boolean, simple possible paths are exhausted in part
by B+ (onset), B− (offset), B1 (on), and B0 (off);
for r there is at least M+ (positive), M0 (no change),
M− (negative); for r0, the previous list would be extended to include paths that has the “special point”
0 – e.g M→0 (down to 0), M0→ (up from 0), and so
on. By “natural” we mean a possible element of T ∗ .
Much qualitative reasoning work explores this (Forbus 1984), although UT requires a full delimitation
on the set of possible causal laws.

1657

Theory T 3 has not 1 but 4 kinds of blocks, where
the “kind of” relation is encoded in O3 :
K3 = K0 ∪ {A, B, C, D}
A3
R3
L3
O3

=
=
=
=

richer model of the concept generator G, resituated
in T ∗ ’s S, K, A, R, L.
We can use the term “concept” for whatever we
like, so long as we are clear, but there is a more specific technical notion explicated here. Many may
wish to refer to the elements in the sets of T ∗ as
“concepts” but this is not intended. In the UT
model, a concept is a hypothesizable word meaning
for the Vocabulary Acquisition Device. In this technical notion, it is incoherent to call lawab a “concept” and coherent to call AB a “concept”, because
only one is lexicalizable. Similarly, theory change
may be defined as the state changes of T ∗ while
conceptual change may be defined as the change in
G(T ∗ ).

Theory T 3

α

A0 ∪ {C −→ r}
R0
L0 ∪ {lawab, lawc, lawd}
{A → BLOCK, B → BLOCK,
C → BLOCK, D → BLOCK}

lawab
contact(x2 : A, x1 : B)



lawd
activates(x2 : D, x1 : D)



B1 ,γ={}

B1 ,γ={contact(x1 ,x2 )}

Parsing and Vocabulary Acquisition

lit(x1 : D)

lit(x1 : D)
lawc
contact(x2 : C, x1 : C)



B1 ,γ={α(x2 )>α(x1 ),contact(x1 ,x2 )}

lit(x1 : C)

Law lawab encodes that every block of kind A, when
contacting another block of kind B. Law lawc, the
block with a higher α will activate the one with
the lower α. Law lawd specifies that any block of
kind D, upon contact with any block of kind D, has
the potential of activating it. The precise form of
theory T 2 is simply a degenerate version of T 3, in
that A2 does not have the attribute α and lawc0
replaces lawc, and has a simpler form.
Concept Generator G
In the UT model of concepts the concept generator G maps T ∗ to a set of lexicalizable concepts
G(T ∗ ), a hypothesis space H for the Vocabulary
Acquisition Device. The simplest model of the concept generator G that maps T ∗ to a set of possible
verb meanings is one that maps each law in L to a
single verb concept. This is a gross oversimplicification but sufficient for our purposes, and yields the
changing hypothesis space of possible verbs shown
in Figure 1(d):
• when T ∗ = T 1, G(T 1) contains a single concept
Q in generated from L1 = {lawq};
• when T ∗ = T 2, G(T 2) contains three concepts AB, C’, and D generated from L2 =
{lawab, lawc0 , lawd};
• when T ∗ = T 3, G(T 3) contains three concepts AB,
C, and D generated from L3 = {lawab, lawc, lawd}
Each element of G(T ∗ ) is compositional. The mechanics of the compositionality is central to model
but not necessary to detail here; numerous lexical
semantics observations can be imported to a much

How can a learner’s Vocabulary Acquisition Device
(VAD) actually map gorp, pilk and seb to G(T ∗ ),
given TAD state T ∗ ? Below we give two concrete
examples of how subjects may “parse” a block activation and infer which kind in K a block is, infer
which law in L is at work, and infer the unobservable attributes and relations in A and R.
Example 1. Suppose the learner’s TAD has T ∗ =
T 2 and has determined that a block labelled J is
of kind A but does not know the kind of a block
labelled L. If the learner sees J activate L, then
because the T 2 has a law lawab (uniquely able to
explain the observation), the TAD may infer that
L is of kind B and so (1) every other block of kind
A will also activate L; (2) L cannot activate any
other block. If the activation is paired with “J is
gorping L” the VAD may infer that gorp refers to
the concept AB.
We use the “parse” terminology by analogy to
natural language: theories generate possible worlds
in the same way that grammars generate possible
sentences. But in learning the mapping from gorp
to AB, there are two kinds of parsing events, where
surface observations are assigned structural descriptions. One kind of parse uses T ∗ (kinds, attributes,
relations, laws ...) to compute a structural description for the surface perceptual observations, e.g. a
block activation. The other kind of parse assigns
a structural description to the phrase “J is gorping
L” using the grammar and the lexicon. The VAD
must use both structural descriptions to assign gorp
to AB, the concept in G(T 2) generated from lawab.
Example 2. Suppose a learner with T 3 has determined that a block labeled X is of kind C. Then
upon seeing X activate Z, then the learner may
make the inference that lawc is at work, Z is of
kind C and so: (1) every block that Z activates can
be activated by X; and (2) every block that X cannot activate cannot be activated by Z either. If the
activation is paired with “X is pilking Z” the VAD
may infer that pilk refers to a concept C in G(T 3).
A learner with T 2 cannot make inferences (1) and
(2) because T 2 lacks the α attribute in A.

1658

Critically, these word-concept mappings cannot
be made unless the learner has T 2 or T 3. Until
the TAD changes state to T 2, the elements AB and
C’ are not available for the VAD. Until the TAD
changes state to T 3, the element C is not available to
the VAD. A teacher who says “X is pilking Z” may
have pilk mapped to C in its VAD but the learner’s
VAD at T 2 or T 1 would only have the concept Q
or C’. A UT model of concepts renders the incommensurability between their concepts of pilk fully
transparent.
TAD Mechanisms
The UT model of concepts factorizes the subjects
learning problem into two coupled induction problems: (1) TAD: Acquire a theory T ∗ using the UT
theory primitives; (2) VAD: Acquire a lexicon using
G(T ∗ ). Many proposals for TAD mechanisms are
available – ranging from connectionist models and
Bayesian causal networks (Rogers and McClelland
2004, Tenenbaum and Niyogi 2003) to analogical
encoding and abduction of plausible hypotheses in
scientific discovery and vocabulary cues themselves
(Gentner 2004; Klahr and Simon 1999). Failures to
parse a surface observation using T ∗ may be cause
for revision, to name another. Subject variability
indicates that a model of theory acquisition that
mechanically computes T ∗ (or p(T ∗ |...)) given data
of a particular form is not a plausible account of the
TAD.
In these experiments, subject’s conscious abduction processes appear to be primary drivers of theory acquisition. I informally asked the 7 T 1 subjects
to “think aloud” on their second run. Hypotheses
verbalized included the alphabetic ordering of the
blocks, how they overlapped, which block was being
dragged, and the position of the area on the screen.
Two subjects used social analogies in their descriptions of how the blocks worked: “X likes Y”, “JU
and L fight with MQ and J”. What causes these abductive inferences and analogies? There is no comprehensive answer to these questions, nor should
any simple comprehensive model of TAD mechanisms be expected.

The Dissolution of the Puzzle
Good puzzles in cognitive science reveal deep-rooted
theoretical problems. The Puzzle of Concept Acquisition reveals that the Standard Picture Model of
Concepts cannot explain concept acquisition. The
Universal Theory of Concepts can explain concept
acquisition. It can dissolve the Puzzle because two
distinct viewpoints can be taken on the set of lexicalizable concepts:
• Viewpoint 1 abstracts away the TAD state, yielding a species-wide conclusion that concept acquisition is an impossibility; a subject whose TAD
state is stuck in T 1 still “has” access to concepts
in G(T 2), G(T 3), . . . because it is possible for the
TAD to change state to T 2, T 3, . . ..

• Viewpoint 2 recognizes the TAD state, and yields
the conclusion that concept acquisition is in fact a
possibility through a TAD state change; a person
whose TAD state is in T 1 “has” only the concepts
G(T 1), and no others.
Questions concerning species-wide universals
(what is a possible TAD state T ∗ ? what is a possible
element of G(T ∗ )?) appear to require Viewpoint 1,
while questions concerning temporal processes and
trajectories of theory acquisition and vocabulary acquisition require Viewpoint 2. Understanding dispute is facilitated with the Universal Theory Model
of Concepts, the key state variables of which are
concretely explicated here in Causal Blocksworld.
Fodor (1975), who says “there literally isn’t such a
thing as the notion of learning a conceptual system
richer than the one that one already has” would
appear to be taking viewpoint 1, while the developmentalist such as Carey (1991) who says “T 1 and
the descendent T 2 are incommensurable insofar as
the beliefs of one cannot be formulated over the
concepts over the other” would appear to be taking
viewpoint 2. Once the Universal Theory Model of
Concepts is taken into account, the gap between the
two viewpoints can be reconciled as merely a choice
of perspective.
Acknowledgements
I thank Robert Berwick for supporting this work, and am
indebted to him, Josh Tenenbaum, Rajesh Kasturirangan,
Noam Chomsky, and Patrick Winston for valuable conversations. This work was funded by NSF Grant 0218852
“Bayesian Learning at the Syntax-Semantics Interface.”

References
[1] S. Carey. Conceptual change in childhood. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA,
1985.
[2] S. Carey. Knowledge acquisition: Enrichment or conceptual change?
In The Epigenesis of Mind: Essays on Biology and Cognition, 1991.
[3] M. Chi, N. de Leeuw, M. Chiu, and C. LaVancher. Eliciting selfexplanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
1994.
[4] N. Chomsky. Lectures on Government and Binding. Dordrecht, Foris,
1981.
[5] A. diSessa. Toward an epistemology of physics. Cognition and Instruction, 10:105-226, 1993.
[6] J. Fodor. The Language of Thought. Harvester Press, Sussex, 1975.
[7] K. Forbus. Qualitative process theory. Artificial Intelligence, 24:85–168,
1984.
[8] D. Gentner. Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow,
editors, Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and thought,
pages 195–235, Cambridge, MA, 2003. MIT Press.
[9] A. Gopnik and A. Meltzoff. Words, thoughts and theories. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1997.
[10] R. S. Jackendoff. Semantics and Cognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
1983.
[11] F. Keil. Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989.
[12] D. Klahr and H. A. Simon. Studies of scientific discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent findings. Psychological Bulletin,
125(5):524–543, 1999.
[13] S. Laurence and E. Margolis. Radical concept nativism. Cognition,
86:22–55, 2002.
[14] S. Niyogi. Bayesian learning at the syntax-semantics interface. In Proceedings of the the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Society, 2002.
[15] S. Niyogi. The Logical Structure of Conceptual Analysis. In Proceedings
of the the Annual Conference of the Cognitive Society, 2005.
[16] S. Pinker. Learnability and Cognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
1989.
[17] T. Regier. The emergence of words: Attentional learning in form and
meaning. Cognitive Science, to appear.
[18] T. Rogers and J. McClelland Semantic Cognition: A Parallel Distributed
Processing Approach. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2004.
[19] L. Talmy. Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science,
12:49–100, 1988.
[20] J. B. Tenenbaum and S. Niyogi. Learning causal laws. In Proceedings
of the Cognitive Science Society, 2003.

1659

