UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Nature of Early Word Comprehension: Symbols or Associations?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/17d7g9db

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Howard, Erica M.
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Nature of Early Word Comprehension: Symbols or Associations?
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Erica M. Howard (howard.432@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
207D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Woodward, Markman, & Fitzsimmons, 1994), and extend
these words to other objects in the category (Campbell &
Namy, 2003). By 14- to 15-months of age, children can
learn words by simply detecting correlations between
words and objects in the environment (Schafer & Plunkett,
1998; Werker, Cohen, Lloyd, Casasola, & Stager, 1998),
and shortly after, children can fast map words to objects in
the environment (Carey & Bartlett, 1978; Markson &
Bloom, 1997; see Woodward & Markman, 1998, for a
review).
Although the developmental changes that occur in
early word learning are well documented, the underlying
nature of children’s early word comprehension is not fully
understood. For example, adults understand that words
refer or stand for objects and categories and differ from
sounds that they simply go with objects (e.g., a four-legged
pet can be substituted by the word dog but not by a barking
sound). Do young infants at the onset of word learning
understand the referential and symbolic nature of words or
are words better understood as features that are associated
with objects? From one perspective it has been argued that
by 9-months of age children already have assumptions that
words but not sounds refer to categories (e.g., Waxman,
2003), and it would be difficult if not impossible for word
learning to begin without children making assumptions
that words are symbols that refer to objects and categories
(e.g., Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994).
From a very different perspective, children’s
assumptions about words are better understood as features
that are associated with objects. In particular, it has been
argued that children do not perceive words as symbols or
semantic markers, rather, words affect behavior on a
variety of cognitive tasks by influencing the overall
similarity of compared entities (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004;

Abstract
The current study investigated comprehension of object labels
in young children. Eight- and 14-month olds were presented
with pairs of pictures (e.g., dog and ball) to establish infants’
initial looking preferences and then children heard a linguistic
label (e.g., dog). Only 14-month-olds reliably increased
looking to the referents after hearing the labels relative to their
initial preference, which suggests that 14-month-olds were
familiar with the word-object relations used in the current task.
When the referent was paired with the source of the auditory
information (e.g., dog paired with a person) and children heard
a label (e.g., dog), 8-month-olds increased looking to the
person relative to their initial preference and 14-month-olds’
comprehension of the word-object relations dropped to chance.
These findings are consistent with the notion that children’s
early word comprehension is associative in nature and
questions whether young children understand the symbolic
nature of words.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
By 6- to 7-months of age, children begin recognizing
familiar words embedded within the speech stream
(Jusczyk & Aslin, 1995) and around 8-9 months of age
infants (according to parental reports) begin associating
words with objects in the environment (Fenson, et al.,
1994). Although word learning during the first year is
often described as a slow and laborious process, children
become very efficient at learning words during the second
and third years of life. For example, under certain
conditions, 12- to 14-month-old children ably associate
words with objects (Woodward & Hoyne, 1999;

1883

Sloutsky & Lo, 1999). By defining words as another
feature of an object, as opposed to a symbol or semantic
marker, it is not surprising that labels are also affected by
perceptual similarity: Children assume that phonologically
similar labels are linked to visually similar entities (Fisher
& Sloutsky, 2004). Although the studies reported above
tested older children, they challenge the idea that even
early in development children expect words to refer to
objects and categories.
If early in development words are features that are
associated with objects (rather than symbols denoting
objects), then children’s behavior on a word
comprehension task should best be predicted by the
statistical regularities found in the environment. Because
most of the words come from a particular source (i.e.,
human being), young children should exhibit knowledge of
this correlation, and this correlation should affect early
word comprehension. In particular, even when children
demonstrate familiarity with word-object relations, they
should have difficulty inhibiting their attention to stronger
correlations (i.e., source of auditory input).
The goal of the current study was to determine whether
young children’s early word comprehension is better
understood as symbols that stand for objects in the
environment or as features that are associated with objects.
The current study employed a preferential looking
procedure to assess children’s word comprehension at 8and 14-months of age (see Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Cauley,
& Gordon, 1987; Reznick, 1990; Schafer & Plunkett, 1998
for similar procedures). For half of the trials children were
presented with two possible referents (e.g., dog and ball).
After establishing the initial saliency of the pictures,
children heard a label for one of the referents (e.g., dog).
Comprehension was assessed by children’s relative
looking to the referent after hearing the label compared to
their initial preference. The remaining trials consisted of
pitting the source of the auditory input against the referent.
For example, children on these trials may have seen a
person paired with a dog and heard the label dog.
If children have some understanding of the word dog
and understand the symbolic nature of the word then they
should have no difficulty inhibiting their attention to the
source of the label (two-dimensional image of a person)
and look to the referent, with looking to the referent
exceeding their initial preference. In other words, if
children have assumptions that words stand for objects,
linguistic input should direct children’s attention to
objects, not to the source of the auditory input (see
Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Baldwin & Markman, 1989,
Xu, 2002, for similar claims). However, if words are
simply associations for young children then they should
look to the image that has the strongest correlation with the
auditory stimulus. Here, children should increase looking
to the person relative to their initial preference.

Method
Participants Twenty-five 8-month-olds (10 boys and 15
girls, M = 250 days, SD = 7 days) and 23 14-month-olds
(13 boys and 10 girls, M = 456 days, SD = 57 days)
participated in this experiment. Parents’ names were
collected from local birth announcements, and contact
information was obtained through local directories. A
majority of infants were Caucasian, and all children had no
auditory or visual deficits, as reported by parents. Fourteen
children were excluded due to fussiness.
Apparatus Infants were seated on parents’ laps
approximately 100 cm away from a 152 cm x 127 cm
projection screen, which was located approximately 5 cm
above the infant’s eye level. A Sony DCR-TRV40
camcorder was used to capture infants’ fixations and was
projected to one of two Dell flat panel monitors in the
observation room. An NEC GT2150 LCD projector was
mounted on the ceiling approximately 30 cm behind the
infant (130 cm away from the projection screen). Two
Boston Acoustics 380 speakers were 76 cm apart from
each other and mounted in the wall. The speakers and
camcorder were concealed by black felt and located
directly below the projection screen. Two small lights were
located behind the infant to ensure that the room was
dimly lit throughout the entire procedure. In an adjacent
room, a Dell Dimension 8200 computer with Presentation
software was used to present stimuli to the infants, as well
as to record the onset and offset of infant’s visual fixations.
Fixations were recorded online by pressing one of two
buttons on a 10-button USB game pad when infants were
looking at the stimuli and releasing the buttons when
infants looked away from the stimuli. A second Sony
DCR-PC120 camcorder was used to record the video
stream of the infant from the monitor indicated above, as
well as to record the image of the stimulus presentation on
a second Dell flat panel monitor. This split screen
recording was used to establish interrater reliability.
Stimuli The visual stimuli consisted of pictures of
common animals and objects (referents) and a picture of a
woman (source of auditory input), see Figure 1 for visual
stimuli. Each image was presented at approximately 36 x
36 cm in size and stimuli were presented in pairs with
approximately 100 cm between the stimuli. The auditory
stimuli consisted of four basic-level labels. Each label
(ball, bird, car, and dog) was spoken by a female
experimenter in infant-directed speech. The labels were
recorded as high quality 44.1 kHz wav files and were
presented by the computer at 65-68 dB.

1884

label was presented twice on each test trial, once at the onset
of the test trial and the second time at 4000 ms.
Accumulated looking to each object (referent and foil) was
recorded during both baseline and test. Twenty-five percent
of the trials were coded offline by experimenters who were
blind to the auditory and visual components presented to
infants. No differences were found between subjects coded
on- and offline.
If children are familiar with the word-object relations then
children should accumulate more looking to the referent
after hearing the label (test phase) in the reference trials
compared to their initial preference (baseline phase).
Furthermore, if children understand that words refer to
objects then pairing a referent with the source of auditory
input should either facilitate comprehension or have no
effect, with children continually looking at the referent.

Figure 1. Visual stimuli presented to infants
Referents

Source

Procedure The overall procedure consisted of 24 trials.
Twelve of the trials were reference trials, and 12 of the trials
were source trials. In the 12 referential trials, children were
presented with two possible referents (e.g., dog and ball)
and children heard one of the labels (e.g., dog). The source
trials consisted of pairing a referent with the source of the
auditory input. For example, children may have seen a dog
paired with a woman and heard dog. Every trial had two
phases: a baseline phase and a testing phase, see Figure 2 for
an overview of the procedure. In the baseline phase children
were presented with two stimuli and no auditory input was
provided. The baseline phase served as a measure of initial
saliency.

Results and Discussion
Initial analyses focused on children’s looking to the referent
prior to hearing labels (baseline). A percent looking to the
pre-labeled referent was calculated on each trial (looking to
referent during baseline/overall looking to both pictures
during baseline), and two separate means were calculated:
One mean for the reference trials and one mean for the
source trials. As can be seen in Figure 3, both the 8- and the
14-month-olds had no initial preference to look to the
referent before hearing the labels on the reference trials, ps >
.1. In contrast, children looked significantly below 50% to
the referent on the source trials, ts > 4, ps < .001, which
suggests that when the referent was paired with the source
children initially had a strong preference to look to the
source. No further analyses were conducted on baseline
trials.

Figure 2. Overall Procedure
(a) Reference Trials (12 trials)
Baseline Phase 4000ms
No auditory input

Test Phase 8000ms
“Dog”

Figure 3. Saliency of stimulus pairs at baseline across
age and trial types.
Source Trials

Percent looking to referent at
baseline

60

(b) Source Trials (12 Trials)
Baseline Phase 4000ms
No auditory input

Test Phase 8000ms
“Dog”

Time

Reference Trials

55
50

*

45
40
35

*

30
25
20
8-months

After assessing the saliency of the visual stimuli, children
moved to the testing phase. The testing phase was similar to
baseline except that children heard one of the labels. The

Age

14-months

Note: “*” < 50%, p < .001. Error bars represent standard errors

1885

The nonsignificant Trial Type x Age interaction
suggests that both age groups responded similarly to the
labels across the Trial Types, however, it was also
important to compare children’s comprehension to chance.
As can be seen in Figure 4, 8-month-olds on the source
trials significantly increased looking to the source (or away
from the referent) after hearing the labels, t (24) = 2.60, p
< .05. This finding is not surprising given that these
children did not demonstrate comprehension of the labels
on the reference trials. In contrast, 14-month-olds did
demonstrate comprehension of the object labels: Looking
to the referents on the reference trials exceeded 0, t (22) =
2.37, p < .05. However, comprehension of these
“comprehended” labels dropped to chance when the
referent was paired with the source of auditory input,
which suggests that these children had difficulty inhibiting
their attention to the source of the auditory stimulus.
Follow up analyses focused on 14-month-olds’
individual responses across the two trial types. These
analyses are important for demonstrating that the decrease
in looking to the referent on the source trials did not stem
from several outliers. On the reference trials, 83% of
children increased looking to the referent compared to
their initial preference (i.e., percent looking to referent at
test > percent looking to referent at baseline), which was
the dominant pattern of response, χ2 (1, N = 23) = 9.78, p <
.005, and is comparable to parental reports at this age
(Fenson, et al., 1994). In contrast, only 35% of the children
increased looking to the referent on the source trials, which
was significantly less than this proportion on reference
trials, χ2 (1, N = 23) = 36.62, p < .001. Therefore,
differences between the reference and source trials were
generated by different distributions rather than by a small
number of outliers.

The primary analyses focused on children’s looking to
the referent after hearing the labels across the two trial
types. However, given children’s initial preferences during
baseline, we deemed it necessary to control for these
preferences in the following analyses. A difference score
was calculated on each trial by subtracting the percent
looking to the referent at baseline from the percent looking
to the referent at test. For each child, a mean was
calculated across the 12 reference trials and a separate
mean was calculated for the 12 source trials. Thus,
difference scores greater than 0 reflect increased looking to
the referent relative to baseline looking and difference
scores less than 0 reflect decreased looking to the referent
relative to baseline (or increased looking to the source on
source trials). Trials where children did not accumulate at
least one look at baseline and one look at test were
eliminated and did not influence the mean. Approximately
12% of the trials were eliminated.
Difference scores by trial type and age are presented
in Figure 4. As can be seen in Figure 4, participants
increased looking to the referents on the reference trials
more than they increased looking to the referents on source
trials. Furthermore, 14-month-olds increased looking to the
referents more than the 8-month-olds. The difference
scores were subjected to a 2 (Trial Type: Reference,
Source) x 2 (Age: 8-months, 14-months) ANOVA with
Trial Type as a repeated measure. The analysis revealed a
main effect of Trial Type, F (1, 46) = 12.62, p < .001, and
a main effect of Age, F (1, 46) = 4.72, p < .05. The
interaction did not approach significance, p = .91.
Figure 4. Comprehension compared to chance across
age and trial types.

Source Trials

Percent looking to referent at
test minus baseline

20

General Discussion

Reference Trials

15

The current study revealed several important findings
concerning children’s early word comprehension. First, the
source of auditory input is very salient for children, and
not surprisingly, children associated human speech with
the source of auditory input (person) well before acquiring
the specific word-object associations: Recall that 8-montholds significantly increased looking to the source after
hearing the labels, whereas, they responded at chance on
the reference trials. Second, developmental differences
were found with only 14-month-olds demonstrating
comprehension of the word-object associations tested in
the current study. These findings are consistent with
previous research using a comparable word comprehension
task (Reznick, 1990; Reznik & Goldfield, 1992),
consistent with parental reports (Fenson, et al., 1994), and
consistent with word learning tasks where young children
often have difficulty learning novel words in a laboratory
setting (e.g., Werker et al., 1998). More importantly,

*

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

*
8-months

14-months

Age
Note: “*” difference score <> 0%, p < .001. Error bars represent
standard errors

1886

concerning how and why language influences cognitive
growth: Can labels facilitate the formation of categories if
children have not acquired the notion that words refer?
The current study may also highlight the difficulty of
children’s early word learning. In particular, for children to
learn a word’s meaning they must inhibit their attention to
the source of the auditory input before they can detect that
the word is correlated with an object. Thus, the current
study makes a non-trivial prediction: Early in development
it should be easier for children to associate a sound with an
object (e.g., dog bark with a dog) than a word with an
object because in the former children’s attention should be
directed to the source, which is also the object that goes
with the auditory stimulus. At the same time it seems likely
that word learning may be facilitated by making objects
more salient. In particular, there is evidence that infants
are more likely to associate words with objects when
objects move (Werker et. al., 1998) or when a word is
associated with the most salient object in a set (Hollich,
Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek, 2000). These manipulations
may help children acquire word-object associations by
directing their attention away from the source of the
auditory input. While this hypothesis needs to be tested, it
would further highlight the attentional and associative
components of early word comprehension.

however, the current study demonstrates that although
older children have acquired more word-object
associations, as indicated by only the 14-month-olds
demonstrating comprehension on the reference trials, the
underlying nature of children’s word knowledge does not
appear to change between 8- and 14-months of age: Both
age groups had difficulty inhibiting their attention to
source of the auditory input.
Why did children look to the person after hearing the
labels? From a socio-pragmatic perspective, it could easily
be argued that children increased looking to the person
because they were trying to detect social cues such as eye
gaze or pointing that could potentially constrain the words’
meanings. While this explanation is consistent with
various theories of how children acquire early word
meaning (see Baldwin & Moses, 2001, for a review), it is
uncertain why 14-month-olds would need to rely on social
cues if they have already acquired knowledge about the
words.
An alternative explanation is that children’s looking to
the source reflects the notion that, for young children,
words are simply features that are associated with objects
(Sloutsky & Lo, 1999). From this perspective, children
should be influenced by the perceptual similarity of the
labels (cf., Fisher & Sloutsky, 2004), and the current study
demonstrates that early word comprehension is also
affected by statistical properties. Eight-month-olds in the
current study demonstrated that the correlation between
human speech and humans is stronger than the word-object
associations presented in the current study. More
importantly, however, is the finding that, even when
children have some knowledge of the word-object
associations, comprehension is still affected by the
inability to inhibit attention to stronger correlations. Of
course, it could be counter argued that the results could
have been different if words were presented in a syntactic
frame rather than in isolation (e.g., Namy & Waxman,
2000). While present research does not address this
possibility, we have preliminary evidence suggesting that
the reported effects do not disappear even when words are
presented in a syntactic frame.
The findings of the current study are not consistent with
the claim that children understand that words are symbols
that stand for objects and categories. In particular, if
children have assumptions that words refer to objects and
categories, then children should direct their attention to
potential referents after hearing words. However, most of
the studies supporting this claim either did not give
children the opportunity to look to the source or did not
assess looking to the source relative to the referent (but see
Baldwin & Markman, 1989). The current study
demonstrates that when children are given the opportunity
to look to source of the auditory input, the relative looking
to the referent decreases considerably. This finding not
only has implications for conceptualizing word meaning in
young children, but may also have broader implications

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation (BCS # 0078945 and REC #
0208103) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Balaban, M.T., & Waxman, S.R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Baldwin, D. A., & Markman, E. M. (1989). Establishing
word-object relations: A first step. Child Development,
60, 381–398.
Baldwin, D. A. & Moses, L. J. (2001). Links between
social understanding and early word learning:
Challenges to current accounts. Social Development
10(3), 309-329.
Campbell, A. L., & Namy, L. L. (2003). The role of socialreferential context in verbal and nonverbal symbol
learning. Child Development, 74, 549-563.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language
Conference, 15, 17-29.
Fenson, L., Dale, P.S., Reznik, J.S., Bates, E., Thal, E. &
Pethick, J.P. (1994). The MacArurthur Communicative
Development Inventories. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development, Serial no. 242, 59(5)
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky V. M. (2004). When mats meow:
Phonological similarity of labels and induction in young
children. Poster session presented at the XXVI Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Chicago, IL.

1887

Schafer, G., & Plunkett, K. (1998). Rapid word learning by
fifteen-month-olds under tightly controlled conditions.
Child Development, 69, 309–320.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y. (1999). How much does a
shared name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic
labels and the development of similarity judgment.
Developmental Psychology, 6, 1478-1492.
Werker, J. F., Cohen, L. B., Lloyd, V. L., Casasola, M., &
Stager, C. L. (1998). Acquisition of word–object
associations by 14-month-old infants. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 1289–1309.
Woodward, A. L. & Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants’ learning
about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child
Development, 70(1), 65-77.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., & Fitzsimmons, C. M.
(1994). Rapid word learning in 13- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 30, 553-566.
Woodward, A.L. & Markman, E.M. (1998). Early word
learning. In W. Damon, D. Kuhn & R. Siegler, (Eds.)
Handbook of child psychology, Volume 2: Cognition,
perception and language (pp. 371-420). New York: John
Wiley and Sons.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object
kind concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223-250.

Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Cauley, K.M., &
Gordon, L. (1987). The eyes have it: Lexical and
syntactic comprehension in a new paradigm. Journal of
Child Language, 14, 23-45.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C.B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical
principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21,
125-155.
Hollich, G. J., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist coalition
model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 65, v123.
Jusczyk, P. W., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infants’ detection
of the sound patterns or words in fluent speech,
Cognitive Psycology, 29, 1-23.
Markson, L., & Bloom, P. (1997). Evidence against a
dedicated system for word learning in children. Nature,
385, 813-815.
Namy, L.L. & Waxman, S.R. (2000). Naming and
Exclaiming: Infants’ sensitivity to naming contexts.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 1, 405-428.
Reznick, J. S. (1990). Visual preference as a test of infant
word comprehension. Applied Psycholinguistics, 11,
145-166.
Reznick, J. S., & Goldfield, B. A. (1992), Rapid change in
lexical development in comprehension and production.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 406-413.

1888

