UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Associability Theory vs. The Strategic Re-Coding Theory: The Reverse Transfer Along a
Continuum Effect in Human Discrimination Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8gt14930

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Meilinger, Tobias

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Associability Theory vs. The Strategic Re-Coding Theory: The Reverse
Transfer Along a Continuum Effect in Human Discrimination Learning
Mizue Tachi (MT334@hermes.cam.ac.uk)
R.P. McLaren (RPM31@hermes.cam.ac.uk)
I.P.L. McLaren (IPLM2@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, Downing Street
Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK

Abstract
The Reverse TAC effect occurs when learning of a hard
discrimination is facilitated by pre-training on an easier
discrimination on the same dimension, even though the
response assignments used in pre-training on that easy
discrimination are reversed when shifting to the harder
discrimination.
The Reverse TAC effect has been
demonstrated in both animal (Mackintosh and Little, 1970)
and human experiments (McLaren and Suret, 2003). We
consider two explanations for this effect; one is the
associability-based hypothesis and the other is the strategic
re-coding-based hypothesis. Associability theory gives an
account based on a combination of associability processes and
generalization. Associability is a learning rate parameter
determined by the relative predictability of an outcome based
on its relationship with the target stimulus. If the target
stimulus is a relatively good predictor of the outcome
(compared to other stimuli present), then this will tend to
maintain, or increase associability. This then controls the rate
of learning in a simple, associatively-based discrimination
learning process. On the other hand, the strategic re-coding
theory explains the Reverse TAC effect by appealing to a
combination of the adoption of some cognitively derived
strategy with simple discrimination learning and emphasizes
the interaction between cognitive and associative processes.
To assess these hypotheses, we carried out two experiments
focusing on the effect of varying the amount of training. Our
conclusion is that the strategic re-coding hypothesis is the less
plausible account of the Reverse TAC effect. Instead, our
empirical data suggested that if subjects’ initial motivation
was relatively low and they faced a situation where their
performance deteriorated (through no fault of their own) over
an extended period of time, then the associability of the to-bediscriminated stimuli would decrease, resulting in a
deterioration in their performance.

Introduction
How do people discriminate objects in the environment, and
what mechanisms underlie this process? Perhaps the most
plausible explanation for these skills may be found among
associative learning theories. The basic idea of these
theories is that learning progresses via the development of
associations between target stimuli and subsequent events.
Our strategy was to look at some specific phenomena in
learning in order to make progress in understanding the
mechanisms involved.
2128

Some years ago Mackintosh and Little (1970)
demonstrated what were then controversial results in a
pigeon experiment; that pre-training on an easy
discrimination could facilitate acquisition of a harder
discrimination using stimuli drawn from the same
dimension, even when the response assignments used in
pre-training were reversed when shifting to the harder
discrimination. Thus, if we denote four stimuli on a
dimension by A, B, C, D, such that A vs. D is the easy
discrimination, and B vs. C the hard one, the finding is that
pre-training on A+ D- will facilitate acquisition of B- C+.
This is the basic Reverse TAC effect which was the focus of
this research. Recently, McLaren and Suret (2003) were
able to replicate Mackintosh and Little's (1970) finding in
humans. This effect, the Reverse TAC effect, was
successfully explained in Mackintosh and Little’s 1970
paper by appealing to the notion of associability. McLaren
and Suret (2003) also adopted Mackintosh and
Little(1970)’s idea by way of explanation for their human
empirical data, assuming that the same, associatively-based
processes, were operating in pigeons and humans.
The basic mechanism underpinning the TAC effect is
often taken to be simple generalisation of the associations
acquired between stimuli and outcomes during pre-training
to those acquired during training, a process that undoubtedly
contributes to standard demonstrations of Transfer Along a
Continuum (TAC) (Lawrence, 1952). In TAC, the
procedure is to pre-train A+ D-, then shift to B+ C-. Both
associability processes and generalisation may be expected
to assist in acquisition of the more difficult discrimination in
this case, resulting in more rapid learning compared to
controls trained on B+ C- for the same total number of
trials. It is the finding of more rapid acquisition of B- C+
after pre-training on A+ D-, however, that demonstrates an
effect of associability that cannot be explained by (indeed is
contrary to) simple generalisation. Associability theory,
such as that formally proposed by Mackintosh (1975), can,
however, deal with this, and Mackintosh and Little (1970)
provided an elegant explanation for the Reverse TAC. An
associability theory essentially requires that a learning rate
parameter (that may, perhaps, also influence performance)
be postulated whose magnitude is governed by an
organism’s prior history with the stimulus and outcome
under consideration. Large values of this parameter promote
rapid learning, small values slow learning. Application of

this approach to Mackintosh and Little (1970)'s results
involves noting that the easy discrimination used in pretraining is (not surprisingly) rapidly acquired. This is taken
to maintain a high level of associability for the features of
the stimuli A and D that support the discrimination between
them, in line with the idea (Mackintosh, 1975) that
relatively good predictors of an outcome will have high
associability. In contrast, the non-predictive features (those
shared by both stimuli or irrelevant to the discrimination
such as left / right position) will tend to experience a drop in
associability. The effect is that the organism's learning is
focused on the predictive elements of the discrimination.
Then, on transfer to the hard discrimination, because B will
be more similar to A than D, and C more similar to D than
A, it will be exactly the elements of B and C that best
distinguish between them that will have the highest
associabilities, promoting learning of the discrimination.
This conclusion seems secure when applied to
Mackintosh and Little (1970)'s data, but what of McLaren
and Suret (2003)? Humans are typically considered to have
more resources available to them than pigeons, and this
introduces the possibility of other explanations for this
result. Perhaps the most obvious is suggested by
consideration of Hall and Honey's (1989) analysis of
acquired distinctiveness in combination with work on verbal
discrimination learning (Ekstrand, Wallace and Underwood,
1966). If pre-training is taken to result in good acquisition
of the response "left" to A and "right" to D (as these
experiments use two keys on a computer keyboard as
outcomes) then the stimuli A and D have representations
whose distinctiveness has been further enhanced by
association to these two different outcomes. Then, on
transfer to B- C+, generalisation to B from A will tend to
produce the outcome "left" (incorrectly so) and
generalisation from D to C "right". This would not aid
pigeons, but say that humans notice that they are suddenly
getting things consistently wrong, and then cognitively reconfigure themselves by adopting the strategy " when I feel
like making a left response I'll press the right key, and when
I feel it's the right key I'll press the left key". There is no
need for an appeal to associability in this explanation, just a
combination of the correct strategy or task set and simple
generalisation, much as in classic demonstrations of verbal
discrimination learning (Underwood, Jesse and Ekstrand,
1964).
Now that there are two possible explanations in play for
what may, in short, be termed the Reverse TAC effect, the
question naturally arises of how to distinguish between
them. Both theories assume that discrimination learning
will proceed by development of associations between target
stimuli and allocated outcomes in pre-training, and
discrimination of the target stimuli (harder discrimination)
in training is facilitated by generalization from those stimuli
(easier discrimination) employed in pre-training.
Here, the previously cited work on verbal discrimination
learning is our guide. It strongly suggests that use of a
strategy that requires the production of a response opposite
to the one previously learned can result in good initial
performance in a transfer test, but that with extended
training performance will not improve and may even
2129

decline. The reason for this is as follows; the previously
acquired associations play the role of “mediators” for the tobe-learned learned associations during training. But during
training itself, these associations will decrease in strength,
and the new, opposing associations between stimuli and
outcomes will increase in strength. This follows quite
straightforwardly as a consequence of the assumption that
associatively-based learning continues during training on
the hard discrimination. Given that the hypothesis is that
subjects are using the strategy of pressing the left key when
they are shown stimulus C on the basis that they feel like
making a right key response, training will reliably link the
occurrence of stimulus C with a left key press, and have the
effect of building up the C – Left association and
extinguishing the C – Right association. Over trials this will
degrade, and eventually eradicate the basis for the subject’s
decision to press the left key! The prediction, then, is that
more training after the reversal will certainly not help
performance if this hypothesis is correct. An associability
analysis, on the other hand, should be relatively unaffected,
since this theory does not assume any cognitive mechanisms
such as strategic re-coding of learned associations, so there
should be only direct connections between the target stimuli
and the currently trained outcomes (i.e., there is no use of
old associations to implement new associations). In
Experiment 1 we test these predictions by using 2 blocks as
well as 1 block of training after the standard pre-training
regime used in previous experiments. Previous pilot
experiments looking at 1 and 2 blocks of training separately
had indicated that we might expect the effect predicted by
the strategic re-coding hypothesis (Tachi, 2004), but
Experiment 1 is the first to test for the effect of varying the
amount of training within a single experiment.

Experiment 1
Stimuli and Apparatus
The stimuli used in Experiment 1 were 44 monochromatic
pictures of faces, which were specially designed to create
four discriminable dimensions. They were grouped into
four subsets (two male and two female) that consisted of 11
faces each. Each subset was on an artificial dimension
defined by two original passport photos of university
undergraduates at the poles and nine intermediate morphed
pictures, which were created using a standard morphing
software package, Morph, between these poles. All stimuli
were assigned the numbers from 1 to 44 indicating their
order on each dimension (i.e. 1-11, 12-22, etc.).
If we take the dimension as spanning stimuli 1-11,
pictures 3 and 9 from each dimension were always shown
when subjects were engaging in the “Easy” task, and
pictures 5 and 7 were shown as the Hard stimuli (see Figure
1 for an example).
On test, all 44 stimuli were shown to the subjects to
measure not only discrimination between the critical stimuli
at 5 and 7 on each dimension, but also to look at
generalization along each dimension. Although designated
as the “Easy” discrimination, stimuli 3 and 9 on each
dimension were still relatively similar to one another, and

learning the discrimination may have been quite difficult.
We hoped that this would make the subjects more likely to
employ some associative process rather than relying on
rules to distinguish between these stimuli.
The experiment-running programme was written in
REALbasic and run on an Apple Macintosh computer. The
stimuli were shown as greyscale images 3.5cm by 4.5cm.
This experiment was conducted in a moderately illuminated
and quiet room, away from any external noise.

1

2

3
3

4

EASY
5
6

7

8

9
9

10

11

1

2

3

4

5

7

8

9

10

11

5

6

HARD 7

Figure 1: The morphed face dimension.

Subjects and Design
The 32 subjects in this experiment were undergraduates
and graduates from the University of Cambridge. They
were randomly allocated to four conditions, ‘Easy Reversed
1’, ‘Easy Reversed 2’, ‘Hard 1’ and ‘Hard 2.’ The factors
differentiating these groups were the contents of pre-training
(easy vs. hard stimuli) and the amount of training after the
pre-training (1 or 2 blocks). All subjects received three
blocks of pre-training on the four face dimensions for a
fixed number of trials (40 trials per block, five presentations
on each of the two faces used from each dimension). In the
Easy Reversed conditions, subjects were trained on the easy
discriminations between stimuli 3 and 9 with opposite
response assignments to those used in later training, denoted
as 3+ 9-. In the Hard conditions subjects were pre-trained
on the hard discrimination between stimuli 5 and 7 with
congruent response assignments to those used in the training
phase, denoted as 5- 7+. The + and – simply indicated
different response assignments; either the ‘X’(left) or
‘.’(right) key press, and these assignments were
counterbalanced across subjects. After the pre-training
phase, subjects received either 1 or 2 blocks of training on
the Hard stimuli (i.e. 5- 7+) for all four dimensions (40 trials
per block, five presentations per stimuli). This was
followed by a test phase that consisted of five blocks of all
44 stimuli (all 11 stimuli from each of the four dimensions)
presented without feedback, so that performance across each
dimension could be assessed. The data of interest were the
responses to the stimuli, especially the trained stimuli (5 and
7), in the final test phase. Significant differences in these
2130

responses would indicate acquisition of the trained
discriminations.

Procedure
At the beginning of each phase of this experiment,
subjects were given instructions by the experimenter; they
were told that they would be shown a series of stimuli in the
form of human faces on the screen, and that their task was
sorting these pictures into two categories by pressing one of
two keys (‘X’ or ‘.’ keys) on the computer keyboard. They
would receive immediate feedback on the correctness of
their responses. So their task was simply that of finding out
and remembering for which stimuli the ‘correct’ response
was the ‘X’ key press and for which stimuli the ‘correct’
response was the ‘.’ key press. If they did not respond
within a time limit of four seconds they would be timed out
and a message would appear on the screen telling them so
before the appearance of the next stimulus. Target stimuli
were presented one at a time. Each trial started with a
fixation cross ‘+’for 1.5 seconds, which was replaced by a
face for a maximum of 4 seconds. The picture disappeared
once subjects made a response to it or were timed out.
Feedback was given for 1.5 seconds with either ‘correct’ or
‘wrong’ displayed in the center of the screen. If the subjects
pressed an invalid key, the message ‘invalid key pressed’
would appear. If the subjects responded before the
presentation of the stimulus, the message ‘you anticipated
the probe’ was displayed before the stimulus appeared on
the screen, and the program moved on to the next trial.
After completing the three blocks of pre-training, subjects
engaged in a totally unrelated paper-based experiment that
lasted for approximately 15 minutes, and then they
continued the training and test phases of Experiment 1. This
procedure was used because the inclusion of a 'gap' between
pre-training and training had been found to be the most
effective way of obtaining the Reverse TAC effect by Suret
and McLaren (2003). On the completion of the pre-training
and training phases, subjects progressed to the test phases
where stimulus presentation was as before but with no
feedback (this was replaced by a 1.5 second pause with a
blank screen between the subjects’ response and the next
stimulus). Prior to the test phase, subjects were told to
categorize the stimuli into two groups (‘X’ or ‘.’) based on
the criteria that they had developed in the last phase of
training.

Results
The results of Experiment 1 are shown in Figure 2.
Following the approach taken in previous studies (i.e.
McLaren and Suret (2003)) which used the same stimuli and
similar designs looking at other aspects of discrimination
learning we collected data from the test phase only. In all
statistical analyses presented here the probabilities are twotailed unless otherwise specified, and were carried out on
the data converted into mean response scores. This is a
direct index of discrimination performance in our subjects.
One key was designated negative (a key press scores -0.5
for that stimulus) and the other key positive (scores +0.5)
during test. Hence, the range of the mean response score is

from -0.5 to +0.5 and it would be 0 for a given stimulus if
subjects did not show any response preference. The critical
comparison in this experiment is the discrimination between
the stimuli at positions 5 and 7 along each dimension, so we
computed a difference score as our final measure for this
discrimination. This is the score for all trained dimensions
calculated by taking the mean response score for stimulus 5
away from the mean response score for stimulus 7. A
positive difference score provides some evidence of learning
of the discrimination during the training, perfect learning
would be indicated by a score of 1, indifference by a score
of 0, with a floor for this index of -1.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) with pre-training task
(easy reversed/hard) and training amount (1block/2blocks)
as factors gave an F(1,28)=3.66, p<.05 (1 tail) indicating an
interaction between these factors (no other effects were
significant). A one tailed test was deemed appropriate
because the earlier pilot work by Tachi (2004) had produced
this pattern of results across experiments. Further analysis
by means of t-tests revealed that in the Easy Reversed
condition, where subjects were pre-trained on the easy
discrimination, the group who received 1 block of training
after reversal showed significantly better performance
(congruent with their training on the hard problem) than
those who had 2 blocks of training after reversal
(t(14)=2.78, p<.05). While in the Hard condition, where
subjects, in effect, only experienced the training
discrimination (Hard task) during the pre-training phase as
well, the 2-blocks-trained group seemed to perform better
than the 1-block-trained group (but not significantly so
t(14)=0.57, p>0.1). Furthermore, when subjects received 1
block of training, performance in the Easy Reversed group
was significantly better than that of the Hard group
(t(14)=2.15, p<.05).
However, when subjects had an
additional extra block of training, learning in the Easy
Reversed group became significantly worse (t(14)=2.78,
p<.05), and this group was now numerically worse than the
Hard group that also had two blocks of training (but not
significantly so, t(14)=1.08, p>0.1).

Discussion
The results from this experiment lend considerable support
to the strategic re-coding hypothesis put forward in the
introduction. It would seem that further training actually
makes subjects worse in the Easy Reversed condition, and
this can readily be explained by postulating that the 'feeling'
to press a particular key which is then re-coded into the
opposite response is degraded by the extra training given in
this condition. Another possibility, however, is that subjects
in the Easy Reversed condition are becoming increasingly
confused as training progresses. They are not warned that
response assignments are switched as they move from pretraining to training. Inevitably they make many mistakes at
first in training immediately after the reversal has taken
place. The group given only one block of training are then
moved to test, where mistakes are no longer an issue as
there is no feedback, but the group given two blocks of
training continue to get feedback and may either become
convinced that the task is impossible, and give up by the
time they get to test, or the more prolonged experience of
relatively low levels of performance may drive the
associability of the discriminatory stimulus features down.
This may seem a somewhat post-hoc appeal to either
motivational or associability factors, but it was noticeable
that subjects in the 2 blocks Easy Reversed condition
seemed confused about the task at the end of the experiment
and some indicated that they thought the task too difficult to
do. A simple way to evaluate one of these alternative
explanations for our results is to maintain the same
experimental design, but ensure that subjects remain highly
motivated throughout the experiment. This was achieved by
offering bonuses for performance during training and test in
Experiment 2. The rationale for this is that the prospect of
the bonuses will prevent subjects giving up on the task, but
would have little effect on any re-coding that they might do.
Indeed, the further inducements might actually encourage
re-coding as a strategy for performing the task.

Experiment 2

0.45

Subjects and Design

0.4

32 subjects in this experiment were taken from the same
population as in the previous experiment. They were
randomly divided into 4 groups, ‘Easy Reversed 1’, ‘Easy
Reversed 2’, ‘Hard 1’ and ‘Hard 2’ as in the previous
experiment. All conditions included a time gap between the
pre-training and training phases. The experimental design
was the same as for Experiment 1, with the exception of the
dummy bonus system that we used to motivate subjects
during the training phase. In this design, at the beginning of
the training phase subjects were instructed that they would
earn additional money if they learnt very well, but, in fact,
all subjects received a message “Congratulations! Bonus
awarded!” at the end of the training no matter how well they
learnt. Otherwise procedures were as in Experiment 1.

Discrimination Score

0.35

0.3

0.25
EasyReversed
Hard

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
1blocktraining

2blockstraining

Figure 2: Results for Experiment 1.

2131

Results
Figure 3 shows the results of Experiment 2.
0.45

0.4

0.35

Discrimination Score

0.3

0.25
EasyReversed
Hard
0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
1blocktraining

2blockstraining

Figure 3: Results for Experiment 2.
A two-way factorial ANOVA with pre-training task (easy
reversed/hard) and task amount (1-block/2-blocks) as
factors did not indicate any interaction between them this
time, F(1,28)=1.11, p>0.1. There was no longer poor
performance in the Easy Reversed 2-block group relative to
the Hard 2-block group, rather there was a small nonsignificant improvement. As we shall see, this result, when
taken in combination with those of Experiment 1 poses a
significant challenge for the strategic re-coding hypothesis.
There was, however, a significant main effect of task
amount, F(1,28)=5.75, p<.05, indicating that two blocks of
training were more effective than one.
Further analyses showed that after 1-block of training the
Easy Reversed group performed better than the Hard group
(t(14)=2.00, p<0.05 1-tail), however, as already noted, in the
2-block-training condition, there was no significant
difference between them. Thus we can argue that the
standard Reverse TAC effect has been maintained in
Experiment 2, whereas the effect of the extra block of
training on the Easy Reversed – Hard difference has
disappeared.
Next, we compared results between Experiment 1 and 2.
A three-way factorial ANOVA with pre-training task (easy
reversed/hard), training amount (1-block/2-blocks) and
motivational state (normal/high) as factors gave a main
effect of motivational state, F(1,56)=7.73, p<.01, reflecting
the generally higher level of performance seen in
Experiment 2. Whilst ANOVA did not indicate an
interaction between all three factors, there were significant
interactions between pre-training task and training amount,
F(1, 56)=4.48, p<.05, and also training amount and
motivation, F(1, 56)=6.18, p<.05. No other effects were
significant. Taking the second interaction, that between
training amount and motivation, first; further analyses by
means of t-tests on the individual comparisons between
experiments revealed (perhaps unsurprisingly) that high
motivation facilitated learning. Note, however, that this
effect was only significant in the longer training condition.
2132

In the conditions where subjects received 2 blocks of
training, highly motivated subjects who were trained with
the bonus system (Experiment 2) performed significantly
better on test than those without the bonus system
(Experiment 1) no matter what they had experienced during
the pre-training phase (t(14)=4.02, p<.05) for the Easy
Reversed condition, (t(14)=2.35, p<.05) for the Hard
condition). The 1-block training conditions show a different
pattern of results since they seemed not to be affected by
motivation. There was no significant difference due to
different motivational states in any of the conditions. In
other words, further comparisons between the 1-blocktraining conditions in Experiment 2 and other conditions in
Experiment 1 implied that, in general, subjects’ performance
after 1 block of training with the increased motivation was
not different from that after normal 1-block-training. Thus,
according to these comparisons between Experiment 1 and
2, the increased motivation induced in Experiment 2
facilitates learning in relatively prolonged training
situations, but has less influence in the short training
conditions. Turning now to the other significant interaction
to emerge from this analysis, that between type of pretraining and training amount, the interpretation is relatively
straightforward. The Reverse TAC effect is observed after 1
block of training, but not after 2 blocks.

General Discussion
The results in Experiment 1 demonstrated that after 1
block of training subjects pre-trained on the Easy Reversed
discrimination showed significantly quicker learning on the
training task (Hard discrimination) than those pre-trained on
the Hard discrimination throughout, however, their
performance suddenly changed for the worse if training was
prolonged (an additional block of training). After 2 blocks
of training there was no benefit as a result of the Easy
Reversed pre-training when compared with the Hard pretraining. What are the implications of these findings for the
strategic re-coding and associability accounts of the basic
Reverse TAC effect considered in the introduction to this
paper?
If the relatively poor performance in the Easy Reversed
conditions after 2 blocks of training is simply due to
motivational factors, then the associability account is
entirely consistent with the data. In this case the explanation
of the effect is simply orthogonal to the mechanism for the
Reverse TAC effect, and does not in any way constrain our
theorising with respect to TAC. Equally, if the effect is a
consequence of the reduced associability of stimulus
representations then this would add further support for
associability processes in human learning. Both these
hypotheses could be consistent with the results of
Experiment 2. In this experiment the bonus scheme is taken
to increase the motivation of subjects during the training and
testing phases. Clearly, if the problem in Experiment 1 is
that motivation collapses in the course of 2 blocks of
training, then measures to increase it should ameliorate the
effect, and this is what is observed. The associability-based
explanation is more subtle. If we assume that 2 blocks of
training allow the associability of the stimulus
representations to decline in the Easy Reversed case, then

why should an increase in motivation change this? Our
hypothesis is that the increased motivation improves the rate
at which learning of new associations takes place, without
directly affecting the rate at which associability changes are
made. If this is so, then the more rapid acquisition of the
new associations should lead to the appropriate components
of the stimulus representations becoming established as
good predictors for the outcomes relative to other
components present, and so prevent their associability
declining. This explanation hinges on the task being
parameterised such that the learning rate is low enough in
Experiment 1 for associability in the Easy Reverse condition
to decline after 2 blocks of training, but not after 1 block of
training. More simulation work accompanied by empirical
tests will be needed to see if this is a plausible assumption.
On the face of it, the strategic re-coding hypothesis comes
out of this well. It can explain the basic Reverse TAC effect
by postulating that subjects in the Easy Reverse condition
learn very quickly to press the left key when they feel the
urge to press the right key and vice .versa. The loss of the
Reverse TAC effect after 2 blocks of training is exactly as
the hypothesis predicts. Further training will lead to
acquisition of the new stimulus-outcome associations and
extinction of the old ones, on the assumption that
associative learning continues automatically in these
circumstances. This will mean that when confronted with a
stimulus subjects will at some stage find themselves in an
ambiguous position, unsure of which key they wish to press.
Eventually they will have to abandon the very strategy that
allowed them to succeed at the task! The strategic re-coding
explanation finds itself in some difficulty when considering
Experiment 2, however, as it must predict that more training
will not improve matters, at least not at first, and that this
cannot be avoided simply by increasing motivation. To see
this, consider the following attempt to reconcile this
hypothesis with the results of Experiment 2 where subjects
were relatively highly motivated throughout their training. It
would be natural to assume that this results in faster learning
during training, and that this might allow subjects to
progress through the stages of initial re-coding followed by
abandonment of this strategy more rapidly. Even if we
postulate that the increased motivation means that subjects
learn so fast that the dip in performance after 2 blocks of
training observed in Experiment 1 is passed by, then, in this
case, the effect seen in Experiment 1 should be seen after 1
block of training rather than 2. It is difficult with this
hypothesis to explain the maintained Reverse TAC effect
after 1 block of training on the one hand, and the lack of any
difference in performance after 2 blocks of training on the
other. The result does not conclusively rule out this
hypothesis, but does make it less plausible.
Our conclusion is that a line of research that began by
promising to support a strategic account of the Reverse TAC
effect in fact now calls that hypothesis into question. Thus,
the associability theory, in conjunction with some
consideration of motivational factors, perhaps provides the
best explanation for the results. And this implies that human
learning and animal learning have the same associativelybased mechanisms. In order to sustain this account we have
to allow that if subjects’ motivation is moderate and they are
2133

put in a situation where their performance worsens (through
no fault of their own) in the absence of any information to
help them explain this occurrence, and if this experience is
relatively prolonged, then their motivation to do the task
will suffer, and their performance collapses as a
consequence. Alternatively, it may be that 2 blocks of
training after reversal have some more stimulus specific,
rather than general motivational effect. Clearly the potential
exists for reversal to drive stimulus associability down, as
until the previously established associations have been
unlearned the stimulus features will predict the wrong
outcomes. Our explanation of the Reverse TAC effect
postulates that these features have high initial associability,
and so will form new associations to the correct training
outcomes during this period. It may be that after 1 block of
training associability is still high and the new, correct
associations are just starting to outweigh the previously
established, incorrect associations. But after 2 blocks of
training associability has dropped sharply, and if this is
reflected in performance as well as learning, then this will
negate the growth of the correct associations to these
stimulus features, and performance will improve slowly, if
at all. It will be a matter for future research to determine
which, if either, of these explanations for our results is the
correct one.

References
Ekstrand, B.R., Wallace, W.P. and Underwood, B.J. (1966)
A Frequency Theory of Verbal Discrimination Learning.
Psychological Review. 73, 6, 566-578.
Hall, G. and Honey, R.C. (1989) Contextual Effects in
Conditioning, Latent Inhibition, and Habituation:
Associative and Retrieval Functions of Contextual Cues.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behaviour
Processes. 15, 3, 232-241.
Lawrence, D. H. (1952). The transfer of a discrimination
along a continuum. Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 45, 511-516.
Mackintosh, N. J. and Little, L. (1970). An analysis of
transfer along a continuum. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 24, 362-369.
Mackintosh, N.J. (1975). A theory of attention: variations in
the associability of stimuli with reinforcement.
Psychological Review, 82, 4, 276-298
Suret, M. and McLaren, I. P. L. (2003). Representation and
discrimination on an artificial dimension. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 56B, 1, 30-42.
Suret, M. (2003) Salience Modulation and Associability
Processes in Transfer along a Continuum. Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Cambridge.
Tachi, M. (2004) How to bring chaos in the complete
discrimination? Focusing on critical factors &
considering models of discrimination learning. First year
report, Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Cambridge.
Underwood, B.J., Jesse, F. and Ekstrand, B.R. (1964)
Knowledge of Rights and Wrongs in VerbalDiscrimination Learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behaviour. 3, 183-186.

