UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Psychological Reality of Local Coherences in Sentence Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bf39203

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Krause, Christina M.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Psychological Reality of Local Coherences in Sentence Processing
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany

Abstract
Dynamical systems of language processing predict that
sentence processing complexity is not only a function of the
globally coherent structure ranging from the beginning of the
sentence to its current point of processing, but also a function of
locally coherent sub-parses. This paper presents an experiment
that tests whether locally coherent, yet globally false
continuations affect on-line anomaly detection times. The
results indicate that they do interfere with processing, but only
if the global analysis is not too demanding. This result can be
seen as an indicator of the psychological reality of local
coherence processing, and hence supports the dynamic system
view on language processing.
Keywords: local coherence; sentence processing; parsing
complexity; relative clauses; anomaly detection; dynamical
systems; simple recurrent networks.

Introduction
There has been considerable debate as to why some sentences
are more difficult to process than others, and why some
people are more affected by this difference than others.
Sentences can differ on a variety of dimensions affecting
working memory demands, such as the number and place
(left, centre, right) of embeddings, the number and range of
open dependencies within a sentence, word order regularity,
and the number and locality of integrations to be made at each
word. The language-related, working memory-oriented
literature has emphasized the notion of one or several
memory resources, whose capacity or capacities may vary
between individuals (Just and Carpenter, 1992, Caplan and
Waters, 1996). Exceeding this capacity leads to an impaired
comprehension quality, as intermediate processing results
may be forgotten. More complex sentences draw more on
these resources, leading to reduced reading speed. For
instance, relative clauses (RCs) are harder to process when
the relative pronoun represents the object of the RC (so called
object-extracted relative clauses, ORCs, as in 1.) than when it
is the subject (SRCs, as in 2., King and Just, 1991; Gibson,
1998; Traxler, Morris, and Seely, 2002).
1.
2.

The reporter whoi the senator attacked ti admitted the
error (ORC)
The reporter whoi ti attacked the senator admitted the
error (SRC)

In English, whether the relative pronoun (who) is the subject
or the object of the RC is determined by the word order
within the RC: in ORCs, where who is followed by an NP and
then the verb, the pronoun represents the object of the

sentence, while the NP is the subject. When who is
immediately followed by the verb, it must be the clausesubject (SRC).
There have been numerous proposals to explain the RC-type
effect. Sheldon (1974) pointed out that the same element
(reporter) bears the same function (subject) in an SRC as it
does in the matrix clause, whereas it carries different
functions when it is the object of the ORC. Processing and
memorizing parallel functions for the same entity should be
less demanding than doing so with different functions.
Wanner and Maratsos (1978) attribute the ORC difficulty to
the fact that the filler (i.e. the host of the relative pronoun,
here reporter) must be carried unattached longer in the ORCs
than in SRCs, where the verb immediately follows the
pronoun. Clifton and Frazier (1989) proposed the active filler
strategy as a heuristics employed by the human parser.
According to that strategy, which assumes that a trace coindexed with the filler is proposed as soon as it is
grammatically permissible during incremental parsing,
memory load is held minimal. Of course, the earliest
permissible filler position is right after the relative-pronoun
who, as in SRCs. Gibson (1998) provided a metric of
integration and memory costs associated with the number of
new discourse elements intervening dependents. Both cost
components are higher for ORCs: the prediction of a verb and
a trace must be kept in memory across the RC subject (where
memory cost is highest), and integration of the clause final
verb with its complements requires crossing more discourse
entities (the subject and the verb). Gordon, Hendrick, and
Johnson (2001) propose similarity-based interference as the
primary source of difficulty when the complements must be
retrieved from memory. MacWhinney and Pleh (1988)
pointed out that comprehenders want to take the perspective
of the subject of the sentence, which requires them to shift
perspective when an ORC is entered, and shift back when
processing continues with the matrix clause. In SRCs on the
other hand, they can keep the same perspective throughout
the entire sentence, which is favourable.
Interestingly, readers with a low reading span show more
difficulties with ORCs than others (King and Just, 1991). The
reading span test used here (Daneman and Carpenter, 1980)
was designed to involve both processing and memory skills.
Just and Carpenter (1992) proposed a model, named CCReader, which has at its core a parallel production system,
whose rules spread activation to memory elements when they
fire. Once a memory element receives enough activation to
pass a threshold, it can be retrieved from memory. Crucially,
the amount of activation available is limited (capacity
constrained, hence CC), so that an activation increase of one

1178

element results in the decline of activation of other elements.
Activation is considered a single resource that all language
related cognitive processes have access to.
High span readers naturally have a larger capacity than low
span readers, so that they can (i.) parse more complex
sentences more easily, (ii.) pursue multiple analyses in
parallel (MacDonald, Just and Carpenter, 1992), (iii.) use
more higher level information to exclude implausible analysis
paths in case of a temporal ambiguity, and (iv.) are less
affected by extrinsic memory load (Just and Carpenter, 1992).
While the single resource idea has received considerable
criticism (Caplan and Waters, 1996, 1999), there is little
dispute about the assumption that some sentences are less
memory intensive than others. Despite their differences, all
proposals share the view that complexity is a function of
certain construction-specific factors of globally correct
analyses of a sentence. This view has recently been
questioned by connectionist researchers.

The dynamical system view on complexity
Tabor, Juliano and Tanenhaus (1997) proposed a dynamical
systems approach to parsing based on a Simple Recurrent
Network (SRN, Elman, 1990) in which syntactic hypotheses
are associated with competing attractors in a metric space.
When a reader/listener encounters a local ambiguity, the time
to resolve it depends upon the point in the multi-dimensional
space where the system starts out and on the number of cycles
needed to settle down in an attractor position. Crucially, while
their account mainly focussed on local ambiguities in
sentences, it was later demonstrated that ungrammatical
influences of local coherences can also affect comprehension
performance. To test this hypothesis, Tabor, Galantucci and
Richardson (2004) conducted a series of self-paced reading
studies with sentences such as (3-6).
3.
4.
5.
6.

The coach chided the player tossed a frisbee by the
opposing team.
The coach chided the player who was tossed a frisbee by
the opposing team.
The coach chided the player thrown a frisbee by the
opposing team.
The coach chided the player who was thrown a frisbee by
the opposing team.

The verb tossed in (3) is morphologically ambiguous: it can
be either a past participle or a past tensed main verb. For that
reason, sentence (3) contains as a local subsequence the main
clause … the player tossed a frisbee …, where tossed is a
past-tensed verb (in fact, this is an instance of the standard
main clause/reduced relative garden path construction, as in
“the horse raced past the barn fell”, cf. Bever, 1970).
However, the subsequence is embedded in a context that
would exclude the main verb analysis, because the NP the
player must be the object of The coach chided, so that it
cannot be the subject of tossed. If the human sentence
processor pursues only global analyses, it should never
consider the past-tense alternative of tossed and the main

clause continuation, given that the previous context excludes
that analysis. Reading times on tossed the Frisbee should
hence not differ from unambiguous counterparts 4-6, where
the main clause analysis is further excluded by the RC
beginning who was … (4,6), and the use of the synonymous
but unambiguous past participle thrown instead of tossed
(5,6). However, reading times were elevated in (3) on that
region. Tabor et al. interpreted this result as evidence for the
interference of globally ungrammatical, yet locally coherent
analyses.
This interpretation has recently been criticized by Gibson
(submitted), whose account assumes an interaction of global
top-down and local (unigram) lexical statistics. According to
this view, strong unigram lexical preferences can override
weak global top-down predictions so that readers can be
fooled by strongly biased ambiguous words. The verb tossed
is statistically much more likely a main verb than a participle
and can hence override the global expectation.
Crucially, Gibson’s account requires lexical ambiguities to
predict an interference effect. While Gibson’s hypothesis can
account for the Tabor et al.’s data, it also predicts that no
local coherence interference should be observable when no
ambiguous words are included in the sentence. This question
will be addressed in the experiment presented below.
Furthermore, neither Tabor et al.’s, nor Gibson’s work have
taken into account inter-individual differences in disruption,
and there is yet no reference to the working memory debate in
the psychological literature at all.
Nevertheless, there has been one notable attempt to tackle
working memory issues with dynamical system accounts.
MacDonald and Christiansen (2002, henceforth MC)
proposed an experience-based account of linguistic
performance. Like Tabor et al’s work, MC used Simple
Recurrent Networks (Elman, 1990) to model processing
difficulty. SRNs acquire implicit grammatical knowledge
when they are trained to predict every next word given the
words of sentences one at a time. MC’s networks were
trained in three training epochs. Each epoch comprised ten
thousand grammatical sentences generated by a probabilistic
grammar, with complexity ranging from simple intransitive
and transitive main clauses to multiple center-embedded
relative clauses.
When MCs’ SRNs where tested with SRCs and ORCs, they
produced grammatical prediction error (GPE) patterns that
resemble the reading times found in high- and low-span
readers (King and Just, 1991): The GPEs started high for
ORCs but then quickly decreased with each training epoch,
while they stayed constantly low for SRCs.
Because SRNs are only presented with sequential
information, processing complexity differences between
SRCs and ORCs can best be attributed to their differential
degree of word order regularity. This claim is based on the
observation that SRCs exhibit subject-verb-object (SVO)
word order, just as simple transitive main clauses do. ORCs,
on the other hand, show irregular word order (OSV). While
the odds for RCs are generally rather low in corpora,
processing SRCs should benefit from word order regularity

1179

being transferred from main clauses. Furthermore, the amount
of training affected the error-patterns in much the same way
as reading span did affect reading times: While there were
basically no differences between more and less experienced
networks for SRCs, more experienced networks were better
then less experienced ones for ORCs. Inter-individual
differences in memory capacity – as measured by the reading
span test – were hence attributed to the differential amount of
experience with language processing, as simulated by the
three training epochs1. Since SRNs lack a clear functional
distinction between the linguistic knowledge, processing, and
a knowledge-free notion of a working memory and its
capacity, MC’s account has been first and foremost posited
against capacity-based working memory models such as
3CAPS (Just & Carpenter, 1992), and generally against any
account that claims a knowledge-independent notion of
working memory capacity.
Local coherences. In MCs networks, parsing complexity is
affected by activation erroneously assigned to ungrammatical
words (so called false alarm predictions) and by missing
activation of grammatical words (misses). Crucially, false
alarm predictions stem from local coherences that the
networks attempt to continue, so that activation is distracted
from the globally grammatical continuation prediction. A
detailed analysis of MCs’ output activity patterns (Konieczny
and Ruh, in prep.) shows that the higher error at the matrix
verb after ORCs is mainly due to the networks predicting
another NP after the embedded verb, as in the locally
coherent sub-sequence NP-verbtrans-NP. Similar locally
coherent false alarm effects are predicted for German RCs
(Konieczny and Müller, 2004) which even remain stable over
more than a hundred learning epochs when the network has
already established the farther reaching agreement
dependency between the matrix subject and the verb.
It is exactly this kind of false alarm prediction of an NP
following the clause-final verb that the following experiment
explores further.

Anomaly detection experiment
It is essential for the understanding of the human language
processor to establish locally coherent false alarm distractions
in comprehension, if they exist. It will furthermore be
important to establish inter-individual differences in
processing local coherences. The present paper addresses this
issue with an on-line anomaly detection experiment. The
rationale behind the experiment is that global syntactic
violations that are nevertheless locally consistent with a false
expectation (i.e., locally coherent) should be harder to detect
than anomalies that are both global and local. Depending on
the theoretical point of view, the local analysis might interfere
by either distracting attention from the global analysis, or by
having the concurrent local analysis compete with the global
analysis for memory resources.

Local coherences, working memory, and experience
If locally coherent expectations are psychologically real, it
will be interesting to see whether and how their effect is
modulated by working memory and experience variables. The
capacity-oriented framework predicts that interference occurs
only if there are sufficient memory resources available to
pursue a parallel local analysis, so that high span, rather than
low span readers should exhibit distraction effects, but only
when sentences are not too complex. For experience-based
models, on the other hand, the most important factor is the
relative frequency and regularity of the local coherence,
compared to all other interfering coherences, including the
global analysis. Furthermore, the relative influence of more
distant constraints should grow with more experience, and
shorter coherences should lose ground. More experienced
participants should hence be better in inhibiting locally
coherent false alarm predictions and should therefore be less
affected by shorter coherences. In the current experiment,
experience was measured with a simple questionnaire, where
participants had to indicate how much time per day they
spend reading any kind of text.

Materials and design
In both German SRCs and ORCs, the verb is placed at the
end of the RC, and function-assignment is based on
morphological case marking. In ambiguous cases, RCs are
preferentially understood as SRCs. ORCs also pose more
problems to language processors than SRCs (e.g. Mecklinger,
Schriefers, Steinhauer and Friederici, 1995; Bader and Meng,
1999).
Four erroneous sentence types (7-10), derived from sentences
with centre-embedded SRCs and ORCs, were constructed
according to a 2x2 design comprising the factors type (SRC,
7-8, vs. ORC, 9-10) and error coherence (coherent vs.
incoherent). Errors were produced by inserting an NP
(der/den Politiker) after the embedded RC-verb. Inserting a
nominative NP after SRCs yields the locally coherent subsequence NPacc-verb-NPnom, i.e., a topicalized transitive main
clause sequence (8). Similarly, an accusative NP after the
verb in ORCs (10) yields an NPnom-verb-NPacc (canonical
main clause) sub-sequence. The incoherent versions were
produced by inserting an accusative NP in SRCs (7), yielding
a local NPacc-verb-NPacc sequence, or a nominative NP in
ORCs (9), yielding a local NPnom-verb-NPnom sequence.
7.

8.

1

This claim was questioned by Caplan and Waters (2002) by
showing that the two variables do not seem to be correlated, but
see Köckner, 2002, for opposing results.
1180

SRC, incoherent
Der Abgeordnete, der den Journalisten beschimpft *[den
Politiker], liefert die Beweise.
The congressman, whonom the journalist acc attacks *[the
politician]acc, delivers the evidence.
SRC, coherent
Der Abgeordnete, der den Journalisten beschimpft *[ der
Politiker], liefert die Beweise.
The congressman, whonom the journalist acc attacks [the
politician]nom, delivers the evidence.

9.

ORC, incoherent
Der Abgeordnete, den der Journalist beschimpft *[der
Politiker], lieferte die Beweise.
The congressman, whoacc the journalistnom attacks *[the
politician]nom, delivers the evidence.
10. ORC, coherent
Der Abgeordnete, den der Journalist beschimpft *[den
Politiker], liefert die Beweise.
The congressman, whoacc the journalistnom attacks *[the
politician]acc, delivers the evidence.

Twenty-four sentences of each type were constructed and
distributed to four lists according to the latin square rotation
scheme, so that one version of each material appeared in each
of the four lists, and each type appeared equally often (five
times) in each list. There were another forty sentences with
various types of errors (agreement errors, noun omission
errors, case errors) and another sixty correct sentences of
various types as fillers, so that there were as many wrong
sentences as there were correct ones in the stimulus sets.

compared to locally incoherent ones, such that coherent ones
should take a little longer to be detected.
If experience interacts with AD performance, it should induce
a larger coherency effect for more regular local coherences.
The coherency effect should therefore be larger for ORCs,
where the local coherency is a regular SVO main clause,
whereas in SRCs, it is a slightly less frequent topicalized
OVS main clause. This difference should be smaller for
more-experienced readers.
However, if experience is just an estimate for working
memory capacity the results might show the opposite pattern:
the coherency effect should be stronger for SRCs, which are
easier to process than ORCs and thus leave enough resources
for parallel local analyses. However, this difference should
vanish for more experienced, and hence high span readers, as
they should have sufficient resources for local parses even in
more demanding ORCs.

Participants

Procedure

Fifty-four students from Freiburg were paid 5 € each to
participate in the experiment. Each participant was assigned
to one of three experience groups, depending on whether she
spent less than an hour per day reading (low experience,
twenty-four participants), between one and two hours
(middle, eighteen participants), and more than two hours
(high, twelve participants).

Sentences were presented in a word-by-word rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) fashion. Each word was presented
180+n*28ms, where n is the number of characters of the
word. Before the experiment, participants were instructed to
press, depending on their handedness, the left or right shift
button as soon as they noticed an error in the sentence. They
could do so during the presentation of the sentences, or
shortly afterwards (up to 800 ms after the last word). There
was no indication as to what the error would be like. No
button had to be pressed if the sentence was entirely correct.
Immediate feedback about their decision (correct or wrong)
was given after each trial. After a short pause of 500 ms, the
next sentence was presented. The time from the onset of the
first erroneous word (der or den) until they pressed the button
was recorded as the anomaly detection (AD) time. The
anomaly detection paradigm was set up with the DMDX
display software package (Forster and Forster, 2002), and ran
on a 1 Ghz Pentium III computer running Windows XP.
After the experiment, participants were given a questionnaire
where they were asked to indicate how much time they spent
reading newspapers, literature, e-mail, books, WWW, etc.
each day on average. The scale ranged from zero to more than
three hours per day.

Results
Accuracy. As expected, participants detected the error
(der/den instead of a comma) with a high precision of more
than 93% correct responses. There was no difference in
accuracy between conditions (see table 1), and no differences
between experience groups.
Table 1: Anomaly detection accuracy for each of the
experimental conditions.

SRC, incoherent
SRC, coherent
ORC, incoherent
ORC, coherent

Correct
rejections
93.8 %
93.4 %
94.1 %
93.2 %

Hypotheses

Anomaly detection times. Only trials with correctly rejected
sentences were analyzed for AD times2. The data were
submitted to a 2x2x3 MANOVA for repeated measures,
including clause type (SRC vs. ORC) and local coherency
(coherent vs. incoherent) as within-subject factors and

Accuracy. There is no grammatically permissible way to add
another phrase after a verb in German RCs without adding a
comma after the verb. The anomaly detection task is hence
fairly easy for the target sentences, as it amounts to noticing
whether the embedded verb is followed by a comma (correct)
or not (false). Therefore we expected participants to perform
with an over-all high accuracy, without differences between
conditions.
Anomaly detection time. AD time, however, should differ
considerably for locally coherent continuation errors,
1181

2

Before data analysis, outliers were excluded. Outliers were
identified for each condition using the SPSS boxplot procedure: a
box is defined by the inter-quartile range of values. Cases with
values more than 1.5 box lengths from the upper or lower edge of a
box were then excluded from data analysis2. This procedure
affected 2.7 % of all data points, with no differences between
conditions.

Anomaly-detection time (ms)

1800
incoherent
coherent

1700

1600

1500

1400

1300

1200
SRC

ORC

Figure 1: Anomaly detection times for SRCs and ORCs with
locally coherent and incoherent errors. Whiskers indicate
standard errors.
Experience level. There was a significant main effect for
experience
(F1(2,69)=3.12,
MSe=67235,
p=.05;
F2(2,22)=5.67, p<.05), which was due to the fact that the least
experienced participants were faster than any of the other two
groups. While there is a clear coherency effect for SRCs in all
experience groups, only the most experienced readers showed
more difficulty for coherent errors in ORCs as well (see
figure 2), though not reliably so. None of the interactions with
coherence or RC-type were significant (all Fs < 1.7). The lack
of a three way interaction experience x RC-type x coherence
might be due to the lack of statistical power, as substantially
more participants are needed for a reliable between-subjects
analysis.

Discussion
The anomaly detection time results support the psychological
reality hypothesis of locally coherent analyses in
comprehension. The fact that the coherency effect is restricted
to SRCs for all but the more experienced readers apparently
supports the capacity hypothesis, provided that reading span

1800

1800

1800

incoherent
coherent

1700

1700

1600

1600

1600

1500

1500

1500

1400

1400

1400

1300

1300

1300

1700
Anomaly detection time (ms)

experience level (low, middle, high) as between-subject
factor3.
Figure 1 illustrates, with experience groups collapsed, that in
SRCs, but not ORCs, AD was reliably (149 ms) longer for
locally coherent errors than for incoherent errors, resulting in
both significant main effects for coherency (F1(1,51)=20.26,
MSe=18336, p<.001; F2(1,23)=8.89, MSe=14241, p<.01)
and RC-type (F1(1,51)=5.79, MSe=36957, p<.05;
F2(1,23)=2.83, MSe=28077, p=.106), and a reliable
interaction of coherence and RC-type (F1(1,51)=5.58,
MSe=35560, p<.05; F2(1,23)=8.31, MSe=46885, p<.01).
Simple contrasts between coherent SRC and incoherent SRC
errors confirmed the effect within SRCs (F1(1,52)=22.61,
MSe=28864, p<.001; F2(1,23)=14.16, MSe=31613, p<.005),
and within coherent (SRC vs. ORC)
sentences
(F1(1,52)=11.99, MSe=44610, p<.005; F2(1,23)=8.32,
MSe=42574, p<.01).

1200

1200
SRC

ORC
low

1200

SRC

ORC
middle

SRC

ORC
high

Figure 2: Anomaly detection times for SRCs and ORCs with
locally coherent and incoherent errors, separated for three
experience groups. Whiskers represent standard errors.
and experience can be shown to be correlated (Klöckner,
2001): Since ORCs are too demanding for less experienced
readers, they have no sufficient resources available for a
parallel locally coherent analysis. If they are available, as in
SRCs and, for highly experienced readers, in ORCs, a local
coherency does indeed affect AD times.
However, the results can also be reconciled with an
experienced-based framework. The local coherences that we
investigated here spread across up to five words (5-gram):
det-noun-verb-det-noun. More experienced networks are
better in incorporating more distant dependencies. More
experienced participants could therefore be more sensitive to
longer coherencies and better in inhibiting short ones. Now,
note that in the materials there is another, shorter (3-gram),
coherence hidden within the larger local coherence: …verbdet-noun. It turns out that in German, the global sequence
verbfin-NPnom is quite common, as it is the beginning of a
canonical question (as in Schläft der Junge?, Sleeps the boy?,
“Does the boy sleep?”), or the continuation of a canonical
main clause, where the Vorfeld-position is occupied by an
adverb (Gestern schlief der Junge, Yesterday slept the boy,
“Yesterday the boy slept”), by a conjunction (Deshalb kaufte
der Mann …; Therefore bought the man … “Therefore the
man bought …”), or any topicalized constituent of the verbphrase (Mit dem Fernglas beobachtete der Polizist …; With
binoculars watched the policeman …; “With binoculars, the
policeman watched …”).
In SRCs, expecting a nominative after a finite verb is
supported by both longer and shorter coherences. In ORCs,
however, the long coherence supports an accusative
prediction, while the short coherence supports a nominative.
Both expectations might then compete with each other, so
that the coherency effect is eventually extinguished here.
More experienced readers, however, might have learned to
better suppress very local (i.e., short distance) distractors, so
that only longer ranging coherences can interfere with the
global analysis. If so, experienced readers might show the
coherency effect even for ORCs, which is, in fact, what the
results so far suggest. Further research will be necessary to
clarify this issue.

3

While experience level is a between-participants factor, it is
treated as a within-item factor in the item analysis.
1182

The results are in line with Tabor et al. (2004), who found
indications of local coherence interference in sentences with
locally ambiguous clauses embedded in disambiguating
sentence contexts. As in the present experiment, readers seem
to have pursued a globally prohibited, but locally coherent
analysis. Different from Tabor et al.’s experiments however,
the present study does not involve local ambiguities. The NPs
added to the sentences are clearly syntactically wrong in all
cases, and yet readers do seem to be disturbed more severely
when the NPs continue a local coherency. The results are
hence hard to reconcile within Gibson’s (submitted) account.

Conclusion
The results presented suggest that local coherences can
interfere with ‘normal’ parsing, as suggested by dynamical
system models. In these models, processing difficulty is
influenced by the number of potential concurrent analyses,
and on-line complexity can be estimated by how much
activation is devoted to false alarm predictions induced by
local coherences. The false alarm effect has two
fundamentally important implications for the nature of
parsing complexity: The standard view, by which human
sentence processing is considered a depth-first mechanism
that pursues only one globally correct parse, must be rejected
in favor of a model that can pursue several alternative
analyses in parallel, at least locally. Moreover, parallel
analyses are not restricted to temporal ambiguities in the
global string, they also occur within local sequences starting
at positions different from the sentence beginning. The
present results support this view.

Acknowledgments
I am very grateful to Daniel Müller for his assistance in
programming the anomaly detection paradigm in DMDX. I
also want to thank Sarah Schimke, Miriam Sutedja, and the
participants of the intensive course “neural models of
working memory and language” held by the author in winter
2003/04 for their help in preparing the materials, and Gerhard
Strube and Holger Keibel for many fruitful discussions, and
their valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Bader, M., & Meng, M. (1999). Subject-Object ambiguities in
German embedded clauses: an across-the-board
comparison. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28 (2),
121-143.
Caplan, D., & Waters, G. S. (1999). Verbal working memory
and sentence comprehension. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 77-94.
Caplan, D., & Waters, G. S. (2002). Working memory and
connectionist models of parsing: A reply to MacDonald
and Christiansen (2002). Psychological Review, 109-1, 6674
Clifton, C., & Frazier, L. (1989). Comprehending sentences
with long-distance dependencies. In G. N. Carlson & M. K.
Tanenhaus (Eds.), Linguistic structure in language
processing. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Daneman, M. & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Behavior, 19, 450-466.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding Structure in Time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. C. (2002). DMDX display software.
University of Arizona.
http://www.u.arizona.edu/~kforster/dmdx/dmdx.htm
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of syntactic
dependencies. Cognition, 68,1, 1-76.
Gibson, E. (submitted). The interaction of top-down and
bottom-up statistics in syntactic ambiguity resolution. MIT
manuscript submitted.
Gordon, P. C. ; Hendrick, R.; Johnson, M. (2001). Memory
interference during language processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 27(6), 1411-1423.
Hacker, W., Handrick, S., & Veres, T. (1996).
Lesespannentest. Manuscript. University of Dresden..
Just, M. A. & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working memory.
Psychological Review, 99(1), 122-149.
King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The role of working memory. Journal
of Memory & Language, 30, 580-602.
Klöckner, K. (2002). Arbeitsgedächtnis oder Erfahrenheit:
Experimentelle Evidenzen und ihre Netzwerk-basierte
Simulation zu deutschen Subjekt- und Objektrelativsätzen.
Unpublished Diploma thesis. Saarland University,
Computational Linguistics.
Konieczny, L., Müller, D. (2004). Does word order account
for the advantage of subject-extracted over object-extracted
relative clauses?. Poster presented at AMLaP 2004,
September 16-18 2004.
Konieczny, L., & Ruh, N. (2004). What's in an error? A
comment on MacDonald and Christiansen (2002).
Manuskript. IIG, Universität Freiburg.
MacDonald, M. C. & Christiansen, M. H. (2002).
Reassessing working memory: A comment on Just &
Carpenter (1992) and Waters & Caplan (1996).
Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
MacDonald, M. C., Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992).
Working Memory Constraints on the Processing of
Syntactic Ambiguity. In Cognitive Psychology. Academic
Press.
MacWhinney, B., & Pleh, C. (1988). The processing of
restrictive relative clauses in Hungarian. Cognition, 29, 95141.
Mecklinger, A., Schriefers, H., Steinhauer, K., & Friederici,
A. (1995). Processing relative clauses varying on syntactic
and semantic dimensions: an analysis with event-related
potentials. Memory and Cognition, 23, 477-494.
Tabor, W., Juliano, C., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (1997). Parsing
in a dynamical system: An attractor-based account of the
interaction of lexical and structural constraints in sentence
processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12, 211272.
Tabor, W., Galantucci, B., Richardson, D. (2004). Effects of
Merely Local Syntactic Coherence on Sentence Processing.
Journal of Memory and Language, 50(4), 355-370.

1183

