UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Emergence of Stimulus-Response Associations from Neural Activation Fields: Dynamic
Field Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4nj4q637

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Schoner, Gregor
Wilimzig, Caludia

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Emergence of Stimulus-Response Associations from Neural
Activation Fields: Dynamic Field Theory
Claudia Wilimzig (Claudia.Wilimzig@neuroinformatik.rub.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik; Ruhr-University of Bochum
ND 04, 44780 Bochum Germany

Gregor Schöner (Gregor.Schoener@neuroinformatik.rub.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik; Ruhr-University of Bochum
ND 04, 44780 Bochum Germany
meaning information ”red” may provide input to neurons encoding the oral response ”red” (Cohen, Dunbar
& McClelland, 1990; Roelofs, 2003; see Figure 1).

Abstract
Dynamic Field Theory is based on spatially continuous
representations of parameter space and provides a mathematical framework to study the metric structure of representations. We review evidence for such metric structure and provide a Dynamic Field Theory of stimulusresponse association to account for effects caused by the
metric structure of representations such as the distance
effect and the interaction of the Hick and Hyman effects
with stimulus metrics. We show how the integration of
different sources of information contributes to stimulusresponse association by providing a new model of the
manual Stroop effect.

“red”

“green”

Introduction
People continuously interact with their environment generating simple behaviors such as pointing or reaching,
but also using more complex skills such as using a computer. Everyday life thus requires a highly flexible
neural system that may adjust and readjust its behavior depending on situational constraints, may continuously learn new responses toward sensory inputs and
may adapt already existing stimulus-response mappings.
Cognitive scientists and psychologists have studied how
neural systems learn to react to input from sensory surfaces and how they compute the corresponding output
through stimulus-response association paradigms. If a
participant is asked to respond to a red stimulus by
pressing a right button and to a green stimulus by pressing a left button, this requires a stimulus-response mapping that the subject probably has never encountered
before. Nevertheless, within a very few practice trials
participants are able to perform such a task.
While such tasks might appear trivial to the participant, it is not obvious how the nervous system might
achieve them. One way researchers have tried to study
stimulus-response associations consists of bringing into
conflict multiple sources of response specification. In
the classic Stroop task (review by MacLeod, 1991), for
instance, the meaning of color words is brought into conflict with the color the words are printed in. Participants
have to speak out loud the latter and are slowed in their
response if that color is incongruent with the meaning of
the color word.
Neural accounts for such conflict in connectionist models are typically based on units that code for entire stimulus or response categories. For instance, neurons representing the print-color information ”red” or the word

red

green

red

print color

green

word
task input

Figure 1: Connectionist model of the Stroop paradigm,
redrawn after Cohen, Dunbar & McClelland (1990)

2359

Neurophysiological evidence on the other hand suggests that features are represented in continuous feature
maps, in which populations of neurons with broad tuning curves are activated. Across neocortex and other
parts of the central nervous system, the location of neurons in the network determines what information neurons encode (space code principle). In many cortical areas, topographic mapping makes that neighboring neurons encode similar kinds of information. Independently
of topography (anatomical coordinates), neuronal representations of parameters can be constructed by sorting
neurons according to what they code (functional coordinates) (Georgopoulos et al., 1982). Neuronal interaction is sensitive to this metric structure of representations, meaning that neurons representing similar information excite each other while neurons representing
dissimilar information inhibit each other. Wilson and
Cowan (1973) as well as Amari (1977) have shown that
the processing of information in such cortical and subcortical networks is mathematically well described by continuous dimensions with an associated metric defined by
interaction.

How may stimulus-response associations occur within
such continuous maps? Does the underlying metric
structure of feature representations influence the way
stimulus-response associations are realized?
Dynamic Field Theory (Kopecz & Schöner, 1995; Thelen et al., 2001; Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002) is an approach to the representation of stimulus and response
parameters that takes their natural metric structure into
account while also being consistent with basic neurophysiological principles (Amari, 1977). Within Dynamic
Field Theory (DFT), task and stimulus parameters define the dimensions of a functional space, over which an
activation field is defined. The activation field evolves
continuously in time under the influence of inputs and
brain-like interactions within the field. Inputs may derive from current sensory stimulation, but also from prior
knowledge about possible choices, memory traces of prior
activation or subthreshold cues. Localized peaks of activation represent perceptual or motor decisions as interaction is sufficiently strong to be capable of making
detection decisions (Bicho, Mallet & Schöner, 2000) or
selecting one out of a set of behavioral options (Kopecz
& Schöner, 1995). Based on the notion of population
distributions of activation (Erlhagen et al., 1999), Dynamic Field Theory is thus a process model of neuronal
decision making.
Many perceptual decision making tasks require a discrete response, for instance, as a label, to graded sensory information. If the neuronal support for decisions
is functionally continuous and metric in nature, how may
categorical responses emerge from such representations?
To categorically react to graded sensory information,
prior information is required that represents properties
of the categories. When prior activation has the appropriate metric and strength, Dynamic Fields respond in
a categorical mode, in which the location of a localized
peak of activation is determined by the location of the
prior distribution of activation and the generation of the
peak driven by a broad boost of activation while the current sensory input is weak (Wilimzig & Schöner, 2005).
In contrast, the field continuously estimates current parameters, as required for sensorimotor decision making
to support pointing or grasping movements, when the
current stimulus input is the dominant contribution and
prior activation provides a smaller contribution (Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002; see also Wilimzig & Schöner, 2005).
Many psychophysical effects occurring in sensorimotor
and perceptual decision making tasks provide evidence
for these concepts (Wilimzig & Schöner, 2005).

for one-dimensional fields to the multi-dimensional case
is straightforward (Taylor, 1999). Minimally, stimulusresponse association requires a two-dimensional field
with one sensory (perceptual) parameter, denoted by y,
and one motor parameter, denoted by x. This field represents all potential associations of a sensory-motor feature
through a dynamical equation of the following form:

Dynamic Field Theory of
Stimulus-Response Associations

Experimental signatures

τ u̇(x, y, t)

= −u(x, y, t) + h + S(x, y, t)
Z Z
+
w(x, x0 , y, y 0 )f [u(x0 , y 0 , t]dx0 dy 0

Due to the interaction of global inhibition and local
excitation
w(x − x0 , y − y 0 ) = −winhibit,xy
+wexcite,x exp[

−(x − x0 )2
−(y − y 0 )2
]w
exp[
]
excite,y
2
2
2σw,x
2σw,y

localized peaks can arise for the appropriate input building stable states of activation. Such a localized peak
then represents both a feature (perceptual decision) and
a response (motor decision) that can be read out for
movement planning.
How is the input structured? The two-dimensional
fields represent all possible feature-response associations
but in a given situation only those linkages that are relevant for the current situation are activated. This is
achieved through prior distributions of activation (preshape). Preshape, information about how to respond to
certain stimuli like ”press the right button for a red stimulus”, provides localized activation specifying response
parameters for feature parameters, Spre (x, y, t) (see Figure 2). The stimulus itself specifies a feature, for example ”red”, but does not give any information about the
response dimension, Sstimulus (y, t), thus the stimulus input is a ridge perpendicular to the motor dimension (see
Figure 2).
Preshaped activations are subthreshold as long as
there is no stimulus information. The stimulus information acts as a local shift of activation (local for the stimulus dimension, delocalized for the response dimension).
With the stimulus input the subthresholded preshape is
uplifted enough to generate a stable peak of activation
(see Figure 2). This peak generation is strongly driven
through interaction dynamics as with the stimulus contribution the localized preshape comes into the competitive regime of local excitation and global inhibition.

Distance of choices

To extend DFT to stimulus-response association tasks
a concept of the linkage between continuous sensory
and motor dimensions is needed. Continuous dimensions may be linked through a multi-dimensional association matrix. Following the DFT concept of neural
activation fields based on the Amari equations we use
a mathematical formalization by means of multidimensions fields. Mathematically, generalizing the concepts
2360

A first signature of the importance of the metric structure of task parameters is the finding that the metric
distance between choices matters (Erlhagen & Schöner,
2002). When preshapes are close along the feature
dimension but specify different motor responses, inputs overlap with more than one preshape (Wilimzig &
Schöner, 2005). As the stimulus input thus gives a contribution to more than one possible choice, both choices

Figure 2: Prior information (preshape) provides localized information specifying values for both dimensions
(a). Stimulus information specifies only a value for the
feature dimension but is unspecific for the response dimension (a). Due to the interaction single peaks of activation arise reflecting both a feature and a motor decision that can be read out for movement planning (b).

Figure 3: If choices are metrically close along the feature
dimension but specify different responses (a), the incoming stimulus overlaps with both choices so they actively
compete with each other resulting in a relatively slow
response generation ((c), black line). If choices are metrically distant along the feature dimension (b), the stimulus specifies only one of them so the peak generation is
faster ((c), grey line).

actively compete with each other leading to a substantial
amount of inhibition (see Figure 3).
In psychophysical literature this ”distance effect” is
one of the most robust phenomena in mental comparison
paradigms (review by Leth-Steensen & Marley, 2000).

Number of choices

For stimulus-response association fields DFT thus predicts that for sufficiently distant choices each stimulusresponse association adds an inhibitory contribution to
the field (Figure 4). In psychophysical literature this
is related to the question whether the number of motor
responses or the number of stimuli determines reaction
time. A classic result is indeed, as predicted by DFT,
that the number of stimulus-response associations determines reaction time (Keele, 1986). For sufficiently
close choices, for example if similar stimuli are grouped
under the same response (multi-to-one mapping), DFT
predicts that this effect decreases or even inverses (Figure 4) which is confirmed by experimental data (for example Lacouture, Li & Marley, 1998). Specifically, Pellizzer and Hedges (2003) showed that when subjects had
to point toward the location of a target the number of
precued locations influences reaction time as predicted
by Hick’s law. When the subjects had to respond to the
target by pressing a button, not the number of precued
locations but their metrical distance determined reaction
time.

The influence of number of choices as an increase of reaction time for an increasing number of choices is formalized through Hick’s law. Erlhagen and Schöner (2002)
have shown that the evolution of Hick’s law is an inherent consequence of the DFT concept of preshape. Each
choice adds a single distribution of preshaped activation. If choices are metrically distant, they interact primarily through inhibitory interaction, thus adding more
choices adds more inhibitory interaction to the field slowing down responses to each of the choices.
As interaction is sensitive to metric structure DFT
predicts a switch to primarily facilitatory interaction for
metrically close choices, thus in the limit case of sufficiently close choices the Hick effect can be reversed as
adding more choices then means adding more facilitatory
interaction (McDowell et al., 2004).
2361

Probability of choices
The amplitude of preshapes codes for the probability
of choices similar to prior probabilities in Bayesian inference – the more probable a choice is the higher the
amplitude of the preshape. Thus, if a probable choice
is specified through the stimulus contribution, it reaches
threshold earlier. On a psychophysical level, this is formalized through the Hyman law referring to faster responses toward more probable choices. DFT predicts
that if choices are sufficiently close, they interact through
facilitatory interaction, thus less probable choices benefit
from the facilitatory interaction of the preshape of the
more probable choice. This leads to the prediction that
for metrically close choices the Hyman effect disappears
which could be confirmed experimentally (McDowell et
al., 2002).
Within DFT, the Hyman law is a result of the memory
traces of prior activation history (Erlhagen & Schöner,
2002). Repeating the same response in reaction to a repeated presentation of the same stimulus leads to faster
reaction times, known as a facilitatory pretrial effect (for
a review see Luce, 1986) due to the increased preshape
for this choice. Whether responses to other stimuli can
contribute from this facilitatory memory trace depends
on the metric distance between stimuli and responses
respectively. In principle, such an effect was shown on
an abstract level shown by Campbell & Proctor (1993).
Again, whether the probability of choices matters depends on their metrical distance.

Influence of task environment - manual
Stroop task

Figure 4: Metrically distant choices (a) interact through
inhibitory interaction leading to the classic Hick effect.
For metrically close choices – metrically close along the
feature dimension, specifying the same response (b) –
this can switch to primarily facilitatory interaction leading to much faster response generation for metrically
close choices ((c), black line) than for distant ones ((c),
grey line), although in both cases the same number of
stimulus-response associations is specified.

Distributions of preshaped activation may also result
from previous tasks, such as memory traces of previously
learned associations. It is a well-known effect that when
participants have to switch between two types of associations (”task-switching”), their responses are slower compared to a single task design. Within DFT this effect
is due to the inhibitory influence of preshapes resulting
from the previously learned associations.

What kind of evidence exists for the assumption that
the representation of the Stroop task is based on similar
kinds of representation? Similar as for other stimulusresponse paradigms, the distance of choices matters. For
the Stroop paradigm this means that the distance determines the amount of interference: If relevant and irrelevant information specify similar, that is metrically close
information, the Stroop effect is larger than if they specify dissimilar information (Pavese & Umilta, 1998, 1999).
In the classic Stroop paradigm participants respond
orally which is a highly overlearned response for human
adults. In manual Stroop tasks participants have to associate colors with responses toward perceptually marked
response locations in the task environment which is an
association learned within the course of the experiment.
Stimuli are color-words written in different print colors,
so the stimulus contains two sources of information: the
word information and the print color. If the task is to
respond to the word information, in the manual Stroop
task the print color causes interference if it is incompatible with the word information which gave rise to the label ”reversed Stroop effect” (for example Durgin, 2003)
as for the classic word reading task the opposite effect
occurs.
Within the DFT model of the manual Stroop effect the
association field consists of a feature (color) and a spatial
dimension. Response buttons add localized preshaped
activations, associating colors with response locations.

However, DFT predicts that this effect decreases with
decreasing metric distance between choices. Having
learned similar responses to the same stimulus or the
same response to similar stimuli decreases or even inverses the classic task-switching cost. Thus, whether
the number of choices, either involved in current processing or previously learned ones, matters depends on
their metrical distance.
2362

Discussion

Stimulus contributions spread out along the spatial dimension. As two values are specified by the stimulus –
one through its color and one through its word information – two inputs are fed into the field that can either
specify the same feature value (compatible situation) or
different ones (incompatible situation) (see Figure 5).

Figure 5: In the manual Stroop task participants communicate their decisions by pressing colored buttons.
This task requires a stimulus-response association field
with one feature (color) and one spatial dimension (for
example movement direction). Localized preshapes reflect information about the location of the response buttons. As the stimulus itself contains two sources of information, for example through its print color and its
word information, two stimulus ridges are fed into the
field with the respectives strengths depending on which
information is the relevant and which the irrelevant one.

A number of psychophysical effects support the concept
that metric discriptions of relevant feature and motor
dimension are necessary to explain how nervous systems associate stimuli with responses as predicted by
DFT. The manual Stroop effect further indicates that
the representation of associations must integrate different sources of information. The concept of preshape in
Dynamic Field Theory provides a basis for understanding this integration of current information from sensory
surfaces and recent information from previous trials leading to a continuous updating of information about associations.
Within the framework of Dynamic Field Theory, the
concept of a memory trace representing the recent history of activation in the field has been used to understand how representations are preshaped by prior experience. This has led to an account for how the action history influences reaching in young infants (Thelen
et al., 2001), how choice probabilities determine reaction time (Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002), and how spatial memory becomes biased toward previously memorized locations (Schutte, Spencer & Schöner, 2003). In
stimulus-response association tasks the opposite effect of
an inhibition of just executed responses may also occur
(overview by Luce, 1986). However, recent evidence suggests that this effect might be due to an attentional bias
(Fecteau, Bell & Munoz, 2004; Fecteau et al., 2004).
This integration of different sources of information
provides an important contribution to the question how
the system learns new stimulus-response associations.
Learning needs to work on a very fast time scale as human adults are able to learn new associations within
very few practice trials or even ad hoc. As Dynamic
Field Theory provides a framework of how these different sources of information are integrated, it may serve as
an important tool to understand how stimulus-response
mappings adjust depending on situational constraints,
to explore how learning can work unsupervised on a fast
time scale, basically bootstrapping itself from previous
responses through preactivations leading to a highly flexible system.

The manual Stroop paradigm shows that the task
environment has an important impact on whether the
Stroop effect occurs or not. In the model, inhibition
arises mostly through the overlap of the stimulus contribution with a preshape, not through the stimulus itself
as it does not specify a response. Thus, DFT predicts
that a response option has to be specified for a particular
color in order to produce interference. That is, the irrelevant stimulus color has to be present in the set of colors
used for the response space. Indeed it was shown that
irrelevant information referring to colours used within
the experiment lead to a substantially larger amount of
interference (Durgin, 2003).
Furthermore, even if the irrelevant information refers
to a response option that is part of the current task set,
the interaction with the environment has an important
impact: The Stroop effect only occurs if the response
buttons are visibly labeled, within the field of vision of
the subjects and not rearranged between trials (overview
by Sugg & McDonald, 1994).
Different sources of information, such as inputs from
sensory surfaces and memory traces reflecting recent activation history, thus contribute significantly to stimulusresponse associations. Within, DFT all these sources of
information are reflected by the amount of preshaped
activation.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes [German National Merit
Foundation].

References

2363

Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in
lateral-inhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27, 77–87.
Bicho, E., Mallet, P. & Schöner. G. (2000). Target representation on an autonomous vehicle with low-level
sensors. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 19, 424–447.
Campbell, K. C. & Proctor, R. W. (1993). Repetition
effects with categorizable stimulus and response sets.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 19, 1345–1362.

Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K. & McClelland, J. L. (1990).
On the control of automatic processes: a Parallel Distributed Processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological Review, 97, 332–361.
Durgin, F. H. (2003). Translation and competition
among internal representations in a reverse Stroop effect. Perception & Psychophysics, 65, 367–378.
Erlhagen, W., Bastian, A., Jancke, D., Riehle, A., &
Schöner, G. (1999). The distribution of neuronal populatio activation (DPA) as a tool to study interaction
and integration in cortical representations. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 94, 53–66.
Erlhagen, W. & Schöner, G. (2002). Dynamic field theory of movement preparation. Psychological Review,
109, 545–572.
Fecteau, J. H., Au, C., Armstrong, I. T. & Munoz, D.
P. (2004). Sensory biases produce alternation advantage found in sequential saccadic eye movement tasks.
Experimental Brain Research, 159, 84–91.
Fecteau, J. H., Bell, A. H. & Munoz, D. P. (2004). Neural correlates of the automatic and goal-driven biases
in orienting spatial attention. Journal of Neurophysiology, 92, 1728–1737.
Georgopoulos, A., Kalaska, J. & Massey, J. (1982). On
the relations between the direction of two-dimensional
arm movements and cell discharge in primate motor
cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 2, 1527–1537.
Keele, S. W. (1986). Motor control. In K. R. Boff, L.
Kaufman & J. P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of perception and human performance. New York: WileyInterscience
Kopecz, K. & Schöner, G. (1995). Saccadic motor
planning by integrating visual information and preinformation on neural, dynamic fields. Biological Cybernetics, 73, 49–60.
Lacouture, Y., Li, S.-C. & Marley, A. A. J. (1998). The
roles of stimulus and response set size in the identification and categorization of unidimensional stimuli.
Australian Journal of Psychology, 50, 165–174.
Leth-Steensen, C. & Marley, A. A. J. (2000). A model
of response time effects in symbolic comparison. Psychological Review, 107, 62–100.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times. Oxford University
Press.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on
the Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163–203.

2364

McDowell, K., Jeka, J. J., Schöner, G. & Hatfield, B.
D. (2002). Behavioral and electrocortical evidence of
an interaction between probability and task metrics in
movement preparation. Experimental Brain Research,
144, 303–313.
McDowell, K., Jeka, J. J., Schöner, G. & Erlhagen, W.
(2004). An inversion of the signal uncertainty effect.
Manuscript under review.
Pavese, A. & Umilta, C. (1998). Symbolic distance between numerosity and identity modulates Stroop interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 24, 1535–1545.
Pavese, A. & Umilta, C. (1999). Further evidence on the
effects of symbolic distance on Stroop-like interference.
Psychological Research, 62, 62–71.
Pellizzer, G. & Hedges, J. H. (2003). Motor planning:
effects of directional uncertainty with discrete spatial
cues. Experimental Brain Research, 150, 276–289.
Roelofs, A. (2003). Goal-referenced selection of verbal
action: Modeling attentional control in the Stroop
task. Psychological Review, 110, 88–125.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P. & Schöner, G. (2003).
Testing the Dynamic Field Theory: Working memory
for locations becomes more spatially precise over development. Child Development, 74, 1393–1417.
Sugg, M. J. & McDonald, E. (1994). Time course of inhibition in color-response and word-response versions of
the Stroop task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 20, 647–675.
Taylor, J. G. (1999). Neural ’bubble’ dynamics in two
dimensions: Foundations. Biological Cybernetics, 80,
393–409.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C. & Smith, L. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant perseverative reaching. Brain and Behavioral Sciences, 24, 1–33.
Wilimzig, C. & Schöner, G. (2005). How are sensorimotor decisions different from perceptual decisions? A
Dynamic Field Theory of continuous and categorical
response generation. Manuscript in preparation.
Wilson, H. R. & Cowan, J. D. (1973). A mathematical theory of the functional dynamics of cortical and
thalamic nervous tissue. Kybernetik, 13, 55–80.

