UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of External Representations on Providing Online Instructions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sq911ck

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bromme, Rainer
Jucks, Regina
Runde, Anne

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of External Representations on Providing Online Instructions
Regina Jucks (jucks@uni-muenster.de)
Rainer Bromme (bromme@uni-muenster.de)
Anne Runde (arunde@uni-muenster.de)
University of Muenster, Psychologisches Institut III, Fliednerstr. 21
D-48149 Muenster, Germany

Abstract
In the following paper, we report on two studies which test for
possible detrimental effects of external representations in a
scenario where experts respond to email inquiries in medical
advice. Based on research on expert-layperson-communication
we assume that experts’ extensive and highly integrated
knowledge of their own domain makes it very difficult for them
to comprehend the completely different perspective of a
layperson. Such an immersion into one’s own, privileged
knowledge is exacerbated through the availability of external
representations (e.g. diagrams of body functions). We
hypothesize that especially visualizations which make the subject
matter immediately evident for the expert, have such a
detrimental effect. Varying the complexity of an external
representation, only available to the expert, we established
furthermore that an “easier”, that is, a less complex illustration,
produces less audience-designed answers than a much more
demanding and complex illustration.

Introduction
Most research on learning from external representations
focuses on individual learning, concentrating, for example, on
the integration of text and graphics when acquiring science or
technology concepts (Glenberg & Langston, 1992; Carney &
Levin, 2002). Recently, a second (so far, smaller) strand of
research has emerged focusing on shared external
representations in interactions, for example in computer
mediated collaborative learning (see, for example, Suthers &
Hundhausen, 2003; Conole, Dyke, Oliver, & Seale, 2004) and
communication (Healey, Swoboda, Umata, & Katagiri, 2002).
This research interest has been accelerated by the fact that
external representations are much easier to access, copy and
distribute in computer-mediated- than in face-to-face
communication. Computer-mediated-communication also
entails instructing using non-shared external representations.
Examples of such situations are hotline settings where experts
respond to inquiries. In such scenarios, experts often have
access to data bases, including graphic representations, which
are intended to support their responses. This scenario has not
been the focus of research until now, but it is nevertheless an
interesting case for identifying the impact of non-shared
external representations on communication in any instructional
context.
In the following paper, we report on two studies which test
for possible detrimental effects of external representations in
such a scenario where experts respond to email inquiries. Why
do we suggest that there are detrimental effects? Research on
1072

expertise provides evidence that experts not only know more
than laypersons, but they also have a different way of
structuring their domain-specific knowledge. Training and
experience mould people’s perception regarding what is
important in their work, so that they view it in a specific way.
There is substantial evidence that experts have difficulty in
adapting their advice to the informational needs of laypersons.
One can assume that experts’ extensive and highly integrated
knowledge of their own domain makes it very difficult for
them to comprehend the completely different perspective of a
layperson. This was termed ‘the curse of expertise’ by Hinds
(1999), whose experimental study demonstrates that experts
underestimate the difficulties novices face when performing a
complex task (also see Bromme, Rambow, & Nückles, 2001;
Hinds, Patterson, & Pfeffer, 2001, for studies on similar
expertise effects). Particularly in the medical field, many
research findings indicate that experts do not orientate their
explanations towards laypersons’ ability to understand what
they hear or read (Bromme, Jucks, & Wagner, in press; Boyle,
1970).
Keysar, Barr, and Horton (1998) have demonstrated that
even in everyday situations, people use ‘privileged
information’, i.e. information that is only available to
themselves and not to their communication partner. When
experts instruct non-experts, their expert knowledge (for
example of medical issues) can be regarded as privileged
information per se. In computer-mediated-communication
however, we assume that such an immersion into one’s own,
privileged knowledge is exacerbated through the availability of
external representations (e.g. diagrams of body functions). We
hypothesize that especially visualizations which make the
subject matter immediately evident for the expert, have such a
detrimental effect (privileged information hypothesis). Hence,
the first aim of our experiments is to explore the impact of
external representations on expert adaptation to a layperson
audience.
For our study we selected the field of online medical advice,
and thus a situation in which experts respond to written
requests by writing emails to the person who has sent a
question. In such settings, the expert often has no further
information, beyond the question itself, available about the
sender and, because feedback is either lacking (if there is a
one-turn interaction) or at least time-delayed, adaptation to the
knowledge level becomes both very important and very
difficult. In cases where the speaker takes into account the
partner’s level of knowledge when planning and formulating a

response, Clark and Murphy (1982) used the term audience
design.
One could argue that experts who are knowledgeable in their
own field, but have no further educational training, have
difficulties in providing any audience design at all. In other
words, they reproduce their knowledge in a non-adapted way,
just as it is represented in their mental model, by means for
example of technical language and by organizing their message
according to their own knowledge structures.
It could, therefore, be argued that (possible) detrimental
effects of non-shared visualizations would not only result from
assumed immersion into expert knowledge, but would reflect a
general lack of ability to adapt their answers to different
audiences. Therefore, in our experiments, we not only vary the
availability of external representations, but also the target
audience. In our experiments, we require experts to answer
requests from laypersons as well as requests from co-experts
(i.e. a person who has overlapping background knowledge on
the subject matter). By doing so, we can determine whether our
experts adapt to different audiences at all. Clark and Murphy
(1982) argue that speech partners apply certain heuristics to
help them adapt their messages to the knowledge of their
interlocutors. These heuristics enable an economical
structuring of communicational contributions (in accordance
with the maxim of quantity proposed by Grice, 1989).
Knowledge presumed to be common ground does not have to
be explained again. One heuristic is particularly relevant to the
experiments described below. It derives from the perceived
group membership of the communication partner (community
membership heuristic), the criteria being age, sex, nationality
and, very important in this regard, the perceived level of
expertise of the communication partner (Isaacs & Clark, 1987;
Clark & Marshall, 1981). We assume that experts apply this
heuristic when they give online instructions and communicate
their knowledge differently to a less and a more knowledgeable
addressee (community membership hypothesis). In our
experiments, our expert-participants respond to requests
written by (fictitious) persons, that are either introduced as coexperts or laypersons.
Hence, we address the following two questions: 1) do experts
adapt to the recipient’s knowledge status (co-expert vs.
layperson) and 2) do graphic illustrations impact on the way
answers are formulated?

and novices within medicine are compared (for a more detailed
discussion of this distinction see Bromme, Rambow, &
Nückles, 2001). Therefore it was possible to run this study with
advanced medical students as ‘experts’. In the context of our
research, the domain-related knowledge is critical.
Materials. Inquiries. The participants worked with an inquiry
that was introduced to them as written by a layperson on the
topic of laxatives, and with an inquiry introduced as written by
a co-expert in another field (medicine instead of pharmacy) on
the same topic. The topic of laxatives and especially their
misuse is frequently the subject matter of communication
between pharmacists and their patients and can, therefore, be
seen as relevant to expert-layperson communication in healthrelated areas. The inquiry from the fictitious medical expert
was identical in content, but more specialized terminology was
used than in the inquiry from the layperson, so that the text of
the inquiry matched the information on expertise status. After
receiving the inquiry, participants were asked to explain to the
respective addressees the link between the use of laxatives and
potassium deficiency and its effects.
External representations. The graphic illustration – used in
the appropriate experimental condition – showed the
relationship between the use of laxatives and potassium
deficiency. It was necessary for the depiction to be clear
enough for the expert to identify the relevant information. On
the other hand, we had to ensure that laypersons without prior
knowledge, did not profit from it unduly. This was ensured in a
preceding experiment with laypersons. Figure 1 shows the
illustration.

Experiment 1

Figure 1: Illustration on the topic of laxatives.

Method
Participants. A sample of advanced pharmacy students from
German universities participated in the experiment. On
average, participants were in their 4th year of university
education (M = 7.09 semester, SD = 1.31) and between 21 and
37 years of age (M = 25.47, SD = 3.16). 68 % of our sample
was female. Furthermore, we administered a test of
pharmaceutical-medical knowledge which matched the topic of
the explanatory task. On average, the participants answered 16
out of 18 items correctly (SD = 1.32). It should be noted that in
our context the concept of ‘expert’ is used in contrast to
laypersons, not to novices, unlike many studies where experts

1073

As a further experimental condition, experts were given a list
of key words which contained the same terms in the same
sequence (starting with Obstipation) as those depicted in the
illustration. This condition without a graphic representation
ensures that the specialist concepts relevant to the explanatory
task were salient in a similar manner.
Design and Procedure. The entire experiment was conducted
online using an internet browser. The data bank program
FileMaker® was used to store the data. The experimental
environment was closed, i.e. only people who had received an
invitation could take part. A 2 x 2 factorial design was used,
whereby the factor ‘addressee’ was carried out in a within-

subject-design (2 levels) and the external representation was
manipulated in a between-subject-design.1 Table 1 provides
information about the experimental design.
The experimental environment consisted of web pages that
could only be viewed in a predetermined sequence. First, a
brief introduction to the task was given. Participants were told,
that the goal of the study is to analyze the communicative
behavior of experts in email situations. They were not informed
about the different experimental conditions. Participants were
asked to answer several questions about their computer and
internet use before they proceeded to answer the two inquiries.
Once the first answer was completed and sent, it was no longer
possible either to review or to edit it.
Table 1: Experimental design.

significant to our research context, because it signaled whether
a layperson’s perspective was used. A bullet list was made of
all the specialist terms used in the answers from the experts.
There were 43 terms in all, 21 of which were used in the
explanations to both, laypersons and medical experts, with an
average usage rate of at least 10 %. We analyzed how often the
terms were used in the answers to both groups of addressees.
For further differentiation, these 21 terms were distinguished
with respect to specialist terms already contained in the
material and those which were not contained in the material. 12
terms were identified as already present in the material. These
appeared in the external representations and/or in the inquiries.
Experts introduced the remaining 9 terms of their own accord.
Use of direct address. The number of times the expert
addressed his explanation directly to the (fictitious) recipient
was counted by counting the pronouns indicating a direct
reference to the patient as the recipient of the written answer
(e.g. you, yours).
Both, the amount of ML terms and the use of direct address
were assessed by going through a definite list of words. Hence,
no interrater agreement was measured.
Content of the answers. In addition to examining the use of
words, we used content analysis to answer the question: what
did the experts write about? The explanatory task was the same
for both addressees. Nevertheless, experts had some scope with
regard to the choice of content for the reply. In total, 28 themes
were identified which could be divided into three categories: 13
themes were classified as behavioral tips, 9 as closely related
to the explanatory task and the remaining 6 as broadly related
to the explanatory task. Thus, information about a chemical
laxative being better than a vegetable laxative is considered a
tip, while information about potassium being important for
preventing obstipation is classified as an argument closely
related to the explanatory task. On the other hand, information
that laxatives help food pass through the digestive system
quickly, while not allowing the body to absorb potassium, is
considered to be only broadly related to the explanatory task.
The interrater agreement was r = .74 for themes broadly related
to the explanatory task, r = .81 for themes closely related to the
explanatory task and r = .84 for classification of behavioral
tips.
Examples. An example was identified when the expert used
certain expressions (e.g. “for example” or “like”) in
combination with descriptions that referred to different
instances of the same category object (e.g. listings of different
drugs, certain foods). Interrater reliability for the total number
of examples in answers was r = .70.
Perceived helpfulness of external representation. At the end
of the experiment, experts rated on a five point scale (from 1 =
“not at all” to 5 = “very”) how helpful they perceived the given
material to be for explaining the subject matter. This question
was presented twice, once with regard to answering the
layperson’s inquiry and the second time with regard to the
answer in the co-expert’s inquiry.

Addressee
External representation

medical
expert

layperson

Illustration

n = 17

Bullet list of keywords

n = 17

The experiment ended with the domain-specific knowledge
test, some demographic questions and questions about
participants’ attitudes to online health counseling. The average
participation time was 45 minutes.
Dependent variables. The answers given by the experts were
analyzed by means of a content analysis. Linguistic structural
characteristics of the texts were used to determine the audience
design of the experts. In so doing, we based our work on
variables that had been used in the psycholinguistic studies on
audience design mentioned earlier in this paper. We also
included variables from instructional psychology. It can be
assumed that these structural characteristics are relevant to
recipients’ text understanding (e.g. using examples, cf.
Reimann, 1997). Experts’ answers were examined in terms of
the following parameters:
Number of words. The total number of words used by
experts in the explanatory phase was counted.
Use of medical language (ML) terms. Many medical
concepts (at least those covered within such hotline scenarios)
can be put in different kinds of words: the specialist term with
a Greek or Latin origin and a German translation, which is
commonly used by laypeople. For example, ‘Laxans’ for
laxatives and the German ‘translation’ ‘Abführmittel’ (The
German language has more of such commonly used nontechnical terms than for example the English language.).
Therefore one can differentiate between a more technical use
of language/words and a more ‘common’ one. This is very
1

In both, the first and the second experiment, a third independent
condition was assigned to a further group of participants providing
them with the same but shared illustration. This condition is not
described here, as it was used to gather data that falls outside the
scope of this article. The data are reported elsewhere (Jucks,
Bromme, & Runde, 2003). The theoretical background to the entire
research project is described in Bromme, Jucks, and Runde (2005).

Results

1074

Groups did not differ with regard to age, gender and
knowledge about the topic, all t(32) < 1.40, ns.

Using all six groups of dependent variables, both main
effects yielded significant differences, both F(9, 24) > 2.90, p <
.05. The addressee by representational form interaction was not
significant, F(9, 25) = 0.79, ns. Univariate analyses for both
main effects provide the following result pattern:
With the exception of information that is closely related to
the inquiry, expert-participants answered the query from the
layperson differently to that from a medical expert. The
layperson received more words, more direct address, more
examples, more behavior-related tips, less information that is
more broadly related to the content of the inquiry and fewer
medical terms (both those that had been used in the materials
and those that had been not) than medical experts, all F(1, 32)
> 9.40, p < .001.
Furthermore, experts perceived the external representation to
be more helpful in answering the medical expert’s inquiry (M =
4.35, SD = 0.77) than answering the layperson’s inquiry (M =
2.94, SD = 1.37), F(1, 32) = 35.86, p < .001.
Answering the queries having the illustration at hand versus
having the bullet list at hand, yielded differences only with
regard to three content-indicators: experts in the condition
‘illustration’ gave more information that is closely related to
the inquiry, provided their recipient with fewer behaviorrelated tips and fewer examples than experts with the bullet list,
all F(1, 32) > 6.20, p < .05. Furthermore, experts perceived the
illustration to be more helpful in explaining the topic (M =
4.03, SE = .19) than the ‘bullet list of keywords’ (M = 3.27, SE
= .19), F(1, 32) = 8.24, p < .01. No further differences
occurred, all F(1, 32) < 2.40, ns.

the items of information one by one. Hence, the representation
format had a very substantial impact on the explanations, even
when the explanatory task remained the same.
Nevertheless, it can be ruled out that the illustration required
more effort of the experts and produced more cognitive load
than the bullet list of keywords. Those topics that are broadly
related to the explanatory task as well the number of medical
terms yielded no differences between the two conditions. The
variables ‘use of direct address’ and ‘length of explanations’,
also yielded no differences between the various external
representation formats.
So far, the results of Experiment 1 allow the following
interpretation: the comparison between explanations written for
a layperson and those written for a co-expert reveals clearly
that our participants are able to adapt their answers to different
audiences. Nevertheless their explanations became more
‘expert’-like when written with a scientific illustration on hand.
Hence, their addressee-orientation decreases. Paradoxically our
expert-participants regarded the illustration as more helpful in
communicating with their recipients than the bullet list of
keywords. It seems that they suffered from an insider bias, and
accordingly concluded that what is easy for them to understand
is also transparent to a less knowledgeable person.
One could argue that the illustration was ‘tempting’ as it was
relatively easy to understand at least for experts. Does a more
‘scientific’ illustration also focus experts on the subject matter
and reduce their addressee-orientation? Study 2 was conducted
in order to answer this question using a more complex
illustration.

Discussion

Experiment 2

Did experts apply the community membership heuristic? The
results show that participants adapted their explanations
significantly, according to the knowledge they expected from a
layperson or a medical expert. When giving an explanation to a
layperson, they used fewer specialist terms than when
addressing a medical expert. Besides, in their replies to the
layperson, experts explained issues in more detail, using more
direct address and illustrative examples than in their
explanations to medical experts. Concerning the selection of
topics, experts also adapted to the (fictitious) recipient. The
layperson received more behavior-related tips and fewer
broadly related, additional specialist information about biochemical processes than medical experts. Only with respect to
the use of themes closely related to the task itself, no
distinction was made between laypersons and medical experts.
These themes formed the core of the explanatory task and left,
therefore, little ‘room for manoeuvre’.
Did the illustration impact on expert’s instructions? The
comparison shows a considerable impact of the external
representation format on the content referred to. Experts who
had a illustration available when replying to the inquiries (even
though the illustration was not available to the recipient), used
significantly fewer examples than experts who had a bullet list
of key words to work with. In addition, more ‘themes closely
related’ to the explanatory task were addressed when experts
had an illustration, rather than a bullet list of key words. This
suggests that experts in the condition ‘illustration’ quite clearly
turned to the illustration when selecting content, ‘ticking off’

Method
Participants. A new sample of advanced pharmacy students
from German universities participated in the experiment. On
average, participants were in their 5th year of university
education (M = 8.50 semester, SD = 0.55) and between 24 and
33 years of age (M = 26.91, SD = 2.69). A total of 46 % of our
sample was female. On average, the participants answered 16
of 18 items from the domain-specific test correctly (SD = 1.14).
Data from 35 persons was used for the following analysis.
Eighteen were randomly assigned to the condition ‘illustration’
and seventeen to the condition ‘bullet list of keywords’.
Materials. Inquiries. The same inquiries were used as in the
first experiment. External representations. Again, the graphic
illustrations – used in the appropriate experimental condition –
illustrated the relationship between the use of laxatives and
potassium deficiency.
In contrast to the illustration used in Experiment 1, in this
experiment, the illustration was more demanding in form and
content (see Figure 2). The first half of the illustration depicts
those aspects that are relevant to the explanatory task. The
bottom part of the illustration shows aspects that have no direct
relevance to the explanatory task. The rationale behind
choosing this illustration is to increase the ambiguity and
therefore, the necessity to decide exactly what contents should

1075

be explained. This illustration was also ‘translated’ into a list of
key words.

differences occurred between the two representation forms,
both F(1, 33) > 3.20, p < .10.
Furthermore, experts perceived the bullet list to be more
helpful for explaining the topic (M = 3.00, SE = .18) than the
illustration (M = 2.25, SE = .17), F(1, 33) = 9.48, p < .001. No
further differences occurred, all F(1, 33) < 2.18, ns.

Discussion of study 2
Regarding the community membership hypothesis, the
results correspond exactly to the results of Experiment 1.
Again, experts answering an inquiry from a layperson used
fewer specialist terms, experts explained issues in more detail,
used more direct address and illustrative examples than in their
explanations to medical experts. Furthermore, they provided
the layperson with more behavior-related tips.
With respect to the privileged information hypothesis, the
results are different from those in Experiment 1. Again, the
illustration had a different impact on experts’ answers than the
bullet list of keywords. In contrast to Experiment 1, experts
perceived the illustration provided in Experiment 2 to be less
helpful in answering the inquiries than the bullet list of
keywords. Furthermore, they provided the lay addressee with
more behavior-related tips when they had the illustration rather
than the bullet list. Hence, the conclusion can be drawn that
experts perceive how demanding the illustration is and thus
devote additional effort to answering the inquiries in a
comprehensible manner.

General discussion

Figure 2: Demanding illustration on the topic of laxatives
The experimental design, procedure, and dependent variables
were administered identically in Experiments 1 and 2.

Results
The groups did not differ with regard to age, gender and
knowledge of the topic, all t(33) < 2.00, ns.
Using all six groups of dependent variables, both main
effects yielded significant differences, both F(9, 25) > 2.90, p <
.05. The addressee by representation form interaction was not
significant, F(9, 25) = 1.59, ns. Univariate analyses for both
main effects provide the following result pattern:
Expert-participants answered the query of the layperson
differently than the query of the medical expert. The layperson
received more words, more direct address, more examples,
more behavior-related tips, and fewer medical terms (both
those that had been used in the materials and those that had
been not), all F(1, 33) > 4.72, p < .05. With regard to
information that is closely related and information that is more
broadly related to the content of the inquiry no differences
occurred on the factor addressee, both F(1, 33) < 3.00, ns.
Experts perceived the external representation to be more
helpful in answering the medical expert’s inquiry (M = 3.29,
SD = 1.05) than in answering the layperson’s inquiry (M =
1.94, SD = 0.91), F(1, 33) = 58.82, p < .001.
Answering the queries with the illustration, versus having the
bullet list on hand, provided differences only with regard to
two content-indicators: With regard to information that is
broadly related to the inquiry and behavior-related tips no

In the two experiments, an online instructional setting
between experts and their recipients was modeled. Both
experiments clearly indicate that medical experts adapt their
answers to their recipients’ needs. Our expert-participants
provided the lay recipient with less technical and more
illustrated information than the expert from a different, but
related field. Hence, community membership of the recipient
was considered in answering the two queries.
Furthermore, both experiments provide evidence that
scientific illustrations exert a particular impact on the form and
content of replies. In Experiment 1, experts – in the appropriate
experimental condition – had an illustration that they regarded
as helpful in explaining the subject matter. This illustration,
although containing scientific information, is more
straightforward and directly focused on the relevant issues than
the second illustration. The latter was, again from experts’ own
perspective, perceived as not helpful for answering the
inquiries. Strikingly, content analyses provide evidence of the
opposite effect. With the ‘helpful’ illustration on hand, experts
seemed to have “left their lay addressee behind”. They went
into more detail than necessary, leaving out examples and
behavior-related tips in contrast to those experts who worked
with the bullet list of keywords.
Although our participants adapted their explanations to the
respective knowledge level of the addressee, when writing with
an illustration the answers became more expert-like. In
contrast, working with the ‘unhelpful’ illustration, experts
provided their audience with more behavior-related tips and

1076

less additional information which is only broadly related to the
subject matter than experts using the bullet list.
A possible explanation of the differences is that the same
underlying cognitive mechanism becomes relevant: once
experts focus on the illustration, and perceive it as useful for
their job, they get involved, use it, and it impacts directly on
the answer. If they immediately “see” how demanding the
material is and perceive the illustration to be unhelpful, they
counteract the impact of the illustration by providing a
comprehensible and comprehensive explanation. Hence, the
availability of an illustration that looks rather easy to experts
while they instruct, could be rather detrimental.
It has to be emphasized that the ‘expert-like’ style of
answering the questions is characterized by a stronger focus on
the physiological mechanisms, in other words on the critical
biological and chemical concepts necessary to understand how
laxatives work. Under certain circumstances it might be
desirable for medical experts to focus on such science-based
explanations, even when answering laypersons’ questions.
Such a focus on explaining science concepts instead of
delivering mere instructions about how to behave as a patient
and instead of delivering treatments without any justification
might be preferable under certain circumstances (Runde,
Bromme & Jucks, submitted). Nevertheless, such a focus
should be the result of a purposeful decision of the expert and it
should not simply be triggered by the availability of a nonshared external representation.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Annika Schneider, Verena Vogel
and Maria Senokozlieva for their help in collecting and coding
the data, to Thorsten Wessels for pharmaceutical expertise and
to Brian Bloch for native speaker advice. This research was
funded by the DFG.

References
Boyle, C. M. (1970). Difference between patients’ and doctors’
interpretation of some common medical terms. British
Medical Journal, 1(704), 286-289.
Bromme, R., Jucks, R., & Runde, A. (2005). Barriers and
biases
in
computer-mediated
expert-laypersoncommunication. In R. Bromme, F. W. Hesse, & H. Spada
(Eds.). Barriers, biases and opportunities of
communication and cooperation with computers- and how
they may be overcome (pp. 89-118). New York: Springer.
Bromme, R., Jucks, R., & Wagner, T. (in press). How to refer
to “diabetes”? Language in online health advice. Applied
Cognitive Psychology.
Bromme, R., Rambow, R., & Nückles, M. (2001). Expertise
and estimating what other people know: the influence of
professional experience and type of knowledge. Journal of
experimental psychology: Applied, 7(4), 317-330.

Carney, R. N. & Levin, J. R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations still
improve students´ learning from text. Educational
Psychology Review, 14(1), 5-26.
Clark, H. H. & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite references and
mutual knowledge. In A. K. Joshi, B. L. Webber & I. A.
Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp. 10–
63). Cambridge: University Press.
Clark, H. H. & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in
meaning and reference. In J. F. LeNy & W. Kintsch (Eds.),
Language and comprehension (pp. 287–299). Amsterdam:
North-Holland Publishing Company.
Conole, G, Dyke, M., Oliver, M., & Seale, J. (2004). Mapping
pedagogy and tools for effective learning design.
Computers & Education, 43(1-2), 17-33.
Glenberg, A. M. & Langston, W. E. (1992). Comprehension of
illustrated text: Pictures help to build mental models.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 129-151.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Healey, P. G. T., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & Katagiri, Y.
(2002). Graphical representations in graphical dialogue.
International Journal of Human-Computer-Studies, 57,
375-395.
Hinds, P. J. (1999). The curse of expertise: The effects of
expertise and debiasing methods on predictions of noviceperformance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 5, 205–221.
Hinds, P. J., Patterson, M., & Pfeffer, J. (2001). Bothered by
abstraction: The effect of expertise on knowledge transfer
and subsequent novice performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 86(6), 1232-1243.
Isaacs, E. A. & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in conversation
between experts and novices. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 116, 26-37.
Jucks, R., Bromme, R., & Runde, A. (2003). Audience Design
von Experten in der netzgestützten Kommunikation: Die
Rolle von Heuristiken über das geteilte Vorwissen.
Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 211, (2), 60-74.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., & Horton, W. S. (1998). The egocentric
bias of language use: Insights from a processing approach.
Current directions in psychological science, 7, 46–50.
Reimann, P. (1997). Lernprozesse beim Wissenserwerb mit
Beispielen. Bern: Huber.
Runde, A., Bromme, R., & Jucks, R. (submitted). Scripting in
net-based medical consultation: The impact of external
representations on giving advice and explanations.
Suthers, D. D. & Hundhausen, C. D. (2003). An experimental
study of the effects of representational guidance on
collaborative learning processes. The Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 12(2), 183-218.

1077

