UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Temporal Order Effect in Children's Counterfactual Thinking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68k4d9c5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Byrne, Ruth M.J.
Meehan, Julie E.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Temporal Order Effect in Children’s Counterfactual Thinking
Julie E. Meehan (meehanje@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland

Ruth M.J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
Psychology Department, University of Dublin,
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
turned out and the way it could have turned out differently
(Kahneman & Tverky, 1982).
There are systematic similarities in how adults mentally
‘undo’ aspects of their mental representation of a factual
situation, when they think about how an outcome could have
turned out differently (e.g., Kahneman & Miller, 1986). For
example, adults show a tendency to mentally undo events that
are exceptional rather than routine (Kahneman & Tversky,
1982). They are more likely to undo actions rather than
inactions, at least in some situations (e.g., Byrne &
McEleney, 2000; Gilovich & Medvec, 1995). They tend to
undo the first cause in a causal chain rather than subsequent
causes (e.g., Wells, Taylor & Turtle, 1987), but they tend to
undo the most recent event rather than an earlier one in a
sequence of independent events (e.g., Byrne, Segura,
Culhane, Tasso & Berrocal, 2000; Miller & Gunasegaram,
1990; Walsh & Byrne, 2004). The mutability of aspects of the
mental representation of the factual situation depends upon
the ease with which people can think of alternatives (e.g.,
Byrne, 2005).
Our interest in this paper is in the development of
counterfactual thinking in children. In the experiment we
report we focus on the tendency to mentally undo the more
recent event in a sequence of independent events. We first
describe the temporal order effect in adult’s counterfactual
thoughts, and then we outline an experiment on the effect in
children’s counterfactual thoughts.

Abstract
When adults think about how an outcome could have turned out
differently, they tend to undo the events leading up to the
outcome in regular ways. Consider a game in which two
players could win a prize if they picked the same color card.
The first picks black and the second picks red and so they lose.
The temporal order effect refers to the tendency to think the
players would have won if the second player had picked black.
Adults also judge that the second player will feel more guilt and
will be blamed more by the first player. We describe the results
of an experiment on the temporal order effect in children’s
counterfactual thoughts. The experiment shows that children
aged six and eight years exhibited the standard temporal order
effect when they thought about what might have been, but they
differed in their judgments of guilt and blame. We discuss the
implications of the findings for understanding the development
of mental representations.

Counterfactual Thinking
When people think about what might have been, they often
imagine how a situation could have turned out differently (see
Byrne, 2002 for a review). For example, if you miss the bus
and are late for an important appointment, you might think
that you would have been on time if you had avoided the rush
hour traffic or if you had taken the train. These sorts of
imaginative thoughts - counterfactual thoughts - are pervasive
in adult mental life (e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). They
play an integral part in higher level cognition such as
deductive reasoning (e.g., Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991).
The function of couterfactual thoughts may be preparatory:
they help people to learn from past mistakes and to prepare
for the future (Markman, Gavanski, Sherman & McMullen,
1993; Roese, 1994). When people think about how a situation
could have turned out differently, they mentally compare the
factual situation to an imagined one. The comparison may
help them to understand the causes of the events and to learn
how to avoid similar outcomes in the future. Another function
of counterfactual thoughts may be affective: they contribute
to the experience of emotions such as regret, guilt, relief,
surprise and hope as well as to social judgments such as
responsibility and blame (e.g., Roese & Olson, 1995). The
suggestion is that the experience of an emotion such as regret
or guilt is amplified by the comparison of the way a situation

The Temporal Order Effect

1467

When adults were asked to think about a student who fails an
examination and to imagine how they, as students, might
have passed, they wished that different examination questions
had been set when they believed the questions had been set
after they had prepared for the examination, whereas they
wished that their preparation had been different when they
believed that the questions had been set before their
preparation (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). When adults are
asked to think about how a basketball team might have
performed better in a league of ten games, they mentally
undid the 10th basketball game in which the team was
defeated, irrespective of how the team performed in the nine
games prior to the defeat (Sherman & McConnell, 1996). The
tendency may play a role in many everyday situations, such
as the propensity for athletic teams to feature their fastest

runner last in a relay race and the common aversion blackjack
players have to playing on the last box (Miller &
Gunasegaram, 1990; Kahneman & Miller, 1986). Consider
the following scenario (from Byrne et al. 2000, p. 280):
Imagine two individuals (John and Michael) who are offered the
following very attractive proposition. Each individual is given a
shuffled deck of cards, and each one picks a card from his own deck.
If the two cards they pick are of the same color (i.e., both from black
suits or both from red suits), each individual wins £1,000. However,
if the two cards are not the same color, neither individual wins
anything. John goes first and picks a red card from his deck; Michael
goes next and picks a black card from his deck. Thus the outcome is
that neither individual wins anything.

The temporal order effect is a robust phenomenon in adults’
counterfactual thoughts. But little is known about the
development of this tendency in children’s thoughts about
what might have been. Our aim in the experiment we report is
to examine whether children also tend to focus on the more
recent event in an independent sequence of events when they
think about what might have been. We also examine the
development of their judgments of emotions and social
ascriptions. We consider the development of counterfactual
thinking in children before we describe the experiment.

The Development of Counterfactual Thinking
Children begin to demonstrate the ability to think about a
situation that was once possible but is so no longer during the
pre-school years (e.g., German & Nichols, 2004; Harris,
German & Mills, 1996). Children as young as 3 years can
engage in counterfactual thinking to reach causal conclusions
about how an outcome could have turned out differently
(Harris et al. 1996). Pre-school children rarely produce
unprovoked ‘if only’ counterfactual assertions (e.g., Kuczaj &
Daly, 1979), but they can generate them upon request (e.g.,
Sobel, 2004). It is not yet clear how competent young
children are in considering alternatives to reality (see Riggs,
Petersen, Robinson, & Mitchell, 1998; Robinson & Beck,
2000). Nonetheless they appear to demonstrate the ability to
represent not only what is true (the facts), but also what is
temporarily supposed to be true (the counterfactual
alternative).
By the age of 6 years, children begin to demonstrate the
tendency to produce spontaneous counterfactual assertions
(Kuczaj & Daly, 1979) and their understanding of guilt and
regret also begins to emerge (Amsel, Robbins, Tumarkin,
Janit, Foulkes, & Smalley, 2003; Guttentag & Ferrell, 2004;
Harris, Olthof, Terwogt, & Hardman, 1987). But little is
known about the relation between the development of
counterfactual thoughts and the development of emotions
such as guilt and regret (e.g., Amsel et al. 2003). For
example, children aged 5, 7, and 9 years were asked to judge
how another person would feel about the facts of a situation,
(e.g., Susan had her usual choice of chocolate pudding for
dessert and became ill, whereas Mary had chocolate pudding
over her usual choice of vanilla pudding and became ill) in
the light of information about a counterfactual alternative,
(e.g., they would not have become ill if they had eaten the
vanilla pudding instead.) The 7- and 9-year-old children made
judgments that compared reality to its counterfactual
alternative (e.g., Mary feels more regret than Susan because if
she had chosen her usual dessert she would not have become
ill), but the 5-year-olds did not (Guttentag & Ferrell, 2004).
We examined the temporal order effect in 6- and-8-year-old
children (Meehan & Byrne, 2005). We predicted that children
aged 6 and 8 years have the capacity to represent not only
what is true (the facts), but what is temporarily supposed to be
true (the counterfactual alternative). We expect that children
tend to think about true possibilities rather than false
possibilities and they tend to think about few possibilities due

When adult participants are asked to undo the outcome, they
tend to focus on the second event, that is, they tend to undo
Michael’s selection of a black card and imagine he selected a
red card instead. In addition, they tend to judge that Michael,
the second player, feels more guilt and that he will be blamed
more by John (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). Both events are
of chance, and logically, neither event should be considered
more mutable, and neither individual should be more likely to
blame the other or feel more guilt.
The temporal order effect may reflect fundamental
properties of the nature of the mental representations that
people construct (Byrne, 2005). People may understand the
story about John and Michael by envisaging several
possibilities. They tend to think about true possibilities
(Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002) rather than false possibilities,
and they tend to think of few possibilities, because of the
constraints of working memory (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). They may mentally represent the facts, ‘John picked
red and Michael picked black and they lost’, and they may
think of only one of the several counterfactual possibilities,
the one in which John picked red and Michael picked red.
Their tendency to think of this possibility rather than others
may indicate that the earlier events in the sequence are
presupposed (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). Earlier events in
a sequence act as a context or anchor against which
subsequent events are interpreted. The presupposition of the
earlier event (John picks red) can be countered by providing
an explicit alternative (e.g., John picks black, there is a
technical hitch in the game and he must pick again, this time
John picks red), and the temporal order effect is eliminated
when there is an explicit alternative (Byrne et al. 2000). The
elimination of the temporal order effect when there is an
alternative rules out the view that the temporal order effect
occurs due to the availability of the more recent event to a
backward search through the entries in working memory. It
also rules out the view that the effect arises because people
calculate the probabilities of a good outcome after each play
(Spellman, 1997). The temporal order effect can even be
reversed when people construct incomplete mental
representations of the events (Walsh & Byrne, 2004). The
result corroborates the theory that people create
counterfactual alternatives by making minimal changes to
their mental representation of reality (Byrne, 2005).

1468

to working memory limitations. Children understand the story
described earlier about John and Michael picking black and
red cards in a similar way to adults. They mentally represent
the facts, John picked red and Michael picked black and they
lost, and they mentally represent only one of several
counterfactual possibilities, the one in which John picked red
and Michael picked red. We predicted that children would
tend to say the players could have won if only Michael had
picked red, that is, they would exhibit the standard temporal
order effect.
We also wished to examine children’s emotion and social
judgments. Adult’s emotion and social judgments are often
amplified by their counterfactual thoughts, that is, their
judgments of guilt and blame often follow the same pattern as
their ‘if only’ thoughts (e.g., Byrne et al, 2000). They think ‘if
only’ most about the second player, and they also judge him
to feel more guilt and to be blamed more by the first player.
But dissociations between counterfactual thoughts and
emotion and social judgments occur (e.g., Roese & Olson,
1995). Emotion and social judgments are sometimes based
more closely on the facts of the situation rather than on the
counterfactual alternatives (Walsh & Byrne, 2004). The
calibration of emotion and social judgments to the mental
representations of facts and counterfactual alternatives may
follow a developmental pattern. Given the evidence that the
understanding of guilt and regret appears to emerge around
the age of 6 or 7 years, we expected to observe a difference
between 6- and 8-year old children in the association of their
‘if only’ thoughts and their judgments of guilt and blame.

Participants were asked to watch each game and to
comment on how the puppets played each game. For
example, for the scenario about the cards, the two puppets
were introduced, with their names clearly marked on badges
(e.g., ‘Here are two puppets, Al and Bill, who are told about
this great game’) and the children were questioned about the
identity of each puppet (e.g., ‘Can you show me which
puppet is which?’). The children were then informed of the
objectives set out for the puppets in the following way:
Each puppet is given a pile of cards, and each one picks a card from
his own pile. Can you see that there are only red and brown cards in
each pile? Now, if the two cards they pick are the same color - so if
both are brown or both are red - each puppet wins the prize. But if
the two cards are not the same color, neither puppet wins anything.
Al goes first and picks a brown card from his pile. Bill goes next and
picks a red card from his pile. So, neither puppet wins anything.

Experiment

Children’s creation of counterfactual alternatives to the
events was measured by a sentence completion task and a
physical manipulation task. For the sentence completion task
we introduced a third puppet named Oscar. The children were
told that he was a friend of the two puppets and that he liked
to wish that things could have been different for his friends.
The children were asked to complete a counterfactual
sentence in the following way: ‘Oscar is going to whisper a
wish in my ear about his friends and it’s your job to guess
how he finishes his wish. So Oscar just said that he wishes
that Al and Bill could have won the prize. They could have
won the prize if only one of them had picked a different
colored card, so if…. Can you guess how he finishes his
wish?’. For the physical manipulation task the children were
asked to indicate how the objects the puppets were playing
with (e.g., the cards) would look if they had won the prize.
Our measurement was based on the observation of which
puppets’ object the children moved: the object of the puppet
who took his turn first (e.g., Al) or the object of the puppet
who took his turn second (e.g., Bill). In both tasks we
measured whether the responses made reference to the first or
second events.
For the children’s judgments of emotions and social
ascriptions, they were asked to indicate which puppet felt
more guilt and which puppet was blamed by the other. We
adapted these two questions to include the puppets informing
the experimenter that one of them felt guilty (e.g., ‘One of
these two puppets just said that they feel guilty about them
not winning the prize. Which puppet do you think said that?’)
and that one of them blamed the other (e.g., ‘One of these
puppets just said that they really blame the other one for not
winning the prize. Which puppet do you think said that?’).
We also asked about who would feel worse (e.g., ‘Which
puppet do you think feels worse about them not wining the
prize’).
The participants were 62 children. There were 33 6-yearolds (15 boys and 18 girls) and 29 8-year-olds (14 boys and
15 girls). All 62 participants received the three scenarios in a
different random order.

Method
The aim of the experiment was to examine the temporal order
effect in the ‘if only’ sentence completions and judgments of
guilt and blame made by 6-year-olds and 8-year-olds. We
adapted three scenarios from Byrne et al. (2000). The
scenarios were about cards, marbles and coins and their
structure was identical to those used by Byrne et al. (2000).
Some aspects of the scenarios were modified for children, for
instance the scenarios were enacted with the use of props and
the protagonists involved were represented as puppets (see
Meehan & Byrne, 2005, for further details). We adhered to
the wording of the original scenarios as closely as possible
but some wording was modified to be more accessible to
children. For example, instead of the individuals winning
£1,000, the children were told the puppets would win stickers
if they met the winning conditions. A number of additional
check questions were included to ensure that the children
understood the objectives set out for the two puppets. For
example, the children were asked about the winning
conditions during the enactment of the games (e.g., ‘Can you
show me how they both can win?’) and as a final check
question (e.g., ‘Can you remind me how the puppets both can
win?’).

1469

Results
‘If only’ thoughts The temporal order effect was observed
for both age groups in the sentence completion task and in the
physical mutation task, and there were no differences between
the two age groups, as Table 1 shows. Overall across the three
scenarios, more children mentally undid the second event
rather than the first event. The temporal order effect was
observed for the 6-year-olds (64% vs. 25%) and the 8-yearolds (63.5% vs. 25%). The two age groups did not differ, χ2
(1, N = 165) = .001, p < .491.
A similar pattern occurs for the physical manipulation. The
temporal order effect was observed for the 6-year-olds (69%
vs. 31%) and the 8-year-olds (73% vs. 27%). The two age
groups did not differ, χ2 (1, N =186) = .524, p < .143 (for
further details see Meehan and Byrne, 2005).
These findings suggest that children as young as 6 years
create counterfactual alternatives to reality by mentally
changing the same aspects of a factual situation as adults.
Children, like adults may mentally represent only true
possibilities, and they may mentally represent few
possibilities due to working memory constraints. These
findings are consistent with the suggestion that children as
young as 6 years have the capacity to represent both what is
true and what is false but temporarily supposed to be true.

olds also judged that the second puppet would feel worse
rather than the first puppet (61% vs. 35%). Nonetheless the
two age groups differed reliably, χ2 (1, N =182) = 2.81, p <
.047.

Table 1: Percentages of mutations of the first event and the
second for the sentence completion task and the physical
manipulation task.
6-year-olds

8-year-olds

Sentence completion
Second
First

64
25

63.5
25

Physical manipulation
Second
First

69
31

73
27

Guilt and Blame Judgments of emotions and social
ascriptions differ for 6-year-olds and 8-year-olds. As Table 2
shows, 8-year-olds ascribed guilt to the second puppet rather
than the first (66% vs. 34%). But 6-year-olds ascribed guilt
equally to the two puppets (46% vs. 53%). The two age
groups differed reliably, χ2 (1, N = 185) = 13.87, p < .000.
Likewise, 8-year-olds judged that the first puppet would
blame the second more than the second would blame the first
(69% vs. 31%). But 6-year-olds judged that the first puppet
would blame the second as often as they judged that the
second would blame the first (48% vs. 52%). The two age
groups differed reliably, χ2 (1, N = 186) = 7.97, p < .005.
The children’s judgments of who would feel worse for not
winning show a similar pattern for 6-year-olds and 8-yearolds. Eight-year-olds judged that the second puppet would
feel worse rather than the first puppet (75% vs. 25%). 6-year-

1470

Table 2: The percentages of emotion and social judgments
6-year-olds

8-year-olds

Second
First

46
53

66
34

Second
First

52
48

69
31

Second
First

61
35

75
25

Guilt

Blame

Worse

The experiment shows that the standard temporal order
effect is observed for 8-year-old children in their ‘if only’
thoughts and in their judgments of emotions and social
ascriptions. The 8-year-olds show a consistent pattern in their
‘if only’ sentence stem completions, their physical
manipulations, and their judgments of guilt, blame, and who
feels worse. Their responses are similar to adults’ responses.
The finding suggests that by the age of 8 years, children
create counterfactual alternatives by changing aspects of their
mental representation of the factual situation in the same way
that adults do when they think about how an outcome could
have been different.
The experiment shows a dissociation between the ‘if only’
thoughts and the judgments of emotions and social ascriptions
for 6-year-old children. The 6-year-olds exhibit the standard
temporal order effect for their ‘if only’ sentence stem
completions and their physical manipulations, and their
judgment of who feels worse. But their judgments of guilt
and blame show no temporal order effect. These findings
suggest at the age of 6 years, children create counterfactual
alternatives by changing aspects of their mental
representation of the factual situation in ways that have not
yet developed to be entirely similar to adults. When 6-yearold children think about counterfactual situations, they appear
to be able to mentally represent both the facts and the
counterfactual possibility. However when they make emotion
and social judgments they may be limited in how their mental
representation of the counterfactual alternative influences
their representation of the facts, perhaps due to working
memory constraints (see Meehan & Byrne, 2005). Children’s
understanding of guilt and blame in counterfactual thinking
does not emerge simultaneously with their understanding of
who feels worse, or with their mental and physical mutations.

Conclusions
Children, like adults, display systematic similarities in their
mutations of factual situations when they think about how an
outcome could have turned out differently. Their emotion and
social judgments follow a developmental pattern. In the
experiment reported here, 6- and 8-year-olds exhibit the
standard temporal order effect in their mutations of the factual
situation, that is, they more readily undo the second event
than the first event in an independent sequence of events. We
suggest that the temporal order effect in 6- and-8-year-olds’
mental mutations of factual situations shows that they have
the capacity to represent not only what is true (the facts) but
also what is temporarily supposed to be true (the
counterfactual alternative). The experiment also shows that
the standard temporal order effect occurs for 8-year-olds’
emotion and social judgments for guilt, blame and who feels
worse, but the temporal order effect does not occur for 6year-olds’ judgments of guilt and blame. The dissociation
between ‘if only’ thoughts and emotion and social
judgements for six year olds may indicate that their creation
of counterfactual alternatives has not yet fully developed.

Acknowledgements
We thank the children, parents and teachers of Belgrove
National School, St. Fintan’s National School and Sutton
Park School for their time. The research was supported by the
Irish Research Council for Humanities and Social Sciences
and the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and
Technology.

References
Amsel, E., Robbins, M., Tumarkin, T., Janit, A., Foulkes, S., &
Smalley, J.D. (2003). The card not chosen: The development
of judgments of regret in self and others. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Mental models and counterfactual
thoughts about what might have been. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 426-431.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The Rational Imagination: How People
Create Alternatives to Reality. Cambridge, M.A: MIT Press.
Byrne, R.M.J. & McEleney, A. (2000). Counterfactual thinking
about actions and failures to act. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 1318-1331.
Byrne, R.M.J., Segura, S., Culhane, R., Tasso. A, & Berrocal,
P. (2000). The temporality effect in counterfactual thinking
about what might have been. Memory & Cognition, 28, 264281.
Gilovich, T., & Medvec, V.H. (1995). The experience of
regret: What, when and why. Psychological Review, 102,
379-395.
Guttentag, R., & Ferrell, J. (2004). Reality compared with its
alternatives: Age differences in judgments of regret and
relief. Developmental Psychology, 40, 764-775.

Harris, P.L, German. T.P, & Mills, P. (1996). Children's use of
counterfactual thinking in causal reasoning. Cognition, 61,
233-259.
Harris, P.L., Olthof, T., Terwogt, M.M., & Hardman, C.E.
(1987). Children’s knowledge of the situations that provoke
them. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 10,
319-343.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Byrne, R.M.J. (2002). Conditionals: a
theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inferences.
Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D.T. (1986). Norm theory:
Comparing reality to its alternatives. Psychological Review,
93, 136-153.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The simulation heuristic.
In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgments
under certainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 201-208). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kuczaj, S.A., & Daly, M.J. (1979). The development of
hypothetical reference in the speech of young children. Child
Language, 6, 563-579.
Landman, J. (1987). Regret and elation following action and
inaction: Affective responses to positive versus negative
outcomes. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 13,
542-536.
Markman, K.D., Gavanski, I., Sherman, S.J., & McMullen,
M.N. (1993). The mental simulation of better or worse
possible worlds, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
29, 87-109.
Meehan, J.E. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The temporal order and
action effects in children’s counterfactual thoughts.
Manuscript in preparation.
Miller, D.T., & Gunasegaram, S. (1990). Temporal order and
the perceived mutability of events: implications for blame
assignment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
59, 1111-1118.
Riggs, K.J., Petersen, D.M., Robinson, E.J., & Mitchell, P.
(1998). Are errors in false belief tasks symptomatic of a
broader difficulty with counterfactuality? Cognitive
Development, 13, 73-90.
Robinson, E.J., & Beck, S. (2000). What is difficult about
counterfactual reasoning? In P. Mitchell & K. Riggs (Eds.),
Children’s reasoning and the mind (pp. 191 -120). Hove
U.K: Psychology Press.
Roese, N.J., (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual
thinking. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 66,
805-818.
Roese, N.J. & Olson, J.M. (1995). Counterfactual thinking: A
critical overview. In N.J. Roese and J.M. Olson (Eds.), What
might have been: The social psychology of counterfactual
thinking (pp. 1–59). Mahwah, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

1471

Spellman, B.A. (1997). Crediting causality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 323-348.
Sherman, S.J., & McConnell, A.R. (1996). The role of
counterfactual thinking in reasoning. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 10, S113-S124.
Sobel, D.M. (2004). Exploring the coherence of young
children’s explanatory abilities: evidence from generating

1472

counterfactuals. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 22, 27–58.
Walsh, C.R., & Byrne, R.M.J. (2004). Counterfactual thinking:
The temporal order effect. Memory & Cognition, 32, 369378.

