UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Embodiment in Situated Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/43g827br

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Author
Ramey, Christopher H.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Embodiment in Situated Learning
Jana Rambusch (jana.rambusch@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Tom Ziemke (tom.ziemke@his.se)
School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skövde
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden
Abstract

Brown, Collins & Duguid, 1989; Barab & Plucker, 2002;
Greeno, 1998; Lave & Wenger, 1991).

The concept of activity is central to situated learning
theories, but activity has largely been considered an exclusively sociocultural process in which the body only
plays a minor role. In embodied cognition research, on
the other hand, there is an increasing awareness that
mind and body are inextricably intertwined and cannot
be viewed in isolation. Findings in the field of cognitive neuroscience provide additional evidence that cognition is tightly linked to perception and action. This
paper aims to shed a light on the role of the body in
situated learning activity by integrating the different
perspectives of situated learning and embodied cognition research. The paper suggests that, like individual
human conceptualization and thought, situated learning is in fact deeply rooted in bodily activity. In social
interactions the body provides individuals with a similar perspective on the world, it functions as a means
of signalling to others what cannot (yet) be expressed
verbally, and it serves as a resonance mechanism in the
understanding of others.

The Body in Situated Learning

Introduction
The paradigm shift from cognitivism (e.g. Pylyshyn,
1990) to situated cognition (e.g. Levine & Resnick, 1993;
Clancey, 1997) holds important implications also for
educational practice and research. Traditionally, learning has been considered an exclusively internal process.
This conviction has found its expression in concepts such
as ability, talent, and intelligence, and is a consequence
of, as Barab and Plucker (2002) put it, “the separation
of the learner from the learning context” and “the isolation of the body from its mind” (p. 165). Contextual
aspects have been believed to play an insignificant role in
learning, and teaching practices have therefore focused
largely on transmitting content into the mind of people.
The traditional view has been challenged in recent years
by both educators and scientists who have started to
consider learning and knowledge acquisition in terms of
interactions and meaning-construction within a sociocultural context. Traditional theories, it has been argued,
are insufficient to explain the ways individuals learn and
make use of knowledge within and outside schools.
Situated learning is a theoretical framework in which
scientists strongly emphasise sociocultural aspects of
cognition and learning. The underlying assumption is
that the knower cannot be separated from the known
leading to a position in which knowledge and learning
are considered the result of social activity in context (e.g.

1803

The notion of (social) activity is one of the cornerstones
in situated learning theories, but for a variety of reasons, the focus in situated learning is almost exclusively
on sociocultural aspects of learning activity such as social interactions and tool use. Activity often appears to
be conceived of as a cognitive process which is somehow detached from the body, making the body just an
additional tool for the subject and not an integral part
of human cognition. Despite an increasing awareness of
the body in different areas of cognitive science (e.g. Roth
& Lawless, 2002; Wilson, 2003), researchers interested
in the nature of learning and knowledge appropriation
have, with few exceptions (e.g. Clancey, 1995; Drodge
& Reid, 2000), largely sidestepped the issue of embodiment in learning. While strongly emphasising the interpersonal and artefact-mediated nature of cognition and
activity, they have been less concerned with the body itself and its role in human thinking. Very often, the body
is “just” another factor, briefly acknowledged and mentioned, but in fact understood and analysed very little.
During recent years, however, the bodily basis of processes such as social interaction and tool use has become
a key concern for a growing number of researchers in
the field of neuroscience (e.g. Adolphs, 2001; JohnsonFrey, 2004; Maravita & Iriki, 2004; Rizzolatti, Fadiga,
Fogassi & Gallese, 2002). Promising findings within this
field, and the growing interest in the body as the primary unit of analysis in other areas of cognitive science,
have opened new opportunities to enhance our knowledge about the body and its role in learning (cognition).
By looking more closely at how the body is involved in
learning activity processes such as tool use and social interactions we can get a better understanding of human
cognition in general and of the body itself.
This paper aims to bring together the (on the surface
completely) different perspectives on learning and activity in the theoretical frameworks of situated learning
and embodied cognition by discussing the sociocultural
dimension of embodied cognition, i.e. how the body is
involved in processes such as social interaction and tool
use as learning and activity in situated learning theories are considered to be linked to practice and social
exchange.

The two next sections describe in some detail the theoretical frameworks of situated learning and embodied
cognition research, with the overall focus on social learning activity, which is characterised by social interactions
and different kinds of tool use.

Situated Learning
Situated learning theories are largely based upon and related to the philosophies of situated cognition where a
key theme is that cognition is for action (e.g. Clancey,
1997; Suchman, 1987; Wilson, 2003). This philosophy
goes directly against the functionalist belief in mindbody dualism according to which a persons ideas, beliefs
and knowledge are autonomous and disconnected from
(bodily) experience. Being widely accepted by a large
number of researchers in the various fields of cognitive
science, this position had, not surprisingly, far reaching
and lasting implications for education and educational
theorising as well (Kirshner & Whitson, 1997). Situated
learning theories generally criticise the traditional philosophical position of dualism by strongly emphasising the
active and situated nature of learning.
The theoretical framework of situated learning is currently characterised by a variety of perspectives and
viewpoints on the issues of learning, activity, and knowledge appropriation, as researchers and scientists interested in the complexities of learning and human cognition are active in a wide range of research fields (e.g.
Brown et al., 1989; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rogoff, 1990).
In spite of the widely differing approaches to learning and
activity there is, nonetheless, a broad scientific consensus to view and describe learning in terms of activity and
participation in a community of practice, which clearly
reveals the close relationship of situated learning and
its historic precursors of cultural-historical psychology
(e.g. Vygotsky, 1932/78), Activity Theory (e.g. Leontiev, 1978; Galperin, 1992a), and early 20th Century
American psychology and sociology (e.g. Mills, 1940).

Cultural-Historical Traditions
The influence of especially the cultural-historical approach to learning and activity is strikingly apparent
as learning and activity are viewed as processes that
are completely interactive and interdependent. One of
the cornerstones in the cultural-historical approach is
the idea of human cognition being the result of cultural
rather than natural processes, that is, to describe and
to explain higher mental processes such as learning and
communication in terms of socially and culturally mediated activity.1 Connecting cultural, social, and mental processes, the cultural-historical approach has clearly
also some implications for education and educational research. Instead of merely focusing on the individual,
attention has been moved to actual learning activities
in which the child is engaged in a framework of guided
participation (Rogoff, 1990). Vygotsky (1932/78), for instance, considered learning a process of activity in which
1
The sharp distinction between cultural and biological
processes, however, is being questioned by many researchers
(e.g. Rogoff, 2003).

1804

human mediators and the use of psychological tools play
central roles. The idea of higher mental processes being a
function of and created through socially meaningful mediated activity is fundamentally opposed to traditional
theories according to which mental activity is superior
to both neural and bodily activity in the sense that one
has first to think about what to do next before an activity can be performed. Given the underlying philosophy
of interdependency between thought and physiological
processes, the notion of activity has not unsurprisingly
become the main unit of analysis and key to understanding human cognition.
Activity is described as a process that is mediated by
other people’s behaviour, material tools, and psychological tools (e.g. language). The use of psychological
tools, for instance, is said to develop in the course of social interaction with other people. Fundamental to the
cultural-historical view on activity has been Leontiev’s
(1978) idea to describe behaviour by means of different
levels of analysis, which are presented in the concepts of
activity, action, and operation, and corresponding, motive, goal, and conditions. In this sense, activity is a
socially meaningful unit of behaviour in which a variety
of action sequences is structured around shared goals and
conditions. The concept of meaningful activity was, according to Galperin (1992a), introduced to clarify that
the object of psychology is not an internal process or
the physiological reactions to stimuli but rather the activity of a subject. Galperin (ibid.) considered the concept of meaningful activity, nonetheless, to be somewhat
troublesome as it was given “a psychological description
with regard to only one concept – motivation” (p. 42).
Galperin argued that by ignoring the object-related operational content of activity it was largely overlooked
that mental activity in fact is highly dependent on external, object-related activity.
Galperin’s theory (1992b) is generally based on the
assumption that mental object-oriented activity is the
result of initially materialised object-oriented activity,
that is, broadly speaking, the physical manipulation of
objects constitutes the basis of human thought. This
assumption suggests that mental processes are deeply
rooted in sensorimotor activity, a perspective which is
highly consistent with embodied cognition research. Furthermore, Galperin’s approach to learning and activity
bears also many similarities to situated learning theories. Learning is described by Brown et al. (1989), for
instance, as a process in which observation, guidance,
and practice are essential elements, and which is characterised by transparent access to learning strategies and
methods; this is an assumption that is quite consistent
with Galperin’s view on learning. Given the strong emphasis on materialised activity, i.e. the idea of the body
being an essential part of mental activity, and the apparent similarities that exist between his ideas and situated learning, Galperin’s approach might provide an
important link between situated learning and embodied
cognition theories. Galperin appears to have been one
of the first scientists to recognise and to explicitly point
out the embodied nature of object-oriented activity.

Apprenticeship and Participation
In situated learning, embodiment aspects of human activity and cognition have received little interest, despite
the large focus on activity in context. Drawing heavily on historical ways of learning and teaching such as
craft and trade apprenticeships, scientists in the research
area of situated learning frequently use different kinds
of apprenticeship concepts to describe and explain situated and sociocultural aspects of learning and knowledge appropriation. The different conceptions of apprenticeship and participation such as guided participation
(Rogoff, 1990), cognitive apprenticeship (Brown et al.,
1989), and legitimate peripheral participation (Lave &
Wenger, 1991) are largely based on ethnographic (anthropological) studies of learning and everyday activity,
which have been instrumental in revealing how different schooling is from activities in the daily domain of
life. From the very beginning, most attention has been
directed at how people learn in the context of participation and guidance. Learning, generally, is viewed as
a process of activity in (a community of) practice and,
accordingly, characterised by a group of people trying to
accomplish some activity (their practise) while cooperating with each other in a community of practice.
Clearly, the interdependency of learning and activity
is one of the central tenets in situated learning, but the
body as an integral part of activity is barely mentioned
since activity most of the time is simply described as a
process in which the culturally and socially based relation between the environment (different kinds of tools,
other persons) and the subject is of central interest. In
embodied cognition research, on the other hand, sociocultural aspects of social interaction and tool use have
received a lot of attention in recent years, but these aspects are largely discussed in the more general context
of human thinking and cognition (e.g. Clark, 1997; Roth
& Lawless, 2002; Wilson, 2003).

Embodied Cognition
The body and its role in thinking has been reconsidered by an increasing number of researchers in various
research areas such as neuroscience (e.g. Rizzolatti et
al., 2002) and philosophy (e.g. Clark, 1997). Instead of
reducing the body to an input-output device and explaining cognition in terms of mental symbol manipulation, researchers and scientists in embodied cognition
now seek to emphasise the complex interplay between
body and mind, between the agent and the world which
it is part of and functions in. Despite differing ways
of conceptualising embodied cognition, however, there
seems to exist a number of features that generally are
associated with the embodied cognition approach (Wilson, 2003).
The basic assumption is that cognition is a continuous process with changing boundaries and, thus, much
more than what takes place within the individual mind.
Cognition, accordingly, cannot be understood without
taking contextual aspects such as tool use into consideration which is a perspective very similar to situated
cognition and learning. Recent findings also suggest

1805

that cognition is deeply rooted in and inextricably intertwined with bodily activity. Most researchers interested in the embodied nature of human cognition have
usually discussed the issues of cognition and activity in
more general terms, but the findings in this field are also
of particular relevance to educators and educational research.

The Body in Social Situations
Human beings are social beings and the interactions and
relations with other individuals are an essential part of
their lives. Through social interactions with others people share informations and contacts and, in the words
of Lave and Wenger (1991), become part of a community of practice. Social interaction, in other words, is
a rather complex process and full of meaning, requiring
people to find ways to communicate and to understand
each other. Through the years, social psychologists have
documented well diverse deeply social interactive phenomena such as mimicry and action imitation, but these
phenomena have not been discussed from an embodiment perspective (Semin & Smith, 2002). In embodied
cognition research, in contrast, social aspects of embodied cognition have not received much attention which
is somewhat surprising as the embodied nature of human cognition in recent years has been addressed from
a broad range of perspectives in many areas of cognitive
science (Lindblom & Ziemke, in press).
However, lately, it has increasingly been shown that
embodied cognition is in many aspects a very social process, and that embodied social processes such as mimicry
and imitation are significant for social relations as they
help people connect, making it possible for them to communicate and to understand each other (e.g. Barsalou,
Niedenthal, Barbey & Ruppert, 2003). Most theories describing the social dimension of embodied cognition are
largely based on the idea of cognition being the result
of activity simulation in specific brain circuits. Such activity simulations appear to provide not only fast learning mechanisms where new actions are learned through
imitation, but also seem to play an important part in
decision making as well as in emphatic and cooperative
behaviour (e.g. Barsalou et al., 2003; Hesslow, 2002).
These assumptions are supported by an increasing number of neuro-chemical and neuro-psychological studies
which indicate the existence of a motor-resonant mechanism in humans. These studies have shown that thinking
about an action to some degree activates the same brain
areas as when the activity is performed in real. That
has led a growing number of researchers (e.g. Rizzolatti
et al., 2002) to suggest that a matching system between
action execution and action observation might constitute the basis of communication and action recognition
and, hence, of a shared understanding between individuals (e.g. a man who watches his wife take the car keys
knows immediately that she is going by car to the grocery store).
Another important aspect of embodied social interaction is gestures as they help the speaker express ideas
and thoughts (Goldin-Meadow, 2003). Gestures are an

important part of human cognition given the fact that
no culture has been discovered yet in which people do
not gesture while talking. According to Goldin-Meadow
(2003) and Wilson (2003), gestures offer a substantive
view on the mental processes of people as they often
carry a person’s knowledge about a certain topic. In a
study conducted by Evans and Rubin (1979 in GoldinMeadow, 2003), for instance, it has been illustrated that
gestures displayed by a group of children repeatedly revealed (non-verbalised) knowledge about a game that the
children explained to an adult. It has also been shown
that children often produce so-called gesture-speech mismatches, an effect by which gestures and speech convey
conflicting information. Goldin-Meadow (2003) argues
that children producing such mismatches are more likely
to benefit from instruction as they, at this stage, are
“open to, and thus on the precipice of learning (p. 40).
However, she also pointed out that gesture-speech mismatches seem to be an important step towards mastery
as children not displaying such mismatches were more
likely to generalise knowledge than did children who in
fact went through this developmental stage (Alibali &
Goldin-Meadow, 1993b in Goldin-Meadow, 2003). This
implies, according to Goldin-Meadow (ibid.), that gestures not only reflect learning, but to a considerable degree also contribute to it.
This assumption is highly consistent with, for example, Roth (2002) who suggested that gesturing is not only
about communication with others but also serves an important (cognitive) function for the speaker as it helps
her think and make things clear and understandable. A
study conducted by Roth (ibid.) shows, for instance, that
the use of gestures in combination with tools not simply
replaced language as a mean of understanding, but was
in fact an important step towards the proper use and
development of required scientific concepts.

That means, tool-use behaviour is not simply the result
of innate structures that in time lead to sudden insight,
but is rather a process of continuous embodied activity.
Lockman’s (2000) perspective is consistent with ecological viewpoints on cognition and object manipulation,
i.e. perception is an active process and all information
necessary can be found in the environment (cf. Gibson,
1979). That means, you know how to use a chair because
the chair affords a particular behaviour, not because you
make use of a mental categorisation that tells you what
a chair is and how it can be used. In other words, there
is no action without perception, knowledge evolves only
through perceiving and acting. Action and manipulation, accordingly, seem to be fundamental for acquiring
knowledge about and the use of objects.
Recently, ecological positions have received significant
support from studies in the field of neuroscience. These
studies have not only illustrated the existence of a motorresonant mechanism, but also a close relation between
perception of an object and the manipulation of the same
object. Regions responsible for grasping and manipulating actions, for example, are active during tool naming and viewing, and during identification actions which
are related to certain tools (Johnson-Frey, 2004). This
mechanism, in other words, seems to provide us with
the means to identify and represent objects with respect
to their function, i.e. the type of interaction they allow.
This mechanism, broadly speaking then, does not simply
specify perception and action aspects of an object but –
in the Gibsonian sense – the particular relationship between agent and environment. The categorisation of an
object, thus, is not only about learning and representing
its visual characteristics, it is more importantly about
understanding its meaning (its use) (Grafton, Fadiga,
Arbib & Rizzolatti, 1997).

Conclusions

Tool Use as Embodied Activity
In recent years, many studies have also investigated the
role of tool use in human thinking and it has become
clear that tool use is a crucial aspect of human cognition (e.g. Hutchins, 1995; Preston, 1998; Rambusch,
Susi & Ziemke, 2004). For quite a long time, tool use,
that is, knowing what a object is and how it can be
used, has been believed to be the result of mental processes. Tool use, accordingly, can at earliest occur at
a stage where mental representations and thought have
evolved. A heavily contrasting view is presented by, e.g.
Lockman (2000) according to whom tool-use behaviour
already can be observed in infants’ attempts to detect
affordances of objects and surfaces in the environment.
In his view, the trial-error behaviour displayed by children of this age is the basis of tool use as this kind of
behaviour is an opportunity for children to explore and
understand their environment on a sensorimotor level.
Tool-use behaviour, in these terms, is a stepwise learning
process in which tool use and insight emerge gradually
over time and arise from small childrens attempts to relate objects to other objects and surfaces while detecting
affordances based on available perceptual information.

Being closely related to the research area of situated
cognition, situated learning theories are, at least at a
first glance, strongly opposed to dualistic assumptions
according to which the mind can be described and understood in isolation from the body and its environment. However, the body and its relation to activity
have mainly been ignored in situated learning theories,
apart from a few notable exceptions. The aim of this
paper has been to take a closer look at how the body
is involved in learning activities as being discussed in
the theoretical framework of situated learning. Cognition, and learning in particular, are seen as processes
that are situated as they emerge through interaction between agent and environment. Much emphasis has, subsequently, been on sociocultural aspects, making social
interactions between individuals and the active use of
structures in the environment a vital part of situated
learning activity. That is, activity in situated learning is
a process that can be described in terms of social interactions and tool use. This has been particularly evident in
the various apprenticeships concepts where learning and
doing are considered processes that cannot be separated
and seen in isolation.

1806

Embodied cognition research has provided an additional picture of the situated nature of situated-learning
activity by putting emphasis on the close and mutual
relationship between thinking and doing from a different
point of view. The underlying assumption in the theoretical framework of embodied cognition is that cognition arises from bodily interactions with the world and
is, thus, grounded in and linked to sensorimotor activity. Situated-learning activity, from this point of view,
is not only a purely sociocultural process but also a process that is the result of bodily interactions in the world.
Recent findings in neuroscience have, for instance, provided solid evidence that our social behaviour is largely
influenced by bodily activity and the way in which we
categorise and use specific kinds of tools. Situated learning, in other words, is a process that is deeply rooted in
sensorimotor activity as communication, social understanding, and tool use are linked to perception and action. The body in situated learning activity, accordingly,
(1) makes possible a shared understanding of the world
between individuals, (2) functions as means for communication and social interaction, and (3) is the basis of
human thought.
There is increasing evidence that suggests that a
shared understanding between individuals is grounded in
human (and non-human primates’) ability to recognise
and simulate the actions of con-specifics. Even though
two individuals always have different perspectives on
things, because they are two different individuals, the
body makes possible a shared understanding between
them. The body here functions as a reference point,
that is, even though two people look at, for instance, a
chair from two different perspectives, both can relate to
that particular chair as both know from bodily experience what a chair is. To put it differently, the experience
of object-related actions is not only essential for an individual understanding of objects but also for a shared,
social understanding of them.
The body is frequently used in human communication
and social interaction. For instance, a person pointing
at a chair has the intention to draw the attention of
another person to this chair to make it clear what s/he
is referring to. The body, here, is signalling something
to the receiver. Obviously, this role of the body is closely
related to the previous one as the body, in turn, makes
it possible for the receiver to understand the pointing
behaviour of the sender. Gesturing is also a process in
which the body is actively involved and which serves
the cognitive function of communication. Activity in a
community of practice, thus, is not only sociocultural in
its content, but is also linked to sensorimotor activity.
That is, the ability to recognise and simulate the actions
of others makes it possible for us to understand each
other and to find a common ground from which we can
communicate with each other.
The body, as the basis of human thought, is critically
involved in processes such as decision making and problem solving as mental simulations of actions are not only
an integral part of human thinking but more importantly also are tightly linked to sensorimotor activity.

Moreover, bodily activity (that is, gestures) is an important tool in developing and understanding abstract concepts and knowledge. That is, human thought cannot be
reduced to symbol manipulation or social exchange, but
is inextricably intertwined with perception and action.

Open Questions and Future Work
With the discovery of the action-perception matching
system, expectations are running high in the scientific
community and one cannot help thinking that a new
era is about to begin in cognitive science. Having the
possibility to find answers for questions regarding the
nature of different kinds of mental abilities, of course,
such a thought is quite compelling. However, it seems
that there is still a long way to go and researchers might
be well advised to be cautious and to avoid direct claims
about the action-perception matching system as the key
to meaning, communication and understanding. Many
experiments have been conducted on monkeys, and even
if there is increasing evidence for the existence of a similar system in humans, we cannot be sure that there
are not other crucial differences after all. Rizzolatti
et al. (2002) also pointed out that the transformation
from goal-understanding to goal-oriented activity has remained an open question. That means, even though it
appears that the action-matching system is fundamental
for an understanding of actions, researchers do not have
an answer to how this understanding is transferred into
a corresponding behaviour.
The aim of this paper has been to discuss the role
of the body in situated learning by integrating situated
learning and embodied cognition research on sociocultural aspects such as social interactions and tool use.
An important and necessary next step is a more concrete
translation and integration of findings within embodied
cognition research to the theoretical framework of situated learning. In the approach introduced by Galperin
(1992b), both situated learning and embodiment perspectives are integrated, which makes his approach a
good candidate to provide a link between the theoretical
frameworks of situated learning and embodied cognition.
This paper can be considered a first step towards such an
integration as it shows that situated learning activity is
tightly linked to embodied sensorimotor activity. In the
future, sociocultural processes such as social interactions
and tool use need to be discussed in much more detail
from an embodiment perspective to gain a more profound understanding of cognition and learning. A more
detailed discussion might also represent a significant step
towards practical applications of this knowledge in educational practice and research.

References
Adolphs, R. (2001). The neurobiology of social cognition. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 91–130.
Barab, S. A. & Plucker, J. A. (2002). Smart people
or smart contexts? Cognition, ability, and talent
development in an age of situated approaches to
knowing and learning. Educational Psychologist,
37 (3), 165–182.

1807

Barsalou, L. W., Niedenthal, P. M., Barbey, A. K. &
Ruppert, J. A. (2003). Social embodiment. In
B. H. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A. & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated
cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
Researcher, 18 (1), 32–42.
Clancey, W. J. (1995). A tutorial on situated learning.
In J. Self (Ed.), Proceedings of the international
conference on computers and education, Taiwan.
Charlottesville, VA: AACE.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition: on human
knowledge and computer representations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there. Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Drodge, E. N. & Reid, D. A. (2000). Embodied cognition and the mathematical emotional orientation.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 2 (4), 249–
267.
Galperin, P. I. (1992a). The problem of activity in soviet
psychology. Journal of Russian and East European
Pyschology, 30 (4), 37–59.
Galperin, P. I. (1992b). Stage-by-stage formation as
a method of psychological investigation. Journal
of Russian and East European Psychology, 30 (4),
60–80.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing gestures. How our
hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Grafton, S. T., Fadiga, L., Arbib, M. A. & Rizzolatti, G.
(1997). Premotor cortex activation during observation and naming of familiar tools. Neuroimage,
6, 231–236.
Greeno, J. (1998). The situativity of knowing, learning,
and research. American Psychologist, 53, 5–26.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation
of behaviour and perception. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 6 (6), 224–242.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Johnson-Frey, S. H. (2004). The neural bases of complex
tool use in humans. Trends in Neuroscience, 8 (2),
71–78.
Kirshner, D. & Whitson, J. A. (1997). Situated cognition: social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Leontiev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness, and
personality. Hillsdale: Prentice Hall.

1808

Levine, J. M. & Resnick, L. B. (1993). Social foundations of cognition. Annual Review of Psychology,
44, 585–612.
Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (in press). Embodiment
and social interactions: implications for cognitive
science. In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev & R. Frank (Eds.),
Body, language, and mind. Vol 1: Embodiment.
Mouton de Gruyter. (to appear in 2005)
Lockman, J. J. (2000). A perception-action perspective on tool use development. Child Development,
71 (1), 137–144.
Maravita, A. & Iriki, A. (2004). Tools for the body
(schema). Trends in Cognitive Science, 8 (2), 79–
86.
Mills, C. W. (1940). Situated actions and vocabularies of
motive. American Sociological Review, 5, 904–913.
Preston, B. (1998). Cognition and tool use. Mind and
Language, 13 (4), 513–517.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1990). Computation and cognition.
In J. L. Garfield (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive
science. New York: Paragon House.
Rambusch, J., Susi, T. & Ziemke, T. (2004). Artefacts
as mediators of distributed social cognition: A case
study. In Proceedings of the 26th annual meeting of
the cognitive science society. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L. & Gallese, V.
(2002). From mirror neurons to imitation: facts
and speculations. In A. N. Meltzoff & W. Prinz
(Eds.), The imitative mind. Development, evolution, and brain bases. Cambridge: University
Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking – cognitive
development in social context. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Roth, W.-M. (2002). From action to discourse – the
bridging function of gestures. Journal of Cognitive
Systems Research, 3, 535–554.
Roth, W.-M. & Lawless, D. V. (2002). How does the
body get into the mind? Human Studies, 25, 333–
358.
Semin, G. R. & Smith, E. R. (2002). Interfaces of social
psychology with situated and embodied cognition.
Cognitive Systems Research, 3 (3), 385–396.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and situated action: the
problem of human-machine communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1932/78). Mind in society. The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, M. (2003). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9 (4), 625–636.

