UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Advantages of Counting Specifically: An Analysis of Polynesian Number
Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3cr057mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Beller, Sieghard
Bender, Andrea

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Advantages of Counting Specifically:
An Analysis of Polynesian Number Systems
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Before we can address this question we will have to prove
that the decimal system was indeed no Western introduction
but as indigenous as the ‘mixed-base’ systems. Although it
cannot be resolved with complete certainty in retrospect
which system is the older one, we will present some evidence for the assumption that the latter were not preceding,
but derived from the general system.
We begin with a short analysis of the elements of number
systems and some of their cognitive implications. After
depicting general patterns of the Polynesian number systems, we will exemplify their numeration principles for the
counting systems in Tongan. When putting the respective
findings into context, it will become clear that Polynesian
cultures did indeed have use for high numbers. By speculating on how they might have handled these without notation,
we will find that the questions of base and extent are inextricably linked and that some of the Polynesian peculiarities are
actually very sensible from a cognitive point of view.

Abstract
Distinct number systems for certain objects within the same
language seem to reveal a lack of abstract thinking and are
therefore often taken as cognitively deficient. The case of the
Polynesian languages will prove this assumption to be mistaken. In addition to a general, perfectly consistent, and decimal system with high numerals, some of these languages also
traditionally applied apparently mixed-base systems for a
range of frequently used objects. Maori, Hawai'ian, and Tongan in particular are conspicuous for such ‘irregularities’, and
one broadly accepted conjecture is that their decimal systems
were introduced by Western missionaries. In order to demonstrate that the opposite is in fact true, this article scrutinizes
their main numeration principles. The results indicate that the
original Polynesian system was always abstract and decimal
and that the supplementary systems were developed as—cognitively efficient—tools for calculating without notation.
Keywords: Counting; Polynesia; cross-linguistic analysis.

Introduction

Elements of Number Systems
and Their Cognitive Implications

There is no doubt that a coherent number system, applicable
in general to all objects worth counting, is cognitively efficient. The reverse conclusion—that everything else is less
efficient and consequently must be a remnant of premathematical comprehension (e.g., Ifrah, 1985; Menninger,
1969)—is, at best, questionable. The case of Polynesian languages illuminates why.
According to contemporary dictionaries, general and perfectly consistent systems with base ten do prevail throughout
Polynesia. But indicators for other systems prior to Western
influence can be found as well: apparently irregular ways of
counting certain objects in Tongan that emphasize pairs and
scores (Churchward, 1953), special lexemes in Marquesan
for 20 (Lynch, Ross & Crowley, 2002), an allegedly vigesimal system in traditional Maori (Best, 1906), and even a
‘mixed-base’ 4 and 10 system in Hawai'ian (Hughes, 1982).
All these cases seem to provide evidence that the traditional
Polynesian base was not decimal. But is this conjecture conclusive? Or is it also conceivable that decimal and other systems were used simultaneously?
Amazingly, we can—often together with these peculiarities and despite the fact that a notation was lacking—find
numerals, up to which nobody would count, such as 100 000
or even 4 000 000. Why then, if Polynesians were so obviously interested in high numbers, did they stick to so
unwieldy a system as the ones with ‘mixed bases’? If they
always had both types, why did they not give up the complicated systems in favor of the decimal system?

For the representation of natural numbers a one-dimensional
system would, in principle, be sufficient, that is a system
with a distinct lexeme for each number. However, since this
is cognitively not efficient for large numbers, many languages apply a two-dimensional system of base and power
(cf. Zhang & Norman, 1995). The composition of the power
terms follows the multiplication principle, while the complete number word is generated by joining all power terms
according to the addition principle. The number word for
652 in English, for instance, which has a decimal base, is
accordingly composed as “six hundred” (6·102), “fifty”
(5·101), and “two” (2·100).
The same advantages of such a two-dimensional system
apply to both oral numeration and notations: Cyclic patterns
keep the number words compact while dramatically reducing
the amount of lexemes needed (cf. Ascher, 1998; Zhang &
Norman, 1995). A small set of basic number words (i.e.,
numerals) suffices, even if we consider that most natural languages also use specific lexemes for the powers of their base.
A strict decimal system, for instance, requires nine numerals
for the basic numbers 1 to 9 and one numeral each for the
base and its higher powers (10, 100, 1 000, …). The higher
the base, the more numerals are needed for basic numbers,
but the less numerals are needed for the power dimension.
A word for zero, essential in strict place-value notations, is
not required in oral number systems; most natural languages
express the powers of their base explicitly and can therefore
simply omit empty places (Greenberg, 1978).
214

Table 1: Polynesian numerals (adapted from Bender &
Beller, 2005).a

As languages consist of a finite set of words, their number
systems are also finite. The limiting number is defined as the
next number beyond the highest possible composition
(Greenberg, 1978), usually one power higher than the largest
numeral. In a decimal system with a lexeme for “hundred” as
the highest numeral, for instance, the limiting number is
999 + 1 = 1 000.
Several factors influence the ease, with which number
words are learnt and operated (e.g., Wiese, 2003). Irregularities in number words and order of power terms, for instance,
slow down the acquisition of the number system (Miller,
Smith, Zhu & Zhang, 1995; see also Geary, Bow-Thomas,
Liu & Siegler, 1996). The shorter the words, the greater is
the memory span (Dehaene, 1997). With regard to bases,
Zhang and Norman (1995) identified a cognitive trade-off in
base size: While large bases are more efficient for encoding
and memorizing big numbers, they also require the memorization of larger addition and multiplication tables when
operating with them.

No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
102
103
104
105
106

The General Polynesian Number Systems
The Polynesian languages belong to the Oceanic Subgroup
of the Austronesian language family, which dates back at
least some 6 000 years. Proto-Austronesian yielded a common set of numerals from 1 to 10, and Proto-Oceanic contained a numeral for 100 (Lynch, Ross & Crowley, 2002;
Tryon, 1995). When we compare contemporary Austronesian languages, ranging from Madagascar through insular
Southeast-Asia into the Pacific, we find that numerals do still
show a considerable degree of convergence and that decimal
systems are by far prevailing. These findings support the
conjecture that the ancestors of the Polynesian voyagers
brought a number system with base 10 and extending to (at
least) a limiting number of 1 000 with them when they
entered the Pacific (cf., Bender & Beller, 2005).
Among contemporary Polynesian languages, most numerals are still widely shared, although with a few exceptions
(see Table 1). Particularly for the numerals from 1 to 9, lexical coincidence—within the range of typical sound shift—is
striking, and even among the numerals denoting 10, for
which variation is highest, we still can find similarities for
the first three languages and traces of replaced numerals for
the latter two. The numeral for the second power of the base
(i.e., 100 or 400 in Hawai'ian respectively) is nearly the same
in every language (teau/lau/rau); mano, on the other hand,
denotes one further power, equalling 1 000 in Tahitian and
Maori, and 10 000 in Tongan and Rapanui. In addition, it reappears in traditional Hawai'ian, where it refers to 4 000
(e.g., Hughes, 1982).
Even beyond this common stock, most Polynesian languages contained numerals for high numbers—up to allegedly 4 000 000 in Hawai'ian. But variation in extent is
remarkable.
While, for the sake of simplicity, we have only depicted
the regular aspects of Polynesian number systems in Table 1,
some peculiarities need to be mentioned. In the Hawai'ian
number system, for instance, the indigenous numerals did
not apply to the pure powers of ten but to the powers of ten
times four, such as 400, 4 000, and so on. Since Hawai'ian

a

Tongan
taha
ua
tolu
fa
nima
ono
fitu
valu
hiva
hongofulu
teau
afe
mano
kilu

Tahitian
ho'e, tahi
piti
toru
maha
pae
ono
hitu
va'u
iva
'ahuru
rau
mano
manotini
rehu
iu

Rapanui
tahi
rua
toru
ha
rima
ono
hitu
va'u
iva
'angahuru
rau
piere
mano

Hawai'ian
kahi
lua
kolu
ha
lima
ono
hiku
walu
iwa
'umi
*lau
*mano
*kini
*lehu
*nalowale

Maori
tahi
rua
toru
wha
rima
ono
whitu
waru
iwa
ngahuru
rau
mano
(tini)

Prefixes are omitted for easier comparison.
Non-decimal powers are indicated by *.

provides just one instance of an apparently widespread pattern of ‘mixed bases’ in Polynesian number systems, some
scholars concluded that the original Polynesian system was
non-decimal (e.g., Bauer, 1997; Best, 1906; Hughes, 1982;
Large, 1902). Even if we refute this conclusion on the basis
of the clearly decimal forms in Proto-Austronesian and
Proto-Oceanic, it could still be that Polynesian number systems had shifted from an initial decimal to non-decimal systems at an early stage and that decimal systems were reintroduced under Western influence.
In order to scrutinize this assumption, an even more complex case with apparently ‘mixed bases’ and some additional
irregularities will be detailed and analyzed in the following.

The Tongan Number Systems
The Tongan language, spoken by about 100 000 people in
the Kingdom of Tonga, traditionally contained different
number systems: One general, perfectly consistent system,
and four diverging ways of counting some of the most common objects.
The general number system is a decimal system with
numerals from 1 to 9 and for the powers of the base up to
100 000 (see Table 2). Nowadays, this extent is increased
through the use of English loan words for higher numerals
such as miliona (“million”). In addition, the contemporary
system contains a lexeme for “zero”, noa, but this term was
most likely not used in the sense of numerical zero until
Western arithmetic was introduced.
The composite number words in between are generated
regularly by two or more lexemes according to the multiplication and addition principle. The multiplier directly pre-

215

Table 2: Traditional Tongan number words (general system).
No
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Word
(noa)
taha
ua
tolu
fa
nima
ono
fitu
valu
hiva

No Word
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90

hongofulu
uofulu
tolungofulu
fangofulu
nimangofulu
onongofulu
fitungofulu
valungofulu
hivangofulu

regular numerals, yet omitting the lexeme for “pair”), coconuts, yam, and fish are, from 20 onwards, counted in scores.
The term for “one score” is even glossed differently depending on the counted object. For the counting of coconuts and
yam, a further term refers to “tens of scores” (tefua for coconuts and tefuhi for yam). The scores (kau) of fish, however,
are regularly counted in number words from one to hundreds.
The counting for each of these objects thus differs from
the others, either with regard to the gradation—that is,
whether it proceeds in pairs only, scores, or 10-scores—or
with regard to terms, or both.
Examining Table 3, two further peculiarities catch the eye:
First, while some terms refer to a particular object and its
number, as tefua (one 10-score of coconuts), other terms can
change their absolute value, depending on the object
counted. The most variable term in this regard is teau, which
refers to 100 ordinary things, 100 pairs of sugar-cane thatch
(i.e., 200 pieces), or 100 scores of coconuts, yam, or fish
(i.e., 2 000 pieces). We may therefore conclude that the
counting unit for ordinary things was 1, for sugar-cane it was
2, and for coconuts, yam, and fish it was 20.
Second, the number 20 seems to play an essential role. But
do these specific ways of counting follow a vigesimal system, as was argued for related Polynesian languages by Best
(1906) or Large (1902)? In a strict vigesimal system, we
would expect numerals for the basic numbers 1 to 19 as well
as for the base and all higher powers (i.e., 201 = 20,
202 = 400, 203 = 8 000, and so on). This is not the case here
(and not in any other Polynesian language, either). Instead,
all the specific systems combine the fundamental base 10
with 2, and should therefore, from a mathematical perspec-

No Word
100
200
300
…
1 000
2 000
…
10 000
100 000

teau
uangeau
tolungeau
afe
ua afe
mano
kilu

cedes the multiplicand, and the larger summand precedes the
smaller with a link in front of the last term.
Several objects, however, were counted not by using the
general system, but rather by diverging systems with at least
partly specific terms for certain numbers (see Table 3). Without exception, these objects are natural products used for
subsistence: pieces of sugar-cane thatch, pieces of yam for
planting, whole yam, fish, coconuts, and one type of pandanus leaves. The counting of these objects followed specific
patterns that all have one feature in common: The smallest
unit is the pair (nga'ahoa for sugar-cane thatch, pandanus,
yam, and fish, and taua'i for coconuts).
While the counting of sugar-cane then proceeds in tens of
pairs (tetula), hundreds and thousands of pairs (using the

Table 3: Tongan specific counting systems (adapted from Bender & Beller, 2004).
General numerals
1 taha
2 ua
4 fa
…
10 hongofulu
20 uofulu
40 fangofulu
…
100 teau
200 uangeau
400 fangeau
…
1 000 taha afe
2 000 ua afe
4 000 fa afe
…
a

Category Sugar cane
1 pair taha [nga'ahoa]
2 pairs ua [nga'ahoa]
… …
10 pairs tetula
20 pairs uangotula
… …
100 pairs teau
200 pairs uangeau
… …
1 000 pairs taha afe
2 000 pairs ua afe
… …

Category Coconuts
1 pair [taua'i…'e] taha
2 pairs [taua'i…'e] ua
… …
1 score tekau
2 scores uangakau
… …
1 10-scores tefua
2 10-scores uofua
… …
100 [scores] teau
200 [scores] uangeau
… …

Pieces of yama

Fish

taha [nga'ahoa] taha [nga'ahoa]
ua [nga'ahoa]
ua [nga'ahoa]
…
…
tekau
uangakau
…

kau … 'e taha
kau … 'e ua
…

tefuhi
uangofuhi
…

kau … 'e hongofulu
kau … 'e uofulu
…

teau
uangeau
…

kau … 'e teau
kau … 'e uangeau
…

Whole yam was also counted specifically, however not with a distinct system, but partly with the system for pieces of yam and
partly with the one for fish. The kie pandanus leaves were also counted like pieces of yam.
216

tive, be rather accounted for as decimal systems that do not
operate on single objects but on pairs of objects. This view is
supported by the emphasis laid on pairs in other linguistic
domains and even in spatial conceptions (Bennardo, 2002).
Was the general system introduced in colonial times to
substitute for the specific systems? European missionaries,
arriving in Tonga in the early 19th century (cf. Campbell,
2001; Rutherford, 1977), did not have great influence on
these counting systems, except for the fact that with compulsory school attendance young Tongans do no longer learn the
traditional systems in the traditional way. A linguistic analysis revealed beyond doubt that all numerals of the Tongan
system are indeed indigenous (Bender & Beller, 2004). We
can therefore entirely dismiss the hypothesis that the general
number system in Tongan, with its strict decimal base and
high numerals, was a Western introduction. Instead, we propose that this general system was always a decimal system of
considerable extent, which, in certain cases, operated with
pairs or scores instead of single units.

Abundance cannot have been the single criteria either, as
many objects that are plentiful in the islands were not
counted specifically. However, if we combine importance, or
rather cultural significance with abundance, we obtain an
intersection that precisely maps onto the group of specifically counted objects. While things like kava, lobster, or pig
are culturally salient, they are not plentiful; and breadfruit,
taro, or mango, on the other hand, are abundant, but not
appreciated as much as comparable products. Only coconut,
yam, fish, and the material for thatching houses and weaving
mats are both important and abundant in Tonga.
A common pattern can be identified in other Polynesian
languages, for instance in Samoan, New Zealand Maori, and
Hawai'ian. In all four languages, fish belonged to the category of specifically counted objects, and in some of them,
coconuts, the most prestigious tubers, and material for fabrics were also included (cf. Bender & Beller, 2005).
But still the main question remains unanswered: What
could be the reason for the parallel use of these different
counting systems?

Counting in Context

The Objective of Specific Counting

This leads us to the question of why certain objects were
counted specifically, while others were not. As this is rather a
question of origin than of practice, it cannot be satisfactorily
answered in retrospect. However, a thorough look at the cultural context of these objects and of counting them may help
to shed some light on this question and on the controversy
over whether the supplementary systems have to be regarded
as ‘non-efficient primitives’.

Taking for granted that the Polynesian languages inherited a
general system with base 10 and extending well beyond
1 000—why then did they develop further systems with
‘mixed bases’ that were restricted to certain objects?
Again, Tongan provides a particularly interesting case. Its
general way of counting follows a perfectly consistent, decimal system with a limiting number of 1 000 000. With the
exception of slight irregularities for terms in the tens and
hundreds, this system was easy to learn and memorize as the
lexemes for basic numbers were comparatively short; the
order of the power terms was fixed, ranging from the higher
to the lower ones; and the base was of medium size. In order
to answer the question as to why people would—for a small
number of frequently used objects—give up such an efficient
system in favor of apparently more complicated ones, we
need to turn to the controversy over the limiting number.
In most cases, and particularly in Tongan and Hawai'ian,
these ‘mixed-base’ systems go together with numerals for
high numbers. One of the reasons why some scholars doubt
that the high numerals were used in a numerical sense (e.g.,
Elbert & Pukui, 1979) is that they were far beyond countable
amounts. However, high number words are not required in
counting—they are required in calculating.
There is no doubt that at least some Polynesian cultures
had a great interest in genuine high numbers and number
words. Even in daily life, when preparing and weaving mats,
for instance, large amounts of certain objects were required.
In addition, large numbers of people had to be provided with
food at special occasions like ceremonial feasts or during
war. Particularly in the hierarchical societies of Hawai'i,
Tahiti, and Tonga, goods were regularly centralized and
redistributed by chiefs and kings (e.g., Goldman, 1970;
Kirch, 1984).
As this was done by way of gift or tributes and allocation,
not only addition (as in counting) was required, but also multiplication (as in calculating): Several families contributed to
a village’s share, and several villages to an island or district
share, thus eventually producing considerably large amounts.

The Objects of Specific Concern
As there is nothing peculiar about a score itself—in Tonga, it
is rather 10 that appears to have been of cultural significance
(Gifford, 1929), in other Polynesian cultures it was 8 (Biggs,
1990)—it cannot be “the score of coconuts” that was significant. Therefore, it must be something more general about
these objects that meant they deserved special treatment in
counting. But what is so particular about them to justify specific counting systems? What do they have in common?
To begin with the food, fish, yam, and coconut are among
the most important foods, providing protein, starch, and fat
as well as water respectively. In addition to whole yam, pieces for planting are considered—and counted—separately.
The sugar-cane leaves were used to thatch traditional houses,
and the pandanus-leaves (kie) to weave fine, white mats.
These products were not only important for subsistence,
but also of high cultural significance. Yam, for instance, is
the most prestigious vegetable food and preferred gift in
social obligations. The ripening of the yam was the time for
the first fruit presentations and the beginning of a new year,
as was the case in other Pacific societies and most likely even
in ancient Polynesia (Gifford, 1929; Kirch & Green, 2001).
Yam and coconut are prototypical for cultivated food that
differentiates between civilized and non-civilized people
(e.g., Gifford, 1924). Several tapu applied to certain species
of fish or are connected to successful fishing in general (Collocott, 1921), and coconuts were used for divination (Gifford, 1929). Still, there were other products, either essential
or significant, that were not counted specifically.
217

Keeping an account of these goods and coordinating their
redistribution was an important task. As no notation system
was available, dealing with large numbers was rendered also
a difficult task. And it is exactly in this context of accounting
where the specific number systems make sense. In extracting
a certain factor (such as 2, 4, or even 20) from the absolute
amount, numbers can be abbreviated and the cognitive effort
required to operate with them facilitated. As Zhang and Norman (1995) stated, a cognitive trade-off is associated with
base size: Despite being efficient for encoding and memorizing big numbers, large bases also require the memorization
of larger addition and multiplication tables for calculations.
The specific, ‘mixed-base’ systems, however, combine the
advantages of both the medium-sized decimal base as well as
the larger ‘semi-base’ 20. While still sticking to the restricted amount of lexemes necessary for basic numbers and to the
respective addition and multiplication tables, as in the former
case, encoding and internal representation of large numbers
(in terms of absolute amounts) as well as operating with
them was facilitated, as in the latter case.
There is some evidence to support this abbreviation
hypothesis.
(1) One indication is that the general numerals were sometimes used even for the special objects as long as the total
numbers were small. Or, the other way around: It was particularly for large numbers that these specific systems were
used.
(2) A second indication is provided by the group of objects
that were counted specifically. What all these objects have in
common is the fact that they were important enough to be
counted with more than sporadic frequency, and at the same
time they were sufficiently abundant to make an abbreviation
desirable. Accordingly, it is precisely this combination of
features that not only characterizes but even legitimizes the
supplementary use of counting systems with their ‘mixed
bases’ and high numerals.
In Tonga, the application of these specific ways of counting can still be observed in at least two contexts. One is the
presentation of food to the sovereign (cf. Bender & Beller,
2004; Bott, 1982; Evans, 2001), in which the ceremonial
character demands the observance of traditional counting.
The other context is part of women’s work in daily life and
occurs when pandanus leaves (kie) are prepared for weaving.
When tied together to be taken to the sea for bleaching, people continue to make bundles in the literal sense at the score.
And as the mats made from kie are among the most valuable
goods of a Tongan family and do, at the same time, require
huge amounts of leaves, the kie may serve as perfect example for the category of objects to be counted specifically.
(3) A third argument in favor of our abbreviation hypothesis has to do with the ‘mixed bases’ themselves. There is no
indication for a genuine vigesimal system in any of the
Polynesian languages as was assumed, for instance, by Best
(1906) or Bauer (1997). Instead, all powers denoted by
numerals in all Polynesian systems result from multiplication of lower powers by 10. What we do find—and in many
cases in addition to a regular decimal system—are systems
that seem to mix a second base, most often 2 or, as in
Hawai'ian, 4, with the fundamental base 10.

With regard to the ‘supplementary base’, we can find evidence for the fact that exactly this number is reflected in the
customary way of counting. Within the Tongan lexicon, for
instance, “counting in general” (lau) is distinguished from
“counting one by one, not in pairs” (lau fakamatelau). Even
in practise, many Tongans still prefer to count objects by taking two items at a time (cf. Bender & Beller, 2004). The
same is reported for Maori (Best, 1906). And for Hawai'ian
with its ‘supplementary base’ four, Alexander (1864) refers
to the custom of counting particular objects in pairs of pairs.
We therefore consider it justified to conclude that, what
might appear as a second base at first glance, should be
rather interpreted as a counting unit, on which an actually
decimal system operates. That means, not single objects
were counted, but pairs of objects (or pairs of pairs of objects
as presumably in Hawai'ian) and even scores of objects as in
certain cases in Tongan or Maori.
It is also no coincidence that all the ‘secondary bases’ are
even numbers, and predominantly 2, as counting in pairs is
fairly fast and comfortable, both from a cognitive and a practical point of view. It then even makes sense that partly different lexemes are chosen for similar reference numbers as
these make it easier to differentiate between the number systems and to identify their respective value.
This assumption also explains why the apparently ‘mixedbase’ systems were not used exclusively but did supplement
more general decimal systems: They were not entirely distinct but derived from the general system. In fact, they ‘transposed’ the original system into a higher order system.

Conclusion: Expanding the Limiting Number
Distinct systems for specific objects can be found in several
Polynesian languages (Bender & Beller, 2005). Since they
were used besides a general decimal system, they may be,
from an evolutionist perspective, regarded as primitive remnants. However, as we have shown, these specific systems
did not precede the general one, but were derived from it. As
a derivative they were even quite sophisticated and can therefore not be regarded as indicating a lack of mathematical
comprehension, either.
We argue, to the contrary, that they were invented for rational purposes. One was to enhance counting of frequent
objects by using pairs or tens or scores as the counting unit.
At the same time, this extraction of a certain factor abbreviated higher numbers and consequently facilitated mental
arithmetic.
The other purpose might have been to expand the limiting
number of the respective system, up to a factor 20 in the case
of the Tongan specific systems.
The distribution of ‘mixed base’ systems and limiting
numbers among Polynesian languages supports this assumption. Despite the overwhelming convergence in numerals,
Table 1 reveals some variation with regard to the limiting
number in contemporary Polynesian number systems. This
variety may result basically from expanding or contracting
the original system according to local requirements. One of
these requirements could have been the size of the population and the degree of stratification. In islands with powerful
chiefs or kings and their strong concern with collecting and
218

Bott, E. (with assistance of Tavi) (1982). Tongan society at
the time of Captain Cook’s visits: Discussions with Her
Majesty Queen Salote Tupou. Wellington: The Polynesian
Society.
Campbell, I. C. (2001). Island Kingdom: Tonga ancient and
modern. Christchurch: Canterbury University Press [2nd,
rev. ed.].
Churchward, C. M. (1953). Tongan grammar. Nuku'alofa,
Tonga: Vava'u Press.
Collocott, E. E. V. (1921). The supernatural in Tonga. American Anthropologist, 23, 415-444.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Elbert, S. H., & Pukui, M. K. (1979). Hawaiian grammar.
Honolulu: University Press of Hawaii.
Evans, M. (2001). Persistence of the gift: Tongan tradition in
transnational context. Waterloo [Canada]: Wilfrid Laurier
University Press.
Geary, D. C., Bow-Thomas, CC., Liu, F., & Siegler, R. S.
(1996). Development of arithmetical competencies in Chinese and American children: Influence of age, language,
and schooling. Child Development, 67, 2022-2044.
Gifford, E. W. (1924). Tongan myths and tales. Honolulu:
Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 8.
Gifford, E. W. (1929). Tongan society. Honolulu: Bernice P.
Bishop Museum.
Goldman, I. (1970). Ancient Polynesian society. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Greenberg, J. H. (1978). Generalizations about numeral systems. In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of human language. Vol. 3: Word structure. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Hughes, B. (1982). Hawaiian number systems. Mathematics
Teacher, 75, 253-256.
Ifrah, G. (1985). From one to zero: A universal history of
numbers. New York: Viking.
Kirch, P. V. (1984). The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kirch, P. V., & Green, R. C. (2001). Hawaiki, ancestral
Polynesia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Large, J. J. (1902). The vigesimal system of enumeration.
Journal of the Polynesian Society, 11, 260-261.
Lynch, J., Ross, M., & Crowley, T. (2002). The Oceanic languages. Richmond: Curzon.
Menninger, K. (1969). Number words and number symbols.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, K., Smith, C. M., Zhu, J., & Zhang, H. (1995). Preschool origins of cross-national differences in mathematical competence: The role of number-naming systems.
Psychological Science, 6, 56-60.
Rutherford, N. (Ed.) (1977). Friendly Islands: A history of
Tonga. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Tryon, D. T. (Ed.) (1995). Comparative Austronesian dictionary: An introduction to Austronesian studies; 4 vols. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wiese, H. (2003). Numbers, language, and the human mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1995). A representational analysis of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.

redistributing resources (such as Tonga, Tahiti, and Hawai'i),
higher numbers might have been required, while societies
with less centralized political forces or small communities
(such as Rapanui or Maori) might not have felt a need for the
very large numbers. It is therefore no coincidence that particularly in languages with high numerals—and we may add:
with a concern for high numbers—supplementary systems
were in use as well.
The existence of specific number systems does not contradict an abstract interest in numbers because coconuts and
fish cannot reasonably be added anyway, and when people
wished to operate generally they still could work with the
general number system. The evolutionist claim that specific
number systems are premathematical remnants can therefore
be rejected. Under the unfavorable conditions of mental
arithmetics without external representation, specific number
systems do serve remarkably rational purposes—and they do
so in a cognitively very efficient way.

Acknowledgments
Data collection in Tonga took place during field work of the
second author within a project funded by a DFG grant to
Hans Spada and Stefan Seitz (Sp 251/18-x). We thank the
Government of Tonga for granting us permission to conduct
research. We are indebted to our Tongan friends and interview partners, in particular to Moana and Sione Faka'osi, Ua
and Pauline Fili, Melesungu Ha'unga, Fonongava'inga Kidd,
Taniela Lutui, Taniela Palu, and Langilangi Vi, for information and insights provided, and we are grateful to Giovanni
Bennardo, Miriam Bertholet, Lothar Käser, Sarah Mannion,
and Mario Spengler for discussion and valuable comments.

References
Alexander, W. D. (1864). A short synopsis of the most essential points in Hawaiian grammar. Rutland, Vt.: Charles E.
Tuttle.
Ascher, M. (1998). Ethnomathematics: A multicultural view
of mathematical ideas. Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole Publ.
Bauer, W. (with W. Parker, Te Kareongawai Evans, & Te
Aroha Noti Teepa) (1997). The Reed reference grammar of
Maori. Auckland: Reed Books.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2004). Counting in Tongan: The traditional number systems and their cognitive implications.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2005). Fanciful or genuine? Bases
and high numerals in Polynesian number systems. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Bennardo, G. (2002). Mental images of the familiar: Cultural
strategies of spatial representations in Tonga. In G. Bennardo (Ed.), Representing space in Oceania: Culture in
language and mind. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Best, E. (1906). Maori numeration: Some account of the single, binary, and semi-vigesimal systems of numeration formerly employed by the Maori. Transactions and
Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute, 39, 150-180.
Biggs, B. (1990). Extraordinary eight. In J. H. C. S. Davidson, K. K. T. Mara & H. Cordell (Eds.), Pacific island languages: Essays in honour of G. B. Milner. London:
Collected Papers in Oriental and African Studies.
219

