UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Limits of Supposing: Semantic Illusions and Conditional Probability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rs7s689

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Elqayam, Shira
Evans, Jonathan St.B.T.
Handley, Simon J.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Limits of Supposing: Semantic Illusions and Conditional Probability
Shira Elqayam (selqayam@plymouth.ac.uk)
Simon J. Handley (shandley@plymouth.ac.uk)
Jonathan St.B.T. Evans (jevans@plymouth.ac.uk)
Centre for Thinking and Language, University of Plymouth
Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK
sort. Some, like our example, are indeterminate because
they can assume any truth value. You may assume that
journalist was telling the truth; you may assume she was
lying. In either case you will not run into contradiction.
Sentences of this sort are called TRUTHTELLER-type
sentences. But sentences that refer to their own truth status
may also end up being paradoxical. This is the case with the
infamous LIAR paradox: ‘This sentence is false’. If you
assume that the sentence is true, it turns out to be false, and
vice versa. You end up with a contradiction each time.
Generally, sentences of the ‘TRUTHTELLER’ type (‘I
am telling the truth’; ‘This sentence is true’; ‘I am a knight’)
potentially evoke a semantic illusion that they are true rather
than indeterminate, whereas sentences of the ‘LIAR’ type
(‘I am lying’; ‘This sentence in false’; ‘I am a knave’) are
resilient to this sort of semantic illusion, and are normally
evaluated as indeterminate (Elqayam, in press). For
instance, reasoners tend to evaluate ‘I am a knave and snow
is white’ – a conjunction with a LIAR plus a true conjunct –
as indeterminate (i.e., neither True nor False). In contrast, a
matching conjunction with the TRUTHTELLER as the
indeterminate constituent – ‘I am a knight and snow is
white’ – is normally evaluated as true (i.e., determinate). In
fact, such evaluation is often indistinguishable from
evaluation of the matched item with a true constituent in
place of the TRUTHTELLER (e.g., ‘Sky is blue and snow is
white’): the three-valued truth table produced by the
indeterminate truth-value is thus ‘collapsed’ (Rescher,
1969) into a simpler, bivalent truth table containing just
True and False as truth-values. This semantic illusion has
thus been dubbed the ‘collapse illusion’ (Elqayam, in press).
The theory of hypothetical thinking (Evans, Over, &
Handley, 2003) suggests that the LIAR and the
TRUTHTELLER initially share a very similar process of
representation (Elqayam, in press). The automatic, heuristic
system 1 throws up the most relevant representation
(principle of relevance) – this boils down to a single
representation (the principle of singularity) of the surface
form of the utterance. Hence, the TRUTHTELLER is
represented
as
Knight(speaker),
the
LIAR
as
Knave(speaker). LIAR-type and TRUTHTELLER-type
propositions critically diverge, though, when the evaluation
process hits the satisficing phase mandated by the analytical
system 2. For the TRUTHTELLER, the process ends then
and there: the ensuing representation is satisficing and there
is nothing to trigger further examination. For the LIAR,
though, the inherent paradoxality of this representation
violates satisficing, so reasoners are obliged to generate an

Abstract
Faced with extreme demands, hypothetical thinking runs the
danger of total failure. Paradoxical propositions such as the
LIAR (‘I am lying’) provide an opportunity to test it to its
limits. Embedded in conditionals, they tended to occasion a
breakdown of probabilistic inference (0% True-0% False
pattern) demonstrating the vulnerability of hypothetical
thinking when taxed by embedded suppositional processes. In
contrast, items with the TRUTHTELLER (‘I am telling the
truth’) were ‘collapsed’ to responses of conditional
probability closely resembling estimates of control items.
Keywords: reasoning; conditionals; Liar paradox.

Introduction
Everyday assertions are not always simply true or false.
They may refer to future events; they may refer to
imaginary, mythological or fictional creatures or personae;
they may be enigmatic or even paradoxical. In all these
cases, we encounter indeterminate propositions –
propositions to which we cannot assign a truth-value of
either true or false. Whenever we are the recipients of an
indeterminate assertion and have to make assumptions
concerning its truth or falsity, we engage in hypothetical
thinking. Consider, for instance, what happens if a politician
and a journalist accuse each other of lying – you know one
of them has to be lying, but you have to make an
assumption in order to decide who does and who doesn’t,
follow up the possible consequences and decide if this
assumption was justified.
The work we report here was designed to test some of the
ways in which we reason when faced with indeterminate
assertions and have to understand their hypothetical
consequences. This sort of suppositional thinking of
semantic concepts is mostly studied by metadeduction – the
research paradigm studying reasoning with semantic
concepts such as truth and falsity (e.g., Byrne & Handley,
1997; Byrne, Handley, & Johnson-Laird, 1995; Evans,
1990; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1990; Rips, 1989;
Schroyens, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 1999). Studies in
metadeduction typically present participants with the island
of knights and knaves, in which each of the inhabitants is
either a knave, who tells nothing but lies, or a knight, who
only tells the truth. Participants have to classify speakers as
knights or knaves based on their utterances.
Consider the journalist from our example, writing in her
column, ‘What I am telling you right now is God’s own
truth’. Meta-deduction typically involves sentences of this
630

alternative model, i.e. Knight(speaker). This would in turn
prove contradictory too, resulting in a vicious, tail-biting
circle of supposition and contradiction, eventually leading
up to the null model and an indeterminate evaluation –
essentially a ‘truth-value gap’.1
The LIAR is by no means unique in creating a truth-value
gap in evaluation – the infamous ‘defective’ truth tables of
the conditional (e.g., Evans, Newstead, & Byrne, 1993;
Evans & Over, 2004) are another such case – that is,
reasoners typically tend to evaluate if p then q as true in the
p q case, false in the p not-q case, and irrelevant otherwise.
For instance, ‘If it rains I will take an umbrella’ is typically
evaluated as true in case it rains and I do take an umbrella,
false in case it rains and I don’t take an umbrella, and
irrelevant if it does not rain at all.
The suppositional account of conditionals (Evans et al.,
2004; Evans, Over, & Handley, 2005) invokes in this
context the Ramsey test – Frank Ramsey’s suggestion that
when people evaluate the conditional if p then q they do so
by adding p hypothetically to their stock of belief and
evaluating q in this context (Ramsey, 1931). In other words:
if triggers hypothetical thinking, a mental simulation that
focuses on the antecedent (the ‘p’). This focus on the
antecedent leaves out of consideration cases in which the
antecedent does not hold, thus creating a truth-value gap.
If the Ramsey test is viable as a psychological theory,
then when participants are asked to evaluate the probability
of a conditional, if p then q, we would expect them to
respond with the conditional probability – the probability of
q given p (abbreviated as q|p). This prediction has recently
received abundant empirical support (e.g., Evans, Handley,
& Over, 2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003).
Up until now conditionals have only been studied with
determinate components; even the defective truth-tables
were obtained for conditionals with perfectly innocuous,
true-or-false materials: the truth-value gaps have been in the
responses, not in the materials. But we have already seen
that the suppositional process faces a unique challenge when
LIAR-type constituents are involved. How, then, would
reasoners respond if we place LIAR and TRUTHTELLERtype constituents in conditionals’ antecedents? This is what
the present paper endeavours to look into.2
As we saw, LIAR-type sentences produce, all by
themselves, the intensive, ‘hyper’, vicious-circle
hypothetical thinking described above. Moreover, if also
produces hypothetical thinking. Combining if with LIARtype antecedent produces, then, hypothetical thinking within
hypothetical thinking, a simulation within simulation. This
is bound to be a highly gruelling task, setting intolerable

demands on working memory, and breaching tractability
boundaries. A conditional with a LIAR-type antecedent tests
hypothetical thinking to its limits.
How, then, could reasoners resolve this impossible
tension? Our hypothesis is that they would tend to respond
with a failure of hypothetical thinking or, in slightly more
technical terms, the ‘null model’ (i.e., the ‘vacuous’ or
‘empty’ model): previous work demonstrates (Elqayam, in
press) that this tends to be the most pervasive pattern.
Reasoners typically evaluate conditionals with a LIAR-type
antecedent (e.g., ‘If I am a knave then snow is white’) as
neither true nor false (or, more precisely, judge them to be
utterable by neither a knight nor a knave). The high
proportion of such responses – about 70%-80% – clearly
demonstrates the breakdown of hypothetical thinking faced
with a paradoxical antecedent.
We still have to translate the null model to probabilistic
response patterns. The best bet seems to be a response
pattern of probabilistic inference breakdown. This would
involve reasoners estimating the likelihood of the
conditional being true as 0%, plus a high percent of ‘0%’
ratings of the conditional being false – in effect, the null
model. We call this the ‘0%-0%’ hypothesis.
In contrast, for conditionals with TRUTHTELLER-type
antecedents, we will expect a simple, straightforward
conditional probability estimate: as TRUTHTELLER-type
propositions are normally ‘collapsed’, that is, evaluated as if
they were simply true, a conditional with a
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent should not be different
from a conditional with any other antecedent. To illustrate,
suppose we have the following conditional: If I am a knight,
then I live in Emerald City; and suppose we know that there
are 300 knights in Emerald City [pq], 100 knights in
Sapphire City [p¬q], and 1000 knaves in each Emerald City
[¬pq] and Sapphire City [¬p¬q]. The probability estimate
we would expect in this case would simply be the
conditional probability (.75 in this case), due to collapse.
Whereas an equivalent conditional with a LIAR-type
antecedent – If I am a knave, then I live in Emerald City –
we would expect reasoners to estimate as 0%, regardless of
the actual frequency distribution.
This study, then, endeavours to examine two hypotheses.
The simpler one is that conditionals with a
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent would be collapsed, and
hence estimates of their truth will reflect conditional
probability, as if they are regular, everyday conditionals.
The other hypothesis involves probability estimates of
conditionals with a LIAR-type antecedent, and predicts a
0%-0% pattern in their evaluation, so that reasoners are
expected to evaluate such conditional as 0% True but also
0% False, regardless of their actual probability. In other
words, conditionals with TRUTHTELLER antecedent are
expected to be collapsed, whereas conditionals with LIAR
antecedents are expected to elicit probabilistic inference
breakdown.

1

This is perfectly in accord with Kripke’s classic analysis (1975); cf.
Elqayam (2005). Note that we are not proposing that the Liar
constitutes a truth-value gap as a solution to the paradox – that
approach only leads to the so-called ‘strengthened Liar’ (cf. Martin,
1984).
2
Note that this is not a normative question: the proliferation of
many-valued logic systems makes it effectively impossible to set
normative standards in meta-deduction (Elqayam, 2003).
631

and ¬p¬q frequencies were set equal to each other, either at
200 or 400 for small city size, or 2000 / 4000 for large city
size. Table 1 presents the design.

METHOD
Participants. 72 students of the University of Plymouth
and 22 prospective students taking part in an open day
participated on a paid volunteer basis and were tested in
small groups. All participants were native speakers of
English and none of them had had formal training in logic.
Materials and Procedure. Test materials were presented
by software, beginning with a consent page, then a preamble
that introduced the Island of Knights and Knaves and the
format of conditional probability puzzles. The test phase
consisted of control and test items presented in an
individually randomised order. In all, each participant was
presented with 16 items. After that, participants were asked
for some personal data that included age, gender, and
background in logic. The final page consisted of thanks and
a detailed debriefing file.

High CP
Low CP

Another between test conditions was question format,
which was either direct or indirect. Direct questions
conformed to the format utilised in Evans et al. (2003), and
were phrased as ‘How likely is it that X is telling the truth /
lying?’ Indirect questions conformed to the format utilised
in the previous collapse study (Elqayam, in press), and were
phrased as ‘How likely is it that X is a knight / knave?’
In all items, pq frequency was kept constant at 150, with
the p¬q frequency set either at 50 (high conditional
probability) or at 450 (low conditional probability). The ¬pq

pq
p ¬q
¬p q
¬p ¬q
Q

¬pq
400
4000
200
2000

¬p¬q
400
4000
200
2000

Each item was presented twice, once with a question
about the probability of its being true (‘What is the
likelihood that X is a knight / is telling the truth?’ and once
with a question about the probability of its being false
(‘What is the likelihood that X is a knave / is lying?’).
In addition to the test items, all participants were
presented with matching control items, in which the knights
/ knaves were replaced by ordinary professions (e.g., ‘If I
am a teacher then I live in Emerald City’), with professions
randomly assigned from a list of four: doctors, painters,
teachers and musicians. Participants were instructed to
assume that there were just two professions in each city.
The control items served to replicate previous conditional
probability findings, thus supporting the soundness of the
paradigm utilised in the present study.
The mixed experimental design thus was 2
(TRUTHTELLER / LIAR -type antecedent of the test items)
by 2 (direct / indirect question) by 2 (high / low conditional
probability) by 2 (large / small city size), the latter two as
repeated measures. For the control items, the antecedent
condition was irrelevant, resulting in a 2x2x2 design. There
were two types of dependent variables, True ratings and
False ratings. Since the True and False questions were
separated, this resulted in a set of 16 items for each
participant.

Design. Figure 1 presents some matching sample items
that illustrate item construction for the various test
conditions. Design was mixed, with conditional probability
and city size as repeated measure variables, and antecedent
type as a between variable. Participants were randomly
assigned either to a TRUTHTELLER condition, in which
the test items consisted of conditionals with a
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent (‘If I am a knight then I
live in Emerald City’), or to a LIAR condition, in which the
test items consisted of conditionals with a LIAR-type
antecedent (‘If I am a knave then I live in Emerald City’).
Speaker and city names were randomly assigned from a list.

Cond.

Table 1: Item frequencies
pq
p¬q
Small city size
150
50
Large city size
150
50
Small city size
150
450
Large city size
150
450

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Since there were no significant differences between the
direct and indirect test conditions, data from these
conditions were pooled.

High CP, Small city size, TRUTHTELLER Condition,
Indirect Q
TRUE Control item
TRUE Test item
Anne: If I am a teacher then I Anne: If I am a knight then I
live in Emerald City.
live in Emerald City.

Low CP, Large city size, LIAR Condition, Direct Q
TRUE Control item
Ben: If I am a teacher then I
live in Emerald City.

TRUE Test item
Ben: If I am a knave then I
live in Emerald City.

150 teachers in Emerald City
50 teachers in Opal City
400 doctors in Emerald City
400 doctors in Opal city

150 knights in Emerald City
50 knights in Opal City
400 knaves in Emerald City
400 knaves in Opal city

150 painters in Emerald City
450 painters in Sapphire City
2000 doctors in Emerald City
2000 doctors in Sapphire city

150 knaves in Emerald City
450 knaves in Sapphire City
2000 knights in Emerald City
2000 knights in Sapphire city

How likely is it that Anne is
a knight? ___%

How likely is it that Anne is a
knight? ___%

How likely is it that Ben is
telling the truth? ___%

How likely is it that Ben is
telling the truth? ___%

p – antecedent (the ‘if’ part of the conditional); q – consequent (the ‘then’ part of the conditional); ¬ – ‘not’
Figure 1: Matching Sample Items, True

632

conditional probability – this is just what the results
demonstrate.

First we analysed the control items, to ensure that they
replicate previous conditional probability findings, and
hence that using the knight-knave scenario in conjunction
with estimates of the probability of conditionals is a viable
paradigm. Table 2 shows the mean probability estimates for
the control items. Two separate 2 (high / low conditional
probability) x 2 (large / small city size) repeated-measure
ANOVAs were conducted for the True and False ratings of
the control items respectively. As predicted, the results of
these analyses essentially replicated previous results
reported for the conditional probability paradigm (Evans et
al., 2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003), both analyses
revealing a highly significant main effect of conditional
probability. High conditional probability items elicited
higher probability estimates than did low conditional
probability items (F(1,93)=67.9, MSE=612, p<.0005). This
pattern establishes the soundness of the present paradigm.

True ratings
60
50
40
30
20
LL

HL

LH

HH

False ratings
70
60
50
40

Table 2: Mean Probability Estimates for True and False
Ratings of Control Items (SD in parenthesis)
True Ratings
Low CP, Small city size
55.4 (27.4)
Low CP, Large city size
55.4 (30.3)
High CP, Small city size
37.2 (25.7)
High CP, Large city size
31.5 (22.2)
CP – conditional probability

30
20
LL

False ratings
43.8 (26.0)
49.4 (30.8)
52.9 (27.2)
58.1 (29.9)

HL

TRUTHTELLER-type
antecedent

LH

HH

LIAR-type
antecedent

LL- Small sample Low p¬q
HL- Large sample Low p¬q
LH- Small sample High p¬q
HH- Large sample High p¬q

For the True ratings, there was no significant main effect
of city size (i.e., no effect of conjunctive probability; p >
.05). There was, however, a main effect of city size in the
False ratings, in which large sample items tended to elicit
higher False ratings than small sample items (F(1,93) = 6.3,
MSE = 442, p < .05. In both ANOVAs, The interactions
between conditional probability and city size were nonsignificant (p > .05.)
Our second step was analysis of the test items, which we
examined
by
two
separate
2
(LIAR-type
/
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent) 2 (high / low conditional
probability) x 2 (large / small city size) mixed ANOVAs for
the True ratings and the False ratings respectively. Figure 2
presents mean True and False ratings for the test items.
For the True rating, some of the predicted pattern
emerged, with two main effects, of conditional probability
and of antecedent type.
Mean True ratings of high conditional probability items
were significantly higher than mean True ratings of low
conditional probability items (F(1,92) = 19.6, MSE = 703, p
< .0005). In addition, the LIAR-type antecedent group
produced True ratings of test items that were significantly
lower than True ratings of test items produced by the
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent group (F(1,92) = 4.6,
MSE = 2183, p < .05). There were no significant city size
effects and no significant interactions (p>.05). The pattern
revealed is entirely in line with the predictions as far as the
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent group is concerned,
which was predicted to collapse, resulting in a pattern of

Figure 2: Mean Probability Ratings of Test items
The observed pattern for the LIAR-type antecedent group
was somewhat surprising, though. The 0%-0% hypothesis
(i.e., 0% True and 0% False) would predict a flattish line at
or near the 0% mark for this group. Instead, we have
response pattern that very closely echoes that of the
TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent group’s, only about 10%
below it. How could this be explained?
Previous work (Elqayam, in press) has revealed a
minority group of reasoners, who can work their way
around the compelling tendency to produce the null model
for LIAR-type constituents. Faced with conditionals such as
‘If I am a knave then snow is black,’ these reasoners
typically evaluate them mainly as true (contrary to the
predominate ‘neither’ evaluation of less able reasoners). If
this group surfaced in the present context as well, we could
reasonably surmise that they have been able to resist the null
model, thus producing the equivalent of ‘determinate’
responses. To deal with the tractability problem they
probably only kept one sort of hypothetical thinking, and
that would have been the relatively easier one, the
probabilistic hypothetical thinking triggered by ‘if’. They
thus ignored the paradoxality of the LIAR-type antecedent
and responded as they would to any other conditional.
Hence, the lower line of conditional probability effect for
the LIAR-antecedent group suggests that the mean True
estimates reflect an averaging effect of two distinct response
patterns: a conditional probability response pattern, and a
633

0%-0% response pattern. The 0% responses may have
pulled down the means, resulting in lower probability
estimates. We take up this analysis again later.
The picture that emerged for the False ratings was
somewhat more ambiguous. There was a significant main
effect of conditional probability, in which mean False
ratings of high low conditional probability items were lower
than mean False ratings of high conditional probability
items (F(1,92) = 6.1, MSE = 895, p < .05). However, there
was no antecedent main effect such as was discerned in the
True ratings (p>.05); it may have been blurred by the added
difficulty of False ratings (in effect, a sort of double
negation effect; cf., e.g., Evans, Clibbens & Rood, 1995;
Evans & Over, 2004) . Both True and False ratings analyses
revealed no significant city size effects and no significant
interactions (p>.05).
To test the ‘0%-0%’ hypothesis more directly, we
computed two indices reflecting the number of 0% True and
0% False responses. First, we computed a ‘0% True index’,
consisting of the number of test items rated as 0% True.
From this we reduced the number of control items rated as
0% True, to control for possible response bias towards 0%.
As there were four test items with True ratings and four
control items with True ratings, the 0% True index had a
potential range of -4 to +4. The higher the score, the higher
is the participant’s tendency to rate test items as 0% True.
Similarly, we computed a ‘0% False index’, which
consisted of the number of test items rated as 0% False,
again, minus the number of control items rated as 0% False,
and again with a potential range of -4 to +4. The higher the
score of the 0% False index, the higher is the participant’s
tendency to rate test items as 0% False.3
Participants who tend to respond with breakdown of
probabilistic inference should have both a high 0% True
index and a high 0% False index. Hence, we should expect
both the 0% True index and the 0% False index to be
significantly higher for the LIAR-type antecedent group
than for the TRUTHTELLER-type antecedent group.
A repeated measure 2 (antecedent type) by 2 (True vs.
False index) ANOVA supported the 0%-0% hypothesis, the
results shown in Figure 3. As can be patently seen, both 0%
indices for the LIAR antecedent group are higher, a
significant main effect, (F(1,92) = 17.7, MSE = 1.335,
p < .0005). In addition to that, there were also a True-False
main effect, the 0% False index being lower than the 0%
True index (F(1,92) = 16.1, MSE = .521, p < .0005);
however, this was probably an artefact of the interaction
effect (F(1,92) = 12.0, MSE = .521, p < .001), in which 0%
True index increased more dramatically than the False 0%
index – probably due to the blurring effect associated with
the False ratings and the double negation effect noted above.
Although the gradient for the 0% False index was less steep,
nevertheless the difference in 0% False index scores
between the TRUTHTELLER antecedent group and the
LIAR antecedent group was significant (t(1,54)=2.3, p<.05).

Thus we can see that responses to the LIAR reflect the 0%0% pattern of probabilistic inference breakdown, in which it
is perceived as neither true nor false.
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
Truth-teller antecedent
True 0% index

Liar antecedent
False 0% index

Figure 3: Mean 0% indices

GENERAL DISCUSSION
In this study we examined estimates of the probability of
conditionals with indeterminate antecedents, such as the
LIAR (‘I am lying’) and the TRUTHTELLER (‘I am telling
the truth’). We made two primary hypotheses: First, we
predicted that conditionals with TRUTHTELLER-type
antecedents would be ‘collapsed’ (Elqayam, in press), that
is, regarded as if they were ordinary conditionals with
nothing exceptional about them. Hence we predicted that
their probability would be estimated as the conditional
probability, q|p; in other words we predicted their estimation
pattern to closely match that of control items with
determinate antecedents and replicate the pattern previously
established in the literature with ordinary conditionals
(Evans et al., 2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003).
The second prediction we made was regarding
conditionals with a LIAR-type antecedent, and was quite
different. We hypothesised that, as the suppositional or
hypothetical-thinking processes involved in judging the
LIAR were immensely complex, and as conditionals
involved hypothetical thinking by themselves, putting the
two together would prove intractably intolerable for
reasoners, and probabilistic inference breakdown would
ensue. Thus, we predicted that probability estimates of
conditionals with LIAR-type antecedent would be both 0%
True and 0% False – what we called the 0%-0% pattern.
We also had a minor prediction involving the soundness
the experimental paradigm. We predicted that probability
estimates of control items involving ordinary conditionals
with determinate antecedents such as ‘If I am a painter…’
would closely resemble probability estimates established in
the literature. Hence we predicted the probability of control
items to be influenced by conditional probability, q|p.
Of these three predictions, two were clearly supported and
one partially so. First, our minor prediction of conditional
probability estimate of control items was supported, lending
credence to the viability of the experimental paradigm that
conjoined meta-deductive components with probability

3
We have also calculated 100% indices but reporting them and their
results would be beyond the scope of present work.

634

REFERENCES

estimates of conditionals.
More importantly, the collapse prediction of conditionals
with TRUTHTELLER-type antecedents was entirely borne
out, as estimates of these conditionals were clearly affected
by conditional probability, just as matching control items
were affected by it. Thus the collapse affect predicted by
hypothetical thinking theory has been supported.
One of the surprises of the present findings was how
robust the conditional probability effect is. Not only did we
replicate it in the control items, it has greatly affected the
test items as well – including the LIAR-type antecedent
group, where we did not expect to find it: conditionals with
LIAR-type antecedents were affected by conditional
probability, although their estimates were significantly
lower. Clearly, at least some of the participants were
responding to these items with conditional probability
estimates. Previous work (Elqayam, in press) identified
reasoners able to resist the pull of the null model in
conditionals with LIAR-type antecedents and come up with
determinate evaluations, and this pattern seems in accord.
More testing established the existence of conditional
inference breakdown pattern as well, as participants did tend
to respond to LIAR items with 0% estimates, both True and
False – the predicted ‘0%-0%’ pattern. This pattern was
superimposed on the conditional probability pattern,
resulting in significantly lowered probability estimates for
the group presented with LIAR-type antecedents.
Hypothetical thinking at its best is only as good as our
bounded rationality is good – we have seen some of these
inherent limitations in this paper. In particular, we seem
helpless to iterate suppositions, and embedding a
supposition within supposition seems to exert an impossible
demand on our capacity – our inferences just break down.
The TRUTHTELLER collapse may mean that the
satisficing principle of bounded rationality is a device of
‘self-defending rationality’ – the built-in mechanisms that
limit normative rationality actually protect us from its
breakdown. Paradoxically, then, the very limitations on
suppositional processes may actually support rationality.

Edgington, D. (2003). What if? Questions about
conditionals. Mind & Language, 18, 380-401.
Elqayam, S. (2003). Norm, error, and the structure of
rationality: The case study of the knight-knave paradigm.
Semiotica, 147, 265-189.
Elqayam, S. (2005). The collapse illusion effect: a
pragmatic-semantic illusion of truth and paradox.
Thinking and Reasoning.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Clibbens, J., & Rood, B. (1995). Bias in
conditional inference: implications for mental models and
mental logic. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 644-670.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. H., & Over, D. E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 321-355.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M. J.
(1993). Human Reasoning: The Psychology of Deduction.
Hove & London: Erlbaum.
Evans, J. St. B. T. & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., & Handley, S. H. (2003). A
theory of hypothetical thinking. In D. Hardman & L.
Maachi (Eds.), Thinking: Psychological perspectives on
reasoning, judgement and decision making (pp. 3-22).
Chichester: Wiley.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., & Handley, S. J. (2005).
Suppositions, extensionality, and conditionals: A critique
of the mental model theory of Johnson-Laird & Byrne
(2002). Psychological Review.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove & London: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: a theory of meaning, pragmatics and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Kripke, S. (1975). Outline of a Theory of Truth. Journal of
Philosophy, 72, 690-716.
Martin, R. L. (1984). (Ed.) Recent essays on truth and the
Liar paradox. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Oberauer, K. & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models
and personal utilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29, 680693.
Ramsey, F. P. (1931). The foundations of mathematics and
other logical essays. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G. (1999).
Error and bias in meta-propositional reasoning: A case of
the mental model theory. Thinking and Reasoning, 5, 2965.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC grant 000-22-0614. We
thank Clare Walsh and three anonymous reviewers for
helpful comments on an earlier draft; Henry Markovits and
members of the Plymouth Thinking and Reasoning Group
for useful discussions.

635

