UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Robustness of the Take The Best Configural Heuristic in Linearly and Nonlinearly
Separable Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68d3m24m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Czienskowi, Uwe
Garcia-Retamero, Rocio
Hoffrage, Ulrich

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Robustness of the Take The Best Configural Heuristic in Linearly
and Nonlinearly Separable Environments
Ulrich Hoffrage (Ulrich.hoffrage@unil.ch)
Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales (HEC), Université de Lausanne, BFSH1, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

Rocio Garcia-Retamero (rretamer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Plank Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, D-14195 Berlin

Uwe Czienskowski (sciencec@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Plank Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, D-14195 Berlin

stopping rule, describing when information search is to be
stopped (TTB stops after the first discriminating cue); and a
decision rule, which describes how to use the available
information to make a decision (TTB chooses the alternative
favoured by the first discriminating cue).
When TTB was used to make predictions in real-world
environments—for instance, to predict which of two cities
has a higher homelessness rate, which of two professors earns
more money, or which of two persons has a higher percentage
of body fat—it turns out that it could compete well with more
savvy strategies such as multiple regression, particularly in
cross-validation (Czerlinski, Gigerenzer, & Goldstein, 1999).
Cross-validation comparisons were made by training on half
of the items in each data set and testing on the other half of
the data. By being simple and focusing only on some, but
relevant, information, TTB avoided being too closely
matched to any particular environment and outperformed
regression in accuracy when generalizing to the test set.

Abstract
Take The Best (TTB) is a fast and frugal heuristic for paired
comparison that has been proposed as a model of bounded
rationality. This heuristic does not take compound cues into
account to predict the criterion. However, causal knowledge
about the relationship between a criterion and several cues may
suggest that processing cues as configurations could be
adaptive in a certain environment. In a series of simulations, we
show that an extension of TTB, namely TTB-Configural,
outperforms both the more frugal TTB and a more demanding
benchmark. Moreover, we review empirical evidence that
people process cues as configurations when equipped with the
corresponding knowledge about the causal structure.

One-Reason Decision Making: The Approach of
Fast and Frugal Heuristics
When we are faced with a decision it is often impossible to
consider all the possible alternatives, their attributes, and their
potential consequences. In fact, in everyday life we often
make fast decisions based on little information. Recently, the
ABC Research Group at the Max Planck Institute for Human
Development has suggested that we use fast and frugal
heuristics in these situations, that is, simple but nevertheless
fairly accurate rules in the mind’s adaptive toolbox1 for
making decisions with a minimum of information
(Gigerenzer, Todd, & The ABC Research Group, 1999).
The fast and frugal heuristic that has received the most
attention to date is Take The Best (TTB; Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996). This heuristic is designed to infer which of
two alternatives, described on several dichotomous cues, has
a higher value on a quantitative criterion. TTB is a process
model that consists of building blocks, which are precise steps
of information gathering and processing involved in
generating a decision. More specifically, this heuristic has a
search rule, which describes the order in which to search for
information (TTB looks up cues in the order of their validity,
i.e., the probability that a cue will make the correct decision
given that it discriminates between the alternatives); a

Compound Cue Processing within the Fast and
Frugal Heuristics Approach
The fast and frugal research program has, however, been
criticized (e.g., by Garcia-Retamero, Dieckmann, Hoffrage, &
Ramos, 2005a) for considering only individual cues when
setting up the cue search order, as is the case, for instance, in
TTB. Consequently, fast and frugal heuristics do not benefit
from the fact that the correct decisions in certain
environments might depend on the interactions between
individual cues. For instance, according to the diathesis–stress
model (Walker & Diforio, 1997), hereditary predisposition
and a current stressor (e.g., a traumatic experience) are
assumed to be necessary for the onset of schizophrenia.
Therefore, in a medical diagnostic context, a doctor might
predict that a patient with a high predisposition to this disease
who suffered a recent traumatic experience would be in worse
shape than other patients who present either only one or
neither of these factors. Note that in this example, the
combination of two cues produces a different value on the
criterion than either one cue or neither cue.
The dilemma of the selection of potential combinations of
cues (i.e., compound cues) for decision making becomes even
more critical if we consider the evidence in several research

1

The adaptive toolbox is the term coined to describe the collection
of specialized cognitive mechanisms in the human mind for
inference and reasoning.
971

areas that suggests that people indeed can and do process
compound cues as configurations2 in certain environments
(e.g., Shanks, Charles, Darby, & Azmi, 1998).
One issue in the literature on configural strategy use that
has generated special interest is whether linearly separable
environments are easier to learn than nonlinearly separable
ones (see Smith, Murray, & Minda, 1997), which indeed
seems to be the case. In a nonlinearly separable environment,
such as the eXclusive-OR (or XOR, for short) logical
structure, the optimal response depends on the relationship
between the components of a compound cue (Shepard,
Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961). In an environment where two
cues are amalgamated into a compound that obeys the XOR
logical rule, an object for which one of the cues that form the
critical compound is present and the other is not has a higher
criterion value than an object for which both are present or
absent. A configural representation is needed to solve this
problem because there is no set of weights for the individual
cues that could make the system generate a proper response.
On the other hand, a problem is linearly separable (e.g., the
AND logical structure) when the optimal response can be
generated as a linear function of the weighted cues (Minsky
& Papert, 1969). In an environment where two cues are
amalgamated into a compound that obeys the AND logical
rule, an object for which both cues that form the critical
compound are present has a higher criterion value than an
object for which only one or neither cue is present (for an
example, see the above-mentioned diathesis–stress model for
the onset of schizophrenia).
Note that individual cues in the environment can be
combined in many possible pairs, triples or even higher
orders to form compound cues in many different ways, thus
leading to a combinatorial explosion. Therefore, it is
extremely difficult to select from this array of compounds
those that are highly valid and meaningful (i.e., stable). A
strategy that processes all possible combinations of cues as
configurations by default would thus be too computationally
demanding (Kehoe & Graham, 1988), that is, it would be
neither fast nor frugal. One possible solution is to assume that
decision makers do not spontaneously process all possible
compound cues in the environment as configurations and
keep track of their validities but instead focus on only the
subset of those that seem “plausible”. The interesting question
is then how this process might work.

people might use their knowledge about the causal structure
of the environment to interpret the empirical input when they
make decisions (see also Waldmann & Holyoak, 1992;
Waldmann & Hagmayer, in press).
Along these lines, we submit that causal knowledge might
allow decision makers to infer whether an elemental or a
configural strategy would be adaptive in a certain
environment. Particularly, we hypothesize that decision
makers would assume that certain cues in the environment
might interact with each other when they are perceived to act
through the same underlying causal mechanism in bringing
about the decision criterion (e.g., drinking alcohol and taking
a prescription drug in affecting the stomach, possibly causing
nausea). In this case, the effect of one cue would frequently
be expected to be modulated by other cues, and they might be
represented together as a configuration (see also Waldmann,
1996). A more complex decision-making strategy that
processes such configural cues would then be used in that
environment, especially when the cues that are perceived to
act through a common causal mechanism indeed form a
highly valid compound cue in the physical world.
We further hypothesize that cues might be represented as
independent elements when they are perceived to act through
different causal mechanisms to bring about the decision
criterion (e.g., tailwind and physical strength in affecting the
speed of a cyclist). An elemental strategy would then be more
adaptive and less demanding in terms of time and cognitive
resources than a configural strategy. In this way, causal
knowledge about the cues’ causal mechanisms might allow
decision makers to deal adaptively with the countless number
of combinations of cues that appear in a particular
environment, by directing them to those that might be
relevant.

TTB-Configural: A Fast and Frugal Heuristic that
Processes Compound Cues as Configurations
Building both on the literature on simple heuristics on the one
hand and causal processing on the other, Garcia-Retamero et
al. (2005a) and Garcia-Retamero, Hoffrage, Dieckmann, and
Ramos (2005b), recently proposed a configural version of
TTB, namely the TTB Configural heuristic. This heuristic,
like TTB, is precisely defined in terms of its building blocks
of search, stopping search, and decision rules and also
assumes that cues are ordered in a hierarchy according to
their validities. The contrast to TTB, which only considers
individual cues, is that TTB-Configural processes compound
cues, which are represented as configurations and included as
such in the cue hierarchy.
To be fast and frugal, TTB-Configural processes a
combination of several cues as a configuration when they are
perceived to act through a common causal mechanism to
bring about the decision criterion. However, TTB-Configural
processes these cues as several individual elements when they
are perceived to act through different causal mechanisms.
Consequently, TTB-Configural includes both configural and
individual cues in the cue hierarchy that is ordered according
to the cues’ validities and begins searching with the cue that

The Adaptive Value of Causal Knowledge for
Compound Cue Processing
When it is said that a cause brings about an effect, it implies
that there is a stable causal link between the cause and the
effect, and an underlying causal mechanism that is an
essential property of the link between the events involved in
this relationship (Ahn & Kalish, 2000). We hypothesize that
2

In our terminology, a configuration is constructed from several
individual cues to create a new stimulus that differs from its
components. We differentiate between the internal representation
of a combination of cues (i.e., a configuration) and the observed
compound cue in the environment.
972

validity of the relevant compound cues (high vs. low vs.
chance) were fully crossed, yielding 12 types of
environments.
When creating an environment, we first generated the
values of the relevant compound cues. In environments with 3
relevant compound cues, the values were randomly generated
with the constraint that the resulting validities equaled .95, .9,
and .85 in the high validity condition and .9, .8, and .7 in the
low validity condition. For environments with 4 relevant
compound cues, their validities were .95, .9, .85, and .8 in the
high validity condition and .9, .8, .7, and .6 in the low validity
condition. In the chance condition, all validities equaled .5.
Next, we generated elemental cues by splitting up these
compound cues. This was achieved by taking the values of a
given compound cue as input and by determining—according
to the probabilities in Figure 1—the values of the two
resulting elemental cues as outputs. Thereby, we used either
the logical AND rule or the logical XOR rule. Seen the other
way around, that is, from output to input, it was either the
AND or the XOR rule that had to be used for the
amalgamation of the two elemental cues to result in the
compound cue. The logical rule thus is the fourth factor that
was varied when creating an environment, yielding altogether
24 types of environments.

has the highest validity—be it an individual or a compound
cue. If the critical piece of information is a compound cue,
TTB-Configural looks up the individual cues that jointly
constitute that compound (for a similar treatment of
compound cues in the context of multilevel set-covering
models, see Baumeister & Seipel, 2002).
In the following, we first report the results of a simulation
study in which we compared the performance of three
heuristics that differed with respect to their treatment of
compound cues. Subsequently, we review two series of
experiments that have demonstrated that TTB-Configural also
performs well when used as a behavioural model.

Simulation Study
In the simulation study, we cross-validated the performance
of three decision-making strategies in several environments
(generation of environments and evaluation of strategies were
programmed in Visual C# .NET (Microsoft .NET
Framework 1.1, Version 1.1.4322 SP1)). These strategies
differ in whether they benefit from causal knowledge about
the cues in the environment to process compound cues as
configurations:
- TTB processes individual cues as independent elements and
does not consider compound cues.
- In contrast, TTB-Configural processes compound cues as
configurations when the decision maker’s causal knowledge
about the compounds’ components induces the heuristic to do
so. Therefore, this strategy only processes some of the
possible compound cues in the environment.
- Finally, TTB-All processes all possible combinations of
individual cues in the environment as configurations.
The task was to infer which of two alternatives, described
on several dichotomous cues, had a higher value on a
quantitative criterion. The performance of the strategies was
determined across a complete-paired comparison of all
objects of a given environment. The environments we used
were artificially created, with the following procedure:
An environment consisted of 50 (or 100) objects that were
described on 6 (or 8) elemental cues. These cues formed 3 (or
4) relevant compound cues, that is, cues for which we
assumed that the decision maker would have causal
knowledge suggesting these cues should be treated as
compound cues. We consider this assumption to be
psychologically plausible and reasonable since we are not
concerned here about how causal knowledge has been
acquired (cf., Lagnado & Sloman, 2002; Novick & Cheng,
2004), but only about how it can be used to aid the selection
of some compound cues from among the wide range of
possibilities in the environment through a top-down process.
For simplicity, we only considered compounds of two cues
(although we see no reason why our conclusions should not
generalize to compounds of higher order).
We created environments in which the compound cues had
high (or low) validities. In addition, as a control condition, we
also used environments in which no such relevant compound
cues existed. The three factors – number of objects (50 vs.
100), number of relevant compound cues (3 vs. 4), and

AND Logical Rule
Compound

XOR Logical Rule

Elemental Cues Compound
Cue 1 Cue 2

1

p = 1.0
p = .33

0

1
1

Cue 1 Cue 2
p = .5

1
0

0

1

0

0

Elemental Cues

1
p = .5

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

0

Figure 1: Scheme according to which a compound cue with a
particular value was split into two elemental cues. Note that
the probabilities are conditioned on the value of the
compound cue.
In a third step, we combined all the elemental cues to
generate all possible compounds of two components, using
both the AND and the XOR logical rule. Note that in this step
the values of the 6 (or 8) elemental cues were the inputs and
the values of the compound cues were the outputs. Because 6
(8) cues can be combined into 15 (28) pairs, the application of
the AND rule and the XOR rule yielded 30 (56) compounds
(which, of course, include the relevant 3 (4) compounds).
Together with the 6 (8) elemental cues, an environment thus
had 36 (64) cues, elemental or compound.
The three steps explained above—generation of relevant
compound cues, generation of elemental cues from those
compounds, and generation of all possible compounds from
those elemental cues—were repeated 100 times for each of
the 24 types of environments. Finally, we split each
environment into two sets: the learning set and the test set,
973

TTB-All. Accordingly, TTB-Configural was most robust (the
differences between performance in the training set minus
that in the test set for the AND environments were 6.6, 6.1,
and 8.9 percentage points for TTB, TTB-Configural, and
TTB-All, respectively, averaged across all other factors;
F(2,1198)=2351.9, p<.001).

with 50% of the objects in each set. We repeated the
assignment of the objects to the learning and test set 100
times (yielding an output file with 24 * 100 * 100 lines). How
do the three strategies process these cues? TTB only includes
the 6 (8) elemental cues in its hierarchy. TTB-Configural
includes the 6 (8) elemental cues and—directed by causal
knowledge—in addition the 3 (4) relevant compound cues.
TTB-All includes all 36 (64) cues in its hierarchy. Evidently,
the spirit of simple heuristics is no longer present with TTBAll, as this strategy does not try to avoid a computational
explosion.
What was our rationale for generating the environments
according to the three steps explained above? The 3 (4)
relevant compound cues were created so that they had some
validity in the whole set, and it can thus be assumed that this
was also true for both the training and the test set. This,
however, should only occasionally be the case for the other
compound cues that were generated from the elemental cues
in the third step. Here we expected that some of these would
actually have a high validity in the training set, simply
because of random fluctuations and because the set of all
possible compounds is quite large. But these compound cues
that have a high validity in the training set will, due to
statistical regression towards the mean, have much lower
validities in the test set (as those with low validities in the
training set can be expected to have higher validities in the
test set).
As a consequence, TTB-Configural should be more robust
than TTB-All. Specifically, in the training set TTB-All should
outperform TTB-Configural, because the set out of which
valid cues—compound or elemental—could be selected was
larger for TTB-All. However, as most of the compounds that
were highly valid in the training set would be useless in the
test set, TTB-All should lose the advantage of selecting from
more cues when evaluated in the test set.

1 .0

Rule = AND
.9

.8

.7

T T B- E l e m _ T r a i n
.6

T T B- C o n f _ T r a in
T T B- A ll _ T r a i n

.5

T T B- E l e m _ T e s t
.4

T T B- C o n f _ T e s t
T T B- A ll _ T e s t

.3

H ig h

Lo w

Ch an ce

V a li d i t y

Figure 2: Proportion of correct inferences of TTB (in the
legend denoted as TTB-Elem), TTB-Configural (in the
legend denoted as TTB-Conf), and TTB-All in the three
validity conditions (high vs. low vs. chance) of the ANDenvironments. The three leftmost box-plots within a validity
condition depict performance of the three strategies in the
training set, the three rightmost that in the test set.
Figure 3 shows the performance of the three strategies in
the XOR environments. Again, there was almost no difference between the validity conditions (except for the contrast
between the high and low validity conditions on the one hand
and chance on the other). However, unlike in the AND
environments, the simple TTB, which did not process
compound cues, was markedly outperformed by TTBConfigural and TTB-All. This is hardly surprising, as the
XOR environment is nonlinearly separable and thus onereason decision making is not adaptive here (unless this one
reason is a compound cue). Note that in the test set, TTB did
not even perform better than chance. Third, TTB-All
outperformed TTB-Configural in the training set, but the
pattern reversed in the test set. This was the case because, as
we had predicted, TTB-Configural was the most robust
strategy (differences between performance in the training set
and test set were 13.6, 2.4, and 4.0 percentage points for TTB,
TTB-Configural,
and
TTB-All,
respectively,
F(2,1198)=2234.4, p<.001). Thus, TTB-Configural was more
robust than TTB-All, even though TTB-All contained the
relevant compounds as well. However, TTB-All had other
compound cues even higher in its cue hierarchy that were not
robust and had a substantially lower validity in the test set.

Results
Data were first aggregated across the 100 runs per
environment, and then these environment-specific means
were aggregated across the 100 environments for a given
type. The standard errors for the mean performance across the
100 environments for a given type ranged between .1 and .4
percentage points, and thus all factors that we manipulated
turned out to be significant in a four-way analysis of variance.
Still, the differences between the levels of the factors number
of objects (50 vs. 100) and the factor number of elemental
cues (6 vs. 8) were relatively small and uninteresting from the
present perspective; therefore, all analyses reported below
were performed across these two factors.
Figure 2 shows the performance of the three strategies in
the AND environments. First, there was almost no difference
between the environments where the compounds had a high
validity and those with a low validity, but there was obviously
a big difference between these environments and the chance
condition, which did not contain any relevant compound cues.
Second, in the learning set, TTB-All performed best, but in
the test set, TTB-Configural outperformed both TTB and
974

We generated complex environments where two of the
three cues (i.e., A and B) were amalgamated into a highly
valid compound cue. For the sake of brevity and simplicity,
we will report results only for those environments where the
compound was constituted by applying the logical XOR and
the AND rule. The validity of the critical compound, AB, in
those environments was 1.00, but the validity of each of its
component cues, A and B, was .50. The validity of the third
cue, C, which was not included in the highly valid compound,
was .75. In a third control environment, the validity of the
compound AB was .50, as was the validity of each of its
component cues. Just as in the complex environments, the
validity of cue C was .75; that is, this was the only individual
highly valid cue.
We also manipulated participants’ causal knowledge about
the cues via the experimental instructions. Particularly, we
differentiated between a configural, an elemental, and a
neutral causal model condition. In the configural causal
model condition, the instructions emphasized that cues act
through the same causal mechanism and at the same point in
time in bringing about the effect (i.e., the criterion value). In
the elemental causal model condition, the instructions
emphasized that the cues acted through different causal
mechanisms and at different points in time in bringing about
the effect. Finally, in the neutral causal model, participants
did not receive any information about the possible causal
mechanisms through which the cues acted. In short, having in
mind a configural, an elemental, or a neutral causal model,
participants received an XOR environment, an AND
environment, or a control environment.
To classify participants according to a particular strategy in
our experiments, we used the Bayesian method for multipleattribute decision making proposed by Bröder and Schiffer
(2003). Since TTB and TTB-Configural showed the highest
fit for most of our participants, we will focus on only these
two strategies. Table 1 shows the percentage of participants
for whom one of these strategies achieved the highest fit. In
accordance with our hypothesis, a high percentage of
participants decided according to the highly valid compound
cue, using the TTB-Configural heuristic, when they had a
configural causal mental model of the environment, that is,
when causal knowledge suggested that the component cues
acted through a common causal mechanism. Furthermore,
even if there was a highly valid compound in the
environment, a high percentage of participants represented its
component cues as independent elements and used the
elemental TTB heuristic when these cues acted through
different causal mechanisms (in the elemental causal model),
but also spontaneously (in the neutral causal model).
Interestingly, these results were found regardless of whether
the component cues were amalgamated into a compound by
applying the XOR or the AND logical rule. Finally, when
there was no highly valid compound cue in the environment,
that is, in the control condition, the elemental TTB was also
the most frequently used strategy.

1 .0

Rule = XOR
.9

.8

.7

T T B- El e m _ Le a r n
.6

T T B- C o n f _ Le a r n
T T B- A ll _ L e a r n

.5

T T B- El e m _ T e s t
.4

T T B- C o n f _ T e s t
T T B- A ll _ T e s t

.3

H ig h

Lo w

Ch an ce

V a li d i t y

Figure 3: Performance of the three strategies in the XOR
environments (for more explanations, see Fig. 2)
In sum, in linearly separable environments, where the
relevant compound cues are constituted by amalgamating two
elemental cues with the logical AND rule, (1) TTB-All was
best when fitting know data, however, (2) TTB-Configural
and TTB did not fall too far behind. Moreover, (3) when
generalizing to new data, TTB-Configural was (slightly)
better than TTB and TTB-All. In nonlinearly separable
environments, the same pattern could be observed with
respect to the comparison between TTB-Configural and TTBAll. However, TTB failed considerably in these
environments, both when fitted to known data and in
particular when used to predict new data.

Series of Experiments
In two previous series of experiments, Garcia-Retamero et al.
(2005a, 2005b) explored whether decision makers will use
TTB-Configural if a highly valid compound cue exists in the
environment and if their causal knowledge about how the
cues affect the criterion suggests that those elemental cues
may interact with each other. In these experiments, both
linearly separable and nonlinearly separable environments
were used.
The task was framed as a medical diagnostic task.
Specifically, participants were presented with information
about two patients and had to choose the one who would
show a higher body temperature. The information provided
about the patients was whether they had ingested three
different substances (A, B, and C, respectively). In a first
block of trials, participants were provided with information
about all three cues in a given comparison at no cost.
Thereafter, they had to make a decision. Outcome feedback
about the correct option was given to enable participants to
learn the cues’ validities. Subsequently, participants went
through a decision-making phase in which the cue
information was no longer available; instead they had to look
it up sequentially. Again, outcome feedback was provided.
975

Table 1: Percentage of participants for whom TTBConfigural and TTB achieved the highest fit in a given causal
mental model condition.
TTB-Configural
TTB Participants
Participants
Config. Elem. Neutral Config. Elem. Neutral
Model Model Model Model Model Model
66.7
58.3
16.6
8.3
8.3
50
XOR
41.7
50
25
16.7
8.3
66.7
AND
83.3
100
66.7
0
0
0
Control
In sum, results in these series of experiments suggest that
TTB-Configural is used when the information structure in the
environment and in the mind fit together, that is, when the
causal knowledge about the cues induced participants to
search for highly valid compound cues in the environment
and a real highly valid compound cue existed in the physical
world. When this was not the case, the elemental TTB was
the best behavioural model in our experiments.

Conclusions
The results from the simulation and from the experiments
complement each other: When there are valid compound cues
in the environment, TTB-Configural, an extension of TTB
that includes such cues in its cue hierarchy, outperformed—in
cross-validation—both TTB and even another extension of
TTB that included all possible compounds. Moreover, TTBConfigural performed well as a behavioural model: If, and
only if, there was a valid compound cue in the environment
and participants received a hint that cues may interact with
each other, then they selected this heuristic from their
adaptive toolbox.

References
Ahn, W., & Kalish, C. W. (2000). The role of mechanism
beliefs in causal reasoning. In F. C. Keil & R. A. Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 199-225).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baumeister, J., & Seipel, D. (2002). Diagnostic Reasoning
with Multilevel Set-Covering Models. Proceedings 13th.
International Workshop on Principles of Diagnosis (DX02), Semmering, Austria
Bröder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2003). Bayesian strategy
assessment in multi-attribute decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 193-213.
Czerlinski, J., Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999).
How good are simple heuristics? In G. Gigerenzer, P. M.
Todd, & the ABC Research Group, Simple heuristics that
make us smart (pp. 97-118). New York: Oxford University
Press.

976

Garcia-Retamero, R., Dieckmann, A., Hoffrage, U., &
Ramos, M. (2005a). Compound cue processing within the
fast and frugal heuristic approach in non-linearly
separable environments. Submitted for publication.
Garcia-Retamero, R., Hoffrage, U., Dieckmann, A., &
Ramos, M. (2005b). Do people use fast and frugal
heuristics to process compound cues in linearly separable
environments? Submitted for publication.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the fast
and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kehoe, E. J., & Graham, P. (1988). Summation and
configuration: Stimulus compounding and negative
patterning in the rabbit. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 14, 320–333.
Lagnado, D. A. and Sloman, S. A. (2002). Learning causal
structure. In W. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.) Proceedings
of the twenty-fourth annual conference of the cognitive
science society. Erlbaum.
Minsky, M., & Papert, S. (1969). Perceptrons: An
introduction to computational geometry. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Novick, L. R., & Cheng, P. W. (2004). Assessing interactive
causal influence. Psychological Review, 111, 455-485.
Shanks, D. R., Charles, D., Darby, R. J., & Azmi, A. (1998).
Configural processes in human associative learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 24, 1353-1378.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. L., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning
and
memorization
of
classifications.
Psychological Monographs, 75 (13), Whole no. 517.
Smith, J. D., Murray, M. J., & Minda, J. P. (1997). Straight
talk about linear separability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 23, 659–
680.
Waldmann, M. R. (1996). Knowledge-based causal induction.
In D. R. Shanks, K. J. Holyoak, & D. L. Medin (Eds.), The
Psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 34, pp. 4788). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Waldmann, M. R., & Hagmayer, Y. (in press). Seeing versus
Doing: Two models of accessing causal knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition.
Waldmann, M. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). Predictive and
diagnostic learning within causal models: Asymmetries in
cue competition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 121, 222-236.
Walker, E. F., & Diforio, D. (1997). Schizophrenia: A neural
diathesis-stress model. Psychological Review, 104, 667–
685.

