UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Scene Category and Content on Boundary Extension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wp5k04m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Balas, Benjamin
Gallagher, Katie
Matheny, Jenna
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Scene Category and Content on Boundary Extension
Katie Gallagher (katieg@mit.edu)
Benjamin Balas (bjbalas@mit.edu)
Jenna Matheny (jnmath@mit.edu)
Pawan Sinha (psinha@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA
saccadic viewing of a scene (Intraub, Gottesman, Willey, &
Zuk, 1996). In terms of developmental stability, boundary
extension has been found across a range of age groups
encompassing young children to older adults (Candel,
Merckelbach, Houben, & Vandyck, 2004; Seamon,
Schlegel, Hiester, Landau, & Blumenthal, 2002). Overall,
the tendency to remember details beyond the boundaries of
a scene is widespread and very reliable. In terms of its
generality, recent results indicate that the effect is not
restricted to the visual modality. Haptic exploration of
tactile scenes by both blind and sighted individuals results
in extension of non-visual boundaries (Intraub, 2004).
The most prominent explanation for the boundary
extension effect is the scene context hypothesis. This theory
suggests that observers form expectations of scene content
for regions beyond picture boundaries according to some
perceptual schema (Intraub & Bodamer, 1993). It should be
noted that this is not the same as suggesting that subjects
default to a prototypic view of a scene. Experiments with
close-up, prototypic, and wide-angle scenes have
demonstrated that observers do not simply remember a
scene prototype (Intraub & Berkowits, 1996). The
observers’ version of the remembered scene is augmented
with new content generated by this schema, leading to an
extension effect (Ohara & Kokubun, 2002). During picture
viewing, observers continuously create a sketch of scene
details beyond the boundaries and complete truncated
surfaces.
Though powerful, the scene context hypothesis does not
address the question of how the visual content of an image
affects the amount of boundary extension that observers
experience. Previous studies have demonstrated that certain
image conditions do not support the effect, but these
conditions are related to the appearance of an image as a
“scene” rather than a picture. For example, neither linedrawings of objects on blank backgrounds nor photographic
objects placed on blank backgrounds elicited boundary
extension (Gottesman & Intraub, 2002). Similarly, object
boundaries (formed when one object circumscribes another
in an image) do not give rise to extension (Gottesman &
Intraub, 2003). In both cases, the lack of a perceived
continuous world beyond the imposed boundary may be to
blame. This explanation does not speak directly to visual
processing, but rather to more abstract notions of how
observers understand a picture as a depiction of some

Abstract
Boundary extension is a robust scene perception phenomenon
in which observers erroneously remember seeing portions of
a previously viewed scenes beyond the image boundaries.
The effect is strong and reliable, and has been demonstrated
for a wide variety of observers. Various studies have shown
that boundary extension is distinct from amodal completion
and subject to certain pictorial constraints that define an
image as being a “scene.” We examine here how scene
content influences boundary extension. We demonstrate that
the presence of foreground objects appears to enhance the
extension effect, and that scene complexity also plays a role
in determining the magnitude of the extension effect. These
results are discussed with regard to the scene context
hypothesis of boundary extension and recent results in scene
perception.

Introduction
When asked to recall a picture of a scene, observers have a
strong tendency to remember seeing a wider-angle view of
that scene than they actually did. (Intraub & Richardson,
1989) This phenomenon is known as “boundary extension.”
(Figure 1).

Figure 1: An example of the boundary extension effect.
Subjects viewing the left image tend to remember seeing a
scene more closely resembling the right image later.
The extension effect is quite robust. Observers who are
aware of the effect and told to guard against it persist in
extending image boundaries (Intraub & Bodamer, 1993).
Both short and long presentation times support the effect,
including display conditions designed to approximate

744

In Experiment 2, we examine the additional influence of
background and foreground salience. We utilize matched
scenes of varying complexity that contain either chairs or
people seated in chairs to test the hypothesis that allocation
of attentional resources across the image may affect the
extension process. Human faces and bodies are extremely
salient visual stimuli, and contain a high level of detail that
observers are very sensitive to. By contrast, chairs are a
close match to the overall shape of a seated human, but lack
the same level of interesting detail that we find in the
biological stimulus. Given this, we expect that scenes with
faces in them may give rise to smaller amounts of boundary
extension due to a “zooming in” effect brought on by
enhanced attention to the foreground object. Similarly, we
expect that highly complex backgrounds that draw attention
may give rise to increased boundary extension. Increased
attention to the background of a scene may enhance the
drive to generate new content beyond the image boundaries.
In both experiments, we use a very simple paradigm to
quantify the amount of extension that takes place. Subjects
are shown a series of target images at a relaxed but steady
pace. After this initial presentation, subjects are shown a
series of test images that consist of veridical, zoomed-in and
zoomed-out versions of each original image. They are then
asked to select the image that they believe they were
previously shown. In this manner, we may assess both the
presence and the degree of extension for the image
categories we consider in our two experiments.

natural scene with rich spatial information. Examinations of
boundary extension related to emotional valance of images
are closer to our goal of understanding how visual content
affects the extension effect. We note in particular a recent
result suggesting that high-anxiety individuals are less
susceptible to boundary extension when viewing
emotionally arousing scenes (Matthews & Mackintosh,
2004). This reduction did not appear in normal observers,
however (Candel, Merckelbach, & Zandbergen, 2003),
indicating that the change in effect size may have had more
to do with the emotional state of the observer than the image
content.
In the current study, we ask whether or not simple
changes in scene category and content give rise to changes
in the occurrence and magnitude of boundary extension.
Rather than investigating complex relationships between
object and image boundaries, we turn to intuitive categories
of scenes such as “indoor” v. “outdoor” scenes.
Computational studies of scene classification suggest that
scene categories such as these (as well as finer-grained
categories such as “urban” and “mountain”) can be
discriminated by means of relatively low-level features.
(Oliva & Torralba, 2001; Torralba & Oliva, 2003) Likewise,
the presence of a foreground object in a scene introduces
dramatic differences in the global distribution of oriented
edges compared to a background-only scene. (Johnson &
Olshausen, 2003)In both cases, differences in low-level
luminance structure and differences in the way attention is
distributed across an image may result in varying amounts
of boundary extension across scene categories.
In Experiment 1, we test this hypothesis by measuring the
amount of extension for indoor and outdoor scenes that
either contain a prominent foreground object or contain no
such focal point. In terms of purely visual content, indoor
scenes differ from outdoor scenes in terms of their “spatial
envelope” (Torralba & Oliva, 2003), meaning that in an
objective sense they are distinct image categories. Indoor
and outdoor scenes are also interesting to study in the
context of boundary extension because in an abstract sense,
indoor scenes are enclosed within fixed borders (such as
walls, ceilings, and floors). We hypothesize that boundary
extension may take place to a lesser extent after viewing
indoor scenes because of this enclosure. Subjects’ tendency
to remember wider-angle views of a scene may be lessened
by their implicit knowledge that they are viewing a scene
that is circumscribed by real-world boundaries. The
presence of objects in a scene also alters raw visual content
and higher-level aspects of scene perception. In particular,
we suggest that placing a foreground object in a natural
scene may draw attention to that object at the expense of
time spent viewing the background. Under these
circumstances, we expect that less boundary extension
would take place. “Tunnel vision” may dominate in such
situations, as the observers’ memory of object details may
elicit post-viewing “zooming in” to interesting object
features.

Experiment 1
In this first experiment, we investigate the degree of
boundary extension after viewing indoor and outdoor
scenes, as well as the effect of a prominent foreground
object on the phenomenon.

Subjects
29 subjects (14 men, 15 women) were recruited from the
MIT undergraduate population for this task. Subject age
ranged from 18-24 years) All subjects had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and were naïve to the purpose of
the experiment.

Stimuli
A series of 24 images were collected from various sources
for this experiment. Scenes depicted outdoor or indoor
scenes that either contained one clear foreground object or
no such focal point.
Eight test images were created by cropping and resizing
each original image to construct “zoomed in” versions.
Digital zooming (as opposed to true optical zooming) has
been shown to have no significant influence on the
extension effect (Wan & Simons, 2004), and was thus
employed here for convenience.

745

would yield less boundary extension than outdoor scenes.
Second, we expected less boundary extension to occur when
viewing images containing a foreground object, due to
attention being disproportionately allocated to the focal
point of the scene. As evidenced by the mean values in
Figure 3, neither of these hypotheses are confirmed by our
data. Our ANOVA yields only a main effect of object v. noobject, such that scenes containing a focal foreground object
result in significantly more boundary extension. (p < 0.05)
Scene category had no effect, and there was no significant
interaction between the two factors.

Procedure
Subjects were seated at a comfortable viewing distance from
the monitor, and were told that they were about to view
series of images. Their instructions were to study each
image carefully as they would be asked to perform a
“difficult memory task” after viewing each image once.
The full set of images was displayed serially in a random
order using Microsoft PowerPoint. Each image was
displayed for 10 seconds before it was replaced by the next
image in the sequence.
Following exposure to all target images, subjects were
then told that they would view the 8 test images
corresponding to each original image (Figure 2). Their goal
was to select the test image that they believed was a perfect
match to the target image they had already viewed. Each set
of test images was presented in order from widest-angle
view (1) to narrowest (8). The target image was always
either image 4,5, or 6, allowing subjects room to make
errors in either direction. Subjects were allowed as much
time as necessary to choose which test image they believed
corresponded to the original target.

Figure 3: Mean extent of boundary extension in terms of
zoom levels for indoor/outdoor scenes with a foreground
object or without.

Discussion
Contrary to our hypothesis, there was no significant
difference in the amount of boundary extension for indoor v.
outdoor scenes. More importantly, there was actually more
boundary extension for images that contained a clear
foreground object. We expected that a “zooming in” effect
might take place due to increased attention to the focal point
of the scene, but we see the reverse effect instead.
Could both of these results be an extension of the finding
that wide-angle views produce less boundary extension than
close-ups? It may seem that scenes containing objects might
be necessarily considered close-ups due to the central
positioning of the object, but we believe our stimuli to be
quite varied in this regard. Our focal objects were depicted
at a range of scene depths, from very close to quite far
away. Moreover, they were also depicted in environments
ranging from panoramic to relatively claustrophobic, with
no clear item effects emerging.
Second, our objects were not truncated by the image
boundary in any of the target images. Therefore, any object
completion processes would not have been able to enhance
the extension effect given the target scenes as input. Given
both of these qualities of our stimulus set, we suggest that
the result reported in this first experiment represents a true
influence of scene content on boundary extension. The

Figure 2: The eight test images created for stimulus C in our
task. The target image in this case was image #4.

Results
The difference between the location of the selected test
image and the original target image on the 1-8 spectrum
defined previously was determined for each item. Boundary
extension was quantified by subtracting the zoom level of
the selected test image from the zoom level of the target
image. The average amount of extension by condition was
determined for each subject, and a 2x2 repeated measures
ANOVA was conducted with scene category (indoor v.
outdoor) and foreground object (present v. absent) as
factors. A graph of the results is displayed in Figure 3.
Our first hypothesis prior to analysis was that the
circumscribed world boundaries implicit in an indoor scene

746

presence of objects may operate independently of other
factors that influence extension, such as wideness of
viewing angle.
To explain this result, we suggest a modification of our
initial attentional hypothesis for “zooming in” effects. Our
naïve assumption regarding the role of attention in boundary
extension was that increased attention to a particular object
in a scene would lead to a “tunnel memory” for details of
that object. The emphasis on object detail could lead to the
selection of test images in which those details were very
apparent, i.e. “zoomed in” images. However, let us consider
what processes might apply to the background of an image
which contains a focal object. If attention is indeed biased
towards the foreground, it stands to reason that fewer details
about the background are retained. We believe this might
lead to two outcomes, each of which may enhance boundary
extension.
First, under the scene context hypothesis it is assumed
that a sketch of what scene details lie beyond truncated
boundaries is continuously formed during picture viewing.
We suggest that when few background details are gathered
at initial viewing, the impoverished information leads to an
increase in the amount of visual content that is filled-in.
Second, given that the background is not well attended to in
these circumstances, errors between the extended image and
the original image will be far less apparent. The
combination of an overactive scene completion mechanism
with an inability to error-check the finished product may
result in increased amounts of boundary extension.
In Experiment 2, we test this notion by examining
whether object salience can influence the magnitude of the
boundary extension effect. We hypothesize that very salient
foreground objects (such as faces) should give rise to still
more extension of image boundaries. This hypothesis is
based on our suggestion that the diversion of attentional
resources from the background to the foreground results in
increased activity of filling-in processes and a lower fidelity
representation of the background. We extend this attentional
account to suggest that making the background of a scene
more complex (and therefore interesting to the observer)
will counteract this phenomenon, leading to less boundary
extension. That is, when attention is drawn to the
background, a higher-fidelity representation of the scene is
maintained and there is less of a drive to generate additional
content due to increased viewing of the background.

Stimuli
36 digital images were taken specifically for this
experiment. In each location, a chair was included in the
center of the image. For half of the images, an individual
was depicted seated in the chair. The remainder of the
images depicted the chair alone.
Additionally, the locations in which pictures were taken
were chosen to conform to three pre-conceived levels of
background complexity. Scenes were placed in these
categories according to recent results concerning the
perceptual dimensions of scene complexity (Oliva, Mack,
Shrestha, & Peeper, 2004). One-third of our images were
taken in “simple” settings (low background clutter), onethird in “medium” complexity settings, and the remaining
one-third in “complex” settings. Naïve subjects provided
complexity ratings for our stimuli. Target images are
displayed in Figure 4.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we adopt the same procedure employed
in Experiment 1 to investigate the effect of background and
object salience on boundary extension.

Figure 4: Example stimuli ranging from simple (top row) to
complex (bottom row). We also display companion images
containing a chair and a seated individual.

Subjects

Procedure

29 subjects (17 men, 12 women) were recruited from the
MIT undergraduate population to participate in this
experiment. Subject age ranged from 18-25 years.

Subjects were given the same instructions as outlined in
Experiment 1. Afterwards, they viewed 18 of the 36 images
created for this task in random order at a rate of 10 seconds

747

per image. The image set was split in half for each subject
so that no subject viewed an image of a particular location
both with and without a seated individual. This was done to
eliminate any interference effects between target images. As
before, all targets were presented at a zoom level of 4, 5, or
6. At test, all 8 images were displayed in order of
increasingly close-up views.

In the absence of faces, we find equally puzzling
behavior. A U-shaped function relating complexity to
extension is evident here, with medium complexity scenes
giving rise to the smallest amounts of extension. Clearly our
initial guess concerning the role of object and background
complexity is mistaken. The actual interaction of foreground
and background content with the boundary extension effect
is obviously far more complicated than our naïve intuitions.

Results
Discussion

The difference between each subject’s selected test image
and the original target’s position on our 1-8 scale of zoom
levels was calculated for each trial. The average differences
for all 6 conditions were calculated for each subject, and a
3x2 repeated -measures ANOVA was carried out. A bar
graph of our results is displayed in Figure 5.

Contrary to our expectations based on the attentional
account we formulated at the end of Experiment 1, we do
not find any more extension for images that contain a highly
salient object that likely draws attention. We do find,
however, an effect of background complexity and a
potentially puzzling interaction between the scene
background and foreground. These findings suggest that the
interaction between boundary extension, attention, and
memory for objects and scenes is quite complex.
At present, we can only speculate on what processes are
actually at work when observers view these scenes. We
present here a discussion of several alternative factors that
may be playing an important role in determining the degree
to which image boundaries are extended.
First, we explicitly assumed that our manipulations of
foreground object identity and background complexity were
analogous to manipulating the allocation of attention across
the image. While we still believe that human faces and
bodies are likely to draw more attention than chairs, it is
unclear to what extent we are justified in assuming that
more cluttered backgrounds draw more attention and/or
viewing. If we are mistaken in our understanding of how
attention is influenced by background complexity, our
expectations for Experiment 2 may be quite skewed. Future
studies could make use of eye-tracking data to ensure that
our notions of how subjects distribute saccades across the
image surface are correct. Alternatively, change blindness
tasks could be employed as a means of measuring how
much attention is being directed towards the background
and the foreground of images that will be used in an
extension task. In both cases, an attentional account of the
data would be greatly bolstered by more rigorous data
concerning exactly how attention is directed towards the
foreground and the background of a scene.
A second possible influence on the extension effect
studied in Experiment 2 is that of scene predictability. In our
attentional account of the data, we assumed that the only
important function of the visual content of the scene was to
direct attention towards or away from different image
regions. However, given that we are discussing a process of
reconstruction (the filling-in of scene content beyond the
boundaries) it is also important to consider how visual
content might make reconstruction more or less difficult.
“Simple” scenes are very boring and should not draw much
attention, yet it is also very easy to predict what should be

Figure 5: The amount of boundary extension when viewing
scenes of varying background complexity, both with and
without people in the foreground.
Our ANOVA reveals a main effect of background
complexity (p < 0.05), and an interaction between the
background complexity and the presence of a face. (p <
0.05) There was no main effect of the presence of a face in
the scene (p > 0.4).
We consider these results in relation to the hypotheses
formulated after viewing the results of Experiment 1. Had
our initial theory been correct, we would have expected the
most extension for simple scenes that contained faces. This
condition should have maximized the amount of attention
allocated to the foreground and minimized the amount of
attention allocated to the background. By our initial account
this should have enhanced the need to generate background
content, while leaving no high-fidelity representation of the
background against which to check errors in reconstruction.
The confluence of these factors should have led to very
large amounts of boundary extension, but instead failed to
produce much at all. Indeed, when scenes contained human
faces we note a monotonic increase in the amount of
extension as background complexity increases, running
completely counter to our proposed account of the extension
process.

748

Gottesman, C. V., & Intraub, H. (2002). Surface construal
and the mental representation of scenes. Journal of
Experiment Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 28(3), 589-599.
Gottesman, C. V., & Intraub, H. (2003). Constraints on the
spatial extrapolation in the mental representation of
scenes: View-boundaries vs. object-boundaries. Visual
Cognition, 10(7), 875-893.
Intraub, H. (2004). Anticipatory spatial representation of 3D
regions explored by sighted observers and a deaf-andblind observer. Cognition, 94(1), 19-37.
Intraub, H., & Berkowits, D. (1996). Beyond the edges of a
picture. American Journal of Psychology, 109, 581-598.
Intraub, H., & Bodamer, J. L. (1993). Boundary extension:
fundamental aspect of pictorial representation or encoding
artifact? J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn, 19(6), 1387-97.
Intraub, H., Gottesman, C. V., Willey, E. V., & Zuk, I. J.
(1996). Boundary extension for briefly glimpsed
photographs: Do common perceptual processes result in
unexpected memory distortions? Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 118-134.
Intraub, H., & Richardson, M. (1989). Wide-angle
memories of close-up scenes. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem
Cogn, 15(2), 179-87.
Johnson, J. S., & Olshausen, B. A. (2003). Timecourse of
Neural Signatures of Object Recognition. Journal of
Vision, 3, 499-512.
Matthews, A., & Mackintosh, B. (2004). Take a closer look:
emotion modifies the boundary extension effect. Emotion,
4(1), 36-45.
Ohara, T., & Kokubun, O. (2002). Boundary extension as
the effects of scene context on picture-memory.
Shinrigaku Kenkyu, 73(2), 121-130.
Oliva, A., Mack, M. L., Shrestha, M., & Peeper, A. (2004).
Identifying the Perceptual Dimensions of Visual
Complexity of Scenes. Paper presented at the The 26th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Chicago.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the Shape of the
Scene: A Holistic Representation of the Spatial Envelope.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 42(3), 145175.
Seamon, J. G., Schlegel, S. E., Hiester, P. M., Landau, S.
M., & Blumenthal, B. F. (2002). Misremembering
pictures objects: people of all ages demonstrate the
boundary extension illusion. American Journal of
Psychology, 115(2), 151-167.
Torralba, A., & Oliva, A. (2003). Statistics of Natural Image
Categories. Network: Computation in Neural Systems,
14(391-412).
Wan, X., & Simons, D. J. (2004). Examining boundary
extension in recognition memory for a large set of
digitally edited images. Journal of Vision, 4(8), 872a.

visible beyond the image boundary. By the same token, one
could imagine that “complex” scenes would be very
unpredictable. However, we note that many of our complex
backgrounds are composed of highly textured elements, like
books or tiles. While these backgrounds contain many more
edges and more “clutter” than simple backgrounds, they are
also predictable in their own way. Could this explain the Ushaped function relating complexity to extension in scenes
without people? Perhaps, although we are still at a loss to
incorporate these ideas with the results obtained from
images containing human faces. In very complex scenes,
viewers may be more willing to accept novel objects
introduced with a wider view. All of these explanations are
at best highly speculative, but at least point to possible
future studies to disentangle the relationship between
foreground and background image content and boundary
extension.

Conclusions
We have demonstrated that scene content can indeed affect
the occurrence and magnitude of boundary extension. In
particular, we find in Experiment 1 that the presence of
objects in the foreground of an image produces larger
amounts of extension. Likewise, the complexity (and
therefore salience) of the background can also affect the
degree to which boundary extension takes place. We suggest
a complex relationship between attention, scene complexity,
and boundary extension. Future efforts to establish the
nature of this relationship could both elucidate the nature of
the boundary extension phemomenon and provide insight
into scene perception and encoding processes. The
interaction between scenes and the objects they are
composed of may prove to be exceptionally rich.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Erin Conwell, Richard Russell,
and Yuri Ostrovsky for many helpful comments. We also
thank the men and women of MIT’s East Campus for
volunteering their time to serve as models for our stimulus
set. BJB is supported by National Defense Science and
Engineering Graduate Fellowship.

References
Candel, I., Merckelbach, H., Houben, K., & Vandyck, I.
(2004). How children remember neutral and emotional
pictures: boundary extension in children’s scene
memories. American Journal of Psychology, 117(2), 249257.
Candel, I., Merckelbach, H., & Zandbergen, M. (2003).
Boundary distortions for neutral and emotion pictures.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 10(3), 691-695.

749

