UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Professor Chewed the Students…Out: Effects of Dependency, Length, and Adjacency on
Word Order Preferences in Sentences with Verb Particle Constructions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1j27v4qr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gonnerman, Laura M.
Hayes, Celina R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Professor Chewed the Students… Out: Effects of Dependency, Length,
and Adjacency on Word Order Preferences in Sentences with Verb Particle
Constructions
Laura M. Gonnerman (LAG5@Lehigh.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Celina R. Hayes (CEH2@Lehigh.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA
Atlantic Ocean’, since the first sentence requires processing
ten words before reaching the final constituent (‘to’ of the PP)
while the second only requires four words to be processed
before reaching the final constituent (‘the’ of the NP).
Experimental studies testing ordering preferences have
shown that the length of the direct object noun phrase (NP)
affects word order preferences, with participants strongly
preferring ‘Mary explained to Sam the recently published
theory of genetic inheritance’ over ‘Mary explained the
recently published theory of genetic inheritance to Sam’
(Stallings, MacDonald, & O’Seaghdha, 1998). Length effects
have also been shown in English dative alternation
constructions, where speakers are more likely to produce
shifted structures if the NP is long (Wasow, 1997a).
In addition to studies of NP length effects on word order in
English, data from cross-linguistic studies show that
processing effects on word order are broadly applicable.
Yamashita and Chang (2001) showed that long NP’s may be
preferred in early rather than sentence final position when the
language is right-headed, as in Japanese. They found that
when sentences offered ordering options, Japanese speakers
chose to produce orders that fronted object NPs when the NP
was long. These results are consistent with the idea that in
Japanese, processing is minimized when all constituents
occur to the right, therefore “long before short” ordering
allows all constituents to be processed in the minimum
amount of words.
Recent experimental studies have shown that in addition to
NP length, other factors affect word order preferences, such
as complexity and newness of the NP (Arnold, Wasow,
Losongco, & Ginstrom, 2000). In addition, other theorists
have emphasized the role of both integration and storage costs
in processing difficulty and hence word order choice (Gibson,
2000; see also Lewis & Nakayama, 2002).

Abstract
Recent research has begun to investigate the relationship
between processing difficulty and preferred grammatical
structures. In three studies, we examine verb-particle
constructions, such as look up, which can occur in different
grammatical orders. First, we measured speakers’ sensitivity to
the semantic similarity of verb-particle constructions (look up)
and corresponding verbs (look). Results of a masked priming
task demonstrated that participants are sensitive to this
gradation in similarity (e.g., chew out vs. finish up), with only
more similar items producing facilitation. Finally, participants
read sentences in a self-paced reading task that varied on three
dimensions: 1) dependency of the verb and particle for meaning
(e.g., chew depends on out in chew out, but finish does not
depend on up for its meaning; 2) adjacency (look the number up
vs. look up the number); and 3) length of the direct object noun
phrase. Reading times increased for more dependent verbparticle constructions, shifted sentences, and sentences with
long intervening noun phrases. These findings support the
proposal that performance factors affect word order preferences
(Hawkins, 1994, 2004).

Introduction
Why do languages opt for the word orders that they do?
Japanese places its verbs and other phrasal heads at the right
ends of its constructions, while English generally places
heads to the left. Although English uses relatively fixed word
order, there are some structures that allow a choice. For
example, one can say ‘I went with John to the store’ or
equally felicitously ‘I went to the store with John.’
Recent research has begun to investigate the factors that
influence word order preferences within the grammars of
particular languages as well as for individual speakers of a
given language. Hawkins has proposed that performance
constraints drive languages to choose word orders that
minimize the processing demands on individual language
users (Hawkins, 1994, 2004). Thus, processing is made easier
when all of the constituents (S, NP, VP, PP, etc) of a sentence
are recognized as early as possible. Different orderings of
constituents involve changes in recognition time; therefore
one order may allow earlier constituent recognition than
another order. For example, the sentence ‘I lent the book
about whales in the Atlantic Ocean to Jim’ requires a longer
constituent recognition domain and thus is more difficult to
process than ‘I lent to Jim the book about whales in the

Verb particle constructions
Verb particle constructions are also interesting in terms of
ordering preferences, since they include a verb (e.g., look)
and a particle (e.g., up) that can either be produced adjacently
as in ‘he looked up the word’ or separately (with an
intervening noun phrase) as in ‘he looked the word up’.
The placement of particles in sentences with verb-particle
constructions has long been a subject of interest in the
linguistic literature, with researchers describing several
785

phonological, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, and discourse
factors that affect particle placement (e.g., van Dongern,
1919; Live, 1965; Bolinger, 1971; Gries, 1999, see also
articles in Dehé, Jackendoff, McIntryre, & Urban. 2002, for a
variety of methodological and theoretical approaches to
understanding verb particles in English and other languages).
For example, Bolinger (1971) discusses the impact of the
particle on semantic interpretation when it is placed near the
verb versus near the direct object. In addition to descriptive
accounts,
some
scholars
have
offered
more
functional/processing based approaches to particle placement.
For instance, Chen’s account of discourse factors involves a
functional explanation based on accessibility of the direct
object concept in the ongoing discourse (Chen, 1986). Gries
(1999, 2002) gives a recent overview of the possible variables
that contribute to particle placement1 and also offers a
processing hypothesis, similar to Chen’s, based on
‘consciousness’ of the elements in the sentence.

Measuring Dependency
Lohse et al. (2004) lay out a series of linguistic tests to
determine the dependency relationship between a verb and its
particle. The verb and particle can be mutually dependent or
mutually independent, or one may depend on the other. For
example, both the verb and particle meanings are modulated
in the construction chew out, neither are particularly affected
in bring in, the verb depends on the particle in pull over, and
the particle depends on the verb in call up. While these
descriptions of dependency relationships are clearly
correlated with ordering preferences in corpus studies, it
remains to be shown that they are reflected in linguistic
performance. Thus, we tested participants’ sensitivity to
dependency relationships in both an off-line judgment task
and an on-line priming task.

Semantic similarity Ratings
Previous studies have shown that participants are sensitive to
semantic similarity variations among morphologically related
word pairs. For example, boldly is judged more semantically
similar to bold than lately is to late or hardly is to hard
(Gonnerman, 1999). When a verb and/or particle are
dependent on one another, the resultant meaning of the verbparticle construction is less similar to the verb alone; thus,
bring in is more similar to bring than chew out is to chew.
Therefore, we asked participants to provide semantic
similarity ratings as a close approximation to the dependency
relationships described by Lohse et al. (2004).

Processing account of particle placement
Lohse, Hawkins, and Wasow (2004) argue that the various
factors determined to affect particle placement can be
explained by a processing approach. They examined two
factors that effect particle placement, namely length of the
direct object NP, and dependency of the verb and particle. In
a corpus study, they showed that as the number of words in
the direct object NP increased, the number of split orderings
diminished. Thus, the particle was more likely to be placed
adjacent to the verb if the direct object NP was long.
Lohse et al. (2004) also investigated the effects of varying
semantic dependency relationships between the verb and
particle on placement of the particle in several corpora.
Dependency in particle constructions concerns the extent to
which a verb relies on its particle for the meaning of the
complete construction. For example, finish does not rely on
up for its interpretation in finish up, whereas chew depends
strongly on the particle, out, in chew out for its semantic
interpretation. Results from the corpus study showed that
dependent particles are more likely to be placed adjacent to
the verb. Thus, the sentence ‘The teacher will chew out the
students’ is more common that “The teacher will chew the
students out.’ The corpora studies support a processing
account of particle placement.
While previous studies have focused on word order
preferences in language production and written corpora, the
present study examines ordering choices in comprehension
using verb particle constructions, testing interactions among
the factors of adjacency, length of the direct object NP, and
dependency between verb and particle.

Participants 128 Lehigh University undergraduates
participated for course credit. They were all monolingual
speakers of American English.
Materials 209 verb particle/verb pairs were divided into 6
lists with 34 or 35 items each.
Procedure Participants were asked to rate the similarity in
meaning of verb particle/verb pairs on a scale from 1 (very
dissimilar) to 9 (very similar). The instructions included
examples of highly similar as well as dissimilar pairs with
corresponding ratings.
9.00
8.00
7.00
6.00
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

1

The factors Gries (1999, 2002) discusses include: 1) stress (of
particle or direct object (DO)); 2) NP type (pronoun vs. complex
nouns); 3) length of the DO; 4) determiner of the DO (definite
versus indefinite); 5) complexity of the DO; 6) meaning of the VP
(idiomatic versus spatial contribution); 7) animacy of the DO; 8)
entrenchment of the DO; and, 9) production difficulty.

1.00
0.00
1

12

23

34

45

56

67

78

89 100 111 122 133 144 155 166 177 188 199 210

Verb-particle Pair

Figure 1. Mean semantic similarity ratings for 209 verb/verb
particle pairs (e.g., look up/look).
786

Results and Discussion

Procedure Participants were tested individually in a quiet
room with dim lighting. Lexical decisions were indicated by
pressing a button on a button box. Rapid and accurate
responses were encouraged. Psyscope (Cohen, MacWhinney,
Flatt, & Provost, 1993) software was used to present stimuli
and record responses. CRT monitors running at 85 HZ were
used to display the stimuli. At the start of each trial a fixation
point (an asterisk) was displayed for 1000 msec, followed by
a mask (%#@!&^$) for 500 msec. The prime was then
briefly presented for 35 msec and the target followed
immediately, remaining on the screen for 200 msec. After the
participant responded, a 500 msec delay occurred before the
next trial began. Primes and targets were presented in white
on a black background, with primes in lower case letters and
targets in upper case.

Results from the survey showed that participants are sensitive
to the degree of similarity between verb particle/verb pairs
(see Figure 1 above). Moreover, the similarity ratings
correspond to the categories of dependency developed by
Lohse et al. (2004), with pairs considered dependent on
linguistic grounds being rated as dissimilar (e.g., throwup/throw), and independent pairs rated as more similar. (e.g.,
clear off/clear).

Masked Priming
Results from the ratings task showed that native English
speakers are sensitive to gradations in similarity of meaning
between verbs and verb-particle constructions. To test
whether these judgments are reflected in on-line processing,
we conducted a masked priming experiment. In the masked
priming paradigm, primes are presented below conscious
threshold such that participants are unaware of having seen
the prime. We expect facilitation for highly similar pairs,
(e.g., clear off/clear), which have a low dependency
relationship, but no facilitation for dissimilar pairs (e.g., chew
out/chew), which are highly dependent.

Results and Discussion
Trials on which participants made errors were excluded from
the latency analyses, as were outliers (responses greater than
2000 msec or less than 200). The decision latencies were
entered into an analysis of variance with the factors Prime
Type (related test or unrelated control) and Similarity (low,
mid, and high). Results showed a main effect of Prime Type,
F (2, 50) =13.3, p < .001, but no main effect for Similarity, F
(2, 50) = 0.3, p < .76, since there was facilitation in the high
and mid similarity conditions, but not the low, as expected.
There was no significant interaction: F (4, 100) = 1.5, p < .21.
Planned comparisons revealed facilitation for targets
following related primes in the mid and high Similarity
conditions, but not for the low similarity items (see Table 1).

Participants 41 Lehigh University undergraduates (20
women and 21 men) participated for course credit. All were
native speakers of English and did not participate in the
similarity survey.
Materials 78 verb particle constructions were chosen from
the set of 209 used in the ratings task above. They were
separated into three equal groups: 26 low similarity; 26
middle similarity; and, 26 high similarity, matched for
frequency. Items in the low condition had ratings less than 4
(e.g., throw up/throw). For the mid condition, ratings were
equal to or greater than 4 and less than 6 (e.g., look up/look).
For the high condition, ratings were greater then 6 (e.g., finish
up/finish). Particles (e.g., up, in, out) were distributed across
conditions, such that they appeared equally often in each
condition. The verb and particle served as related prime (e.g.,
cover up), with the verb as target (e.g., cover). For each of the
78 related test primes (e.g., cover up) an unrelated control
prime was selected to match in frequency and number of
letters (e.g., shut off). Test and control primes did not overlap
in meaning or orthography. The items were divided into two
lists, one with the related test-target pair (e.g., cover
up/cover), the other with the unrelated control-target pair
(e.g., shut off/cover); each participant saw stimuli from only
one list.
In addition, 78 real word prime-target filler items were
added to each list, so that the overall proportion of related
prime target pairs in the list was reduced. Finally, 156 nonword filler items were included, matched overall for
frequency and reflecting the composition of the real-word
items. Thus, half of the non-word pairs had verb-particle
primes, divided equally into related (e.g., keep up/keem) and
unrelated verb-particle pairs (e.g., live down/bool). The other
half of the non-word pairs had one-word primes (e.g.,
basil/grook). Each list therefore consisted of 312 prime-target
pairs, 39 of which were related verb-particle/verb pairs (look
up/look).

Table 1: Response latencies for target words by prime types
and similarity
Prime-Target Similarity
Prime Type

Low

Mid

High

Unrelated (cast off/throw)

550

553

557

Related (throw up/throw)

543

532

537

7

21*

20*

Unrelated-Related

Thus, the factor of verb particle dependency described by
Lohse et al. (2004) was indeed reflected in on-line processing
of verb-particle constructions. Results from the masked
priming task showed that more similar, less dependent, items
(finish up/finish; look up/look) produced greater facilitation
than less similar, high dependent pairs (chew out/chew)

Ordering Effects in Self-paced Reading
We have shown that speakers are sensitive to dependency
relationships between verbs and particles in both off-line
judgments and an on-line priming task. To address whether
differences in processing of alternative word orders are, in
fact, influenced by the nature of the dependency relationship,
we conducted a self-paced reading task. We also looked at the
factors of NP length and adjacency, which have been shown
to affect ordering preferences in corpora and production
787

Results and Discussion

studies (Lohse et al., 2004; Stallings et al., 1998; Yamashita
& Chang, 2001).

Reading times for sentences where participants answered the
yes-no question incorrectly were excluded from analysis.
Mean reading times per word were calculated for each
sentence. These values were then entered into an analysis of
variance with the factors of particle Position (adjacent,
shifted), NP Length (short, medium, long), and Dependency
(low, mid, high). There were main effects of Position: F(1,
140) = 21.5, p<.001, with shifted sentences taking longer to
read (347 msec) on average than adjacent ones (336 msec);
NP Length: F(2, 280) = 18.9, p<.001, with reading times
increasing as the length of the NP increases; and Dependency:
F(2, 280) = 24.0, p<.001, with reading times increasing as the
verb becomes more dependent on the particle for its meaning.
Mean reading times are shown below for each condition (see
Table 3).

Participants
141 Lehigh University undergraduates participated for course
credit. All were monolingual English speakers.

Materials
The 78 low, mid, and high similarity verb-particle/verb pairs
were the basis for our Dependency variable. We used the
verb-particle constructions from pairs that were rated low in
similarity (e.g., chew out/chew) as our high Dependency
items. Mid Dependency constructions were taken from the
mid Similarity set (e.g., look up/look), and low Dependency
from the high Similarity set (e.g., finish up/finish).
We used three levels of the Length variable. Short direct
object NPs included two words, medium NPs included five
words, and long NPs included nine words.
The Adjacency variable had two levels: particles were
either next to the verb in non-shifted constructions (look up
the number) or were shifted (look the number up).
For each of the 78 verb-particle constructions, 6 sentences
were created, reflecting the three length possibilities and two
levels of adjacency (see Table 2 below for sample).
These sentences were divided into six lists, such that each
list contained only one sentence form for each verb particle
construction; therefore a single participant did not read more
than one sentence containing the same verb and particle.

Table 3: Mean reading times (msec) by Length (short,
medium. long) and Dependency (low, mid, high) for
sentences with Adjacent and Shifted particles.
Dependency
Low

Table 2: Sample set of stimulus sentences for the verb look up
(a mid-dependency item)
Length

Adjacency

Sample sentence

short

adjacent

The man will look up the word.

short

shifted

The man will look the word up.

medium

adjacent

medium

shifted

long

adjacent

long

shifted

Mid

High

Length

Adj

Shift

Adj

Shift

Adj

Shift

Mean

short

323

325

340

334

348

355

337

medium

330

350

334

358

327

355

342

long

344

325

337

352

343

373

346

Mean

332

342

350

These main effects indicate that more processing is
required, as reflected in increased reading times, for sentences
with long direct object NP’s, highly dependent verb-particle
constructions, and shifted particles.
There was an interaction of Adjacency by NP Length: F(2,
280) = 13.1, p<.001, with slowest reading times for long NPs,
but only in shifted sentences. There was also an interaction of
Adjacency by Dependency: F(2, 280) = 24.2, p<.001, with
slowest reading times for high dependency items (chew out),
but, again, only in shifted sentences. Finally, there was an
interaction of NP Length by Dependency : F(4, 560) = 6.4,
p<.001, showing that reading times increased when sentences
contained verb-particle constructions that were higher in
Dependency. This effect was only seen for the short and long
direct object NPs.
The interactions between Adjacency and Dependency
showed slower reading times for shifted, high dependency
sentences (The teacher chewed the students out). There was
also an interaction between NP Length and Adjacency, with
slower reading times for long NPs in shifted sentences (The
man will look the historical origin of the unusual and
interesting word up.) Thus, it is harder to read sentences
when a long NP intervenes between the verb and particle.

The man will look up the origin of
the word.
The man will look the origin of the
word up.
The man will look up the historical
origin of the unusual and
interesting word.
The man will look the historical
origin of the unusual and
interesting word up.

Procedure
Sentences were presented one word at a time on a computer
screen. Participants read at their own pace, pressing a button
to replace the word they had just read with dashes and to
display the next word of the sentence. After reading each
sentence, participants answered a yes-no content question to
ensure careful reading. Reading times for each button press
were recorded.

788

380
370

Low Dependency
Mid Dependency
High Dependency

We have included the graph for Short NPs only, in the
interests of space. The patterns for the Medium and Long NPs
are generally the same, except that the effect which is mainly
apparent for High Dependency verb-particles in the Short NP
condition is exaggerated in the Mid Dependency condition
when the NP is long.
Of greatest interest, however, are the reading times for the
particle itself in the different conditions. Figure 4 shows the
difference between the mean particle reading times in shifted
minus adjacent sentences. When the direct object NP is short,
reading times for the particle are only slower in shifted
sentences if the verb is highly dependent on the particle for its
meaning. For long NPs, shifted particles are slower for Mid
dependency constructions as well. When the verb is not
dependent on the particle, readers are not slow to process the
particle, even if the intervening NP is long. For the medium
length NPs, the particle is slower when shifted for all three
dependency conditions. It is unclear why the medium length
NPs should yield a particle effect even for low dependency
constructions.

360
350
340
330
320
310
300

short

medium

long

NP Length

Figure 2. Mean reading times per word for sentences with
short, medium, or long direct object NPs, and low, mid, or
high Dependency verb-particle constructions.
A Length by Dependency interaction, with reading times
increasing as Dependency increases, occurred for both short
and long sentences, but not medium length sentences (see
Figure 2). This pattern of effects may reflect the influence of
competing forces on processing efficiency.
For high
Dependency verb-particle constructions, putting the verb next
to the particle helps interpret the verb in the verb-particle
construction. However, shifting the particle would allow the
comprehender to build an NP structure earlier, making shifted
structures more efficient for recognizing sentence
constituents. Therefore, in sentences with short intervening
NPs, keeping the particle and verb together does not greatly
reduce the recognition domain for the NP. These sentences
are thus highly sensitive to variations in Dependency. With
longer NPs, shifted structures will be very difficult regardless
of Dependency, so that having a long intervening NP strongly
affects processing even for low dependency items. Thus,
these sentences are highly sensitive to Adjacency. With NPs
of medium length, both Dependency and Adjacency have
effects, but in opposite directions, effectively canceling each
other out.
To determine where the effects are occurring in each
sentence type, we examined word-by-word reading times (see
Figure 3 below).

80
70
60

Low Dependency
Mid Dependency
High Dependency

50
40
30
20
10
0

Short

Medium
NP Length

Long

Figure 4. Difference in mean reading times for the particle
when shifted minus adjacent in sentences with short,
medium, or long direct object NPs, and low, mid, or high
Dependency verb-particle constructions.

Reading Times by Dependency with Short NP, Particle Adjacen

Reading Times by Dependency with Short NP, Particle Shifte

410

410

Low Dependency
Mid Dependency
High Dependency

390

Low Dependency
Mid Dependency
High Dependency

390

370

370

350

350

330

330

310

310

290

290

The

man

will

look

up

the

word.

The

Word Position

man

will

look

the

word

Word Position

Figure 3. Mean word by word reading times for sentences with direct object NPs, with the particle adjacent to the
verb (left) or shifted (right).
789

up.

General Discussion

References

Results from the semantic similarity judgment task showed
that speakers are sensitive to the degree of similarity between
a verb-particle construction and the corresponding verb.
Furthermore, this variation in similarity led to different
priming results, with highly (e.g., finish up/finish) and
moderately (e.g., look up/look) similar pairs producing
significant facilitation, while low similarity pairs did not
prime (e.g., throw up/throw). These findings suggest that the
notion of dependency, given a detailed linguistic analysis by
Lohse et al. (2004) and shown to affect word order in corpora,
is also reflected in both offline ratings and on-line decision
latencies.
In addition, the dependency relationships between verbs
and particles were shown to affect reading times in a selfpaced reading task, with increasing latencies as dependency
increased. There was also a main effect of length of the direct
object NP, with increasing reading latencies as NP length
increased. This pattern is consistent with other experimental
studies of length effects on ordering preferences (Arnold et
al., 2000; Stallings et al., 1998; Yamashita & Chang, 2001).
Finally, a main effect of adjacency showed that reading times
increased when the NP intervened between the verb and
particle. Taken together, the main effects provide strong
support for processing influences on ordering in
comprehension.
The pattern of interactions among dependency, NP length,
and adjacency showed that reading times were generally most
affected when two factors compounded the difficulty of a
particular word order. For example, reading times were
significantly longer for shifted sentences with high
dependency verb-particle constructions, such as ‘The teacher
chewed the students out’ or shifted sentences with long
intervening NPs, such as ‘The man will look the historical
origin of the word up.’
The pattern of results from the three tasks presented here
indicate that lexical factors, such as dependency in particle
constructions, and syntactic constraints, such as adjacency,
and NP length, affect reading times in a comprehension task.
The findings are consistent with corpora and production
studies of word order preference, but extend them to
investigate the interactions of both lexical and syntactic
factors. Importantly, these factors were shown to affect
processing in a comprehension task, indicating that both
speakers and hearers may be responding to similar constraints
(cf. Wasow, 1997b; Stallings et al., 1998). The findings
support Hawkins’ (1994, 2004) notion that word order is
influenced by performance factors.

Arnold, J.E., Wasow, T., Losongco, A., & Ginstrom, R.
(2000). Heaviness vs. newness: The effects of structural
complexity and discourse status on constituent ordering.
Language, 76(1), 28-53.
Bolinger, D. (1971). The Phrasal Verb in English.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chen, P. (1986). Discourse and particle movement in English.
Studies in Language, 10 (1), 79-95.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M. & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: An interactive graphic system for
designing and controlling experiments in the psychology
laboratory using Macintosh computers. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Dehé, N., Jackendoff, R., McIntryre, A., & Urban, S. (2002)
Verb-Particle Explorations. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Gibson, E. (2000). The dependency locality theory: A
distance-based theory of linguistic complexity. In Y.
Miyashita, & A. Marantz (Eds.), Image, Language, Brain,
95-126. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gonnerman, L. M. (1999). Morphology and the Lexicon:
Exploring the Semantics-Phonology Interface. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. University of Southern California.
Gries, S. (1999). Particle movement: A cognitive and
functional approach. Cognitive Linguistics, 10(2), 105-145.
Gries, S. (2002). The influence of processing on syntactic
variation: Particle placement in English. In: Dehe, N.,
Jackendoff, R., McIntyre, A., & Urban, S. (Eds.), VerbParticle Explorations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hawkins, J.A. (1994). A Performance Theory of Order and
Constituency. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hawkins, J.A. (2004). Efficiency and Complexity in
Grammars. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, R. & Nakayama, M. (2002). Syntactic and positional
similarity effects in the processing of Japanese embeddings.
In: M. Nakayama (Ed.) Sentence Processing in East Asian
Languages. Stanford: CSLI Publicaitons.
Live, A. (1965). The discontinuous verb in English. Word,
21, 428-451.
Lohse, B., Hawkins, J. A., & Wasow, T. (2004). Domain
minimization in English verb-particle constructions.
Language, 80(2), 238-261.
Stallings, L.M., MacDonald, M.C., & O’Seaghdha, P.G.
(1998). Phrasal ordering constraints in sentence production:
Phrase length and verb disposition in heavy-NP shift.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 392-417.
Van Dongen, W. A. Sr. (1919). He puts on his hat and he puts
his hat on. Neophilologus, 4, 322-353.
Wasow, T. (1997a). Remarks on grammatical weight.
Language Variation and Change, 9, 81-105.
Wasow, T. (1997b). End-Weight from the speaker’s
perspective. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26 (3),
347-361.
Yamashita, H. & Chang, F. (2001). “Long before short”
preference in the production of a head final language.
Cognition, 81(2), B45-B55.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant R01 MH55628-06
and an undergraduate research award to C. Hayes. We would
also like to thank the undergraduates in the Language
Acquisition and Processing Lab at Lehigh who helped with
data collection.

790

