UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time Interval Estimation: Internal Clock or Attentional Mechanism?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5x07d8k2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Anderson, John
Dickison, Daniel
Taatgen, Niels
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time Interval Estimation: Internal Clock or Attentional Mechanism?
Niels Taatgen1,2 (taatgen@cmu.edu), John Anderson1 (ja@cmu.edu),
Daniel Dickison1 (danieldickison@cmu.edu) and Hedderik van Rijn2 (hedderik@ai.rug.nl)
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Av.
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
2
University of Groningen, Department of Artificial Intelligence, Grote Kruisstraat 2/1
NL-9712 TS Groningen, Netherlands
Abstract

reproduced interval. On the other hand, if they have to do a
demanding task during the reproduction of the interval, their
cognitive counting is slower resulting in a longer interval.

The human ability to accurately estimate time intervals in the
order of 0 to 20 seconds can be explained by two seemingly
incompatible theories: the internal clock and the attentional
counter theory. Based on a dual timing task experiment we
conclude that a symbiosis of both theories is necessary to
explain all the phenomena found in our experiment and in the
experiments we review. This conclusion is supported by the
computational models we present of the experiments.

Interval Estimation
The human ability to routinely estimate short time intervals
plays an important role in everyday life. Time estimates
play a role in situations where we take an action and expect
some response, for example when we click on a link in a
web-browser, in real-world decisions, for example judging
whether we should brake for a yellow traffic light or not,
and in multi-tasking situations where we have to
strategically switch between tasks, for example using a
mobile phone in a car.
There are at least two theories that address interval
estimation, the attentional counter theory and the internal
clock theory. The attentional counter theory (Hick et al,
1977; Thomas & Weaver, 1975) assumes that there is a
cognitive timer that counts subjective time events.
Increasing the counter is a process that requires attention.
As a consequence, if there are other processes competing for
attention, the counter is increased less often, “stretching”
time. For example, in an experiment by Zakay (1993),
participants had to estimate a 12 second interval. In one
condition, they had to estimate the interval while doing a
secondary task, and had to reproduce it while doing nothing
else. In the other condition, they had to estimate the interval
while doing nothing else, but had to reproduce it while
doing a secondary task. The secondary tasks were, in
increasing level of complexity:
- No secondary task (ET, empty time)
- Reading color words (printed in black) (W)
- The Stroop task: Naming the color names of color
words printed in incongruent ink (CW)
- Color-word associations: like the Stroop task, but now
participants had to name a word associated with the
ink color (CWA)
Figure 1 shows the results of this experiment. In the
relatively easy ET and W conditions there is no effect of the
secondary task, but in the more demanding CW and CWA
tasks, time estimates are affected. According to the
attentional counter theory, when the participants have to do
a demanding secondary task during presentation of an
interval, they can devote less attention to keeping track of
time, resulting in a lower cognitive count and a shorter
2122

Figure 1: Results of Zakay’s (1993) experiment.
The internal clock theory (i.e., Matell & Meck, 2000)
states that the brain has devoted several areas that
implement a time estimation system. The general idea is that
certain stimuli can synchronize neurons in a certain area of
the cortex, effectively acting as a starting sign. As each of
the neurons produces its own particular pattern of activation
over time, each interval is associated with a unique pattern
of activation. These patterns can then be read out by other
brain areas in the basal ganglia. Contrary to the attentional
counter theory, the timing system does not require any
attention, and errors in time estimation are mainly due to
noise. In a typical interval timing experiment (Rakitin et al,
1998) participants were presented with intervals of 8, 12 and
21 seconds, which they then had to reproduce. Figure 2
shows the results of this experiment in terms of the
distributions of the responses. Although the variance
increases for larger intervals, the peaks of each of the
distributions are exactly at the duration of the interval that
the participants had to estimate.
An important difference between the Zakay (1993) and
Rakitin et al. (1998) experiments is that in the Zakay
experiment each participant produced exactly one time
interval, while in the Rakitin et al. experiment they
produced 80 intervals with feedback on the true duration
every few trials. Although in the Rakitin task there is a
secondary task to prevent participants from counting, this
task is always the same and doesn’t produce the distortions
in time perception in the Zakay experiment. When just
looking at these two experiments, the attentional counter
theory is consistent with both, but the internal clock theory
only with the Rakitin experiment. On the other hand, many

practical examples of time perception seem to be highly
automated (for example many timing aspects of driving a
car), giving some credibility to an internal clock
mechanism. The Zakay experiment mainly proves there is
some effect of attention, but not necessarily that the role of
attention is to keep an explicit cognitive count. The internal
clock theory by itself does not really deal with attention, or
other aspects of cognition. With this in mind we (Taatgen,
van Rijn & Anderson, 2004) designed an internal clock
module for the ACT-R architecture. This module can not
only model timing experiments like the Rakitin et al. (1998)
experiment, but can also shed some light on how timing
interacts with other aspects of cognition, including attention.

defined as the time between the start of a trial and the
moment a light comes on.

Figure 3: Illustration of the temporal module
The timer is initiated at the start of the trial. When the light
comes on, the value of the timer (5 in the example) is read
and stored. When the interval has to be reproduced, the
value of the timer perceived earlier is used. We have
estimated values for the parameters in these equations to
obtain an optimal fit to the Rakitin et al. (1998) experiment
of interval estimation (reported in Taatgen, van Rijn &
Anderson, 2004). We found 11 ms for start tick, 1.1 for a,
and 0.015 for b. These values also provided excellent fits to
the other experiments discussed in that paper.

Figure 2: Distribution of responses adapted from Rakitin
et al. (1998) for intervals of 8, 12 and 21 seconds.
The goal of our present study is to reconcile the
experimental results from the attentional and internal clock
theories. Our model will use an internal clock that will keep
track of time on its own account. To keep track of time,
however, this clock has to be explicitly attended, at least in
the initial stages of learning.

The Temporal Module
The general idea, based on Matell and Meck (2000), is
that an internal timer can be started explicitly to time the
interval between two events. A reset event sets an integer
counter to zero, after which it is increased as time
progresses. The temporal module acts like a metronome, but
one that starts ticking slower and slower as time progresses.
The interval estimate is based on the number of ticks the
metronome has produced. More precisely, the duration of
the first tick is set to some start value:

t 0 = starttick
Each tick is separated from the previous tick by an interval
that is a times the interval between the previous two ticks.
Each interval has some noise drawn from a logistic
distribution
! added to it. The distribution of this noise is
determined by the current tick-length.

Figure 4: Outline of ACT-R
Figure 4 illustrates the role of the temporal module within
the ACT-R architecture (Anderson et al., 2004). ACT-R is a
cognitive architecture based on production rules. What is of
importance in relationship to the issue of attention is that
production rules have to start and read the timer in the
temporal module. This means that errors in time estimates
are not only due to noise in the temporal module itself, but
also due to the production system not initiating or reading
the module at the right moment. This latter type of “noise”
is especially important in the initial stages of skill
acquisition, when the length of the interval has not been
established yet. In order to investigate the various
contributions to time estimation, we designed the following
experiment.

Experiment

t n +1 = at n + noise(mean = 0,sd = b " at n )

Method

Suppose we want to reproduce a time interval, as
represented in the first horizontal bar in Figure 3 that is

Participants 17 males and 15 females from the Carnegie
Mellon student population volunteered to participate in the
experiment

!
2123

Experimental task

stimuli become available. The data are averaged over the
two conditions that start with the letter task and the two
conditions that start with the addition task, and are plotted
separately for trial 1-5 (block 1) and trial 6-10 (block 2).
The dotted line plots the distribution that would be expected
if this were a pure interval estimation experiment like the
Rakitin et al. (1998) experiment plotted in Figure 2. These
plots show that participants do worse than that ideal, but
also show that the task they are doing, letter or addition, has
only a small impact.

Figure 5: the dual timing task
Figure 5 outlines the task. The display consists of two
boxes, a high profit box on the left, and a low profit box on
the right. In each of these boxes stimuli can appear, to which
the participant has to respond. Stimuli are buttons with,
depending on the condition, an addition with one-digit
numbers or a letter. Additions can either be correct or wrong
by one, and letters are either “A” or “B”. Participants have
to respond to correct additions and “A”’s by clicking on
them when they are in the right box, or by pressing space on
the keyboard with the left hand when they are in the left
box. In the right box stimuli appear for 1200 ms, with
between 0 and 2000 ms in between. Stimuli in the left box
do not appear by themselves: they have to be requested by
the participant by pushing the “Test High” button. Stimuli in
the left box are available in certain time periods, basically
six seconds on and seven seconds off. So at the start of the
experiment there are six seconds in which there are stimuli
available, then seven seconds without available stimuli, then
six seconds again with stimuli, etc. The end of a six second
period is always marked in the left box with a brief
appearance of the word “End”. Whenever the participant
presses the “Test High” button during a period with stimuli,
stimuli actually appear in the left box for the remainder of
that period. When the participant presses the “Test High”
button during the seven second period without stimuli,
nothing happens. Optimal behavior is therefore to press the
“Test High” button right at the beginning of the six second
period, which is exactly seven seconds after the word “End”
appeared in the left box. Stimuli in the left box appear for
1200 ms with 300 ms in between. A trial lasts 120 seconds.
Participants score 30 points for each correct response in the
right box, 100 points for each correct response in the left
box, they pay 10 points for each click on the “Test High”
button, receive 30 penalty points for an incorrect response in
the right box, and 100 penalty points for an incorrect
response in the left box. Participants were instructed on all
the aspects of the task, except the durations of the intervals,
which they had to determine by trial-and-error.
Design The experiment has four conditions: 15 trials of 120
seconds with the letter task (LL), 15 trials with addition task
(AA), 10 trials with the letter task followed by 5 trials with
the addition task (LA), and 10 trials with the addition task
followed by 5 trials with the letter task (AL).

Results
The two solid lines in Figure 6 plot the distributions of the
moments at which participants first click the test button.
These moments are defined as the deviation from the
optimal time, that is, the time at which new high profit
2124

Figure 6: Distribution of first-click times for both tasks
compared to an expected distribution of a pure interval
estimation experiment.
To get a more precise idea of the impact of learning and
condition, we fit a linear mixed-effect model (Laird &
Ware, 1982) with the absolute deviation of the time of first
click from the optimal moment to click as dependent
variable, and condition and trial number as independent
variables. Averages for these absolute deviation values,
aggregated in three blocks, are plotted in Figure 7. The
analysis revealed a significant learning effect (p=0.001), no
effect of initial task (Letter or Addition), no effect of
changing from the Addition to the Letter task (condition
AL), but significant slowing effect in the Letter to Addition
condition (condition LA, p=0.013). Similarly, we looked at
the average times relative to the click moment. Although the
average time offers no indication of performance, it can
reveal shifts in timing due to change in task. Figure 8 shows
the basic outcomes. Again we fit a linear mixed-effect
model to these data, revealing no learning effect, an effect
of initial task with Addition producing later responses than
Letter (p=.0011), no effect of changing from Addition to
Letter, but a significant later response of changing from
Letter to Addition (p<0.0001).

dual-tasking can be obtained by looking at the periods that
there are stimuli in both the left and the right box. As
stimuli in the left box produce higher scores, we assume that
people will only react to stimuli in the right box if they have
spare capacity to do so. We therefore took as a measure of
dual tasking the proportion of target stimuli in the right box
to which the participant responded while there were also
stimuli in the left box. Figure 9 shows the results:
participants turn out to be able to achieve a high level of
dual-tasking in the Letter task, but only around 50% in the
Addition task. This shows that the Addition task does
indeed require more attention than the Letter task, making a
simplicity-based explanation unlikely.
Figure 7: Average absolute deviation from optimal click
moment for the four conditions. Note that the change of task
for the LA and AL conditions is between block 2 and
block 3

Our eventual result is consistent with neither the
attentional mechanism theory (which would predict much
larger impacts of the task-difficulty manipulations) nor the
internal clock theory (which would predict no influence at
all). However, it is consistent ACT-R’s temporal module,
which predicts small influences of difficulty, because the
temporal module cannot be attended as often as necessary
when the task is more difficult. In order to show this in
more detail, we have constructed a computational model of
the task.

The Model
The model builds on earlier models of time estimation
(Taatgen, van Rijn & Anderson, 2004), dual tasking
(Anderson, Taatgen & Byrne, submitted) and skill
acquisition (Taatgen & Lee, 2003). We will explain the
model at a fairly global level.

Figure 8: Average deviation from optimal click moment
for the four conditions

Time Estimation
Because the duration of the interval is unknown, the model
has to determine it by trying out various intervals. When the
model sees “End” in the left box, signaling the start of the
interval, it starts the internal clock, which starts generating
time ticks as illustrated in Figure 3. Whenever the model has
some slack time to think about time (the details of which we
will discuss in the next section), it attempts to retrieve a
previous experience of pressing the test button at
approximately the present time. If a successful experience is
retrieved, the model will initiate a click on the test button. If
a failed experience is retrieved, the model will do nothing.
Finally, if no experience at all is retrieved for the present
time, the model randomly decides to press the button or not.
After the button has been pressed, the model judges whether
the button-press was successful. If stimuli appear in the left
box, the present time is stored as successful, but if nothing
happens the present time is stored as a failure. Note that late
test-button presses are judged as successful, even if they are
for example 4 seconds late, but that early presses are judged
as failures, even if they are early by only 100 ms. As the
model accumulates more experiences it will become more
accurate at estimating the right interval, but only within the
boundaries of the accuracy of the temporal module itself
(i.e., what is depicted by the dotted pure interval estimation
distribution in Figure 6).

Figure 9: Proportion dual-tasking for the four conditions
To summarize, the effect of task difficulty seems to be
rather small. If the attentional mechanism theory would be
right, we would expect to see a lower accuracy for the
Addition task than the Letter task, because less attention can
be devoted to keeping track of time, and we would also
expect significant shifts in timing after a task change (in the
LA and AL conditions). Such a shift can only be found in
the LA condition, and it is relatively small compared to the
deviations found in the Zakay (1993) experiment. A
possible explanation is that both tasks are just too easy:
Zakay only found an effect in the more difficult secondary
tasks. It is therefore useful to look at the amount of dual
tasking that participants manage to do at intervals that there
are stimuli in both the left and the right box. A measure of

Multi Tasking
The model has to divide its attention between three tasks:
attending and responding to the left box, attending and
2125

responding to the right box, and attend the time. Only two
of these tasks are relevant at the same time: either the left
box and the right box have to be attended, or the right box
and the time. The model is mainly event-driven, and will
respond to changes on the screen. When a new stimulus
appears on the screen, the model will attend to it and initiate
a response. The only exception is when the model is busy
with a stimulus on the left box, because then it will ignore
stimuli in the right box until it is done with the stimulus in
the left box. A stimulus in the left box can on the other hand
interrupt processing in the right box. Attending to the time
interval is initiated whenever the model has no stimulus to
process. However, since retrieving a past experience takes
time, especially when these experiences are relatively new
and still have a low activation, attending the time can be
interrupted if a new stimulus appears on the screen.

making the task harder, and an even smaller (and in the data
insignificant) effect of making the task easier.
The model’s changes in behavior due to task difficulty are
mainly due to the fact that the model has less (or more) time
to occasionally check the time. Although the internal timer
might have a good estimate of the time, this will not help if
there is no production rule that reads it at the right moment.
Later in the experiment, when the model starts learning
production rules, this problem becomes smaller because it
starts to learning specific timing rules that do not require
retrievals from declarative memory, and are therefore less
susceptible to interruption.

Skill acquisition
ACT-R’s rule learning mechanism, production compilation,
will gradually learn rules that correspond to cognitive
actions that are repeated often. For the present model, the
main rules of importance are rules that are associated with
retrieving previous experiences from memory. Initially, the
process of judging whether or not to click at a certain time
requires three steps:
1. A production rule makes a retrieval request to
declarative memory for a past experience about the
present time (50 ms)
2. Declarative memory tries to find a matching
experience (can take up to 680 ms, depending on
the activation of the experience)
3. A rule that acts upon the retrieved experience fires
(50 ms)
At any moment this process can be interrupted by a new
visual stimulus. However, once a certain experience has
been retrieved often enough, the three steps are collapsed
into a new rule specialized for that experience, for example:
IF the current time is 41 time ticks
THEN press the test-button
This new rule only takes 50 ms to execute, and has therefore
a much higher probability to fire at the appropriate time.

Figure 10: Time distributions produced by the model

Model results
We ran the model 200 times for each of the four conditions,
and then averaged the results. The model produces time
distributions that are quite similar to the distributions found
in the experiment (Figure 10). Although the differences
between the two distributions are subtle, it shares two
characteristics with the experimental data: the peak of the
distribution is slightly higher for the letter task, and there is
a slight shift to the right in the distribution of the Addition
task. These two aspects become also clear if we look at the
average response times and average deviations from the
optimal time. Figure 11 shows the average deviations from
the optimal response time, and Figure 12 the average
response times relative to the optimal response time.
Although the model results are far less noisy than the data,
we can see the same effects that we saw in the data: a
learning effect in the deviations but not in the response
times, a small effect of task difficulty, a small effect of

Figure 11: Average absolute deviation from optimal click
moment for the model

2126

Figure 12: Average deviation from optimal click moment
for the model
Figure 13, finally, shows the dual-tasking performance by
the model, which is quite consistent with the dual-task
performance by the participants.

Figure 14: Zakay task, comparison between model and data
In summary, a model consisting of an internal clock
combined with a general cognitive architecture attending
this clock provides explanations for both the in general
accurate human capacity for timing intervals and effects of
attention due to secondary tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by ONR grant N00014-04-10173.

References

Figure 13: Proportion of dual tasking by the model

Discussion
The model shows the same small effects of task difficulty as
the participants in the experiments. In the case of the model,
the generally slightly longer times for the Addition task can
be explained by the fact that the Addition task itself needs
more time to finish, leaving smaller intervals in between
stimuli in which the time-retrieval process tries to retrieve
old experiences, and thus increasing the probability that this
process is interrupted.
Another interesting aspect of the model is that the model
learns production rules that handle timing, reducing the need
for attention in situations where time intervals are well
practiced. This aspect is of importance we want to use it to
model situation in which a sense of timing is automated
(e.g., the traffic light situation).
A final issue is how we can explain Zakay’s (1993)
estimation effects with a clock model, as these effects are
often quoted as supportive of an attentional counter theory.
To do this, we have to make one extra assumption: given the
fact that the participants estimate this interval just once, they
are prone to making all sorts of “startup” mistakes. One
possible mistake is that the temporal module used for one of
the secondary tasks, effectively resetting it to zero, and the
probability for this becomes larger as the secondary task
becomes more demanding. Based on this assumption, the
model results in Figure 14 can be produced (other
assumptions could probably produce similar predictions in
combination with the temporal module).

2127

Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M., Douglass, D.,
Lebiere, C. & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of
mind. Psychological Review, 111 (4), 1036-1060.
Anderson, J.R., Taatgen, N.A. & Byrne, M.D. (submitted).
Learning to Achieve Perfect Time Sharing: Architectural
Implications of Hazeltine, Teague, & Ivry (2002)
Hick, E.R., Miller, G.W., Gaes, G. & Bierman, K. (1977).
Concurrent processing demands and the experience of
time in passing. American Journal of Psychology, 90,
413-446.
Laird, N.M. & Ware, J.H. (1982). Random-Effects Models
for Longitudinal Data, Biometrics, 38, 963-974.
Matell, M.S. & Meck, W.H. (2000). Neuropsychological
mechanisms of interval timing behavior. BioEssays, 22,
94-103.
Rakitin, B.C., Gibbon, J., Penney, T.B., Malapani, C.,
Hinton, S.C. and Meck, W.H. (1998). Scalar Expectancy
Theory and Peak-Interval Timing in Humans. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
24, 15-33.
Taatgen, N.A. & Lee, F.J. (2003). Production Compilation:
A simple mechanism to model Complex Skill
Acquisition. Human Factors, 45(1), 61-76.
Taatgen, N.A., van Rijn, H. & Anderson, J.R. (2004). Time
perception: beyond simple
interval estimation.
Proceedings of the sixth international conference on
cognitive modeling (pp. 296-301). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thomas, E.A.C. & Weaver, W.B. (1975). Cognitive
processing and time perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 17, 363-367.
Zakay, D. (1993). Time estimation methods–do they
influence prospective duration estimates? Perception, 22,
91-101.

