UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Topic and Vehicle Play Different Roles in Processing of Metaphor: Activation and Inhibition of
Semantic Features of Constituent Terms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3p92p10w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Kusumi, Takashi
Matsuda, Ken

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Topic and Vehicle Play Different Roles in Processing of Metaphor:
Activation and Inhibition of Semantic Features of Constituent Terms
Keiko Nakamoto (kenakamoto@nifty.com)
Takashi Kusumi (kusumi@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University.
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan

Among many models of metaphors (e.g., Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980; Kintsch, 2000), two major psychological
models focus on the asymmetric roles of a topic and a
vehicle in comprehension process—the alignment model
(Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Wolff, 1997; Wolff & Gentner,
2000) and the class inclusion model (Glucksberg, 2003;
Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990). The alignment model assumes
that in a nominal metaphor the topic and vehicle terms
denote literal concepts, and metaphor processing begins
with a bidirectional comparison between the two, and
predicts that the two terms are equally processed in the early
phase of comprehension. In contrast, the class inclusion
model claims that the roles of the topic and vehicle differ
even in the initial phase. This model assumes that the
vehicle term of a metaphor has dual functions— referring to
the conventional literal referent, and denoting the more
abstract, metaphoric category. According to this model, we
must inhibit the literal meanings of a vehicle and make an
appropriate abstraction of it in order to interpret a metaphor.
More specifically, the class inclusion model states that the
vehicle would first be processed to arrive at an interpretation.
Although both these models have been evaluated using
various psychological experiments, which of the models is
more suitable for explaining the metaphor comprehension
phenomena is still inconclusive. Some researches have
demonstrated that both the topic and vehicle play an
important role even in the earliest processing stage of
metaphors (Gentner & Wolff, 1997; Wolff & Gentner,
2000), while other studies reported that the roles played by
the topic and vehicle in metaphor comprehension differs
from the commencement of processing (Gernsbacher et al.,
2001; McGlone & Manfredi, 2001). On the basis of these
findings, Glucksberg and his colleagues have proposed a
model that has been modified from the original class
inclusion model. The model, called the interactive property
attribution model, assumes that the sentence structure of
metaphors should be considered in order to explain the
manner in which they are understood.

Abstract
This paper has examined the asymmetric roles of a topic and
vehicle in the metaphor comprehension process. We began by
proposing a perspective on the roles of topic and vehicle in
terms of the sentence and discourse structure. According to
this perspective, the topic, together with the preceding context,
would convey information regarding the aspects of the topic
that are relevant in creating a coherent interpretation of the
metaphor with the entire discourse. In contrast, the vehicle
would convey information regarding the types of objects or
events it would represent. Thus, it is predicted that a prior
presentation of a metaphor-relevant feature of the topic would
facilitate the comprehension of the corresponding metaphor,
while a metaphor-irrelevant feature of the vehicle would
interfere with the comprehension. Two experiments were
conducted in order to test these predictions, taking a priming
paradigm similar to that of McGlone and Manfredi (2001).
The obtained results were supportive of our proposal and
suggested the importance of considering sentence and
discourse structure to reveal the metaphor processing
Key words: metaphor comprehension; priming effects;
activation and inhibition of semantic features

Introduction
The purpose of this study is to explore the asymmetric roles
of the topic and the vehicle in comprehending metaphors.
The manner in which people comprehend nominal
metaphors, such as “crime is a disease” is one of great
interest in cognitive processes of natural language. In
general, it is believed that metaphor interpretation is
primarily based on the semantic features that the vehicle
(disease) and the topic (crime) have in common (Gentner,
1983), or the features that the vehicle consists of, and are
applicable to the topic (Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990). In this
case, the features such as {harmful, spreading rapidly , ...}
would be used for the interpretation. However, the topic and
vehicle have features that are irrelevant to the achieved
interpretation. For example, most people would not consider
that the metaphor intends to refer to the features of the topic
such as to be punished or those of the vehicle such as
causing a fever. Therefore, people must suppress or inhibit
those features of the topic and the vehicle that are not
relevant to metaphor interpretation; they must activate or
focus on the metaphor-relevant features. With reference to
this point, one related problem arises: would metaphorirrelevant and relevant features be treated equally or
differently for a topic and a vehicle? More specifically, are
suppression and activation processes of topic and vehicle
features similar or different?

Reconsidering nominal metaphor comprehension
in terms of a sentence and discourse structure

1588

In general, assertions would include given and new
information (Clark & Haviland, 1977). For example, in the
assertion “The first speaker of this session is my colleague,”
the noun phrase the first speaker of this session would
express information that is commonly shared by the speaker
to the hearer (i.e., they know that there has been a talking
session that has several speakers and that someone will give

b. The bank is (like) a castle in appearance.

his speech first). In this case, however, the hearer would not
be aware of who the first speaker in the session is. Therefore,
(is) my colleague conveys the new information to the hearer.
Similarly, as non-metaphoric statements, metaphors have
provided new information (Glucksberg, 1989; Glucksberg et
al., 1997). Glucksberg et al, have claimed that in metaphoric
sentences of the form X is (like) a Y, people would prefer to
put a relatively less familiar concept in the new sentence
position (the subject) and a familiar concept in the existing
sentence position (the predicate).
However, what exactly does it mean when we say that the
topic conveys given information and the vehicle conveys
new information? Glucksberg et al. (1997) argued this
problem in terms of two types of world knowledge that are
used to comprehend metaphors. The first type is knowledge
about the topic, particularly which dimensions are relevant
or meaningful to it. For example, when talking about
oranges, the size, taste, price, or smell can be meaningful.
In contrast, the distance of the oranges from the ocean or the
opaqueness of the oranges would seldom be referred to as
meaningful topics. The second type is the knowledge of the
kinds of concepts that the vehicle may represent. For
example, the term rocket could easily be regarded as
representative of fast-moving objects, as compared to a car.
The topic and vehicle of a metaphor provides this differing
information, and their meanings are interactively affected to
generate a cohesive interpretation of the sentence.
On the basis of these observations, the interactive
property attribution model has been proposed and verified
by several experiments in recent metaphor literatures
(Gernsbacher, et al., 2001; Glucksberg et al., 1997, 2001;
McGlone & Manfredi, 2001). This model emphasizes that
the metaphor comprehension process can be aptly described
as a process in which the vehicle of a metaphor is
interpreted as denoting a metaphoric category that has
properties which can be attributed to the topic. The model
predicts that if the vehicle of a metaphor is regarded as the
literal category containing several features that cannot be
attributed to the topic, then comprehension of the metaphor
will be difficult or even impossible. As suggested by the
model, several researches have demonstrated that when the
features of the vehicle that are irrelevant for metaphor
interpretation are activated before reading a corresponding
metaphor, then comprehension becomes relatively more
difficult compared with when the features are not activated.
Although the interactive property attribution model
provides some interesting suggestions for the metaphor
comprehension process, it also has several limitations,
particularly when considering the discourse structure. In
most cases, metaphors are not used in isolation. They are
usually placed in a context consisting of various types of
statements other than metaphoric ones. Taking this into
account, the information conveyed by the topic and the
vehicle must reflect the ordinal discourse structure.
Let us consider the following examples:
(1) a. The bank at the corner of the street has been
attacked three times by a criminal team.
b. The bank at the corner of the street was
designed by a famous architect.
(2) a. The bank is (like) a good prey for robbers.

Both of (2a) and (2b) can be interpreted as metaphoric
statements even without any context. However, when (1a) is
presented before (2), (2a) seems to be easier to understand
than (2b). On the other hand, when (1b) is presented, (2b)
seems to be easier to understand than (2a). This example
implies that the topic appears ambiguous even when it is a
concrete noun, such as bank, and the preceding context
provides information that allows a hearer to select what of
aspects of the topic are relevant in the discourse. Hence, a
metaphoric statement can be easily understood when the
metaphor refers to those aspects or properties of the topic
that are consistent with the discourse context. In contrast,
when the metaphor refers to irrelevant aspects of the topic to
the context, understanding may become slightly difficult.
However, since we often discuss the various aspects of an
object in the same context (for example, talking about the
taste, color, and price of an apple in a cooking situation), it
is plausible that the interference effect of the preceding
context would not be so significant.
In contrast, the vehicle of a metaphor would seldom be
the main topic of a given discourse context. For instance,
(2a) is not suitable in a context in which the behaviors of
predatory animals are described. Therefore, the topic term
alone must provide the constraints for disambiguating the
vehicle term. In other words, it is suggested that people may
not utilize the information in a preceding context to interpret
a vehicle term as a metaphoric category, because a discourse
in natural settings does not have such structure. If this is the
case, it is predicted that the comprehension of a metaphor is
not necessarily facilitated by the preceding context, which
activates the metaphor-related features of the vehicle term.
In contrast, activating the metaphor-irrelevant features of
the vehicle term in a metaphor would interfere with
comprehension, because these properties must be
suppressed in order to generate an appropriate interpretation.

Aims of this study

1589

Taking the reconsideration of the context effect in the
metaphor comprehension discussed above, the following
predictions have been addressed. First, metaphor
comprehension should be facilitated if the relevant feature
of a topic term is activated before reading the corresponding
metaphor. Second, the comprehension should be interfered
with if the irrelevant features of a vehicle are activated prior
to the metaphor presentation. Moreover, it is necessary that
the features are activated in association with the topic or the
vehicle for producing facilitation and interference. In
particular, the same features will facilitate or interfere with
the metaphor comprehension when they are referred to as
predicates of the topic or the vehicle (e.g., crimes spread
rapidly), but not when they are referred to in isolation
(spread rapidly).
In order to test these predictions, two experiments were
conducted. In Experiment 1, the features were presented as
primes for the corresponding target metaphors and as the
predicates for the constituent terms. In Experiment 2, the
same features were presented without the constituent terms,
prior to the target metaphors.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was conducted to investigate the roles of
activation and inhibition of the topic and vehicle-related
features using a priming paradigm similar to that used by
McGlone and Manfredi (2001). In order to arrive at specific
conclusions, we modified their method in several points.
The most important modification was the addition of the
literal fillers to the experimental materials; this was done to
avoid making participants have processing sets that were
unusually adaptive to metaphors. Since there is a possibility
that people can adaptively respond to a ratio of trials where
the primes and corresponding targets are semantically
related to each other during the entire trials (cf., Neely,
1991), this modification may be important to test the
findings of McGlone and Manfredi in a more natural
environment where the metaphors were mixed with nonmetaphorical statements in order to generalize the results. In
addition, we presented probe sentences after the target
metaphor was comprehended, in order to ensure the
understanding of the metaphor. In McGlone and Manfredi’s
study, the participants were encouraged to wait until they
had a well-articulated inter-pretation before they responded,
and were suggested that it might take a few second.
Although they introduced this procedure to make sure that
the participants understand the meaning of the metaphors, it
seemed to impose an extra load on the participants. In the
present study, instead of their procedure, a probe sentence
was presented after the participants read the metaphors, and
judgment whether the meaning of the probe matched to that
of the metaphors was required. It was expected that these
modification made the experimental setting more similar to
natural discourse than that of the previous study. In order to
reduce the duration of the experiment, the control primes
that did not contain both the constituent terms of a metaphor
(XXXX is XXXX) were not used in the experiment.

Method
Participants. Fifty-four students from Waseda University
volunteered to participate in the experiment for the partial
fulfillment of a course requirement. All participants were
native Japanese speakers.
Materials. Forty-two metaphors (e.g., Loneliness is a
desert 1 ) were drawn from previous metaphor researches
(Kusumi, 1987; Gentner & Clement, 1988; Glucksberg et
al., 1997; Nakamoto, 2003) and were used as target stimuli
in this experiment (e.g., Loneliness is a desert). English
metaphors were translated into Japanese, and these were
verified to ensure that they were still understandable and
retained their original meaning without significant changes.
Six types of primes were created for each target metaphor
(e.g., Loneliness is a desert) based on a preliminary study
where the description of the characteristics or features of the
topics and the vehicles and interpretations of the metaphoric
sentences were collected from 60 university students. These
1

In Japanese, nouns are given equal treatment in grammar,
whether they are countable or uncountable, singular or plural.
Therefore, all the target sentences were in the same form (XXX ha
XXX da) in Japanese.

participants were divided into three groups and assigned
each the topic-term, the vehicle-term, or the metaphor group.
First, in order to construct the metaphor-relevant primes, the
features which that were obtained as responses in all the
groups were selected. For example, the feature empty was
obtained as a response for the topic loneliness and the
vehicle loneliness, as well as for an interpretation of the
sentence. These shared features were then combined with
the topic (Loneliness is empty) and the vehicle (Desert is
empty). Second, the features that were obtained from the
vehicle group but not from the other groups were selected
(e.g., dry). The features that were obtained from the topic
group but not from the others were also simultaneously
selected (sad). These features were subsequently combined
with the vehicle and the topic to make the metaphorirrelevant primes (Desert is dry, Loneliness is sad). Termalone primes were created by replacing the vehicle
(Loneliness is XXXX) or topic (XXXX is desert) in each
metaphor with a string of Xs. Six separate stimulus lists
were created in which each metaphor was paired with one of
the six primes corresponding to it. Each list contained seven
metaphors with each of the six prime types. These lists were
created to ensure that the participants saw each metaphor
and prime only once in the experiment.
In addition to these prime target metaphor pairs, 42
category inclusion statements were created as literal fillers
(e.g., Chocolate is a sweet, A sparrow is a bird). The primes
for these literal sentences were also created. In order to
equate the ratio of relevant and irrelevant primes to the
corresponding target literal fillers, the primes containing the
topics of the target sentences were created as the irrelevant
primes (Chocolate melts), whereas the primes with the
predicates were created as the relevant primes (A bird has
wings). This was done because the topic functioned as an
example of the category denoted by each predicate. Hence,
the features of each category were inevitably inherited by
and shared with the topic. This procedure inevitably resulted
in a difference in the nature of the prime target set
constructed between the metaphors and the literal fillers.
However, the participants could not determine which of the
terms were presented in a prime, before the corresponding
target was presented. Therefore, we assumed that the
difference did not significantly affect the results. In
addition to the relevant and irrelevant primes, term alone
primes were also created (Chocolate is XXXX). The same
literal filler pairs were combined with the six stimulus
metaphor lists and used in the experiment.
In order to encourage the participants to read the target
sentence carefully, probe sentences were created for 14
metaphors and 14 literal fillers. Half the probe sentences
were semantically related to the target (e.g., Loneliness
makes a person feel desolate for Loneliness is a desert) and
the other half were not related (Chocolate is made from
cocoa beans for Chocolate is a sweet).
Design. A 2 (term: topic or vehicle) × 3 (prime type:
metaphor-relevant, metaphor-irrelevant, term-only) within
subject design was used.
Procedure. The participants were tested individually. In the
experiment, they were required to interpret a metaphor
presented on a computer screen, and their reading time was

1590

Results and Discussion
The primary concern of this paper is to reveal the
characteristics of activation and inhibition of metaphorrelevant and irrelevant features in the comprehension
process. The responses in the metaphor trials have been
analyzed and reported here.
Metaphor comprehension times greater than 6,000 msec
or less than 500 msec (approximately 2.3%) were excluded
from this analysis. The mean comprehension times and SDs
were calculated for each condition and for each participant.

The responses that deviated more than 2 SDs from the mean
were then discarded as outliers. This resulted in the
elimination of approximately 5.5% of the trials. After these
preliminary procedures, the mean comprehension times in
each of the prime type (metaphor-relevant, irrelevant,
control) by each term (topic, vehicle) were re-calculated for
all the participants. The mean comprehension times in each
condition are presented in Figure 1. As shown in Figure 1,
the participants took a longer time to comprehend the target
metaphors when the metaphor-irrelevant features were
presented before than when they were not. Moreover, this
tendency was clearly observed in the vehicle-term condition
but was not in the topic-term condition. In contrast, when
the metaphor-relevant features were presented in advance,
comprehension of the target metaphor tended to be quicker.
The difference between the topic and vehicle condition was
observed once again for this tendency. The facilitation by
the preceding metaphor-relevant features was found only
when they were presented with the topic-terms, but not
when they were presented with the vehicle-terms.
Comprehension Time (msec)

recorded. The presentation of the stimuli and the recording
of the responses were controlled by Superlab pro (Cedrus
corporation) with an AT compatible PC and a response box.
The participants began each trial by pressing one of the
buttons on the response box. Before the trial commenced, a
message “Ready?” appeared in the center of the screen.
When the participants pressed the button, the message
disappeared and a fixation cross appeared 8.4 inches from
the top edge of the screen, where the first letter of a prime
sentence following it would be presented. The fixation cross
remained on the screen for 1,000 msec. It was then replaced
by one of the six primes (e.g., Loneliness is XXXX) for a
given target sentence. The participants were required to read
the prime carefully, so that they would be able to interpret
the subsequent sentence easily and quickly. After 1,800
msec, the prime sentence disappeared and the fixation cross
again appeared 5.8 inches from the top of the screen. After
200 msec, the fixation cross was replaced by the
correspondence target sentence (Loneliness is a desert). The
participants were instructed to read the sentence carefully
and press the button at the center of the response box when
they felt that they understood it. The task consisted of a total
of 84 trials–42 trials were experimental trials where the
target sentences were the metaphors. The other 42 trials
were fillers that contained the literal statements as the target
sentences. In 24 of the trials (12 metaphor, and 12 literal
filler trials), a probe sentence (Loneliness makes a person
feel desolate) was presented after the participant responded
to the target. This was followed by a string of three question
marks (???) which appeared at the center of the screen for
1,500 ms. Probes were introduced to ensure the participants
to interpret the target sentence, not just to see it and press
the button. When the trial started, the participants were
unable to determine whether it contained a probe or not.
They were required to judge, as quickly as possible, whether
the probe sentence denoted a meaning that was similar to
the target. When the probe and target had similar meanings,
the participants were instructed to respond “Yes” by
pressing the rightmost button of the response box. If not,
they were instructed to respond “No” by pressing the
leftmost button (for this example, the correct response was
“Yes”). After they responded, a feedback message was
presented for 1,500 msec to inform them of whether their
answer was correct. Then the screen was cleared and
remained so for 2,000 msec as an inter-trial interval.
In order to familiarize the participants with the task, 21
practice trials were given before the experimental trials. One
third of the practice trials had probes for the targets, in the
same manner as the experimental trials.

1800
1700

Vehicle

Topic

1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
Term-alone

Metaphorrelevant

Metaphorirrelevant

Figure 1 Mean comprehension times by term and prime
type. Error bars represent standard errors.
In order to statistically test these tendencies, a 2 × 3
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted using term
(topic or vehicle) and prime type (term-alone, metaphorrelevant feature or metaphor-irrelevant feature) as withinsubject factors. The participants were treated as a random
variable. The ANOVA revealed that there were significant
main effects of term [F(1, 53) = 7.695, p < .001] and prime
type [F(2, 106) = 12.202, p< .0001]. Overall, the metaphor
comprehension in the topic-term condition was faster than
in the vehicle-term condition. More importantly, the
interaction between the two variables was also significant
[F(2, 106) = 3.643, p < .05]. The simple main effects in both
the topic- and vehicle-conditions were shown to be
significant [F(2, 212) = 4.75, p < .01 in the topic-term
condition; F(2,212) = 13.542, p < .0001, vehicle condition].
Subsequently, Ryan’s multiple comparison procedure was
conducted to compare the means. This analysis indicated
that in the topic-term condition the comprehension was
much faster when the target was preceded by the metaphorrelevant feature (1354 msec) than when it was preceded by
the control (1449 msec; p < .05). The difference between the
metaphor-irrelevant prime (1499 msec) and the control was
not significant. In the vehicle-term condition, the metaphorirrelevant prime interfered with the target metaphor
comprehension (1651 msec) as compared to the control

1591

(1445 msec; p < .05). The comprehension time of the target
preceded by the metaphor-relevant feature (1425 msec) did
not significantly differ from that of the control.
As the present experiment was essentially a replication of
that of McGlone and Manfredi (2001) with the literal fillers,
the obtained results were similar to theirs for the main part.
In particular, our results were identical to theirs, in terms
that the interference was observed when a sentence
consisting of the vehicle term and the metaphor-irrelevant
feature was presented. However, there was also a difference:
In our study, the facilitation was observed when the
metaphor-related feature was presented with the topic, while
McGlone and Manfredi did not find such an effect. This
might be due to the modification such as the addition of the
literal fillers and the use of the probe sentences, which were
made in order to make the experimental setting more natural
than the previous study. As a consequence, it made the
participants to respond faster. It is suggested that metaphor
comprehension is facilitated when the previous sentences
mention the same aspect of the topic, when the sentences
were embedded in a natural, discourse-like setting.
In general, the results in Experiment 1 were consistent
with our proposal. The comprehension of the metaphor was
facilitated when the metaphor-relevant feature was activated
in association with the topic. In contrast, the comprehension
was inhibited when the metaphor-irrelevant feature was
actively associated with the vehicle. Moreover, there was no
significant facilitation or interference when the metaphorrelevant features were presented with the vehicle terms, or
when the metaphor-irrelevant features were presented with
the topics prior to the corresponding metaphors.
Although these results could be in agreement with our
proposal, there is another possible explanation for them. In
Experiment 1, the metaphor-relevant and irrelevant features
were presented as the predicates for the constituent terms of
the corresponding metaphors. However, it is possible that
activating the features alone will make similar effects. In
particular, since the metaphor-irrelevant features used in the
experiment were different for the topic and vehicle term
condition, it is difficult to deny the possibility that the
difference between the topic and the vehicle in the condition
is simply a matter of the association strength between the
features and the metaphors. If this were the case, then the
facilitation or interference in this experiment could be the
result of the excitatory or inhibitory links between the
features and the metaphors that might have been constructed
during the comprehension process; these could not be
regarded as evidence for the asymmetric roles of the topic
and the vehicle, particularly in terms of sentence structure.

Method
Participants. Forty students from Waseda University
volunteered to participate in this experiment for the partial
fulfillment of a course requirement 2 . All were native
Japanese speakers and did not participate in Experiment 1.
Materials. The materials in Experiment 1 were used with
the following modification of the prime sentences: The topic
and vehicle terms were removed and only the predicate
phrases were used as the primes (empty for the metaphorrelevant prime of Loneliness is a desert). Therefore, there
was no distinction between the topic and vehicle term
condition in the term alone and metaphor-relevant features.
The difference in the metaphor-relevant features remained,
because the prepared materials were different for the topic
and the vehicle (e.g., sad for loneliness and dry for desert).
Consequently, there were four types of primes for each
target metaphors— the metaphor-relevant feature, the
metaphor-irrelevant feature of the topic, the metaphorirrelevant feature of the vehicle, and the neutral.
Design. A one-way within-subject design with four levels of
prime types was used.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 1,
including the ratios of the prime types, because it was better
to keep the ratio of the semantically-related prime-target
pairs equal to that of Experiment 1.. Each participant
viewed the metaphor-relevant features 14 times, the controls
14 times, the metaphor-irrelevant of the topic 7 times, and
the metaphor-irrelevant of the vehicle 7 times.

Results and Discussion
Outliers were discarded in the same manner as in
Experiment 1. The mean comprehension times and the ratio
of the excluded trials are shown in Table 1. As shown, the
results in Experiment 2 differed from those in Experiment 1.
Comprehension was not delayed when the metaphorirrelevant feature was preceded the target. In addition, there
was no facilitation in the metaphor-relevant condition as
compared to the neutral. A one-way ANOVA revealed that
the main effect of prime types was marginally significant
[F(3, 117)= 2.636, p < .06]. Subsequently conducted
multiple comparisons of Ryan’s method showed that there
was no condition that significantly differed from the neutral.
TABLE 1

Mean Comprehension times, SDs (in msec) and Ratio of
Outliers in Each Condition
% of
Prime type
M SD
outliers
Metaphor-relevant features
1344 598 5.9
Metaphor-irrelevant features of topic
1364 636 5.4
Metaphor-irrelevant features of vehicle 1291 528 4.6
Neutral
1364 619 6.1
In summary, the facilitation and inhibition, produced by
presenting the features relevant or irrelevant to the corresponding metaphor, disappeared in Experiment 2. These

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was conducted in order to exclude the
possibility described above. In Experiment 2, the metaphorrelevant and irrelevant features were presented as the primes
without the topic and the vehicle terms (i.e., the primes
presented a word or phrase denoting only the semantic
features). If the effects observed in Experiment 1 disappear
when a prime consists of the feature alone, we are able to
conclude that they can be regarded as evidence for the
asymmetric roles of metaphor constituents.

2

Two additional persons participated in the experiment, but the
outliers they made were in excess (more than 20% of the total
trials); therefore, they were not included in the data analysis.

1592

results excluded the possibility that the effects observed in
Experiment 1 were caused merely by the semantic features,
irrespective of the types of terms they predicated.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion

The authors would like to thank Kenpei Shiina, Kow
Kuroda, and Hajimu Hayashi for their helpful comments.
This research was supported by the 21st Century COE
Program (D-2, Kyoto University) from Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

The results of the two experiments can be summarized as
follows: (a) The primes that presented the metaphor-relevant
features as the predicate of the topic facilitated metaphor
comprehension, while those that presented the metaphorrelevant features with the vehicle did not display such
effects. (b) The primes that presented the metaphorirrelevant features with the vehicle interfered with metaphor
comprehension, while those that presented the metaphorirrelevant features with the topic did not. (c) The effects of
the metaphor-relevant and irrelevant features disappeared
when they were presented on their own in the primes. These
results are completely consistent with our predictions.
The findings in this research suggest that the topic and
vehicle play different but critical roles in understanding a
metaphor. The topic, together with the prior context,
provides information regarding the aspects that are relevant
to the intended meaning of a metaphor. In contrast, the
vehicle after taking the restriction provided by the topic,
would be interpreted as denoting a metaphoric concept that
has features attributable to the topic. Clearly, it is necessary
for metaphor understanding to inhibit the metaphorirrelevant aspects of the vehicle, the features related to the
literal concept of the vehicle), and to modify or abstract the
features that could be candidates for ground of the metaphor
interpretation. The present results added a supportive
evidence for the interactive property attribution model
(Glucksberg et al., 1997; McGlone & Manfredi, 2001).
Although the present study did not conducted in truly
natural environment, the experimental procedure was
modified to make the settings somewhat more natural than
those in the previous study, and provided a possibility to
connect the often-used priming paradigm to natural
discourse settings. We acknowledge that our modification
was a very small step to reveal metaphor comprehension
process in natural discourse settings. But, the facilitation
effect caused by the metaphor-relevant sentence with the
topic term might be observed only with such efforts. If our
modification was appropriate for the purpose to bring the
experiment to a natural setting, it is implied that it is
necessary for revealing the metaphor processing to take into
consideration the sentence and discourse structure in which
a metaphor appears. In order to take such an approach, we
must reconsider the relationship between metaphor and
literal expressions, because natural contexts usually include
both of them. The previously proposed models have claimed
that there is no clear boundary between them and have
assumed that there is a common set of cognitive processes
for both of them (Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Glucksberg,
2003; Kintsch, 2000; Wolff & Gentner, 2000). However,
they do not seem to provide sufficient explanation about the
relationship between metaphor and literal processing. In
addition, of course, the analysis of metaphor use in natural
discourse is so important to reveal the metaphor
comprehension process in more detail.

References

1593

Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112, 193-216.
Clark, H. H., & Haviland, S. E. (1977). Comprehension and
the given-new contract. In R. O. Freedle (Ed.), Discourse
production and comprehension. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. (1988). Evidence for relational
selectivity in the interpretation of analogy and metaphor.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation (Vol. 22). San Diego: Academic Press.
Gentner, D., & Wolff, P. (1997). Alignment in the
processing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and
Language, 7, 331-355.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Keysar, B., Robertson, R. R. W., &
Werner, N. K. (2001). The role of suppression and
enhancement in understanding metaphors. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 433-450.
Glucksberg, S. (1989). Metaphors in conversation: How are
they understood? Why are they used?. Metaphor and
Symbolic Activity, 4, 125-143.
Glucksberg, S. (2003). The psycholinguistics of metaphor.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 92-96.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparison:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3-18.
Glucksberg, S., McGlone, M. S., & Manfredi, D. (1997).
Property attribution in metaphor comprehension. Journal
of Memory and Language, 36, 50-67.
Kintsch, W. (2000). Metaphor comprehension: A
computational theory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
7, 257-266.
Kusumi, T. (1987). Effects of categorical dissimilarity and
affective similarity of constituent words on metaphor
appreciation. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 16,
577-595.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
McGlone, M. S., & Manfredi, D. A. (2001). Topic vehicle
interaction in metaphor comprehension. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1209-1219.
Nakamoto, K. (2003). Semantic priming effect of metaphor
constituent terms. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 96, 33-42.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word
recognition: A selective review of current findings and
theories. In D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.), Basic
processes in reading: Visual word recognition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Wolff, P., & Gentner, D. (2000). Evidence for role-neutral
initial processing of metaphors. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 26, 529-541.

