UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Training Produces Suboptimal Adaptation to Redundant Instrument Failure in a Simulated
Human-Machine Interface

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6j9154mm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Ons, Bart
Storms, Gert
Vanpaemel, Wolf

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Training Produces Suboptimal Adaptation to Redundant Instrument Failure
in a Simulated Human-Machine Interface
Rob Youmans (ryouma1@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1007 W. Harrison St.
University of Illinois, Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607 USA
limited by prior experience when faced with the need to
adapt to changing task conditions?
Third, attention allocation is only partially under
deliberate and intentional control. Little is known about the
relation between feedback, negative outcomes, and attention
allocation. Under which circumstances will a negative
outcome alter attention allocation as opposed to other task
components?
We investigate these questions with the help of a
simulated human-machine interface in which the degrading
of one set of instruments poses a need to re-allocate
attention.

Abstract
The operation of machines typically requires attention to
instruments that signal the state of the machine. One
safeguard against instrument failure is to provide backup
instruments, but this works only if the operators react to
failure by switching attention to the backups. Little is known
about the effect of negative outcomes or feedback on attention
allocation. In two experiments, we demonstrate that prior
training causes operators of a simulated machine to adapt to
instrument failure by changing to a suboptimal decision rule
rather than by reallocating attention to a different information
channel. The results raise theoretical questions and warn
interface designers not to overrate backup instruments.

Introduction

A Simulated Machine Interface

The operation of complicated machines involves the entire
cognitive architecture: perception, attention allocation,
working memory, skill acquisition, decision making,
problem solving and so on. We focus on how machine
operators utilize available information about a machine in a
situation in which the instruments they have been trained to
use suddenly begin to provide inaccurate information that
leads to poor task performance, when a second, valid,
source of information is available. A fully rational operator
would respond by switching to the valid information source.
Three cognitive observations suggest that the response of
human operators is more complex. First, feedback and
negative outcomes show that some task component has
failed, but not necessarily which one. In prior work, we
proposed a theory of how people learn from negative
outcomes when the learner knows that the cause of the
negative outcome is a fault in his or her task strategy
(Ohlsson, 1996), but in human-machine interactions, the
learner also has to consider the possibility that the machine
is failing. How do individuals decide which component is
responsible?
Second, training produces biases and automaticity that
might interfere with rapid adaptation to changing task
demands (Allport, A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S., 1994).
Although quickly switching from one task set to another
might subjectively seem to progress smoothly and
effortlessly, empirical evidence strongly suggests that
switching between even simple task sets can be quite
difficult (e.g., De Jong, 2000). To what extent are people

In our simulation, participants assume the role of the
operator of a juice factory. Two input containers, Tank A
and Tank B, were shown on the upper left side of a
computer screen, connected with pipes to a mixing tank
shown to the right; see Figure 1.
On the lower half of the screen was the gauge equivalent
of the color information. Here, three realistic looking
temperature gauges representing Tanks A, B, and the
Mixing Tank were displayed; see Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example of factory interface. Note. Factory
interface was in color.

2416

Each input tank contains a certain amount of liquid at a
certain temperature. The factory is operated by adding some
amount of liquid from Tank A and some amount from Tank

B into the Mixing Tank. The mixture instantly becomes
ready-to-sell juice. The amount and temperature of the juice
is determined by the amount and temperature of the
previous content of the Mixing Tank, the added input from
Tank A and the added input from Tank B. Once a
participant entered their inputs, the simulation was
animated; the colored liquid was shown flowing through
pipes into the Mixing Tank, and the Mixing Tank’s color
and gauge responded appropriately to new input. The new
temperature in the Mixing Tank indicated the results of
participants’ inputs after each addition, and accurately
represented how liquids mix. The task of the operator was to
decide how much liquid was to be added to the Mixing
Tank from Tanks A and B, with the goal of maximizing the
production of juice without overheating the facility, a type
of trade-off situation. Once the two inputs were added, the
resulting state of the Mixing Tank was computed and
displayed 1, and the operator could make the next decision
about how much liquid to add from either input tank.
As shown in Figure 1, the display was divided into two
sections by a thick gray line. On the top half of the screen is
the section that we will refer to as the color information
portion of the screen. On the bottom half of the screen is
the section that we will refer to as the gauge information
portion of the screen. In the beginning of each experiment,
both the color and gauge information portions of the screen
provide the necessary information to successfully perform
the mixing task. For example, in the color portion, the
temperatures in all tanks are represented by the liquids
shades of blue or red. These colors were chosen as
somewhat naturalistic indicators of heat (e.g., many bath
and kitchen fixtures represent temperature, where blues are
cool and reds are hot). To help ensure that participants
understood these color values, a color-to-temperature guide
was on screen at all times. The colors were divided into
three shades of red, three shades of blue, with one shade of
gray in between. Deep red was the hottest temperature, and
deep blue was the coolest, with gray representing the
average of the blue and red extremes. In the gauge
information portion of the screen, a red ‘needle’ in each
gauge indicated those same temperatures.
It was the temperature of the Mixing Tank that was most
important in the simulation. Although the input liquids
could be hot or cold, the Mixing Tank could not
accommodate extreme heat. If temperatures in the Mixing
Tank ever rose above a certain point, the juice was ruined.
This point was represented by the two deepest shades of red
(colors), and the two highest needle readings (gauges), and
are referred to as the critical temperature. If the content of
the Mixing Tank reached this temperature, then the
pasteurization process was spoiled. Tanks A and B could
safely hold liquids across the entire range of possible
temperatures; only the Mixing Tank had this temperature
restriction.
In both sections, the temperatures of the liquids in Tank

A, Tank B, and the Mixing Tank are indicated. In normal
operation mode, the factory may be operated on the basis of
either the color or gauge information; these two information
sources are redundant. Because the colors and gauges
present identical information, the task can be solved equally
well on the basis of either.
The simulated instruments were implemented so that they
could be made to malfunction at a determined point in the
simulation. When malfunctioning, both sets of instruments
still displayed temperature values for the three tanks, but
either the gauges or colors became inaccurate. Only one
source of information became inaccurate, so the operator
always had the option of discontinuing use of the failing
source, and switching to the other.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we examined participants’ success rates
for running the factory as a function of type of training and
type of failure. Participants were either trained to use the
colors or the gauges, and they experienced either no failure,
failure in the type of instrument they had trained on, or
failure in the instrument they had not been trained to use. If
the participants responded to the failure of one source of
information by switching attention to the other source, their
performance might exhibit a brief decrement, a switch cost,
and then quickly return to pre-failure performance levels.
However, reluctance to switch from a failing source of
information would, in this design, lead to rising Mixing
Tank temperature, and eventually, an overheating of the
system.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 181 undergraduate
psychology students from the University of Illinois at
Chicago. The participants were randomly assigned to each
of six groups; five groups of 30, and one group of 31.

Design
The study was a fully crossed 2 (training: color, gauges) by
3 (failure type: none, colors, gauges) design.

Procedure

1

Informed consent and debriefing were done off-line, but in
the experiment participants interacted with a computer. To
clarify the procedure, we differentiate between the practice
sessions and the three experimental rounds that followed.
Practice Sessions. The practice sessions were designed to
teach participants how to operate the simulation
successfully. Depending on the participants’ experimental
condition, the practice session began with instructions for
using either the color or gauge information, but not both.
Participants were told how Tanks A and B related to the
Mixing Tank, and were told repeatedly that their goal was to
use the factory to produce as much juice as possible, without
overheating the Mixing Tank. Next, participants operated a
partial version of the factory simulation that displayed only
that portion of the screen that they had been trained on. For
example, if a participant was in a color training condition,

TEMPcurrent = [(14 * TEMPprior.) + (7 * TEMPa) + (7 * TEMPb)] / 3,
rounded to the closest whole value.

2417

then in the practice session they did not see the gauges, and
those trained on gauges could not see any representation of
the color portion of the screen during practice. The result
was that participants practiced with only one of the sources
of information, but never both.
The participants were asked to produce the maximum
volume of juice per trial. Each trial consisted of two
judgments about how much liquid to input, one amount
from Tank A (judgment 1) and one from Tank B (judgment
2), into the Mixing Tank. Participants indicated how much
juice, from zero to seven gallons, should be entered into the
Mixing Tank by typing the appropriate digit on the
keyboard. Juice production accumulated across trials. In this
paper, a series of trials is referred to as a round.
If participants drove the Mixing Tank into the critical
temperature range during practice, a warning appeared, and
the system paused for 8 seconds. Otherwise, practice ended
when participants had produced 300 gallons of juice. After
this, the participants were instructed with respect to (but did
not practice with) the second source of information that had
been absent, and were told that this new portion of the
screen conveyed the same information as that with which
they had just practiced with, albeit in different form.
Participants were told that if they were having trouble using
one of the two sources of information in any part of the
simulation, they should switch to the other source.
Following the practice session, participants had a chance to
ask questions, and then began the experimental rounds.
No failure conditions. Following the practice session,
participants in the no failure condition were asked to operate
the factory for three rounds. In each round, both color and
gauge portions of the screen were presented simultaneously
and participants were asked to produce 150 gallons of juice
as quickly as possible without overheating the Mixing Tank.
If the Mixing Tank was heated past the critical temperature,
the round ended and a failure display was presented
indicating that the participant had overheated the system.
Color-failure conditions. Following the practice session,
participants in the color-failure condition were asked to
operate the factory for three rounds. The rounds operated
just as they did in the no failure condition, except that in the
color-failure condition the color information became highly
misleading to the participants half way through each round.
Specifically, after roughly half of each round was complete,
the color information stopped matching those temperatures
displayed by the gauges, and instead indicated that the
liquid in Tanks A and B were shades of cool blue.
Gauge-failure conditions. Following the practice session,
participants in the gauge-failure condition were asked to
operate the factory for three rounds. The rounds operated
just as they did in the no failure condition, except that in the
gauge-failure condition the gauge information became
highly misleading to the participants half way through each
round. Specifically, after roughly half of each round was
complete, the gauge information stopped matching those
temperatures displayed by the gauges, and instead indicated
that the liquids in Tanks A and B were cool temperatures.

In both failure conditions, the moment at which the
mismatch between the sources of information occurred will
be referred to as the failure point. The failure point was the
moment during a round at which a successful participant
that is basing his or her decisions on the failing source of
information should recognize that the information has
failed, and switch to the other source of information. In the
failure conditions, the failure point always occurred when a
participant had produced between 70 and 90 gallons of juice
and the Mixing Tank was a gray color or less. If these
conditions did not occur, then the failure point occurred at
90 gallons of production. These criteria helped to ensure
that, after the failure point, there was still leeway for the
Mixing Tank’s temperature to increase.
Feedback. In all conditions, three forms of feedback were
displayed for the participants operating the system; two
while operating, and one after each round was over. The
first form was the sudden mismatch between the
temperature representations of Tanks A and B as
represented by the colors and by the gauges. For example, in
the color-failure condition, after the failure, the colors
always incorrectly appeared as shades of blue, while the
gauges continued to accurately reflect the temperatures of
Tanks A and B. Thus, if participants examined the color and
gauge representations of Tank A and B, their respective
temperatures would no longer match. This type of feedback
could be called online feedback, since its onset was during
each experimental round, rather than beforehand or
afterwards; see Figure 2. Once the failure occurred, online
feedback persisted until the end of the round.

Figure 2: The two rectangles highlight the first form of
online feedback, the mismatch between the color and
gauge information. The oval highlights the second form
of online feedback, the mismatch between what a
participant would expect to happen to the Mixing Tank
when the color information is used, and the actual
outcome whereby the Mixing Tank’s temperature
increases rather than decreases. Note. Factory interface
was in color.
The second form of feedback was also online, and
consisted of the mismatch between the color representations

2418

of the temperature in Tanks A and B, and the effects of
adding this juice to the Mixing Tank. In short, the second
form of feedback was the illogical way in which the
supposedly cool contents of Tanks A and B increased the
temperature of the Mixing Tank. Like the first form of
feedback, this inconsistency persisted until the end of the
round, but unlike the first form, this feedback actually made
it possible to readily deduce that the color information had
become unreliable, while the gauge information maintained
its integrity.
The third form of feedback was the outcome feedback
that followed each round. In short, participants were told
when they failed or succeeded in producing 150 gallons of
juice after each round. Thus, in addition to responding to
both forms of online feedback within rounds, participants
also had the opportunity to respond to feedback between
rounds. For example, a participant in the color-failure
condition could adapt to the failure of color information by
reflecting on that failure after the first round, and deciding
to go with the gauge information in the following rounds. If
this decision were made, then in subsequent rounds the
participant would succeed, and he or she could deduce that
the error was located in the color information, even without
reacting to the online feedback.

color and gauge conditions were significant, nor were any of
the differences between those participants who practiced
with a stable information source and those in the control
conditions.
In short, in both the color and gauge failure conditions,
there were no significant differences between participants
who encountered no failure and those who practiced on the
stable information source. For example, if a participant
practiced on color information, and gauges subsequently
failed, their performance was not affected. Likewise, the
performances of participants who practiced with the gauges
and experienced color failure were not affected. Because
participants in the no failure condition performed identically
to participants who practiced on a stable information source,
all further comparisons were made between participants
who practiced with a stable information source and those
who practiced with a failing information source.

Practice With Failing Information Source
As shown in Table 1, this experiment detected large
significant differences in the performance of participants
who had practiced with an information source that was
stable versus those participants who practiced with a failing
source of information.
Table 1: Number of participants from Experiment 1 who
successfully completed the simulation by condition.

Results
Our analysis of Experiment 1 focused on the success or
failure of participants in the simulation. Specifically, we
examined what conditions led to successful operation of the
factory simulation, and what conditions led to failure.

Round

Color Practice

Gauge Practice

s1

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail
No Failure

2 (6%)***
18 (60%)
19 (66%)

21 (70%)
7 (23%)***
19 (66%)

2

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail
No Failure

5 (16%)***
22 (73%)
22 (76%)

20 (67%)
12 (40%)*
18 (62%)

3

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail
No Failure

11 (36%)**
21 (70%)
24 (83%)

21 (70%)
15 (50%) ns
20 (69%)

No Failing Information Source
In conditions in which no failures of any information source
occurred, participants were generally successful at the task.
As shown in Table 1, participants that trained on color
information succeeded 66% of the time in Round 1, 75% in
Round 2, and 82% of the time in Round 3. Similarly,
participants trained on gauges succeeded at the task 66% of
the time in Round 1, 62% in Round 2, and 69% in Round 3.
None of the differences between the color and gauge
conditions were significant. In short, regardless of which
information source (colors or gauges) participants practiced
on, they were able to produce 150 gallons of juice without
overheating the system around 66% of the time on their first
try, and improved thereafter.

Condition

Note. Where indicated, significant differences reflect
comparisons between groups who practiced with a
failing information and groups who practiced on the nonfailing information. * p < .05; ** p < .01; ***p < .001

Practice with Stable Information Source

Round 1. Participants trained on either color or gauge
information succeeded in Round 1 of our simulation
differently depending on which source of information failed.
When color information failed, only 6% were able to
successfully complete the round, which was significantly
less than the corresponding condition’s 60% success rate
when training occurred on the stable information source, χ2
(1, N = 61) = 19.84, p < .001. Likewise, only 23% of
participants who were trained on gauge information
succeeded when gauge information failed, compared with
70% when training occurred on the stable information
source, χ2 (1, N = 60) = 11.28, p < .001.

In conditions in which a failure occurred in the information
source that was not practiced, participants were generally
successful at the task. As shown in Table 1, participants that
trained on color information and experienced failing gauges
succeeded 60% of the time in Round 1, 73% in Round 2,
and 70% of the time in Round 3. Similarly, participants
trained on gauges that experienced color failures succeeded
at the task 70% of the time in Round 1, 67% in Round 2,
and 70% in Round 3. None of the differences between the
2419

Round 2. Participants trained on either color or gauge
information succeeded in Round 2 of our simulation
differently depending on which source of information failed.
When color information failed, 16% were able to
successfully complete the round, compared with 73% when
training occurred on the stable information source, χ2 (1, N
= 61) = 20.22, p < .001. Likewise, only 40% of those
trained on gauge information succeeded when gauge
information failed, compared with 67% when training
occurred on the stable information source, χ2 (1, N = 60) =
4.92, p < .05.
Round 3. Participants trained on color information
succeeded in Round 3 of our simulation differently
depending on which source of information failed. When
color information failed, only 36% were able to successfully
complete the round, compared with 70% when training
occurred on the stable information source, χ2 (1, N = 61) =
7.04, p < .01. However, though the same trend was detected
for participants who were trained on gauge information, the
difference between the 50% of those who were trained on
gauge information was not significantly different from the
70% when training occurred on the stable information
source, χ2 (1, N = 60) = 2.50, ns.

Method
Participants
Participants were 36 undergraduate psychology students
from the University of Illinois at Chicago. They were
randomly assigned to each of four groups, with 9 per group.

Materials/tasks
The same simulation as in Experiment 1 was used in
Experiment 2, except that the program was modified to
record participant reaction times on each trial. In
Experiment 2, reaction times were measured from the
presentation of Tank A and B’s new values at the beginning
of each trial, to the participant’s first response.

Procedure and Design
The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was used in
Experiment 2. Because no differences were found between
participants who practiced on a stable information source
and those in conditions where no information source failed,
the later condition was not run in Experiment 2. The design
was therefore a fully crossed 2 (training: color, gauges) by 2
(failure: color, gauges) design.

Results

Discussion of Experiment 1
The results showed a decrease in performance when an
instrument failed that the participants had been trained to
use. Contrary to expectation, the participants did not recover
after such failures in the first round, in spite of the two types
of feedback the simulation provided. Perhaps more
surprisingly, participants did not recover even after two
additional rounds. Put differently, after completing an
average of 31 trials per round, for an average of 93 trails,
only 36% of participants trained to use the color indicators
succeeded, as compared to 70% of those with the same
training with the failing gauges and 83% of those with the
same training and no equipment failure. The recovery rate
for the participants trained on the gauges was better, 50% as
compared to 70% and 69%, but the main finding of
Experiment 1 is clear: The participants experienced
difficulties in switching to the alternative information
channel.

Performance levels
The participants’ success rates in Experiment 2 were not
significantly different from participants’ performance in
Experiment 1. Participants rarely succeeded when the
information source they had practiced on failed, usually
succeeded when the information source that they had not
practiced with failed, and all conditions improved across
rounds as they did in Experiment 1.
Table 1: Number of participants from Experiment 2 who
successfully completed the simulation by condition.

Experiment 2

Round

What was the nature of the difficulty in returning to no
failure performance levels? After all, the participants only
had to look at a different part of the screen to gain the same
information as they had gained previously. The answer turns
on the nature of the participants' adjustment to the
instrument failure. The obvious hypothesis is that they (a)
noticed the negative outcome, (b) interpreted it as some
failure of their customary information source, and (c)
accessed the other, and less familiar, source. This hypothesis
makes two predictions: First, that reaction times, the time
from the end of one trial to the first input in the next, should
increase sharply when the failure is introduced. Second, that
this increase should gradually diminish over trials.

Condition

Color Practice

Gauge Practice

s1

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail

1 (11%)
5 (56%)

5 (56%)
2 (23%)

2

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail

2 (22%)
5 (56%)

6 (67%)
4 (44%)

3

Colors Fail
Gauges Fail

4 (44%)
8 (89%)

8 (89%)
6 (67%)

Reaction Times

2420

Reaction times in the three trials before the failure point and
the three trials after were averaged within each condition,
for each of the three rounds in Experiment 2. No significant
differences emerged in any of the four conditions across the
trials; see Figure 3. The time it took participants to make a
decision about how much liquid to send into the Mixing
Tank remained consistent contrary to expectation.

Reaction Times (ms)

5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

simply switch to the other one. Because our operators were
explicitly told to switch to the alternate source of
information if having trouble, doing so seems an obvious
strategy to adopt. However, negative outcomes are not easy
to interpret, training creates biases that might interfere with
noticing behavior, and attention allocation may not be fully
under voluntary control. In Experiments 1 and 2, we
observed a drastic performance decrement in terms of
success rates when the information source a participant had
been trained on failed, and we also observed an
unexpectedly slow recovery of these success rates across the
three experimental rounds. However, the hypothesis that
these issues were due to a struggle to think through the
online feedback and how to adapt to it within each round
was not supported by the reaction time data from
Experiment 2. Even in the face of repeatedly failed rounds,
participants’ within round reaction time data did not support
the notion that they became more sensitive to noticing
failure points, let alone reacting to them. Instead, it appears
that the participants adapted to their failures between
rounds, by switching to an unexpected and suboptimal
decision strategy: By lowering input into the Mixing Tank,
users prolonged the number of trials until failure, while not
addressing a key variable, namely maximum production in
each trial. Participants did so regardless of the instructed
strategy to switch to the other source of information when in
trouble. We know of no cognitive theory that would predict
that re-allocation of attention would be such an unattractive
option in this situation. Could it be that the automaticity of
practice on one source of information not only creates a
reluctance to switch to others, but also a failure to react to
the environments outside of these automatic procedures? If
this is true, then our results strongly caution against
assuming that providing backup instruments is an effective
safeguard against instrument failure.

Color Trained/ Color Failure
Color Trained/ Gauge Failure
Gauge Trained/ Gauge Failure
Gauge Trained/ Color Failure

No Failure

No Failure

No Failure

Failure

Failure

Failure

Trial Type

Figure 3: Participant’s average reaction times for the
three trials preceding and the three trials following
information failures by condition in Round 1. Due to
space constraints, highly similar null results, found in
Rounds 2 and 3, are not here shown.

Discussion of Experiment 2
The reaction time data were not consistent with the
hypothesis that the failure to recover, observed in both
experiments, was due to the need to think through the
implications of the negative outcomes. Casual observation
of participants’ performances suggests a different
interpretation: The participants reacted to each round’s
failure by entering smaller amounts of input liquid; see
Figure 4. This had the effect of prolonging the number of
trials in a round before overheating the Mixing Tank, but at
the cost of requiring more trials to reach the target of 150
gallons. In short, participants in the experimental conditions
significantly reduced their average input into the simulation
across rounds by roughly one unit between Rounds 1 and 2,
t(8) = 2.40, p < .05, and again between Rounds 2 and 3, t (8) =
3.02, p < .05.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Justin Oesterreich for his many valuable
contributions to this project. We also acknowledge Tim
Miura, Ben Jee, James Pellegrino, and Jenny Wiley for their
helpful suggestions, and Dustin Rhodes for his help in
setting up our lab and deep appreciation of Wonder Woman.
Finally, we would like to thank Richard Mueller for his
insightful comments on amateur pilot training.

Response 0 - 7

Average Response - Color Practice/Color Fail
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Average Response

*
1

2

*

References

3

Allport, A., Styles, E. A., & Hsieh, S. (1994). Shifting
attentional set: Exploring the dynamic control of tasks. In
C. Umilta & M. Moscovitch (Eds.), Attention and
performance XV: Conscious and nonconscious information
processing (pp. 421-452). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
De Jong, R. (2000). An intention-activation account of
residual switch costs. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.),
Control of cognitive processes (pp. 357-376). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Ohlsson, S. (1996). Learning from performance errors.
Psychological Review, 103, pp. 241-262.

Round

Figure 4. Participants’ decisions on how much liquid to
send to the Mixing Tank across rounds. *p < .05

General Discussion
When two sources of information are available and one of
them fails it seems as if a fully rational operator would

2421

