UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Turnip Soup: Head Noun Influence on the Comprehension of Noun-Noun Combinations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/93h96518

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Cater, Arthur
Maguire, Phil

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Turnip Soup:
Head Noun Influence on the Comprehension of Noun-Noun Combinations
Phil Maguire (phil.maguire@ucd.ie)
Arthur Cater (arthur.cater@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract
Although previous studies of noun-noun compounding have
shown that past experience of a modifier influences the
comprehension of combinations involving that modifier
(Gagné & Shoben, 1997; Storms & Wisniewski, in press), no
similar head noun influence has been found. In this paper we
describe an experiment that investigates the influence exerted
independently by head nouns that are particularly suggestive
of the instantiated relation. Our results indicate that when
suitable head nouns are examined, they exert a similar
influence on comprehension difficulty to that exerted by
modifiers. Combinations with biased heads were interpreted
reliably faster than those with neutral heads and the head’s
strength ratio contributed significantly in predicting
sensicality judgment times in a regression analysis. However,
while a facilitating effect was observed for compounds using
a relation highly typical of the head, no inhibiting effect was
evident for relations that contradicted the head’s bias. We
discuss the implications of these findings and suggest some
refinements to Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) CARIN model.
Keywords: Conceptual combination; noun-noun compounds;
relation selection; CARIN.

Introduction
The combination of two words is a technique commonly
adopted by speakers in order to refer to novel concepts (e.g.
holiday tension, picnic bee). Although people have a well
developed means of understanding these novel compounds,
the associated comprehension process is not trivial,
requiring many levels of understanding. Accordingly, the
study of conceptual combination is important, both because
it is intimately associated with the generativity and
comprehension of natural language and because it is
important for understanding how people represent concepts.
In English, a language in which compounding is
particularly productive, combinations consist of a modifier
followed by a head noun. Usually, the head noun denotes
the main category while the modifier implies a relevant
subcategory or a modification of that set’s typical members.
In this way, a cereal box is interpreted as a particular type of
box, and more precisely as one which contains cereal as
opposed to other types of boxes. However, in order to
understand a combination like this, people first have to be
able to relate the two concepts in a meaningful way. Gagné
and Shoben’s (1997) Competition Among Relations In
Nominals (CARIN) theory focuses primarily on the relation
linking the constituent nouns in a combination. This theory

maintains that there is a fixed, relatively small taxonomy of
standard relations that can be used to link the modifier and
head noun concepts and that people possess statistical
knowledge about how often each relation has been used
with a modifier concept in the past. As a result, the most
available standard relation is the one most frequently used
to interpret other compounds containing that same modifier.
For instance, the modifier mountain is most often associated
with the <located> relation thus making the combination
mountain stream easier to interpret than mountain magazine
which uses the <about> relation.
The emphasis placed on the primacy of the modifier is an
important feature of CARIN that distinguishes it from
previous theories of conceptual combination. Gagné and
Shoben (1997) provided empirical support in favor of this
primacy. They found that the modifier’s relation type
frequency distribution influences the ease with which a
combined concept can be interpreted while that of the head
does not. Subsequent studies have replicated this effect in
Indonesian (Storms & Wisniewski, in press) and in French
(Maguire & Cater, 2004), languages in which the order of
the head and the modifier is reversed. These studies showed
that combinations involving a relation used frequently with
the modifier were easier to interpret than combinations
involving a less frequent relation, while no effect was
observed regarding the relation type distribution of the head.
Although Gagné and Shoben (1997) pointed out that
CARIN does not exclude a role for the head noun, the
theory fails to elaborate on what form such a role might
take. Despite the fact that no head influence was observed in
their study, we speculated that a more sensitive experiment
using carefully constructed stimuli would clarify the issue of
the head’s importance. Accordingly, the focus of our study
was whether, under certain conditions, the relation type
distribution of the head influences the interpretation process
in the same manner as the modifier. We hypothesized that
such an influence would be most apparent when the head is
strongly biased towards the instantiated relation, as in such
cases, the required relation is particularly available.

Issues of Stimulus Construction

1385

The following experiment was designed in order to
determine whether the relation type distribution of the head
noun influences conceptual combination when the influence
of the modifier is held constant. We examined whether
combinations with heads that are particularly biased towards

the instantiated relation are easier to understand than
combinations without this bias. In addition, we investigated
whether combinations involving relations that contradict the
head’s bias are more difficult to understand.
In order to carry out the study we needed to find head
nouns that were reliably biased towards one relation type
(e.g. soup is generally modified by a food substance such as
mushroom). Consequently, we needed to find a way in
which we could objectively measure the frequencies with
which constituent nouns were associated with each relation
type. Previous studies involving relation type distributions
have faced the same problem and have tackled the issue in
different ways. Gagné and Shoben (1997) used a sampling
technique in which they took 91 heads and 91 modifiers,
paired them together and derived distribution frequencies
for each based on the 3,239 sensible combinations that
emerged. However, it is doubtful whether a sample of this
size is broad enough to accurately reflect the relation type
distribution associated with a given noun. This method also
fails to account for the fact that common combinations are
encountered regularly, while exposure to rarer combinations
may be very infrequent. Furthermore, it ignores the reality
that different heads combine with disparate sets of modifiers
and vice versa. As a result, reliance on a constrained set of
nouns will cause distortions in the overall relation type
distributions and the unnaturalness of arbitrary pairings has
the potential to exaggerate the incidence of rarer relations.
Storms and Wisniewski (in press) pioneered an alternative
method for deriving relation distributions that avoids the
problems of unnatural context and type-token frequencies.
In their study participants were provided with heads and
modifiers independently and were asked to generate up to
ten possible combinations containing each noun. After
classifying all the generated combinations in terms of Gagné
and Shoben’s relation categories, the relation frequencies
were derived through counting. However, this technique can
also be prone to inaccuracies since participants are
predisposed to select the most obvious combinations first,
leading to much repetition. Hence, the resultant set of
combinations fails to reflect the full range of combinatorial
possibilities, with the result that the rarer relations are
understated.
In order to avoid these problems and derive accurate
relation type distributions, we used the British National
Corpus (BNC) World Edition, and extracted all the nounnoun compounds from the 100 million words contained
therein. This was carried out using the Gsearch tool (Corley
et al., 2001), a chart parser that detects syntactic patterns in
a tagged corpus via a user-specified context-free grammar.
In order to determine relation type frequencies for heads that
we suspected might show a skewed distribution, a random
sample of 100 combinations containing the relevant head
was extracted. These were then classified in terms of Gagné
and Shoben’s (1997) relation categories.

Experiment
While previous studies have not found any influence exerted
by the relation type distribution of the head noun, this may
have been because the materials used were not sufficiently
biased towards the dominant relation. Accordingly, we
consciously sought out heads with the most skewed
distributions and were able to verify these biases using the
BNC frequencies.
The experiment was designed so that response times for
combinations involving highly biased or “predictive” heads
(PBIAS) could be compared with response times for
combinations using the same modifier and relation but with
an unpredictive head (PCONTROL). In a second group of
conditions we also compared response times between
combinations where the head’s bias contradicted the
instantiated relation (CBIAS) and combinations using the
same modifier and relation but with an uncontradictory head
(CCONTROL). This second group of conditions was included
so that we could examine whether comprehension becomes
more difficult when an extremely atypical and unexpected
relation is instantiated. All four conditions are illustrated in
Figure 1 with relevant examples.
Accordingly, the focal difference between the PBIAS and
PCONTROL conditions was the relation type distribution of the
head, and likewise for the CBIAS and CCONTROL conditions.
The modifier and relation were maintained across the two
sets of conditions so that the influence of the relation type
distribution of the modifier would be constant, and thus the
influence exerted by the head could be examined
independently. When selecting the materials we were also
careful to avoid using modifiers that were themselves
particularly biased in case an extremely predictive modifier
would overwhelm any influence exerted by the head (e.g.
time periods, geographical locations, substances).

1386

PBIAS
Head Distribution Biased
Towards Relation

PCONTROL
Same Modifier
Same Relation

“Turnip Soup”
Relation Frequency = .93

Head Distribution
Unbiased
“Turnip Field”
Relation Frequency = .22

Same Head

CBIAS
Head Distribution Biased
Towards Other Relation
“Pub Soup”
Relation Frequency = .00

CCONTROL
Same Modifier
Same Relation

Head Distribution
Unbiased
“Pub Chips”
Relation Frequency = .04

Figure 1: Experimental conditions.

Method
Participants Thirty-six first year undergraduate students
from University College Dublin participated in the study for
partial course credit.
Materials Twenty-five combined concepts were generated
for each of the four conditions as well as 100 nonsensical
filler items. Each of the sensible combinations was ascribed
to one of the 16 relation types in the CARIN taxonomy. The
25 predictive heads used in the PBIAS and CBIAS conditions
met the criteria that a 100-combination sample of the BNC
contained at least 60 combinations instantiating the most
common relation for that head. During our search for
predictive heads it emerged that the best candidates were
frequently agent nominalizations, and of the 25 heads
chosen, 10 were of this type. Combinations were generated
so that corresponding stimuli in the PBIAS and PCONTROL
conditions had the same modifier and same relation and
likewise for the CBIAS and CCONTROL conditions. Each pair of
conditions was controlled for word length, plausibility,
familiarity and frequency of the head. The average lengths
of the PBIAS (M = 11.3) and PCONTROL (M = 11.0) materials
were not significantly different, t(24) = .57, p = .57.
Similarly, there was no reliable difference in the average
lengths of the CBIAS (M = 11.8) and CCONTROL (M = 11.3)
materials, t(24) = 1.83, p = .08. In a stimulus pre-test two
independent judges rated the plausibility of the 100
materials on a scale of 1 to 5, where 5 was the most
plausible. The judges were explicitly instructed to only
evaluate the concept referred to by the combination and not
the manner of its expression. The plausibility ratings did not
reliably differ between the PBIAS (M = 3.4) and PCONTROL (M
= 3.4) conditions, t(24) = -.15, p = .88, or between the CBIAS
(M = 4.1) and CCONTROL (M = 4.2) conditions, t(24) = -.64, p
= .53.
Tagalakis and Keane (2003) demonstrated that the
familiarity of combinations has a large influence on
response times in sensicality judgments. Although the
familiarity ratings in their experiments were generated by
the participants, we reasoned that a corpus study would
provide more accurate statistics. At 100 million words, the
BNC was not large enough to produce detailed frequencies
for novel noun-noun compounds so instead we availed of
the internet and gauged combination frequency by using the
number of hits generated by a Google search for that
combination. Combinations generating less than 50 hits
were rejected as being too unusual. One disadvantage to
using Google was that many of the hits generated were
simply noun co-occurrences and not actual concept
combinations. We minimized the number of false positives
in the frequency counts by avoiding searches for terms with
nouns that commonly double as verbs (e.g. forest walk) and
also by avoiding searches for regular phrases (e.g. ocean
view is a popular place name). Using log Google hits, the
average frequencies of the PBIAS (M = 3.6) and PCONTROL (M
= 3.7) conditions did not reliably differ, t(24) = -.45, p =
.66. Likewise the average frequencies of the CBIAS (M = 3.4)

and CCONTROL (M = 3.4) conditions were not reliably
different t(24) = .07, p = .95. Finally, we also controlled for
the frequency of the head noun’s occurrence as a head by
taking the log of the number of combinations in the BNC
with the same head. The average head frequencies of the
PBIAS (M = 2.4) and PCONTROL (M = 2.2) conditions were not
reliably different, t(24) = .94, p = .36. Likewise, there was
no significant difference between the average head
frequencies of the CBIAS (M = 2.4) and CCONTROL (M = 2.2)
conditions, t(24) = .72, p = .48.
Because our experiment examined the effect of the head’s
relation type distribution, each combination was categorized
using the CARIN taxonomy in order to determine the level
of bias of the head towards the instantiated relation. This
was not a straightforward task as some of the materials
proved difficult to classify, particularly the agent
nominalizations. Although Levi (1978) considered these
compounds separately from those characterized by
recoverably deletable predicates (RDPs), CARIN makes no
such distinction. For the sake of comparability with Gagné
and Shoben’s (1997) study, we endeavored to select the
most appropriate category for each combination. However,
for materials such as bridge designer and bear hunter, the
final selection did not always satisfactorily reflect the true
relationship.
Design A within-participants design was used for the
experimental manipulation of condition. Each participant
saw the same set of 200 stimuli, comprising the four
conditions (PBIAS, PCONTROL, CBIAS, CCONTROL) of 25
materials each and the 100 nonsensical filler items.
Procedure Participants sat in front of a computer screen and
placed the index finger of their left hand on the F key of the
computer keyboard and the index finger of their right hand
on the J key. They were informed that a series of noun-noun
compounds would be displayed on the screen for which they
would have to make sensicality judgments, pressing J for
sense and F for nonsense. Emphasis was placed on the fact
that they should only press F if the combination was truly
incomprehensible. Each trial was separated by a blank
screen lasting for one second. The combination then
appeared in the middle of the screen and participants had to
make a decision by pressing the appropriate key.
Participants were initially given a short practice session
where feedback was given regarding their judgments. The
aim of this practice session was to familiarize them with the
process of making quick sensicality judgments and also to
set a reliable threshold for sensicality. Without such a
measure, participants would have been liable to disregard
unusual but potentially sensible combinations as nonsense.
After completing the practice session, participants were
instructed that they were now beginning the experiment.
The stimuli were then presented in a random order to each
participant.

1387

Results and Discussion
A total of 9.5% of trials were omitted from the analysis.
6.9% of responses were incorrect and hence these trials
were not considered. Additionally, response times deemed
unreasonably fast (< 400ms, 0.1%) or unreasonably slow (>
4000, 1.9%) were also excluded. After this initial
elimination process, any remaining response times which
were more than three standard deviations outside each
participant’s mean for that condition were also excluded.
This eliminated a further 0.6% of trials.
The mean response times were 1,218; 1,392; 1,370; and
1,348 ms for the PBIAS, PCONTROL, CBIAS and CCONTROL
conditions, as illustrated in Figure 2. The mean accuracy
rates were .94, .86, .88, and .94 respectively. We conducted
several repeated measures ANOVAs in order to examine the
influence of the head’s relation type distribution on response
times and accuracy rates, using both participants and items
as random factors.
The difference in response times between the PBIAS and
PCONTROL conditions was reliable across participants and
across items, F1(1,35) = 32.30, p < .01; F2(1,24) = 19.02, p
< .01. The difference in accuracy rates between these two
conditions was also significant, F1(1,35) = 30.83, p < .01;
F2(1,24) = 9.04, p < .01. The difference between response
times in the CBIAS and CCONTROL conditions was not reliable,
F1(1,35) = .99, p = .33; F2(1,24) = 0.67, p = .42. However,
the difference between the accuracy rates for these
conditions was significant, F1(1,35) = 21.55, p < .01;
F2(1,24) = 4.70, p = .04.

1400

Correlation and Regression Analysis In order to
determine the correlation between relation strength and
response time we applied Gagné and Shoben’s (1997)
strength equation to the distribution data for the head nouns.
This equation, as shown below, consists of an exponential
decay function where pselected is the relation frequency of the
instantiated relation. While Gagné and Shoben included four
terms in the denominator, we included only the proportion
of the selected relation, pselected and the relation with the
highest remaining proportion, p1.

RT (ms)

1300
Biased

1200

Neutral

1100
1000

P

both the agent nominalizations and the RDP combinations
equally. Taken together, our results suggest that the
influence of the head’s relation type distribution is limited
to situations where it is strongly biased towards the
instantiated relation.
Regarding the accuracy rates, we observed significant
differences between both sets of conditions. While that
between the PBIAS and PCONTROL conditions corresponds with
the difference in response times, the difference between the
CBIAS and CCONTROL conditions requires an alternative
explanation given that the response times for these
conditions did not reliably differ. We suggest that although
the speed of comprehension did not vary, participants may
have been more inclined to incorrectly judge the CBIAS
stimuli as nonsense. The suggestiveness of the head may
have led them to apply the wrong relation and judge the
combination on the basis of an incorrect interpretation. For
example river factory may have initially conjured up the
image of a factory that makes rivers. Because of the salience
of this incorrect interpretation, participants may have
applied it ahead of the more sensible yet less obvious
alternative. This possibility is evident from the fact that
river factory produced the lowest accuracy rating of all
materials at 36% as opposed to 89% for river bench.
Despite the discrepancy, both entities have equal potential
to be located next to a river and indeed Google produces
23% fewer hits for the latter phrase. Although these
contradictions of the head’s bias seem to have increased the
error rate by misleading some participants, they did not lead
to a significant increase in response time. Hence we
conclude that for those materials correctly interpreted, the
comprehension process was no more difficult.

C

Figure 2: Response times by condition.

apselected

These results demonstrate that the relation type
distribution of the head exerts an influence over the ease of
interpretation of a combination. Combinations that used a
relation that was very typical of the head (e.g. sausage
factory) were interpreted reliably faster than those that used
a head that was less indicative of the instantiated relation
(e.g. sausage machine). This effect was also reliable when
we considered the agent nominalizations and the RDP
combinations separately. Conversely, there was no
significant difference in response times between
combinations where the instantiated relation contradicted
the head’s bias (e.g. river factory) and those involving a
neutral head (e.g. river bench). Once again, this applied to

Head Strength Ratio =

e

apselected

e

+ eap1

1388

The resulting values for head strength encapsulated the
information regarding head biases in each of the four
conditions. Materials in the PBIAS condition had strengths at
the higher end of the range while those in the CBIAS
condition were very low because their distributions were
dominated by another very frequent relation type. Although
Gagné and Shoben (1997) reported that the optimum value
for the variable a was about 36, we decided upon a value of
3. Assigning a value of 36 meant that virtually all of the

strength values became either a one or a zero, whereas a
value of 3 resulted in a more continuous distribution.
We obtained correlations between response time and head
strength (r = -.36, p < .01), familiarity (r = -.33, p < .01),
head frequency (r = -.29, p < .01), plausibility (r = -.25, p =
.01), modifier frequency as a modifier in the BNC (r = -.24,
p = .03) and word length (r = .10, p = .30). All the above
correlations were significant except that between response
time and length.
When considering only the 50 non-biased materials, the
correlation between response time and modifier frequency
strengthened to -.37 (p < .01) and that between response
time and head frequency strengthened to -.38 (p < .01).
Conversely, the predictive value of strength was greatest for
those materials with high strength values. When considering
only the 50 materials in the PBIAS and PCONTROL conditions,
the correlation between the head strength ratio and response
time strengthened to -.51 (p < .01). For the CBIAS and
CCONTROL materials, the correlation between strength and
response time was not significant (r = -.10, p = .48).
These analyses indicate that past experience of both the
head and modifier is important during the comprehension
process. The frequency of both constituents correlated
significantly with response time, particularly in the absence
of a suggestive head bias. However, the degree of
correlation between head strength and response time was
greatest for combinations with higher strength values. This
again suggests that the influence exerted by the head’s
relation type distribution is greatest for combinations where
the instantiated relation is one that is strongly suggested by
the head’s relation type bias.
We fitted a stepwise regression model using the predictor
variables of head strength ratio, familiarity, head frequency,
plausibility and modifier frequency as well as the data from
all 100 experimental items. The four variables that entered
into the model were head strength, plausibility, familiarity
and head frequency and the resulting multiple correlation
was .57. The standardized regression coefficients for these
variables were -.35 (p < .01), -.25 (p < .01), -.22 (p = .02)
and -.21 (p = .02) respectively. This supports our hypothesis
that the head noun exerts an important influence on those
combinations for which it is particularly suggestive.

General Discussion
These results are consistent with some aspects of the
CARIN theory in so far as they support the notion that
interpretation is influenced by relation type distribution. The
observed patterns in response time are in keeping with
CARIN’s assertion that it easier to determine whether a
phrase makes sense if it involves a relation that is highly
available. However, several refinements to the theory are
required in order to account for the role of the head noun.
The results clearly contradict CARIN’s principle that the
head noun has little or no effect on relation availability,
thereby undermining the notion of modifier primacy. The
finding that both constituents of a combination have equal
potential to influence comprehension challenges the view

that modifiers have certain
determining the relation.

semantic

privileges

in

Lack of Prior Evidence
No previous studies have revealed a facilitating influence
exerted by the head’s relation type distribution. We believe
that this may have been due in part to the experimental
materials used and in part to the relation distributions
derived using these materials. Whereas we purposely
selected the most biased heads for our experiment, Gagné
and Shoben’s (1997) method was far less selective in that it
applied the highest frequency relations of an arbitrary set of
heads. The relative strength of these highest frequency
relations was not subject to any criterion. As a result, the
majority of Gagné and Shoben’s heads are not associated
with highly dominant relations. Taking BNC frequencies
into account, only four of them actually meet our criteria for
sufficient bias (magazine, equipment, crisis and scandal). If
our hypothesis that only the most predictive heads exert an
influence is accurate, then this may have contributed to the
lack of an effect.
Another reason for the discrepancy may be due to the fact
that the influence of the head was not assessed
independently. Conditions of high modifier strength were
combined with conditions of low head strength and vice
versa, with the influence of one condition potentially
obscuring that of the other. Furthermore, we have reason to
believe that predictive heads may be far rarer than predictive
modifiers, an inequality that would consequently be
exacerbated by a random sample of materials. Our reasoning
is as follows: the concept denoted by a particular sense of a
head noun is of some ontological category which is also
therefore the ontological category of the entire combination.
This category is generally open to modification along many
dimensions as the concept has many features with default
values. On the other hand, while a modifier noun also
denotes a concept of some ontological category, that
concept can serve as a fitting value for only a limited
number of modifying dimensions and will typically modify
those same dimensions in a wide variety of head nouns.
For example, if we consider a noun such as garden, any
aspect of the garden concept can be potentially modified,
including what grows in the garden, what the garden is used
for, where it is located etc. However, when garden is used
as a modifier, it can be employed in a more limited number
of ways. Its usage signifies that the head concept is related
to gardens in some way, and the possible variations on this
relation are fewer. For most nouns, the number of
dimensions in which they can be modified will be
considerably greater than the number of dimensions for
which they can serve as modifiers. Moreover, a wide range
of head nouns will be modified in a similar way by the same
modifier. As a result, it is relatively easy to find modifying
nouns with skewed relation type distributions but harder to
find head nouns with skewed distributions. In a random
sample, the few head nouns that might markedly reveal such

1389

a tendency are likely to be outnumbered by others that will
not, hence diminishing the effect observable by experiment.
This phenomenon has repercussions for relation type
distributions that are derived from arbitrary pairings as it
implies that such a technique will be less successful at
revealing the natural combinatorial tendencies of heads than
those of modifiers. The greater flexibility of head nouns
means they have a greater potential to be modified in ways
that are simultaneously sensible yet unnatural. As a result,
predictive heads will often need to be paired with a precise
domain of modifiers in order to reveal their bias. Predictive
modifiers, on the other hand, are more likely to reveal their
bias in arbitrary pairings because of their ability to modify
the same slot in a wide variety of head nouns, regardless of
the nature of the head concept.
As an example let us consider one of our predictive head
materials, soup. The BNC reveals that 93% of the time, this
head combined with a modifier referring to what the soup
contained. However, if we look at the pairings of soup with
Gagné and Shoben’s 91 modifiers we notice that in order for
the <has> relation to emerge, soup must be paired with a
modifier that denotes a food substance. Since only 12 of
Gagné and Shoben’s modifiers fall into this category, soup
gets a far lower weighting for the <has> relation than we
would expect. Additionally, when we consider the other
sensible combinations that emerge, we see that other
features of the soup concept are affected, resulting in
modifications that are unrepresentative of its typical usage
as a head. Thus we find combinations such as party soup,
home soup, office soup, family soup, and student soup.
These uncharacteristic modifications give soup a
misleadingly high weighting for the <located> and <for>
relations. The use of arbitrary pairings means that the
emergent distributions are strongly influenced by relation
type biases among the set of modifiers and hence the only
biased heads that can be reliably detected using this
technique are those that have features with particularly
versatile domains such as book or magazine.

noun in the lexicon would be excessively inefficient and,
given our finding that only heads with the greatest bias
influenced response time, it seems plausible that speakers
might only be aware of the clearest distinctions in a noun’s
relation type distribution.

Conclusion
Experiment has shown that the ease of comprehension of a
conceptual combination is influenced by the relation type
distribution of heads that are particularly suggestive of the
instantiated relation. This finding contradicts one of the
central tenets of the CARIN theory, challenging the notion
that modifiers enjoy certain semantic privileges in
determining the relation (Gagné & Shoben, 1997). On the
other hand, we found no influence on comprehension when
the instantiated relation contradicted the head’s bias and
correlation analyses between response time and the head
strength ratio were only significant for the positively biased
condition. This suggests that the foremost influence of the
head’s relation type distribution is to speed up
interpretations under the presence of an extremely dominant
relation.
While our study has shown that the head noun can
influence ease of comprehension, it is possible that in
general, modifiers are better predictors of the relation. The
discrepancy between the modifier’s modifying potential and
the head’s potential to be modified means that biased
modifiers are far more common than biased heads, and the
greater predictive value of the modifier in general may
explain why Gagné and Shoben’s (1997) random sample of
heads and modifiers revealed an influence for the modifier’s
relation type distribution but not for the head. This
asymmetry in the predictive potential of both constituents is
an interesting phenomenon that may reveal much about the
process of conceptual combination.

References

Modifier Influence

Corley, S., Corley, M., Keller, F., Crocker, M. W. &
Trewin, S. (2001). Finding syntactic structure in unparsed
corpora: The Gsearch corpus query system. Computers
and the Humanities, 35, 81-94.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 71-87.
Levi, J. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of Complex
Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Maguire, P. & Cater, A. (2004). Is conceptual combination
influenced by word order? Proceedings of the 42nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Storms, G. & Wisniewski, E. J. (in press) Does the order of
head noun and modifier explain response times in
conceptual combination? Memory and Cognition.
Tagalakis, G. & Keane, M. T. (2003). Modeling the
understanding of noun-noun compounds: The role of
familiarity. Proceedings of the European Cognitive
Science Conference.

While we uncovered a non-linear relationship between the
degree of head influence and head strength, it is unclear
whether the same pattern applies to modifier influence.
Gagné and Shoben (1997) dichotomized relation
frequencies as high or low and as a result, information about
differences in frequencies was lost, making it difficult to tell
whether the influence of the modifier extends linearly across
all modifier strength values. We propose that only the
relation distributions of extremely biased constituents
feature in the comprehension process, since less evident
distributional variations would be of little predictive value.
Consequently, while the CARIN model assumes that the
relation distribution of every relation is stored separately for
every single noun, we propose that people encode only that
information which is likely to be of benefit during
interpretation, specifically those distributions that are
particularly biased. Storing separate distributions for every
1390

