UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding the Unconscious Brain: Evidence for Non-Linear Information Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mv488f1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bosch, Peggy
Hugdahl, Kenneth
van den Noort, Maurits

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding the Unconscious Brain: Evidence for Non-Linear Information
Processing
Maurits van den Noort (Maurits.Noort@psybp.uib.no)
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Jonas Lies vei 91
Bergen, N-5009 Norway

Peggy Bosch (Pbosch@online.no)
Department of Psychiatry and Clinical Medicine, Sandviksleitet 1
Bergen, N-5035 Norway

Kenneth Hugdahl (Hugdahl@psybp.uib.no)
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Jonas Lies vei 91
Bergen, N-5009 Norway

Abstract
Neuroimaging techniques have made breakthroughs in the
field of conscious emotional processing possible. However,
people process most emotional information at an unconscious
level and this influences our daily life (Van den Noort, 2003).
These unconscious processes still remain a great mystery.
What are the limits of unconscious information processing?
Neuroimaging- and skin conductance studies will be
discussed to answer this question.
Keywords: unconscious; emotions; information processing;
non-linear; consciousness.

Unconscious Information Processing
Emotions are the very center of human mental life.
Emotions are those processes, which “establish,
maintain, change, or terminate the relation between the
person and the environment on matters of significance to
the person” (Campos et al., 1994).
In the late seventies, the cognitive approach to emotion
was more or less the only approach. This started to change
with the publication of the paper “Feeling and Thinking:
Preferences Need No Inferences” by Robert Zajonc (1980).
He argued, on the basis of logic and clever experiments, that
emotion can exist before and without cognition.
Much of contemporary psychology has come to recognize
that a great deal of human emotional functioning is rooted in
unconscious processes. During the last two decades, a lot of
studies were conducted in this field. These studies, for
example, showed that humans pick up the emotional content
of facial expressions outside conscious awareness and intent
to influence perceptions of the target individual (Baldwin,
Carrell & Lopez, 1990; Murphy & Zajonc, 1993;
Niedenthal, 1990; Niedenthal & Cantor, 1986). Other
studies showed that humans evaluate objects (as for
example “good” or “bad”) at an unconscious level (Bargh et
al., 1992; Bargh et al., 1996).
In the famous experiment by Chen and Bargh (1999) half
of the participants were instructed to push a lever away from

them if the presented stimulus word was evaluated as
positive (incongruent). They were also instructed to pull the
lever toward them if the stimulus word was negatively
evaluated (incongruent). The other half of the participants
received the opposite instructions. As can be seen in the first
row of Table 1, people were significantly faster to respond
to positive words when they were pulling the lever
(congruent) than pushing the lever (incongruent), and faster
to respond to negative words when they were pushing
(congruent) rather than pulling the lever (incongruent).
In a second experiment, the conscious goal to evaluate the
stimuli was removed, half the participants had to push and
half had to pull the lever as quickly as possible when the
word appeared, in a straight reaction-time task. As can be
seen in the second row of Table 1, those pushing the lever
were faster for negative (congruent) than for positive stimuli
(incongruent), and those pulling the lever were faster for
positive (congruent) than for negative (incongruent) stimuli,
even though in the second experiment no evaluation was
asked.

2254

Table 1: Mean reaction time by congruency.
Congruent
1683a
679a

Incongruent
1950b
688b

Current theories of emotion suggest that stimuli are first
processed via an automatically engaged neural mechanism,
which occurs outside conscious awareness. This mechanism
operates in conjunction with a slower and more
comprehensive process that allows a detailed evaluation of
the potentially harmful stimulus (LeDoux, 1996; Liddell et
al., 2004).
The conclusion can be drawn that unconscious emotional
processing happens all the time and has direct behavioral
consequences. Until now, these unconscious processes
remain a great mystery. What are the limits of unconscious
information processing? (Van den Noort, 2004a)

Non-Linear Information Processing
To answer this question, data will be presented from several
skin conductance- and neuroimaging (fMRI and ERP)
studies.

Skin conductance studies
Skin conductance is a frequently used measurement
technique in research on emotions. Skin conductance is an
electrical measurement of the minute amounts of sweat
being produced by the skin. It indicates changes in the
autonomic nervous system, which in turn indicate emotional
changes (Oatley & Jenkins, 1996).
In
psychophysiological research on emotions,
“emotional” or “calm” stimuli are presented to participants
while psychophysiological measures are continuously
monitored. The calm pictures include, for example, pastoral
scenes and neutral household objects, and the emotional
pictures include, for example, erotic and violent scenes
(Radin, 1997). The dependent variable in all these studies is
the post-stimulus response.
Interestingly, Radin (1997) found that the baseline level of
skin conductance preceding highly emotional stimuli was
higher than the baseline level preceding calm stimuli. He
used a computer to randomly select and present target
photos from a pool of digitized photographs. In this
experiment, as discussed before, the calm pictures included
pastoral scenes and neutral household objects, and the
emotional pictures included erotic and violent scenes. In
these prestimulus studies, the presentation of emotional and
neutral stimuli was randomized with replacement so that
each trial was completely independent of the previous ones.
Four different experiments were conducted in which 31
participants were involved and 1060 target photos were
presented. The results, as can be seen in Figure 1, showed
an expecting orienting response after the target photo was
displayed. Moreover, there was a significant prestimulus
effect that peaked with a four standard error difference in
physiological measures between extreme and calm targets,
one second before the target photo was displayed.

In replication studies, the same general results were found.
Again, the baseline level of skin conductance preceding
highly emotional stimuli was higher than the baseline level
preceding calm stimuli (Van den Noort, 2003).
Interestingly, non-linear information processing was not
only found in experiments by using visual material, but also
in a study by using auditory stimuli. In this experiment,
stimulus type was determined just before presentation by a
true random generator. 125 participants heard 20 stimuli per
session with a 50% chance of an auditory stimulus or a
silent control. The dependent variable was the proportions
of 3-second epochs prior to audio and control stimuli in
which a skin conductance response, that is a minimum in
skin conductance followed by a maximum, occurred. A
significant effect was found (N = 125, Z-score (Z) = 3.27),
effect size (ES) = 0.09 +/- 0.03, p < .006) (Van den Noort,
2004b).

FMRI study

Figure 1: Results from a skin conductance experiment.
The baseline level of skin conductance preceding highly
emotional stimuli was significantly higher than the
baseline level preceding calm stimuli (Radin 1997).

Bierman and Scholte examined the neural substrates of
anticipation in conjunction with fMRI (Bierman & Scholte,
2002; Van den Noort, 2003). A comparison of erotic and
violent material in the earlier studies suggested that there
might be different time courses for these different types of
emotions.
In the experiment, a 1.5 Tesla Siemens system was used.
Ten participants (6 male, 4 female) entered the study. Each
participant first got an MPRAGE high resolution scan which
lasted for about 20 minutes. The task instruction was given
outside of the scanner. Then, a position localizer scan of
about 2 minutes was conducted after which the experimental
task of about 13 minutes was presented. The participants
were instructed to relax while passively looking at the
pictures that were randomly presented by a computer
connected to a video projector onto a screen. The
participants were able to watch the screen by looking at a
mirror inside the scan. They were requested to try to forget
any emotional material right after exposure finished so that
the next presentation would be influenced as little as
possible by the previous one. The stimulus material
consisted of a picture pool of 36 emotional (18 erotic, 18
violent) and 48 neutral stimuli. The neutral and violent
stimuli were taken from the International Affective Picture
System (Ito, Cacioppo & Lang, 1998) while the erotic
material was taken from a previous study on sexuality by
Laan (Laan et al., 1994). For each stimulus presentation, the
stimulus condition was determined randomly with a priori
chance of 2 neutral versus 1 emotional. Each stimulus
sequence started with the 4.2 second presentation of a
fixation point during which the anticipation was measured.
After the exposure of the stimulus picture, which also lasted
4.2 seconds, there was a period of 8.4 seconds during which
the participant was supposed to recover from the stimulus
presentation. Data were analyzed using Brainvoyager. The
main hypothesis of the study was, whether a prestimulus
difference in BOLD signal could be found (Van den Noort,
2003).
The poststimulus results showed whole visual cortex
activation, which could be expected because visual stimuli
were used. Interestingly, all the regions of interest resulting

2255

from the contrast analysis, showed a response for all stimuli
(including the calm pictures). An exception to this was the
subcortical region close to the amygdala. Both erotic and
violent pictures showed a response there. The fact that erotic
stimuli have impact on the BOLD signal from the amygdala
is in line with results from Everitt (1990), who found
dramatic change in sexual behavior after lesion of the
amygdala in rats. Moreover, the amygdala plays an
important role in most brain-referenced theories of emotion
(Cacioppo, Gardner & Berntson, 1999; Damasio, 1994;
Davidson, Scherer & Goldsmith, 2003; Gallagher & Chiba,
1996; Gray & McNaughton, 1996; LeDoux, 1996; Zajonc,
1998).

period for future calm versus emotional pictures at both FP1
(left frontopolar; tsum = -28.82, p < .05) and FP2 (right
frontopolar; tsum = -27.27, p < .05) EEG sites. The ERPs for
a future emotional stimulus were more negative, with the
point of maximum negativity occurring slightly before that
of the ERPs for the future calm pictures. In addition, there
was a positive shift with a steep slope observed
approximately 4 seconds before the emotional stimuli. In
both locations, this positive shift in the emotional trial ERP
occurred approximately a second before the shift occurred
in the calm trial ERPs. There was a significant tsum
difference between the prestimulus ERPs for calm versus
emotional trials at midline EEG site Pz (tsum = -13.24, p <
.05). Because of the significant findings at FP1 and FP2, an
additional RPA of the EOG channel was conducted, which
revealed that eye movement artifacts did not contribute to
this result (Van den Noort, 2004b).

Discussion

Figure 2: Results from an fMRI experiment. There is a
significant difference in the prestimulus phase between
highly emotional (pink curve) and neutral stimuli (blue
curve) 4 seconds before stimulus presentation.

In this paper, data was presented that suggest the existence
of non-linear human information processing, however, more
research on this topic is needed.
In future research it would be interesting to replicate the
ERP study in the fMRI scanner. Combined recording could
give us more direct information on the exact time-window
and location of the brain activation. In addition, the same
experimental set-up can be used in an experiment with
simultaneous fMRI and skin conductance recording
(Williams et al., 2000; Williams et al., 2001). The great
advantage of simultaneous fMRI and skin conductance
recording, is that it could give us more insights in the exact
interplay between brain activation and skin conductance
response.
Moreover, it would be interesting to test the existence of
non-linear information processing by using other
experimental paradigms like the gambling paradigm
(Bechara et al., 1994; Bechara et al., 1997). In this
paradigm, skin conductance is measured just before
participants take a winning or losing card from one of four
randomized decks of cards. These decks are designed in
such a manner that they are advantageous in the long run.
The goal of the study is to examine if participants’
physiology, reflects learned, unconscious knowledge about
the decks before the participants are consciously aware that
the decks are biased (Bechara & Damasio, 2002; Bechara,
Dolan & Hindes, 2002).
It is obvious, that if the skin conductance- and
neuroimaging results can be repeated with other
methodological paradigms as well; this would highly
support the hypothesis of non-linear information processing
in the human brain. Therefore, it is important to exclude all
methodological issues that could perhaps explain this
phenomenon. With respect to this, replication studies with
other methodological paradigms can be very helpful.

The analysis of the prestimulus phase showed a significant
prestimulus effect that was widely distributed over many
brain regions, including hippocampus, pallidus, amygdala,
and caudate nucleus. Most brain regions did not show
striking differences in anticipation before emotional and
neutral stimuli. However, larger anticipatory activation
preceding emotional stimuli compared to neutral stimuli
was found in the right amygdala and in the caudate nucleus.
For the male participants, as can be seen in Figure 2, this
appeared before the erotic stimuli while for the female both
erotic and violent stimuli produced this prestimulus effect
(Van den Noort, 2003).

ERP study
The same experimental set-up as in the skin conductance
and in the fMRI-studies was used for the ERP study
(McCraty et al., 2004). 26 adult participants, 11 males, 15
females, participated in the experiment. Each participant
was fitted with an EEG electrode cap according to the
International 10-20 system. An additional electrode for
recording the electrooculogram (EOG) was placed above the
right eye to monitor eye blinks and movement. Data editing
was blind to stimulus category (calm or emotional targets).
Data processing and statistical analysis used DADISP,
MATLAB and SPSS. Results for the group as a whole
showed a significant difference in ERPs in the prestimulus
2256

General Discussion
Given the effect of non-linear information processing, the
question arises as to what functions it serves. A possible
consequence of non-linear information is to predispose the
individual’s behavior toward positive objects and away
from negative ones when the conscious mind is otherwise
occupied (Van den Noort, 2004c). In other words, it might
be an old evolutionary mechanism that humans share with
other species. Humans slowly ascended from lower life
forms to what we are today (Darwin, 1871). Therefore, if
unconscious non-linear information processing is an old
evolutionary mechanism, then other species should have this
same mechanism.
So far, little scientific research on animal non-linear
information processing has been done. At the elementary
level of biologic organization, cellular structures appear to
have immediate knowledge of remote actions in the system,
thereby enabling the emergence of spontaneous long-range
cooperative organization in bio-molecules and membranes
(Hameroff, 1987), in dendritic networks of cortical neurons
(Shepherd et al., 1985), and in colonies of single-celled
organisms such as bacteria (BenJacob et al., 2000). At the
level of multicellular organisms, a prestimulus response has
been experimentally demonstrated in earthworms (Wildey,
2001). However, more scientific research on higher levels of
life is definitely needed (Van den Noort, 2004b). These
future studies on animals can perhaps explain the
observations that were done directly after the large Asia
earthquake last year? According to Wildlife officials in Sri
Lanka, thousands of people perished in the quake and tidal
wave catastrophe, but strange enough, almost no dead
animals were found on the island nation (Bedi, 2004).

References
Baldwin, M. W., Carrell, S. E., & Lopez, D. F. (1990).
Priming relationship schemas: My advisor and the Pope
are watching me from the back of my mind. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 26, 435-454.
Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Govender, R., & Pratto, F. (1992).
The generality of the automatic attitude activation effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 893912.
Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Raymond, P., & Hymes, C.
(1996). The automatic evaluation effect: Unconditionally
automatic attitude activation with a pronunciation task.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 104-128.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50, 7-15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(1997). Deciding advantageous before knowing the
advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293-1295.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, H. (2002). Decision-making and
addiction (part I): impaired activation of somatic states in
substance dependent individuals when pondering
decisions
with
negative
future
consequences.
Neuropsychologia, 40, 1675-1689.
2257

Bechara, A., Dolan, S., & Hindes, A. (2002). Decisionmaking and addiction (part II): myopia for the future or
hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia, 40, 16901705.
Bedi, R. (2004). No ark needed for flood in Asia. The
Washington Times.
Ben-Jacob, E., Cohen, I., & Levine, H. (2000). Cooperative
self-organization of microorganisms. Advances In
Physics, 49, 395-554.
Bierman, D. J., & Scholte, H. S. (2002). Anomalous
anticipatory brain activation preceding exposure of
emotional and neutral pictures. Toward a Science of
Consciousness IV, Tucson, USA.
Cacioppo, J. T., Gardner, W. L., & Berntson, G. G. (1999).
The affect system has parallel and integrative processing
components: Form follows function. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 839-855.
Campos, J. J., Mumme, D. L., Kermoian, R., & Campos, R.
G. (1994). A functionalist perspective on the nature of
emotion. In N. A. Fox (Ed.), The development of emotion
regulation: Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59, 284-303.
Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Nonconscious approach
and avoidance behavioral consequences of the automatic
evaluation effect. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 25, 215-224.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason,
and the human brain. New York: Grosset/Putnam.
Darwin, C. (1871). The Descent of Man and Selection in
Relation to Sex. London: J. Murray.
Davidson, R. J., Scherer, K. R., & Goldsmith, H. H. (2003).
Handbook of affective sciences. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Everitt, J. W. (1990). Sexual motivation: A neural and
behavioral analysis of the mechanisms underlying
appetitive and copulatory responses of male rats.
Neuroscience Behavioral Review, 14, 217-232.
Gallagher, M., & Chiba, A. A. (1996). The amygdala and
emotion. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 6, 221-227.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (1996). The
neuropsychology of anxiety: Reprise. Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, 43, 61-134.
Hameroff, S. R. (1987). Ultimate Computing: Biomolecular
Consciousness and Nanotechnology. Amsterdam: North
Holland Press.
Ito, T. A., Cacioppo, J. T., & Lang, P. J. (1998). Eliciting
affect using the International Affective Picture System:
Bivariate evaluation and ambivalence. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 855-879.
Laan, E., Everaerd, W., Bellen, G., & Hanewald, G. (1994).
Women’s sexual and emotional responses to male- and
female-produced erotica. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 23,
153-170.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Liddell, B. J., Williams, L. M., Rathjen, J., Shevrin, H., &
Gordon, E. (2004). A Temporal Dissociation of
Subliminal versus Supraliminal Fear Perception: An
Event-related Potential Study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16, 479-486.

McCraty, R., Atkinson, M., & Bradley, R. T. (2004).
Electrophysiological Evidence of Intuition. The Journal
of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 10, 325336.
Murphy, S. T., & Zajonc, R. B. (1993). Affect cognition,
and awareness: Affective priming with optimal and
suboptimal stimulus exposures. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 64, 723-739.
Niedenthal, P. M. (1990). Implicit perception of affective
information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
26, 505-527.
Niedenthal, P. M., & Cantor, N. (1986). Affective responses
as guides to category-based influences. Motivation and
Emotion, 10, 217-231.
Oatley, K., & Jenkins, J. M. (1996). Understanding
Emotions. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Radin, D. I. (1997). Unconscious perception of future
emotions: An experiment in presentiment. Journal of
Scientific Exploration, 11, 163-180.
Van den Noort, M. W. M. L. (2003). The Unconscious
Brain: The Relative Time and Information Theory of
Emotions. Oegstgeest: Citadel.
Van den Noort, M. W. M. L. (2004a). Unconscious
information processing of emotions: Non-linear
processing. 10th Annual Meeting of the Organization for
Human Brain Mapping, Budapest, Hungary.
Van den Noort, M. W. M. L. (2004b). Unconscious
information processing of emotions: Non-linear

processing. 28th International Congress of Psychology,
Beijing, China.
Van den Noort, M. W. M. L. (2004c). Unconscious
information processing of emotions: Non-linear
processing. International Journal of Psychology, 39, 6970.
Wildey, C. R. (2001). Biological Response to Stimulus.
Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, United
States of America.
Williams, L. M., Brammer, M. J., Skerrett, D., Lagopoulos,
J., Rennie, C., Kozek, K., Olivieri, G., Peduto, A., &
Gordon, E. (2000). The neural correlates of orienting: An
integration of fMRI and skin conductance orienting
response. NeuroReport, 11, 3011-3015.
Williams, L. M., Phillips, M. L., Brammer, M. J., Skerrett,
D., Lagopoulos, J., Rennie, C., Bahramali, H., Olivieri,
G., David, A. S., Peduto, A., & Gordon, E. (2001).
Arousal Dissociates Amygdala and Hippocampal Fear
Responses: Evidence from Simultaneous fMRI and Skin
Conductance Recording. NeuroImage, 14, 1070-1079.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences
need no inferences. American Psychologist, 35, 151-175.
Zajonc, R. B. (1998). Emotions. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, &
G. Lindzey (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology.
Boston: McGrawHill.

2258

