UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Cognition in Microscopy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9sk6d4dd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Chariker, Julia H.
Fell, Ronald D.
Pani, John R.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Cognition in Microscopy
John R. Pani (jrpani@louisville.edu)

Julia H. Chariker (julia.chariker@louisville.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA

Ronald D. Fell (rfell@louisville.edu)

Department of Biology, University of Lousiville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA
Abstract

Keywords: visual cognition; expertise; microscopy;
perception; reasoning; scientific reasoning; education; skill.

viewing, at high magnification, thin slices that have been
removed from the tissue, chemically fixed, and stained to
emphasize a variety of structures.
Microanatomy concerns the primary types of cell (e.g.,
nerve, gland, fat, and muscle), the basic tissues (e.g.,
connective tissue, muscle, and the epithelia), and their
arrangements in the organs and basic structures of the
body (e.g., skin, lung, pancreas, and liver). Students learn
microanatomy from textbooks, a few diagrams, and
illustrative photographs of microscope slides related to
the text and diagrams. At least half of course time (and
much more than half of study time) is devoted to learning
to recognize these structures in microscope slides. This
central role for the microscope continues into the practice
of pathology (Crowley, Naus, Steward, & Friedman,
2003).

Microscopy as a Visual Information System

The Challenge of Microscopy in Histology

Disciplines that seek to maximize human expertise seem
generally to employ visual information systems. A visual
information system, as we will use the term, includes a
domain of visual structure that is constructed purposely to
provide information about a target domain. Very often the
target domain in a visual information system is
inaccessible to observation except through the
information domain. Thus, the discipline of astronomy
depends on telescopes to provide information about extraterrestrial objects, a physician uses EKG to examine a
living heart, air traffic controllers use radar images to
visualize extended traffic patterns, and neuroscientists use
MRI to study the intact brain (e.g., Brooks, Norman, &
Allen, 1991; Hoffman, 1984; Lesgold et al., 1988). Study
of the learning and use of visual information systems
provides a number of opportunities to gain insight into
fundamental properties of cognition. These insights can
be used to aid the development of training techniques in
the various disciplines that depend on visual information
systems.
We report here two studies aimed at understanding the
use of microscopy in histology. Histology is the
microanatomy of biological tissue (e.g., Ross, Kaye, &
Pawlina, 2003). It is a core course in both the biological
and medical curricula, and it is essential to the study and
practice of pathology. The discipline of histology depends
on the use of microscopes. Knowledge of highly complex
three-dimensional tissues is obtained by

The challenge in interpreting microscope slides depends
in large part on the nature of the mapping between the
target domain and the information domain in this
discipline. First, as illustrated with the sweat gland in
Figure 1, the structure of the visual patterns seen in
microscope slides is generally not the same as the
structure of the whole tissue. The organs and tissues that
form the human body are three-dimensional, but they
must be identified in the microscope with essentially twodimensional sections from their interiors.
A second challenge in microscopy it that the mapping
from target domain to information domain is both manyto-one and one-to-many. Structures that are quite different
can appear to be very similar when a thin slice through
them is the only information about them that is available.
Moreover, many different organs and systems in the
anatomy of an organism can include the same individual
types of structure (e.g., ducts or layers of epithelium). On
the other hand, the same structure can appear in many
different ways in a microscope slide. Different staining
methods can result in different appearances. Tissue
sections can be taken at different orientations to the threedimensional structures, resulting in a variety of twodimensional views. Finally, the position of a section from
a tissue may determine whether a particular structure in
the tissue does or does not appear in the slide.

We can learn a great deal about cognition through the study
of visual information systems – systems in which a domain
of visual information is used to explore a separate target
domain (e.g., telescope images used to explore astronomy).
This study examined a real world task, microscope slide
interpretation, in a complex visual domain, histology.
Histology is a fundamental course in biology and medicine,
and it is central to the practice of pathology. This
investigation demonstrated that identification of
histological structures in a microscope is a challenging task
with large individual differences. It is remarkable for the
degree to which it encourages an integration of visual
knowledge, high level recognition, general (anatomical)
knowledge, and reasoning into a single cognitive skill.

1702

A Model of Cognition in Histology

Blood vessel
not part of
gland.

The development of expertise in histology takes place in
two streams of experience and cognitive representation.
One stream concerns the microscope slides (the
information domain) and the other concerns anatomy and
physiology (the target domain). These streams
increasingly develop into one interconnected knowledge
structure with multiple modes of representation (see van
Someren, et al., 1989). The existence of relatively abstract
structural invariants across the slide and anatomical
domains is an important aid to this integration. For
example, in both an actual pancreas and in a microscope
slide from a pancreas, one finds an interlobular duct and
cuboidal epithelium, and the duct is lined with the
epithelium.
Histological practice includes microscope slides that
must be visually perceived and recognized. Efficiency
demands that the value of visual information is
maximized. That is, what visual recognition can provide,
recall and reasoning need not. On the other hand, the
challenges presented by the mapping between slides and
anatomy in histology determines that visual recognition is
not always successful. When it is not, recall and reasoning
are important for identification.
Within the slide domain, practitioners face several
constraints and develop several types of skill (for related
discussion, see Oliva & Schyns, 1997; Schyns, Goldstone,
& Thibault, 1998). One critical skill is a relatively low
level ability to visually organize and recognize
information, as takes place in normal face perception.
Tissues come to have a characteristic “look”. In addition,
expertise develops for categorical encodings of visual
episodes (one’s lab mate’s pancreas slide) and prototypic
visual configurations (what most pancreas slides have).
These representations include multiple levels of
hierarchical composition, and they can be quite complex.
The representations are also well integrated with the
verbal knowledge that applies to the whole anatomy.
Histologists must be able to talk about what they see. The
development of expertise in the slide domain is carefully
guided (and tested) by the curriculum. All good students
learn to “see” loose connective tissue and to recognize
prototypic cases of “gland”.
Biological tissue is complex, and histology is an exact
science. Recognition of a slide requires that all structures
in the slide fit the proposed anatomical concept, and that
no structure known to be in the anatomical concept is
inconsistent with the structures in the slide. In the general
case, then, identification of a tissue requires model-based
recognition that integrates recognition of individual
structures into a single scene-based interpretation of the
tissue as a whole.
In practice, recognition of parts of a tissue does not
ensure that the whole tissue is immediately or confidently
identified. In such cases, perception gives way to an
integrated process of perception and thinking. This
generally takes the form of hypothesis testing, and it can
be implemented either with knowledge encoded through

Duct not
shown

Figure 1. A Sweat Gland and a Section Through It

Research Method
So little is known about cognition in microscopy that our
work has begun with two interview studies (see Ericsson
& Simon, 1993) with students in the basic undergraduate
course in histology. The intent was to observe a variety of
phenomena that, at a cost of statistical power, would
indicate the nature of the skill as a whole. For a related
study that looked at the development of expertise in
pathology, see Crowley et al. (2003).
Participants in our studies viewed microscope slides
through one head of a two-headed laboratory microscope.
A video camera was aimed through the other head of the
microscope and recorded what the participants saw and
the manner in which they explored the slide. A
microphone attached to the video camera recorded
everything that the interviewers and the participants said.
These studies were rich sources of information in the
form of first hand observation of practice and visual and
auditory recordings of verbal protocols, structured
interviews, and open-ended discussions. So as not to
become lost in a sea of data, we begin by presenting the
fundamental components of a model that has emerged
from the two studies. We then describe the studies,
relating the data to the model.
1703

Method

experience in the slide domain or with knowledge of
anatomy and physiology. In the slide domain, the
practitioner can review the possible interpretations of the
tissue based on knowledge of how tissues look in slides.
In the anatomical domain, the practitioner can attempt to
develop a plausible anatomical interpretation of what
gave rise to the slide. Such reasoning is sometimes spatial
in character and on occasion includes hand gestures.
With reasoning, visual perception of the slide
becomes incorporated into goal-directed search for
structures and evaluation of their consistency with
hypotheses. In these cases, practitioners clearly are using
diagnostic information about tissue. Quite often they look
for visual features that are not at all salient to the
untrained perceiver. Interestingly, what is learned as
diagnostic in the context of a college course can
underestimate the diagnostic information available in
histology.
Whether a microscopist will reason in the slide
domain or the anatomical domain depends on the value of
visual information in leading to an identification of the
tissue. In numerous cases, visual information is
insufficient or even misleading, and the more successful
practitioners are able to introduce anatomical knowledge
in a way that augments or reinterprets the initial response
to the visual information.
The overall cognitive system in histology is a
seamless integration of trained visual organization, high
level recognition, and reasoning in both the slide and
anatomical domains. The integration is aided both by the
common language used for slides and anatomy and by the
abstract spatial invariants that span them.
Practitioners come to ignore the difference between
recognizing a slide and seeing an instance of anatomy.
The slide is a viewpoint on the anatomy, much as one
recognizes an object that is partially occluded. Successful
processes of reasoning lead to model-based recognition of
the slide, so that immediate recognition and reasoningdriven interpretation are not clearly differentiated.

Materials. In Study 1, four histological slides were
viewed through one head of a two-headed laboratory
microscope. A slide from the scalp was expected to be
easy for the students to identify and describe. The scalp is
complex, with numerous intermingled structures.
However, it contains several salient diagnostic structures
(e.g., hair follicles), it was a tissue that the students had
all studied in class, and the stain in this particular slide
was familiar to the students.
A section from a tendon was a simple tissue that all the
students had studied, and the stain was a familiar one.
However, it was expected to be somewhat challenging to
identify, because the collagen fibers that often can be seen
in a tendon were not easy to discriminate in this slide.
A slide of the pancreas showed a tissue that the students
were familiar with, but the stain on this slide was one with
which the students were unfamiliar. The slide was
moderately complex, with several structures to identify.
The epiglottis was a complex tissue that the students
studied but had not seen in a slide. The slide contained
many structures common in other parts of the body, and
the stain was one that was familiar to the students. Correct
identification required knowing a configuration of
structures rather than a single diagnostic characteristic.
Study 2 featured a comparison between tissues
presented in familiar and unfamiliar stains. Participants
first saw the unfamiliar stain of the pancreas presented in
Study 1. That was followed by an unfamiliar stain of the
lung. The relatively easy slide of the scalp then was
presented. The last two slides were stain preparations of
the pancreas and lung that were familiar from the
histology lab.
Procedure. In Study 1, the first session consisted of a
verbal protocol followed by a structured interview. For
the verbal protocol, participants verbalized their thoughts
as they viewed the four slides under the microscope.
Participants were asked to “think aloud” as they viewed
each slide. They were assured that they were not being
tested; instead, the objective was to understand the natural
process of slide reading. They were encouraged to change
focus and magnification as needed, and to follow their
own pace. After the verbal protocol was completed for all
four slides, the structured interview took place. The two
interviewers reviewed a checklist of structures for each
slide and agreed on the structures to be reviewed. Each
slide was viewed under the microscope a second time, and
a series of questions was asked. The majority of questions
referred to structures that had been omitted or
misidentified earlier.
In Study 2, the verbal protocol and structured interview
were combined into a single method. Participants were
encouraged to speak freely. However, identifications were
followed by questions about how the participant had
decided on the identification. Omitted structures were
queried in the same session. Failures at identification
were followed up with requests for best guesses.

Interviews with Students from the First Year
Course in Undergraduate Histology
Participants
In Study 1, five undergraduate students, three females and
two males, participated in two sessions, each lasting
approximately one and one-half hours. All students were
in the pre-medical or pre-dental curricula. Four of the
students had received a grade of A in the course and one
had received a grade of B. All students had completed the
undergraduate course in histology within the previous
year.
In Study 2, participants were eight students enrolled in
the histology course. Six were female and two were male.
Four of the students had received a grade of A on the first
exam, 1 had received a grade of B, and 3 had received a
grade of C.

1704

Results

With its little layers that come apart.
It gives you dandruff, too.
Which is weird that I remember that.
But it’s thin skin.
Because the part that can peel off is relatively thin.
Like if you look at it it contrasts with the palms of your hand.
Where that stratum corneum layer is really thick.

The importance of visual recognition. In Study 1, the
mean time that the participants spent identifying and
describing a tissue ranged from 3 to 7 minutes across the
four slides. The mean time prior to identification of the
whole tissue, or to a decision to give up trying, correlated
closely with the expected level of difficulty. These times
ranged from less than 30 seconds for the scalp to over 5
minutes for the epiglottis. Participants used all available
magnifications to view the tissues and changed
magnification frequently.
A correct identification of whole tissue was made 12
times during the verbal protocol out of the possible 20
identifications (five students looking at four slides). All
five participants identified the scalp. Four identified the
tendon. Two participants identified the pancreas in the
unfamiliar stain. Only one participant was able to identify
the epiglottis during the verbal protocol.
This variation across the four slides clearly
implicated the importance for tissue identification of
familiar visual information. The scalp included salient
diagnostic features in a familiar stain, the tendon was a
simple structure in a familiar stain but included an unclear
presentation of an important feature (collagen fibers). The
pancreas was presented in an unfamiliar stain, and the
epiglottis had not been seen in a slide before.
The importance of familiar visual information was
reinforced in Study 2 by the comparison of identification
for familiar and unfamiliar stain preparations of the same
tissues. Two participants (out of eight) identified the
unfamiliar pancreas without prompting about specific
structures, and 1 participant identified the unfamiliar lung.
In contrast, 5 participants identified the familiar pancreas
without prompting, and all 8 participants identified the
familiar lung easily.

al

P

l

in

sV

sF
tt i

lo
ig

Ep

Ep

ig

lo

tt i

Fi

V

as

as

re

re

nc
Pa

nc
Slide

na

P

l
na
Fi

Pa

nd

on

Te

Te

nd

on

V

na

V

Fi

p
al

p
al
Sc

Sc

P

l

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

P

Proportion of Total Possible Structures

In a coding system developed for the verbal protocol of
Study 1, the participants’ language was expressed in
terms of a minimal set of propositions (elementary
relational statements and their arguments). A system of 38
propositions accounted for all statements across the five
participants. Nearly sixty percent of all propositions used
by the participants referred to structures on the slide. For
example, three percent of propositions asserted that a
structure looked like a given type of structure
(LOOKSLIKE[X,Y]). Fourteen percent of propositions
were associated with reasoning. For example, a little over
two percent of propositions involved contrasting new
information with previous information (CONTRAST).
Almost sixteen percent of propositions were expressions
of prior knowledge. For example, ten percent of
propositions were noun phrases referring to histological
categories.

G eneral L ab el
S pecific L abel

Figure 2. Proportions of Specific and Categorical
Identifications of Structures in Study 1.

Categorical recognition. Tissues were quite often
described at a relatively high taxonomic level. For
example, it was common for participants to quickly label
glands as “glandular” or to refer to a blood vessel without
regard to whether it was an artery, vein, or other type of
vessel. Categorical recognition was most apparent in the
identification of individual structures within the whole
tissue. The proportion of structures correctly identified at
general and specific levels for each slide is presented in
Figure 2. Note that recognition at high taxonomic levels is
often not the best use of information for purposes of
identification (i.e., it can be too general).

Participants’ language almost never differentiated
between the structure in a microscope slide and the
structure of whole anatomy. In those cases where this
clearly might have been done, language for a structure
that had been identified referred to the whole tissue. For
the convoluted tubule at the bottom of Figure 1, for
example, a typical description would refer to “this duct”
rather than to “these bits of duct.”
A second coding system was developed to capture goaldirected cognitive processes. A master list was composed
of the types of elementary cognitive process used to work
toward the goal of identification. The list is presented in
Figure 3. For each participant and each slide, progress
toward identification was then diagrammed using the
listed processes in the order in which they occurred.
The frequencies of the individual types of cognitive
process are presented in Figure 4 for the verbal protocol
in Study 1. The 13 types of cognitive process were
divided into three categories: attempts at recognition,
hypothesis testing, and post-hoc justification. By far the

Discourse about the slides. Coding of student discourse
began with a preparation of written transcripts and a
conversion of these to individual statements. These
corresponded to simple but complete thoughts. For
example:
Because that part is skin.
Yeah, that part’s skin…
1705

most prevalent form of recognition was noting structures
on the slide and then immediately inferring a whole
tissue. This clearly depended, however, on the nature of
the tissue and the slide. The scalp, indeed, was invariably
recognized from hair follicles or the characteristic
epithelial layers in thin skin. In Study 2, however, the
most common response to the familiar lung was
immediate recognition of the whole tissue (7 out of 8
participants). As one student said, “Nothing else looks
like that.”
There were 39 instances of hypothesis testing in Study
1. Of these, there were 13 times when participants
considered confirming evidence and 24 times when
participants considered disconfirming evidence. There
appears to be no confirmation bias in histology. On the
contrary, students were painfully aware that they might be
wrong in their conclusions.

Because that’s the only thing that tendons are real easy to…
Oops there you go you can see it better now.
Not quite like it’s supposed to be but that’s ok.
But like tendons have their nuclei are longer.
And they’re more organized.
And smooth muscle has long nuclei
but they are all in crazy patterns.
And these are sort of organized.

Those students who were able to identify the tissues that
the majority of students could not accomplished this
through reasoning that incorporated anatomical
knowledge. This knowledge allowed transcending the
limitations of the immediate visual information. These
limits were apparent, for example, in the case of the
pancreas presented in the unfamiliar stain. The islets of
Langerhans is a structure in the pancreas that is highly
diagnostic. In Study 1, two students did not notice the
islets and one otherwise very skilled student noticed them
and explicitly rejected them as islets of Langerhans. In
contrast, one of the students who did identify the pancreas
considered the slide to be equally representative of
pancreas and kidney, two tissues that do not look very
much alike. This student enunciated lists of diagnostic
features for both pancreas and kidney but had difficulty
matching them to the visual structures in the slide. A
lengthy process of hypothesis testing generated the
correct answer.
The one student in Study 1 who easily identified all
of the tissues had clear and extensive anatomical
descriptions that were used to interpret the slides. When
this student was asked at the end of the study how he
learned new tissues, he said that he began by mastering
the anatomy of the whole tissue through the descriptions
in the textbook. After that, he went to the microscope and
looked for the structures that he knew should be there.

Incorporation of reasoning. Reasoning about the tissues
took a variety of specific forms, but in general it involved
an evaluation of evidence concerning a hypothesis. In
every instance, the advent of reasoning could be traced to
a problem in using visual information to obtain a
confident interpretation of the whole tissue. In the case of
the tendon, reasoning clearly focused on the visual
features of the tissue as it was manifested in the slide:
It looks kind of like a tendon.
I don’t know if I just don’t have the focus right or maybe I don’t
have the iris right
but you can usually see wavy things on tendons.
But all the nuclei are kind of in lines.
They are sort of orderly.
Which is usually the way tendons do. (High magnification)
But you can usually see the collagen in them better though.
So, that’s kind of weird…
But I don’t think its smooth muscle.

Attempts at Recognition
Immediate recognition of whole tissue
Recognition of one or more parts; Immediate inference of whole tissue
Recognition of one or more parts; Immediate inference of high-level category
List a set of features; infer a structural form
List one or more parts; Search memory for matching description
List one or more parts; No further action
Hypothesis Testing
Generate Hypothesis: Confirm: Find structures consistent with hypothesis
Generate Hypothesis: Confirm: Search for inconsistent features
Generate Hypothesis: Disconfirm: Absence of consistent structure
Generate Hypothesis: Disconfirm: Presence of inconsistent structure
Use confirmation/disconfirmation to weigh two alternatives
Post-hoc Justification
Post hoc justification: Confirm: Presence of consistent structure
Post hoc justification: Disconfirm: Presence of inconsistent structure
Figure 3. Master List of Cognitive Processes Used in Goal-Directed Cognition

1706

Discussion

Successful identification of histological structures in a
microscope is remarkable for the degree to which it
depends on an integration of visual knowledge, high-level
recognition, general (anatomical) knowledge, and
reasoning. As expertise develops, practice does not
clearly differentiate between seeing and thinking or
between slides and the anatomy that they indicate.

In histology, there are differences in structure between
what is visible in microscope slides and what is known
about the whole tissue. Moreover, the mapping from
tissue to slides is many-to-one and one-to-many. As a
consequence, identification of biological tissue in a
microscope is often challenging, and individual
differences among student practitioners are large.
18
16
14
Frequency

12
10
8
6
4
2

Im
m

ed
In
.R
fe
ec
rW
og
ho
n.
l
e
Hi
Ti
gh
ss
-L
ue
ev
el
Ca
St
ru
teg
ctu
.
ra
lF
Se
or
ar
ch
m
M
em
or
y
Li
st
Co
Pa
nf
rts
:P
re
se
Co
n
nf
: A ce
Di
bs
sc
en
on
ce
f:
Ab
Di
sc
se
on
nc
e
f:
Pr
es
W
en
ei
gh
ce
Tw
o
Po
Al
stt.
ho
Po
c:
stCo
ho
nf
c:
.
D
isc
on
f.

0

Cognitive Processes

Figure 4. Frequencies of the Elementary Cognitive Processes
Hoffman, R. R. (1984). Methodological preliminaries to
the development of an expert system for aerial-photointerpretation. (Technical Report, ETL-0342). The
Engineer Topographic Laboratories.
Lesgold, A. M., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R.,
Klopfer, D., & Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a
complex skill: diagnosing x-ray pictures. In M. T. H.
Chi, R. Glaser, & M. J. Farr (Eds.), The nature of
expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oliva, A. & Schyns, P.G. (1997). Coarse blobs or fine
edges? Evidence that information diagnosticity changes
the perception of complex visual stimuli. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 72-107.
Ross, M. H., Kaye, G. I., & Pawlina, W. (2003).
Histology: A text and atlas (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Schyns, P. G., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibault, J-P. (1998).
The development of object features in object concepts.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-54.
van Someren, M. W., Reimann, P., Boshuizen, H. P. A.,
& de Jong, T. (Eds.). (1989). Learning with multiple
representations. New York: Pergamon.

Acknowledgment
The authors were supported by grant 1 R01 LM00832301A1, Histological Reasoning: Visual Cognition in
Microanatomy, from the National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, during completion of this
work and preparation of this manuscript.

References

Brooks, L. R., Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991).
Role of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 120,
278-287.
Crowley, R. S., Naus, G. J., Stewart, J., & Friedman, C. P.
(2003). Development of visual diagnostic expertise in
pathology: An information processing study. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association, 10, 3951.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol
analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.

1707

