UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Hand Primes and Manipulable Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8tp3c6hz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Bonfigliolo, Claudia
Borghi, Anna M.
Lugli, Luisa
et al.

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Hand Primes and Manipulable Objects
Anna M. Borghi (annamaria.borghi@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, Viale Berti Pichat, 5
Bologna, 40127 Italy

Claudia Bonfiglioli (claudia.bonfiglioli@unitn.it)

Department of Cognitive Science and Education, Via Matteo del Ben, 5
Rovereto (Trento), 38068 Italy

Luisa Lugli (lugli@dsc.unibo.it)

Department of Communication Disciplines, Via Azzo Gardino, 23
Bologna, 40122 Italy

Paola Ricciardelli (paola.ricciardelli@unitn.it)

Department of Cognitive Science and Education, Via Matteo del Ben, 5
Rovereto (Trento), 38068 Italy

Sandro Rubichi (rubichi@unimo.it)

Department of Social, Cognitive and Quantitative Sciences, via Giglioli Valle, 9
Reggio Emilia, 42100 Italy

Roberto Nicoletti (nicoletti@dsc.unibo.it)

Department of Communication Disciplines, Via Azzo Gardino, 23
Bologna, 40122 Italy

Coslett, Tang, Saffran, Kimberg, Detre, in press; Pecher,
Zeelenberg, & Barsalou, 2003). In line with this account,
various evidence on cortical object representation has been
provided (e.g., Zago, Fenske, Aminoff, & Bar, 2005). In
addition, Martin, Wiggs, Ungerleider, and Haxby (1996)
reported greater activation of left premotor cortex in naming
tools relative to naming animals and in generating action
words to tools. This account leads to the prediction that
manipulable artifacts (e.g., knife) and manipulable natural
kinds (e.g., apple) differ as the first are typically
manipulated for a specific use, the second are not
necessarily associated to a specific function. So, for
example, a hammer is typically used to hammer nails,
whereas a flower does not have such a specific function.
Consistent with this theory is evidence showing that
visual stimuli activate motor information, i.e. seeing an
object re-activate previous action experiences with that
objects. An experiment supporting the view that there is a
strict relationships between specific visual stimuli and
specific motor actions was performed by Craighero, Bello,
Fadiga and Rizzolatti (2002). They instructed participants to
prepare to grasp a bar, which could be oriented either
clockwise or counterclockwise, and to grasp it as fast as
possible on presentation of a visual stimulus. The visual
stimuli were pictures of the right hand as seen in a mirror.
Reaction times (RTs) were faster when there was a
similarity between hand position as depicted in the
triggering visual stimulus and the response position, i.e. the
grasping hand final position. Behavioral studies with
compatibility paradigms, i.e. paradigms implying some kind
of dimensional overlap between stimuli and responses,

Abstract
In three experiments we assessed whether priming a hand
shape activated motor information. Primes consisted of
photographs of hands displaying one of three postures
(precision, power, open hand). Targets consisted of
photographs (Experiment 1 and 3) or words (Experiment 2) of
objects, artifacts and natural kinds, manipulable with a
precision (pencil) or with a power grip (bottle). Participants
had to categorize objects into artifacts or natural kinds by
pressing a different key. They had to respond to target-objects
only when the targets followed the precision and the power
primes, while they didn't have to respond when the targets
followed the open hand (catch-trial). In Experiments 1 and 2,
artifacts were processed slower than natural kinds, and natural
kinds graspable with a power grip were processed faster than
those graspable with a precision grip. These results confirm
that visual primes activate general motor information on
objects. However, only in Experiment 3, in which a motor
training phase lead participants to associate a specific visual
prime with a motor action, we found an interaction between
Kind of Prime (precision, power) and Kind of Grip (precision,
power grip). Results suggest that vision and motor
information are strictly interwoven and support theories
according to which object concepts are grounded in
sensorimotor experience.

Introduction
A recent account of conceptual knowledge suggests that
information is distributed over modality attribute domains
(visual, tactile, auditory, etc.) and that these domains are
more or less activated depending on their relevance during
knowledge acquisition (Barsalou, 1999; Boronat, Buxbaum,
322

chosen artifacts and natural kinds were objects which are
graspable with a precision grip (e.g., pencil, nut), the other
half were objects which are graspable with a power grip
(e.g., bottle, apple).
Procedure Participants sat in front of a computer monitor.
Each trial began with a fixation point (+) displayed on the
monitor for 500 ms. When the fixation cross disappeared,
one of the three hand photographs was displayed. The prime
was followed by the target consisting of the photograph of
one object. When the prime consisted of a hand mimicking a
precision or a power grip, participants had to press a
different key to decide whether the target object was an
artifact or a natural object. When the prime depicted an open
hand (catch-trial), participants had to avoid responding to
the target. Participants received feedback both for correct
and for wrong responses. All stimuli were displayed
centrally on the monitor and randomized. Each object was
seen four times by each participant, each time preceded by a
different hand prime. The experiment consisted of one
practice block of 48 practice trials and of one experimental
block.

indicate that the vision of objects elicits motor information,
related in particular to reaching and grasping movements
(Tucker & Ellis, 1998). For example, participants were
instructed to press a switch mimicking a precision or a
power grip in order to decide whether objects were natural
kinds or artifacts. Results showed they were faster in
responding with a precision grip to both artifacts and natural
kinds objects graspable with a precision grip, such as
pencils and cherries, and faster in responding with a power
grip to objects graspable with a power grip, as for example
hammers and apples (Ellis & Tucker, 2000; Tucker & Ellis,
2001).
Notice that the behavioral studies showing a relationship
between specific visual stimuli and specific motor responses
typically require a preactivation of the motor system. For
example, Craighero et al. asked participants to grasp a bar,
whereas Tucker & Ellis asked them to press a device
mimicking either a precision or a power posture. In our
experiments we chose to avoid pre-activating the motor
system and used a simple categorization task - participants
had to press a different key to decide whether objects
represented by photographs (Experiment 1 and 3) or
referred to by words (in Experiment 2) were artifacts or
natural kinds. All objects were manipulable ones, half were
graspable with a power grip (e.g., apple), and half with a
precision grip (e.g., cherry). The objects were preceded by a
visual prime consisting of a hand mimicking either a power
or a precision grip.
If information on object manipulability is automatically
evoked when seeing objects, particularly when objects are
preceded by a visual hand prime activating information on
grasping, then we predict that:
a. objects which do not imply access to function but only
to action, as natural kinds, should be processed faster than
objects linked to functional information, as artifacts
(Kellenbach, Brett & Patterson, 2003);
b. larger objects should be processed earlier than small
objects as the latter require more time to be manipulated.
In addition, if specific information on how to manipulate
objects is automatically activated when viewing a hand
suggesting a specific kind of grasp, then the response should
be affected by compatibility between the hand posture and
the way in which be object can be grasped, i.e. either with a
precision or with a power grip. Experiment 1

Figure 1: The precision and the power hand grip.

Results
Reaction times more than 2 standard deviations from each
participant's mean were excluded from this analysis and the
analysis of all other experiments reported. Analyses of
errors revealed no evidence of a speed accuracy tradeoff, so
we focused on RTs analyses. In the participants' analysis
correct RTs were entered into a 2x2x2 ANOVA with the
following factors, manipulated within participants: Kind of
Prime (precision, power), Kind of Target (artifact, natural
kind), and Kind of Grip adequate for the target object
(precision grip, power grip).
Responses to natural kinds were 15 msec faster than
responses to artifacts, though results only approached
significance [F(1, 13) = 3.66, MSe = 1743.7, p <.08].
More interestingly, the interaction between Kind of
Target and Grip was significant[F(1, 13) = 8.39, MSe =
477.21, p <.02] (see Figure 2). Newman-Keuls post-hoc
analyses showed that this was due to the fact that with
natural kinds objects graspable with a power grip were
faster than both natural kinds graspable with a precision grip
and all artifacts.

Method
Participants Fourteen students of the University of
Bologna took part in the experiment. All were right-handed
and received course credits for their time.
Materials Digital photographs of a human hand displaying
one of three different postures (precision, power, open hand)
(see Figure 1) and 64 photographs of manipulable objects,
32 artifacts and 32 natural kinds, were selected. All photos
represented objects of the same size, independent from
objects’ real size (for example, apples were smaller and nuts
larger than they are in real life). A special care was taken in
selecting everyday, common and familiar objects. The
majority of the items were taken from the set used by Ellis
and Tucker (2000) and Tucker and Ellis (2001). Half of the
323

Reaction times (msec)

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was an exact replica of Experiment 1 with
verbal rather than with visual stimuli. If the results we find
were similar to that of Experiment 1, we could argue that
also words activate motor information (Borghi, Glenberg &
Kaschak, 2004). In addition, finding activation of motor
information also with words would suggest that it does not
depend only on the direct vision-to-action route, but that
access to conceptual knowledge contributes to explain it.

540
520

pow er grip

500

precision grip

480
460
artifacts

Method

natural kinds

Participants Fourteen students of the University of
Bologna took part in the experiment. All were right-handed.

Kind of Target

Materials The material was the same of Experiment 1. The
only variation introduced were the object photographs
which were substituted by the object names.

Figure 2: Experiment 1. Interaction between Kind of
Target and Kind of Grip.

Discussion

Procedure The procedure was identical to that of
Experiment 1. The only variation consisted in the fact that
the targets consisted of object names rather than
photographs.

The results provide evidence that even with a simple
categorization task, i.e. with a task which does not require a
pre-activation of the motor system, objects primed by a
hand in a grasping posture activate motor information. The
activation of motor information explains the advantage of
natural kinds over artifacts which might be due to the fact
that the latter evoke both manipulation and function
information. A further cause of the longer RTs required by
artifacts is that with artifacts information on manipulation
and on function may differ: for example, a hammer might be
grasped in different ways to be moved and to be used to
hammer a nail. As predicted, objects graspable with a power
grip were processed faster than objects graspable with a
precision grip. It could be argued that the effect is a purely
perceptual one, not linked to manipulation and action: for
example, Kosslyn (1976) has shown that, in a part
verification task with objects’ nouns, large parts were
responded to faster than small ones when participants
formed a mental image of the object before responding.
However, the presence of the effect only with natural kinds
rules out this possible objection: the more plausible
explanation links the effect to the fact that natural kinds
evoke motor information on grasping, while artifacts evoke
also function information. Further controls however are
planned in order to better disentangle this issue.
The absence of the compatibility effect between the Kind
of Prime and the Kind of Grip lead to exclude that a specific
visual prime, i.e. an hand with a specific posture, activates
specific motor information. However, our results provide
evidence that some kind of motor information was activated.
Experiment 2 was aimed to determine whether this
activation was directly evoked by the visual stimuli or
whether it was mediated by conceptual knowledge. In order
to verify this in Experiment 2 instead of photographs we
used words referring to objects. If we find similar effects,
then we can argue that not only visual stimuli but also
object names activate motor information. This would
suggest that the effects found depend on the activation of
conceptual information rather than simply on affordances
(Tucker & Ellis, 2004).

Results

Reaction times (msec)

One participant was eliminated due to a too high number of
errors. As in Experiment 1, the main effect Kind of Target
was significant: natural kinds were responded to 41 msec
faster than artifacts [F(1, 12) = 8.99, MSe = 4924.65, p
<.02]. In addition, objects graspable with a power grip were
19 msec faster than those graspable with a precision grip
[F(1, 12) = 12.53, MSe = 728.17, p <.01]. The advantage of
objects graspable with a power grip over objects graspable
with a precision grip was stronger for natural kinds, as
revealed by the interaction between Kind of Target and Grip
[F(1, 12) = 26.65, MSe = 692.24, p <.001] (see Figure 3).
680
660
640
620
600
580
560
540

pow er grip
precision grip

artifacts

natural kinds

Kind of Target

Figure 3: Experiment 2. Interaction between Kind of
Target and Kind of Grip.
Crucially, also the interaction between Kind of Prime and
Kind of Target was significant, due to the fact that response
times were longer with artifacts names preceded by the
precision prime than by the power prime and than by natural
kind names [F(1, 12) = 5.72, MSe = 3806.71, p <.04] (see
Figure 4).

324

Reaction times (msec)

found between Kind of Prime and Kind of Object found in
Experiment 2 suggests that the prime was processed. The
second explanation is that, even if the visual prime elicited
information concerning manipulability, it was not sufficient
to activate a specific kind of motor information.
Accordingly, even if both visual cues activate general
information related with object “grasping”, each prime did
not evoke a specific kind of grasp, i.e. a precision vs. a
power grasp.
In order to test whether the visual prime alone was not
sufficient to evoke specific manipulation information, in
Experiment 3 we introduced a training phase that preceded
the experiment in which each visual prime was associated
with a specific motor response. During training participants
saw in a random order both the power and the precision
primes, and had to reproduce with both hands the gestures
seen. Our prediction was that, if during the training phase
participants learned to associate a specific visual stimulus
with a specific gesture, then simply seeing the visual
stimulus would automatically activate information on the
specific motor response associated to it.

680
660
640
620

pow er prime

600
580

precision prime

560
540
artifacts

natural

Kind of Target

Figure 4: Experiment 2. Interaction between Kind of Prime
and Kind of Target.

Discussion
The results confirm what found in Experiment 1, showing
that not only seeing but also reading words referring to
everyday objects activates motor information. As in
Experiment 1 natural kinds were processed faster than
artifacts, probably due to the absence of an interference
between motor and function information. In addition,
natural kinds graspable with a power grip were processed
faster than both artifacts and natural kinds graspable with a
precision grip.
This is perfectly consistent with theories assuming that
concepts are grounded in sensorimotor activity (Barsalou,
1999) and with theories and experimental results on
language
comprehension
showing
that,
while
comprehending action sentences, we internally “simulate”
the action described reactivating the real experience
(Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Kaschak, Madden, Therriault,
Yaxley, Aveyard, Blanchard, & Zwaan; Zwaan, 2004). In
this case the object name and the visual prime lead
participants to form an internal simulation of object
grasping. The “simulation” hypothesis is supported by the
effects of prime, which was different for artifacts and
natural kinds. In fact, grasping objects with a precision
prime requires more time. This is true especially for artifacts
as the precision grip is typically used for skilled actions
related to object function (consider for example how we
generally grasp a pencil in order to write with it).

Method
Participants Thirty students of the University of Bologna
took part. All were right-handed.
Materials Materials were the same of Experiment 1. In
addition a list of 30 trials was prepared with 15 photographs
of the hand in the precision posture and 15 of the hand in the
power posture.
Procedure The procedure of the experiment was identical
to that of Experiment 1. The only variation consisted of the
introduction of a training phase. During the training the two
hand photographs displaying the precision and the power
posture were shown in a random order for 15 times each, for
a total of 30 trials. Participants were instructed to reproduce
with both hands the gesture of the photograph on the screen.
An experimenter controlled that participants correctly
performed the task. After the training phase, participants
started the experiment.

Results
The data of one participant were eliminated due to a too
high number of errors. As in the previous experiments, the
main effect Kind of Target was significant: natural kinds
were responded to 24 msec faster than artifacts [F(1, 29) =
9.76, MSe = 3471.33, p <.01]. Also the interaction between
Kind of Target and Kind of Grip was significant in the
participants analysis [F(1, 29) = 7.96, MSe = 4500.84, p
<.01] due the fact that natural kinds objects graspable with a
power grip were faster than natural kind objects graspable
with a precision grip and than artifacts (see Figure 5). As in
Experiment 2, there was an interaction between the Kind of
Prime and the Kind of Concept, which only approached
significance [F(1, 29) = 3.19, MSe = 3879.38, p =.08;]
Again, with artifacts the precision prime was slower than
the power prime, suggesting that information about function
slows down processing. The most interesting result was the

Experiment 3
The rationale behind Experiment 3 was the following. The
first two experiments provided evidence that viewing
objects automatically activates some kind of motor
information. Even though we found clear evidence of the
activation of motor information, we did not find evidence of
specific effects of the two different visual primes, i.e. there
was no compatibility effect between the Kind of Prime and
the Kind of Grip adequate for the target object. Two
explanations are possible. The first is that participants did
not pay enough attention to the prime. However, the very
low percentage of errors made when the catch-trial was
presented rules out this explanation suggesting that
participants processed the prime. Also the interaction we
325

primes were associated during a training phase with two
specific gestures. This suggests that visual primes alone are
not sufficient to evoke motor information of a specific kind,
unless they are combined with a pre-activation of the motor
system.

Reaction times (msec)

expected interaction between Kind of Prime and Kind of
Target [F(1, 29) = 4.05, MSe = 2295.60, p =.05]. (see Figure
6). Post-hoc Newman-Keuls indicated that the interaction
was due to the fact that the power prime followed by a
target graspable with a precision grip required longer RTs
than other cases. The presence of this effect suggests that
participant, due to the training, became sensitive to the
compatibility between the prime and the target. It is not
clear why we did not find a processing disadvantage also for
the other incompatible pair, i.e. the pair given by the
precision prime followed by a target graspable with a power
grip. It may be due to the fact that, even though photographs
referred to objects manipulable either with a precision or
with a power grip, in the photos objects were presented with
a standard size – for example, strawberries are of the same
size as hammers.

General Discussion
The experiments provide evidence of the activation of motor
information. Across 3 experiments we found that the visual
prime activated motor information, i.e. general information
on how to manipulate objects. The processing advantage of
natural kinds over artifacts can be easily accounted for by
theories according to which conceptual knowledge
information is distributed over modality attribute domains.
Namely, whereas natural kinds activate visual and motor
information, artifacts elicit also function information.
Studies on conceptual organization have shown that the
recognition of artifacts depends more on functional features
than the recognition of natural objects (Warrington &
Shallice, 1984). In addition, recent neuropsychological
studies suggest that action and function information might
differ (Buxbaum, Veramonti, & Schwartz, 2000; Kellenbach
et. al, 2003). Thus, longer RTs with artifacts may be due to
the fact that artifacts evoke both manipulation and function
information, and that the two kinds of information may be
dissociated, whereas this is not the case for natural kinds.
An alternative explanation is also possible: Humphreys,
Riddoch and Forde (2002) propose that in categorization
tasks natural kinds are responded faster than artifacts
because of their higher perceptual similarity – an apple and
a flower are more similar to each other than, say, a hammer
and a pencil. However, also in this second case a higher
within category similarity is grounded in the similarity of
possible motor responses.
The faster responses with objects graspable with a power
grip than with objects graspable with a precision grip
represent a further proof of the activation of motor
information, even if this effect was confined to natural
kinds. The result is consistent with the simulation
hypothesis: given that a precision grip requires more time
than a power grip, the same is true when we internally
simulate the grasping action. The striking similarity of the
results obtained with photographs and with words suggests
that the activation of motor information is not directly
evoked by the visual stimuli but it is mediated by conceptual
knowledge. Consistent with this hypothesis is recent
evidence by Creem and Proffitt (2001) who found that
conceptual information was necessary in order to
accomplish appropriate actions with objects. Performing
semantic tasks of different difficulty levels interfered with
the primary task consisting in grasping appropriately objects
with a handle, whereas nonsemantic tasks did not interfere
with the grasping task. This suggests that retrieval of
semantic information about an object is a necessary
component of grasping objects in an appropriate manner. In
line with these results Tucker & Ellis (2004) recently found
affordance compatibility effects between object size and
kind of grip also with object names (see also Pecher &
Zwaan, 2005).

560
540
520

pow er grip

500

precision grip

480
460
artifacts

natural kinds

Kind of Target

Reaction times (msec)

Figure 5. Experiment 3. Interaction between Kind of Target
and Kind of Grip.
560
540
520

pow er prime

500

precision prime

480
460
pow er grip

precision grip

Kind of Grip

Figure 6. Experiment 3. Interaction between Kind of Prime
and Kind of Grip.

Discussion
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggested that priming a
hand shape elicits general motor information on object
manipulability. However, the precision prime and the power
prime did not activate a specific kind of motor information.
Experiment 3 showed that specific information related to the
kind of grip could be activated only when the two visual
326

The described results allow to argue that the visual prime
elicited general information on manipulation both when
targets consisted of objects photographs or of object names.
However, without preactivation of the motor system we did
not find a specific effect of the two different prime postures
on object processing. Only in Experiment 3, in which during
training participants learned to associate the specific visual
primes with specific gestures, they re-activated the gestures
while processing the prime. This is consistent with previous
evidence. For example, Klatzky, Pellegrino, McCloskey, &
Doherty (1989) assessed whether priming a hand shape
facilitated judgments about the sensibility of actions
performed with objects. They found compatibility effects
between 4 postures and action sentences – for example, the
sentence “aim with a dart” was processed faster when
preceded by a pinch posture than by other postures.
Crucially, in Klatzky et. al 's study before the experiment
participants learned to associate the prime, which could be
presented either visually or verbally, to a specific gesture
they had to perform. The different results of Experiment 1
and 2 and of Experiment 3 suggest that in order to activate
specific motor information, i.e. information on the specific
posture to adopt for a given object, it is necessary to preactivate the motor system. This can be done associating a
specific visual stimulus to a specific motor response. An
alternative is possible. In these experiments we chose to
present a visual prime which was not “dynamic”: the hand
was presented in a static, horizontal posture. It is possible
that rendering the visual prime more evocative and dynamic
or manipulating the perspective of the hand prime, as
suggested by a recent study by Vogt, Taylor & Hopkins
(2003), could lead to activate specific motor information
even without a pre-activation of the motor system. Further
experiments are planned in which the visual presentation of
the prime will be manipulated.

and action. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27,1, 218-228.
Ellis, R. & Tucker, M. (2000). Micro-affordance: The
potentiation of components of action by seen objects.
British Journal of Psychology, 91, 451-471.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M.P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,9,
558-565.
Humphreys, G.W., Riddoch, M.J., & Forde, E.M.E. (2002).
The principle of target-competitor differentiation in object
recognition and naming (and its role in category effects in
normality and pathology). In E.M.E. Forde & G.H.
Humphreys (Eds.). Category specificity in brain and
mind. Hove: Psychology Press.
Kellenbach, M.L., Brett, M., & Patterson, K. (2003). The
Importance of Manipulability and Action in Tool
Representation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15,
30-46.
Kaschak, M.P., Madden, C.J., Therriault, D.J., Yaxley,
R.H., Aveyard, M., Blanchard, A.A., & Zwaan, R.A. (in
press). Perception of Motion Affects Language
Processing. Cognition
Klatzky, R.L, Pellegrino, J.W., McCloskey, B.P., &
Doherty, S.(1989). Can you squeeze a tomato? The role of
motor representations in semantic sensibility judgments.
Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 56-77.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1976). Can imagery be distinguished from
other forms of representation? Evidence from studies of
information retrieval. Memory & Cognition, 4, 291-297.
Martin, A., Wiggs, C.L, Ungerleider, L.G., & Haxby, G.V.
(1996). Neural correlates of category specific knowledge.
Nature, 379, 649-652.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L.W. (2003).
Verifying conceptual properties in different modalities
produces switching costs. Psychological Science, 14, 119124.
Pecher, D. & Zwaan, R. (2005). Grounding Cognition: The
Role of Perception and Action in Memory, Language,
and Thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception
and performance, 24, 3, 830-846.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (2001). The potentiation of grasp
types during visual object categorization. Visual
Cognition, 8, 769-800.
Tucker & Ellis (2004). Action priming by briefly presented
objects. Acta Psychologica, 116, 185-203.
Vogt, S., Taylor, P., & Hopkins, B. (2003). Visuomotor
priming by pictures of hand pictures: perspective matters.
Neuropsychologia, 41, 941-951.
Warrington, E.K. & Shallice, T. (1984). Category-specific
semantic impairment. Brain, 107, 829-854.
Zago, L., Fenske, M.J., Aminoff, E., & Bar, M. (2005). The
rise and fall of priming: How visual priming shapes the
cortical representation of objects. Cerebral Cortex,
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In: B.H.
Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Vol. 44 (pp. 35-62). New York: Academic Press.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Elena Gherri, Cristina Iani, Antonio Pellicano,
Lucia Riggio, and Alessia Tessari for discussion and helpful
suggestions.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Borghi, Glenberg, Kaschak (2004). Putting words in
perspective. Memory and cognition, 32, 863-873.
Boronat, C.B., Buxbaum, L.J., Coslett, H.B., Tang, K.,
Saffran, E.M., Kimberg, D.Y., & Detre, J.A. (in press).
Distinction between manipulation and function
knowledge of objects: Evidence from functional magnetic
resonance imaging. Cognitive Brain Research.
Buxbaum, L. J., Veramonti, T., & Schwartz, M.F. (2000).
Function and manipulation tool knowledge in apraxia:
Knowing ‘what for‘ but not ‘how‘. Neurocase, 6, 83-97.
Craighero, L., Bello, A., Fadiga, L. & Rizzolatti, G. (2002).
Hand action preparation influences the responses to hand
pictures. Neuropsychologia, 40, 492-502.
Creem, S.H. & Proffitt, D.R. (2001). Grasping objects by
their handles: a necessary interaction between perception
327

