UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Weblogs, Genres, and Individual Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bg0t4c6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 27(27)

Authors
Gill, Alastair J.
Nowson, Scott
Oberlander, Jon

Publication Date
2005-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Weblogs, Genres, and Individual Differences
Scott Nowson (S.Nowson@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics; University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK

Jon Oberlander (J.Oberlander@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics; University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK

Alastair J. Gill (A.Gill@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics; University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
now being discussed as both a topic (Cohn, Mehl, & Pennebaker, 2004, Rosenbloom, 2004) and a tool for study
(Mortensen and Walker, 2002). This paper discusses the
place of blogs within a range of genres, and investigates
some aspects of individual differences between writers.
A corpus was gathered by asking authors of personal weblogs—‘bloggers’—to complete a sociobiographic questionnaire and an on-line implementation of
an IPIP Five Factor Personality Inventory (41 items
scored from a 5 point scale, Buchanan, 2001). A corpus of text was created by asking each blogger to submit text they had previously written, for a whole month
preceding the date of the questionnaire. The month was
specified so as to reduce the effects of subjects choosing
their ‘best’ or ‘favourite’ month. The resulting corpus
consisted of 71 subjects (24 males and 47 females), with
ages ranging from 15-50 (mean 28.4). When all text considered ‘personal,’ that which discussed individual concerns rather than general ones, was collected from the
larger HTML files, it amounted to over 410,000 words.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. The
next section discusses previous work on individual differences in language production, following Dewaele and
Furnham. It then introduces a unitary measure of a
text’s formality (as opposed to contextuality): the Fmeasure, due to Heylighen and Dewaele. The section
following this considers blogs as a genre, using the Fmeasure to compare the corpus with sub-corpora from
the British National Corpus. The paper then turns
to the impact of individual differences between writers on their texts’ contextuality/formality. The paper
concludes by considering which dimensions of individual
variation are most worthy of further study.

Abstract
Blogs are personal online diaries, and a relatively recent
form of computer-mediated communication. What kind
of writing do they contain? This paper adopts a measure
of linguistic contextuality/formality, due to Heylighen
and Dewaele, and applies it to a corpus of weblogs.
It first compares the corpus with sub-corpora from the
British National Corpus, and weblogs are shown to be
more formal than e-mail, but less formal than biographies. Then, the paper explores the impact of individual differences between writers on their texts’ contextuality/formality. It appears that Extraversion and Neuroticism are less influential than previously supposed,
and it is argued that gender and Agreeableness account
for more of the variability in the extent to which weblog
writers take their readers’ contexts into account.

Blog It All
27% of internet users read weblogs, but 62% still don’t
know what they are. This is in spite of the fact that an
estimated 8 million weblogs have been created in the US
alone (Rainie, 2005). A weblog is a frequently updated
website which contains news and views on a variety of
topics, from politics to gossip. Weblogs are already being seen as a powerful news-gathering medium (Belo,
2004). The term ‘blog’ is more widely used, and is most
commonly used to refer to the sub-category of online
personal diaries. Mirriam-Webster named ‘blog’ as their
Word of the Year 2004.
The internet is increasingly considered as a resource
for linguistic study (Keller, Lapata and Ourioupina,
2002; Volk, 2001), and a number of studies have focused
on the nature of various types of computer-mediated
communication (CMC), such as asynchronous e-mail and
synchronous chat. A key reason for studying these genres is to determine how they differ from non-computermediated analogues. In addition, however, CMC has the
great virtue that it can make available large amounts of
naturalistic language use, at relatively low cost; in particular, transcription costs are small compared to those
associated with spontaneous speech. As a result, CMC
environments offers an excellent arena in which to study
the projection and perception of individual differences
(Hancock and Dunham, 2001; Markey and Wells, 2002;
Gill and Oberlander, 2002, 2003). To date, however, relatively little work has considered blogs though they are

Background

1666

Extraversion and Neuroticism are the two dimensions
of variation which are common to the two major trait
theories of personality: Costa and McCrae’s five factor
model (Costa and McCrae, 1992); and the three factor
model of Eysenck (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991). Level
of Extraversion is associated with how outgoing and assertive a person is; level of Neuroticism is associated
with how anxious, self-conscious and temperamental a
person tends to be (Matthews, Deary and Whiteman,

Heylighen and Dewaele tested the idea via factor analysis of part-of-speech data and found that over 50% of
the variance was accounted for by a factor very similar
to their measure. They used the F-measure to explore
corpus data derived from Dutch, Italian, and English
sources. The results were consistent: spoken language
scored lower than written language, meaning that the
latter is more formal; newspapers were more formal than
works of fiction; interview data was more formal than casual conversation.
Importantly, Heylighen and Dewaele were also able to
analyse the relation between gender and contextuality,
and the results consistently showed that women used
more contextual language—both in written and spoken
texts—while men tended toward formality.
Of course, there are other factors which can be used to
distinguish between genres. Following an extensive factor analysis of 67 linguistic features, Biber (1988) found
a number of significant factors. One of these factors,
termed ‘involved versus informational production’ concerned amongst others, most of the variables in the Fmeasure. Loewerse, McCarthy, McNamara and Graesser
(2004) followed Biber by repeating his analysis with a
new set of 236 language and cohesion features, including
a number of LSA-based metrics. They too found several
factors that readily highlight differences in genres.
However, it is Heylighen and Dewaele’s F-measure
which has been used specifically to investigate individual
differences between writers within a genre, so we adopt
their measure here. Along side gender effects, following
Dewaele and Furnham’s earlier work on personality and
implicitness, it is expected that there should be a correlation between Extraversion and contextuality: Extraverts
will prefer the use of the contextual parts of speech, and
Introverts will prefer their more formal counterparts.

2003). Perhaps because of its connection to communicativeness, the Extraversion dimension has been studied
particularly intensively in work on the relationship between personality and language use.
Furnham (1990) proposed the following description of
Extravert language: it is less formal; has a less restricted
code; it uses vocabulary more loosely, and uses more
verbs, adverbs and pronouns. Using factor analysis of
syntactic tokens produced by L2 speakers, Dewaele and
Furnham (2000) describe implicit language as a preference for pronouns, adverbs and verbs, while explicit
language involves a preference for nouns, modifiers and
prepositions. They find that Extraverts prefer implicitness, while Introverts prefer explicitness.
Oberlander and Gill (2004) investigated this ‘implicitextravert hypothesis’ on a corpus of e-mail texts collected from 105 subjects, who had been asked to write
two e-mails to a good friend whom they hadn’t seen
for quite some time. However, Pennebaker and King
(1999)’s factor analysis of a collection of texts from writers of known personality had previously isolated a factor for ‘Immediacy’, which correlated with high Neuroticism. Gill and Oberlander (2003) also found that
high Neurotics had a preference for common words that
occurred frequently in speech. This led Oberlander
and Gill to investigate an ‘implicit-neurotic hypothesis’, whereby high Neurotics would prefer implicit expressions, and low Neurotics explicit. They found that
only some parts of speech were used with significantly
different relative frequencies by the sub-groups of their
subjects. However, n-gram analysis for part-of-speech
sequences revealed some support for both hypotheses.
One question raised by that study is whether a larger
corpus would provide clearer evidence of implicitness effects. Another question is whether there is a better way
of measuring a text’s implicitness.
The second question is addressed by Heylighen and
Dewaele (2002). They explore the notion of implicitness in greater detail and develop a unitary measure of
a text’s relative contextuality (implicitness), as opposed
to its formality (explicitness). Briefly, they consider a
notion of deixis following Levelt (1989), and demarcate
a group of expressions that must be anchored to some
part of the spatio-temporal context of utterance in order to be properly interpreted. Greater use of these
expressions leads to greater contextuality, while greater
use of non-deictic expressions leads to greater formality.
They propose that certain parts of speech (such as verbs)
are generally (although not invariably) deictic in nature,
while others (such as nouns) are generally non-deictic.
They then define the F-measure, a single measure of a
text’s contextuality versus formality: a low score indicates contextuality, represented by a greater relative use
of pronouns, verbs, adverb, and interjections; a higher
score indicates formality, represented by greater relative
use of nouns, adjectives, prepositions and articles. F is
defined as follows:
F =

Differences Between Genres
In order to understand blogs as a genre, it is necessary to
place them in a larger context. To this end, we chose to
compare the genre to a range selected from the British
National Corpus (BNC). The BNC consists of over 4000
files, containing over 100 million words of both spoken
and written English. Calculating the F-score of a number of genres from the BNC allows us to place blogs on a
scale and furnishes an opportunity to test the face validity of Heylighen and Dewaele’s F-measure by examining
the plausibility of that scale. The F-score of Gill and
Oberlander’s e-mail corpus can also be calculated, and
included in the placement.

Method

0.5 ∗ [(nounf rq + adjf rq + prepf rq + artf rq)
−(pronf rq + verbf rq + advf rq + intf rq) + 100)]

Using Lee’s BNC World Edition Index1 (2001), 17 genres were selected from the BNC. These included both
spoken (n = 4) and written (n = 13) material, ranging from sermons and fiction writing, to text taken from
newspapers and academic works. Only files dating from
1985 to 1994 and (for speech) only spoken files with a
single speaker were included. Altogether there were 837
files comprised of 23 million words. The original release

1667

1

Available at http://clix.to/davidlee00

Table 1: Average F-score of selected genres from BNC
Genre
Sermons
Lectures on Social Science
Unscripted Speeches
Fiction Prose
Personal Letters
Sports Mailing List E-Mails
Scripted Speeches
School Essay
Biography
Non Academic Social Science
Nat Broadsheet Social
Professional Letters
Nat Broadsheet Editorial
Nat Broadsheet Science
University Essays
Academic Social Science
Nat Broadsheet Reportage

Table 2: Average F-score of E-Mail and Blog corpora as
situated in the BNC genre ranking.

Ave F
42.4
44.3
44.4
46.3
49.7
50.0
53.0
53.2
56.3
56.9
57.5
57.5
58.1
60.0
60.3
60.6
62.2

Genre
Sports Mailing List E-Mails
E-Mail Corpus
Scripted speeches
School Essay
Blog Corpus
Biography

Ave F
50.0
50.8
53.0
53.2
53.3
56.3

Discussion

of the BNC comes pre-tagged using the CLAWS tagset.
These tags are algorithmically reduced to the set needed
for calculating the F-score of each file. These scores are
then averaged to give the F-score of each genre.
Both the blog and e-mail corpora have also been
tagged using the MXPOST tagger (Ratnaparkhi, 1996)
and the PENN tagset. These tags were mapped down to
the same set for comparison. Each e-mail file contained
2 messages from the same writer (n = 105) while each
blog file contained all the text for an author from one
month (n = 71).

This particular result can be explained by considering
some of the situational factors involved in deixis. Heylighen and Dewaele draw on four categories: the persons
involved, the space of the communication, the time, and
the prior discourse. When collecting e-mail data, subjects were instructed to imagine they were writing to a
friend—a single person who knew them. The blog data
however, was collected from web-published blogs. These
can be read by persons unknown to the writer; hence, to
some extent, they are written with such readers in mind.
So bloggers cannot assume as large a shared context with
their readers as writers of e-mails composed for friends.
Not knowing the reader means the writer can assume
less about any knowledge of any places, or spaces that
are discussed. Similarly, since one cannot know when a
blog post will be read, or whether any previous posts
have been read, the writer can assume less about the
time and discourse contexts.
In sum, it appears that the F-measure of contextuality is a reasonable method for distinguishing between
genres. In fact, the ordering on genres is very similar
to that found by Biber (1988) when ranking via his involved/informational factor. However, as noted above,
the current measure of contextuality/formality can also
be used to explore individual differences between writers
within a genre.

Results
When the F-score calculation was completed on the BNC
genres selected, they ranked as in Table 1. As predicted by Heylighen and Dewaele (2002), spoken genres are on the whole less formal than written, with sermons, lectures, and unscripted speeches scoring the lowest. Scripted Speeches are more formal than Unscripted
and also those written genres considered least formal:
Fiction, Personal Letters and E-Mails. Many of the
results are intuitive: Academic writing is more formal
than Non-Academic; Professional Letters are more formal than Personal; University-level Essays are more formal than School level. We also see degrees of similarity:
Personal Letters are close to the BNC’s E-Mails (which
come from a mailing list; cf. Collot and Belmore, 1996).
The F-score was calculated for the new blog corpus
and Gill and Oberlander’s existing e-mail corpus. The
results are displayed, along with those of the closest genres selected from the BNC, in Table 2. As one might
expect, the e-mail corpus is very similar to the E-Mails
taken from the BNC; proximity to Personal Letters follows from this. It can be seen that the blogs are scored
as being significantly less contextual than the e-mails
(t=3.54, DF=174, p<.001).

Individual Differences Within Genres
The individual differences under investigation here
mainly concern those of personality. The hypotheses are
that the F-measure correlates negatively with both Extraversion and Neuroticism. But, following Heylighen
and Dewaele, and to further test the validity of their
measure, we can first test for gender differences.

Gender differences

1668

Gender has previously been investigated in the BNC, for
instance in the Conversational sub-corpus looking at a
word level (Rayson, Leech and Hodges, 1997), and in
written work using sub-word level characteristics (Argamon, Koppel, Fine and Shimoni, 2003).
Heylighen and Dewaele applied their F-measure to
texts of known gender and found a distinct difference between the sexes. Females score lower, preferring a more
contextual style, while men prefer a more formal style.

Table 3: Average F-score for Male and Female writer in
selected genres
Genre
Fiction prose Adult
E-Mail Corpus
Blog Corpus
Non academic Social Science
Academic Social Science

Male
47.8
53.1
55.2
59.5
60.5

Table 6: Average F-score of corpus stratified by trait
Trait
Neuroticism
Extraversion
Openness
Agreeableness

Female
45.0
49.5
52.4
52.1
60.8

Low
54.1
54.8
52.7
52.3

Mid
53.0
53.0
53.1
53.1

High
53.8
53.2
54.4
55.9

Table 4: Pearson Correlation between F-score and personality trait.

tive, and significant correlation with Agreeableness. The
correlation with Openness is also reasonably strong and
positive, but does not reach significance. Conscientiousness shows the smallest correlation of all.
To gain a better perspective on what is happening,
we can also look at the frequencies of the individual
parts-of-speech that define the F-measure. When there
is an overall negative correlation between trait score and
the F-score—as with Extraversion and Neuroticism—we
might expect a negative correlation between trait score
and frequencies for nouns, adjectives, prepositions and
articles, while there should be a positive correlation for
pronouns, verbs, adverbs and interjections. The opposite
should hold when there is positive correlation between
trait score and the F-score—as with Agreeableness and
Openness. Table 5 displays the results. As might be
expected from the overall correlations shown in Table 4,
we here find that Agreeableness has the strongest correlations, and the most that reach significance. Openness
also has some reasonably strong and significant correlations. None of the Extraversion and Neuroticism correlations reach significance. And once again, there are
only very small correlations for Conscientiousness.
However, with only a couple of small exceptions, the
directions of the correlations are as expected. Neuroticism and Extraversion scores correlate positively with
the frequencies of contextual parts of speech, and negatively with those parts of speech considered formal. The
opposite is true for Agreeableness and Openness.

Trait
r
Neuroticism
–.090
Extraversion
–.098
Openness
.162
Agreeableness
.272*
Conscientiousness
.028
Note: two-tailed, *p<0.05

This result was taken to be consistent with previous findings from socio-linguistic and psychological studies.
A number of the genres selected from the BNC are
marked for author gender, as are the e-mail and blog
corpora. Table 3 shows the average F-score for males and
females in the genres for which data was available. For
both genders, the ordering of genres remains as shown
in Tables 1 and 2. Females score lower in four out of
five genres. Within the blog corpus this difference is
significant (t=2.90, DF=69, p<.005). The exception is
when the writing is academic in nature. Here there is
little difference between male and female F-scores; both
are relatively high. It appears that while females prefer
a more contextual style, when required, they can adopt
a style at least as formal as that projected by males.

Stratified corpus analysis

Personality correlation

It therefore appears that there is some relation between
contextuality/formality, for the four personality dimensions of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness and Agreeableness. But the relation is stronger in some cases than
in others. To take a closer look at each case, we adapted
the stratification approach used in Oberlander and Gill
(2004). Here, High and Low personality sub-groups are
created for each personality dimension by splitting off
the groups at greater than 1 standard deviation above,
and below, the mean score for each dimension. The
remainder of the subjects are allocated into the Mid
sub-group for that dimension. For the current analysis, we have therefore dropped the further requirement
that writers in a given sub-group for a dimension had to
have scores within 1 standard deviation of the mean on
the other dimensions. With this simpler stratification
strategy, we retain all 71 subjects for the exploratory
analysis. The average F-score for the sub-groups, by dimension, can be seen in Table 6. As might be expected

A starting point for personality analysis is to test the correlation between F-score and writer trait score. While
Extraversion and Neuroticism have already been discussed, the remaining traits of the Five Factor Model are
Openness, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. Openness is characterised by culture, intellect and originality; level of Agreeableness is associated with how compliant, straightforward and altruistic a person is; Conscientiousness concerns how competent, deliberate and
self-disciplined an individual is (Matthews et al., 2003).
The results of the Pearson Correlation analysis for all
files in the blog corpora along the Five Factor dimensions are displayed in Table 4. The results are not
as expected. Given the implicit-extravert and implicitneurotic hypotheses, we expect a negative correlation
with Neuroticism and Extraversion. The correlation is
in the expected direction, but it is small, and does not
reach significance. However, we do find a stronger, posi1669

Table 5: Pearson Correlation between POS frequency and personality trait.
Trait
Neuroticism
Extraversion
Openness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness

Noun
–.117
.017
.055
.196
.053

Adjective
Prep’n
Article
Pronoun
.128
–.075
–.077
–.013
–.092
–.117
–.148
.231
.354**
.268*
–.002
–.005
.165
.151
.260*
–.173
.007
–.054
.041
–.095
Note: two-tailed, *p<0.05, **p<0.01

Independent
variable
Gender
Agreeableness

β
.33
.27

R2

.18

Adverb
.127
–.044
–.244*
–.263*
–.010

Interj’n
.016
.110
–.221
–.240*
–.023

for this measure, the two traits lead to similar results.
In fact, Dewaele and Furnham noted that Extraversion
was most likely to correlate strongly with implicitness
in formal situations, such as examinations. Weaker correlations were found in more informal (contextual) situations. Now, according to the results in the first part
of this paper (see Table 2), blogs are more formal than
e-mail. But they are still relatively informal—just surpassing School Essays in their F-score. Even ignoring the
non-linearity just noted, this relative informality could
reflect informality in the communication situation, and
thus fit with the low correlation between Extraversion
and F-measure found in the current corpus.
Heylighen and Dewaele also discussed the relation between Openness and F-measure, although at the time
they had no corroborating evidence for a link. They
hypothesised that since Openness is also considered the
factor of intellect, it should correlate positively with formality. This is what we have found.
Agreeableness and language use, however, have not
been extensively discussed previously. One aspect of
Agreeableness is cooperativity: highly Agreeable individuals are most willing to cooperate and accommodate.
In communication, this could be realised via a better
ability—or at least willingness—to adapt to the interlocutor’s communication situation or style. Interpreting
this in the setting of blogs suggests that bloggers of an
Agreeable nature are more likely to be aware of the lack
of shared context between themselves and the reader,
thus adjusting their writing away from contextuality, in
the direction of formality.

Table 7: Multiple regression of the F-score
Dependent
variable
F-score

Verb
.150
.024
–.152
–.257*
–.053

p

.001

from the overall correlations, the F-scores for Low Neurotics and Low Extraverts are greater than the F-scores
for High sub-groups. The opposite trend holds for the
other dimensions. Moreover, on Openness and Agreeableness, the F-scores for the Mid sub-groups are intermediate between the F-scores for the Low and High
sub-groups. However, for Neuroticism the F-scores for
the Mid sub-group are lower than those of either end
sub-group. There is thus a hint of non-linearity in these
results. This is consistent with Gill, Harrison and Oberlander’s (2004) finding that, for inter-personal priming,
High and Low sub-group performances resemble one another more than they resemble that of the Mid subgroup. The result for Extraversion is harder to accomodate; the closeness of the Mid and High sub-groups
suggesting that only high Introversion affects formality.

Regression analysis
A final confirmatory analysis involved determining which
of the personality variables, if any, best accounted for
variance in F-score. To this end, a step-wise multiple
regression was employed. The F-score was considered
the dependent variable; the personality traits, along with
gender and age, the independent variables. The results
are displayed in Table 7. Only 18% of the variance of the
F-score is explained. Gender makes the most significant
contribution. The only personality trait that enters the
regression equation is Agreeableness, and this was indeed
the personality trait that showed the highest correlation
(see Table 4). Note that gender and Agreeableness are
independent, Pearson’s r=-.004, ns.

Conclusion

Discussion

The study has used Heylighen and Dewaele’s F-measure
to draw two main conclusions. One is that blogs are,
as a genre, likely to prove more formal than e-mail,
but not much more formal than School Essays. The
other is that, within the blog genre, there is variability
in contextuality/formality due to individual differences.
But the differences that make the most difference are
not Extraversion or Neuroticism, but Openness and—
especially—Agreeableness and gender.

Neuroticism and Extraversion did not correlate with
contextuality/formality as strongly as we had expected.
There was a small and non-significant effect in the
expected direction. So, support for implicit-extravert
and implicit-neurotic hypotheses is not forthcoming, although the results do seem consistent with the idea that,

Acknowledgements

1670

Our thanks to Judy Robertson for her helpful input. The
first author gratefully acknowledges support from the
UK Economic and Social Research Council, studentship
number R42200134353.

References
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J., & Shimoni, A.
(2003). Gender, genre, and writing style in formal
written texts. Text, 23(3).
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Belo, R. (2004). Blogs take on the mainstream. BBC
News Online. Available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/
1/hi/technology/4086337.stm
Buchanan, T. (2001). Online implementation of an IPIP
Five Factor Personality Inventory [On-line]. Available at: http://users.wmin.ac.uk/∼buchant/wwwffi/
introduction.html
Cohn, M.A., Mehl, M.R., & Pennebaker, J.W. (2004).
Linguistic markers of psychological change surrounding September 11, 2001. Psychological Science, 15,
687-693.
Collot, M. and Belmore, N. (1996). Electronic language: A new variety of English. In S. Herring,
(Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Costa, P., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Professional Manual. Psychological Assessment Resources, Odessa, FL.
Dewaele, J.-M., & Furnham, A. (2000). Personality and
speech production: a pilot study of second language
learners. Personality and Individual Difference, 28,
355–365.
Eysenck, H., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1991). The Eysenck
Personality Questionnaire - Revised. Hodder and
Stoughton, Sevenoaks.
Furnham, A. (1990). Language and personality. In H.
Giles & W. Robinson (Eds.), Handbook of Language
and Social Psychology. Wiley, Chichester.
Gill, A., & Oberlander, J. (2002). Taking care of the
linguistic features of Extraversion. Proceedings of the
24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 363–368). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Gill, A., & Oberlander, J. (2003). Perception of e-mail
personality at zero acquaintance: Extraversion takes
care of itself; Neuroticism is a worry. Proceedings of
the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 456–461). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Gill, A., Harrison, A. & Oberlander, J. (2004). Interpersonality: Individual differences and interpersonal
priming. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp. 464–469).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hancock, J. and Dunham, P. (2001). Impression formation in computer-mediated communication. Communication Research, 28, 325–347.
Heylighen, F., & Dewaele, J.-M. (2002). Variation in
the contextuality of language: an empirical measure.
Foundations of Science, 7, 293–340.
1671

Keller, F., Lapata, M., & Ourioupina, O. (2002). Using
the web to overcome data sparseness. In Jan Hajic and
Yuji Matsumoto, (Eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, (pp. 230–237). Philadelphia.
Lee, D. Y. W. (2001). Genres, registers, text types, domains and styles: clarifying the concepts and navigating a path through the BNC jungle. Language Learning & Technology, Vol.5(3), 37-72.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1989). Speaking. From Intention to
Article. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass..
Louwese, M., McCarthy, P.M., McNamara, D.S., &
Graesser, A.C. (2004). Variation in language and cohesion across written and spoken registers. Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1035–1040). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Markey, P. and Wells, S. (2002). Interpersonal perception in internet chat rooms. Journal of Research in
Personality, 36, 134–146.
Matthews, G., Deary I., & Whiteman, C. (2003). Personality traits: Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mortensen, T., & Walker J. (2002) Blogging thoughts:
personal publication as an online research tool. In A.
Morrison (Ed.) Researching ICTs in Context, InterMedia Report, 3/2002, Oslo.
Oberlander, J., & Gill, A. (2004). Individual difference
and implicit language: personality, parts-of-speech
and pervasiveness. Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1035–
1040). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Pennebaker, J.W., & King, L. (1999). Linguistic styles:
Language use as an individual difference. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1296–1312.
Ratnaparkhi, A. (1996). A maximum entropy part-ofspeech tagger. Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, University of Pennsylvania.
Rainie, L. (2005).
The state of blogging.
Pew
Internet & American Life Project. Available at
http://www.pewinternet.org/PPF/r/144/
report display.asp
Rayson, P., & Leech, G., & Hodges, M. (1997). Social differentiation in the use of English vocabulary:
some analyses of the conversational component of the
British National Corpus. International Journal of
Corpus Linguistics, Vol.2(1), 133-152.
Rosenbloom, M. (Ed.) (2004). The Blogosphere. Communications of the ACM, Special Issue, 47 (12). ACM
Press, New York
Volk, M. (2001). Exploiting the WWW as a corpus to
resolve PP attachment ambiguities. In P. Rayson, A.
Wilson, T. McEnery, A. Hardie, & S. Khoja, (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics Conference, 601606, Lancaster.

