UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Animal Models of Expertise Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9x08n722

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Helton, William S.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Animal Models of Expertise Development

William S. Helton (Deak_Helton@Wilmington.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 251 Ludovic Street
Wilmington, OH 45177 USA

Abstract

There appears to be no realistic way to determine
the extent to which learning or inherent talent influences
human expertise development. Although data has been
gathered to support one position or the other, the data has
not been decisive. The data is only suggestive because it is
correlational in nature. Experiments that truly test
competing theories of expertise development, for practical
and ethical reasons, cannot be employed with humans.
However if we take evolution seriously, then the continuity
of species suggests to us a proper means to investigate the
issue of expertise development, namely, the employment of
non-human animal models.

There is a continuing debate in the psychological literature
between those who lean more towards learning theories of
expertise development and those leaning more towards talent
theories. However, the development of human expertise has
not been open to direct experimental methods and will
probably continue to elude experimentalists in the future. A
promising alternative is to employ non-human animal models.
Expertise researchers have seemingly overlooked this
possibility. However, there are studies in the animal behavior
literature that address the development of non-human animal
expertise without specifically referring to the topic as
expertise. I will discuss two non-human animal examples of
expertise development that have been researched by
ethologists. Non-human animal expertise development, unlike
human expertise development, is subject to direct
experimentation. Hence, I recommend initiating expertise
research with non-human animals.

Preliminary Remarks on Expertise
Definition of Expertise

Sternberg (1999) proposes that intelligence is a
type of developing expertise, which if true would indicate
the ubiquity of expertise in all human affairs. Skoyles
(1999) argues that the environmental demands for the
development of expertise were the primary catalysts for the
rapid increase in brain size among early homo ancestors.
Expertise is, no doubt, an important area of psychological
research that is increasingly expanding its horizons.
However, human expertise research has been haunted
historically by two fundamental problems: first, a functional
definition of expertise and second, how expertise is
developed. In this paper, I will be addressing the second
issue, the development of expertise. There is a continuing
debate between those who lean more towards learning
theories of expertise development and those leaning more
towards innate talent theories. Researchers from both
perspectives acknowledge that the other plays some role in
expertise development; only straw-men argue that expertise
does not require some innately inherited architecture or that
expertise can develop without any learning at all. The
debate is over the degree to which talent or learning
determines the development of expertise. The majority of
expertise researchers currently favor a stronger input from
learning (Ericsson, 1996; Ericsson & Charness, 1997;
Howe, Davidson, & Sloboda, 1998); however, this position
is not without critics (Gardner, 1997; Winner, 1996).

551

I will not attempt to provide a solution to the first
historical problem of human expertise research, a proper
definition of expertise, in this paper. However, for nonhuman animal models to be a viable solution for the
problem of expertise development, it must be demonstrated
that animals’ performance satisfies the proposed definitions
of expertise that are popular in the human literature.
Currently, there are two modal definitions of expertise
proposed in the human literature: either expertise is the
matching of a preset criterion level of performance for a
skill, or expertise is being in the top 5% of performers of a
skill. Personally, I agree with Wagner and Stanovich (1996)
in their belief that defining expertise as exceptional
performance, being in the top 5% of performers in a
domain, is wrong headed, and that a more proper definition
is the matching of a preset criterion-level of performance.
Nevertheless, by either definition of expertise, pre-select
criterion or top 5% of performers, animals would satisfy the
definition on a variety of skills. For example, the top 5% of
greyhound track runners, or greyhounds that can run some
distance at a pre-select speed.
Failure of Human-centered Approaches
According to Ericsson (1996), phenomena can be
studied via scientific methods when they meet these three
criteria: (1) the phenomena occur reliably in clearly
specified
situations
with
distinctive
observable
characteristics, (2) the phenomena should be reproducible
under controlled conditions, and (3) the phenomena should

be predictable and describable by objective measures.
Ericsson provides detailed information on how human
expert performance meets these criteria. However, Ericsson
acknowledges that the development of human expertise
does not yet meet these criteria. Human expert performance
is reliable, reproducible, and predictable in laboratory tests,
but the development of human expertise has not been fully
open to these laboratory techniques.
Shiffrin (1996) indicates that finding a suitable
experimental design is a formidable task. Expertise takes a
long time to develop; it consumes a large percentage of the
life span of an organism. In humans, the development time
is considered to be roughly ten years for most domains
(Ericsson, 1996). Designing an experiment in which
individuals are randomly assigned to different training
conditions for a long period of time, up to possibly ten
years, without many participants dropping out is
enormously difficult. Shiffrin sugges ts marksmanship in the
military as a possible way to conduct such a long involved
experiment, however, there are limitations to this proposal,
in that there may be a selection bias. People that join the
military, especially for combat arms units, are likely to be
interested in marksmanship; they may be already motivated
to excel in marksmanship. A primary problem with human
studies of expertise development is they are hopelessly
confounded by the participants’ willingness to partake in the
training. The unfortunate reality is the participants’
willingness to stay in the experiment, to continue training,
may be due to their ease of mastery, or what many call
talent. Hence, the role of talent in expertise development
continues to irk researches promoting the strong learning
view. Although researchers can learn a great deal about
expertise by studying humans, an exclusive human focus
will leave many questions unanswerable.

Animal Models of Expertise Development
Most conceivable attempts to design proper
experiments of human expertise development are going to
fail, because of realistic or ethical constraints. An alternative
solution is to employ non-human animal models. Using
non-humans to study learning and intellectual development
has proven enormously informative historically (Harlow &
Mears, 1979). Extensive studies have been conducted on
‘skill’ development and learning in non-humans (Hikosaka,
Miyachi, Misyashita, & Rand, 1996). Expertise researchers,
however, have seemingly overlooked the relevance of the
work to their field. In order to elucidate the potential of nonhuman research, I will provide two examples of expert
models: asymmetric orb-web construction by predatory
spiders and narcotic detection by canines. The two examples
discussed do not describe actual expertise development
experiments; they are comprised of recent ethological
studies serving as indicators of what may be done in future
research. The examples are not definitive; a myriad of other
non-human examples could have been selected. Hopefully
they are suggestive of the range of potential models
available, from simple to complex.

552

Web Construction
A splendid animal model for the development of
expertise in a non-human organism is the construction of
orb-webs by predatory spiders. A common feature of orbwebs is their structural ‘top/bottom’ asymmetry
(Herberstein & Heiling, 1999). The lower web region is
often larger than the upper web region in many species of
orb-web spiders. Orb-web spiders are not active foragers.
They waste very little energy in actively seeking out prey;
however, they expend a great amount of energy in the
construction and maintenance of their complex traps, webs.
Because of this immense energy expenditure, orb-web
spiders become expert web builders. The expenditure of
effort required to build a web is so great that the allowance
for too many mistakes would be fatal for the species. Nature
is not very forgiving to the unskilled.
The value of web asymmetry is improved prey
capture, due to the speed advantage a spider has in detecting
and reaching prey captured below the hub. Orb-web spiders
wait in the hub or center of their web facing downwards.
Spiders are quicker in detecting vibration sources when
directly oriented toward them. A spider will reorient itself to
face a source of vibration, similar to a person, who turns
toward an object when it is detected in the periphery of the
visual field. Also, spiders are slower at reaching prey above
the hub, because of the pull of gravity. For these reasons,
asymmetric web construction increases the spider’s chance
of capturing prey, and this is adaptive.
Spiders are invertebrates with comparatively small
and ‘primitive’ nervous systems. They are generally
regarded to have a limited capacity to acquire and retain
information gained through experience (Heiling &
Herberstein, 1999). However, many invertebrates meet the
requirements of associative learning, and learning is
currently regarded as a fundamental neural process that does
not require complex neural structures (Dukas, 1998).
Spiders can learn, although their plasticity is currently
considered to be limited in comparison to vertebrates, like
humans. Orb web asymmetric construction was until
recently largely considered to be genetic or due to physical
constraints. Behavioral ecologists are only recently
exploring the role of learning in web construction. Physical
constraints have been known to effect web asymmetry; for
example, increasing the spider’s weight either artificially or
naturally increases the amount of asymmetry (Herberstein &
Heiling, 1999). The amount of asymmetry also varies by
species, possibly indicating some genetic or hardwired
elements. Although physical constraints and genetics do
affect asymmetric web design, it is partially learned by
spiders (Heiling & Herberstein, 1999).
Juveniles of several orb-web spider species are
known to construct perfectly symmetrical webs, whereas,
mature spiders of the same species construct asymmetric
webs, even when weight is controlled. Web asymmetry in
some species seems to be the result of learning; the spiders
become more efficient web designers over their life history.
Via experimental manipulation, Heiling & Herberstein were

able to empirically test the hypothesis that asymmetry is
learned. They observed that spiders do learn to construct
asymmetric webs, via feedback about the capture rates of
locations on their webs. The process is more involved then
classical conditioning. The spiders designed their webs
based on information about capture rates independently of
food reward. The design shape of the web was not
contingent on the spider’s consuming the prey captured by
the web, but on their knowledge of which locations on the
web lead to the capture of more prey.
Based on appearances, spiders are very different
from humans. However, as a model of expert development,
they are informative. Asymmetrical web construction can be
classified as expertise by either definition of expertise:
either a pre -select criteria of amount of asymmetry or the
top 5% of asymmetrical web construction. The development
of asymmetric web construction occurs reliably in clearly
specified
situations
with
distinctive
observable
characteristics, is reproducible under controlled conditions,
and is predictable and describable by objective measures.
Hence, meeting the criteria outlined by Ericsson (1996) for
phenomena to be studied via scientific methods. Even for an
organism considered to be as simple as a spider, learning or
the interaction with the environment plays an important role
in developing expertise. But even a spider with no
experience can construct a functional web. Genetics does
control a great amount of the abilities of a spider.

Narcotic Detection
Constructing a web is directly necessary for the
survival of orb-web spiders, but many skills developed by
people are not. Most of the domains investigated by human
expertise researchers are not survival skills. The
development of skills with immediate survival value may be
qualitatively different from skills that are more indirectly
adaptive or for skills that are not adaptive at all. At least
someone could raise the objection that expertise only refers
to non-survival skills, where there would be a minimum
amount of genetic hardwiring. To alleviate this objection
another model from the animal kingdom can be proposed:
the development of skills among canines, in particular
narcotic detection.
Dogs are extremely versatile social animals. They
share the longest historical social bond with humans, and
may be the only domesticated species that was not actually
forced into domestication (Prestrude & O’Shea, 1998).
Dogs are trained and put to use in a variety of disciplines,
including, arson detection, blind assistance, epilepsy
detection, forensic tracking, guarding, hearing-aid
assistance, lure racing, narcotic detection, retrieving, search
& rescue, sheep herding, sled racing, weight pulling, etc.
The similarity between canine skills and human skills
should be obvious. What is the difference between a human
track runner and a greyhound racer, besides the fact that the
greyhound is faster?
The ability of a dog to detect narcotic substances is
not historically a survival skill for that species. However,

553

some dogs do become particularly skilled at detecting
narcotic substances. Granted, the ability to detect some
substances via scent, such as tracking prey, may have been
historically a survival skill. But the ability to smell things in
general is not the ability to distinguish between narcotic
substances and other scent sources in a complex
environment, like a ship, airport, or under a bus. Likewise,
the ability to distinguish between objects via visual
information was probably a survival skill for early humans,
but that does not imply that the ability to distinguish
between specific letters on a page of many letters ever was.
Narcotic scent detection is a complicated skill. In
regards to narcotic detection, not only is the scent
environment extremely complicated for a dog (imagine all
the scents in an airport), but also the smuggler is probably
trying to hide the narcotic substance and its scent. The
training required to detect a narcotic substance is very
involved. A relevant issue for expertise development is how
much of the skill is trainable, and how much of it requires
innate abilities. Slabbert and Rasa (1997) conducted an
experiment to determine the effect puppies observing
maternal narcotic detection had on their later skill
development. German shepherd pups from untrained and
trained narcotic detection bitches were separated into two
groups: those separated from their mothers at 6 weeks and
those separated from their mothers at 3 months. The pups
reared by trained bitches in the extended maternal group (3
months) were allowed to observe their trained mothers work
between the ages of 6 and 12 weeks. When the groups were
later tested for narcotic detection aptitude at age 6 months,
the observational group did significantly better than the
other groups. Of the observational group, only 15% failed
the aptitude test, whereas, in the other groups 81% failed.
Early learning and inspiration, a proper role model, does
seem to play a very significant role in the ability to acquire
the skill. The power of an early role model demonstrated in
this study may provide some insight into the phenomena of
e xpertise running in human families, such as the musical
skills of the Bachs or the mathematical skills of the
Bernoullis.
Nevertheless, 15% of the observational group still
failed to pass the preliminary aptitude test, let alone develop
“true” expertise. Obviously, the skill requires that the dog
have a functioning nose, the ability to learn to distinguish
scents, and the hard to define quality, motivation to do the
task. All of the dogs were German shepherds, regarded as
one of the most trainable breeds, from a reputable police
breeder, suggesting prior ‘artificial’ selection for a
predisposition to work. Even with a role model and early
encouragement, some of the dogs still seem disinterested in
doing the task. This disinterest may be due to individual
genetic variation in temperament or motivation.
Dogs are closer to humans in capacity and in skills
than spiders. As a model of expert development, canine
narcotic detection is excellent because like many human
skills it is not directly adaptive, and is complicated, taking a
lot of formal training to develop. Unlike asymmetric web

construction, but similar to many human skills, narcotic
detection is not self-taught. Also from a practical point of
view, there is a large potential provider of funds for research
on the development of this skill, namely law enforcement
agencies. Narcotic detection can be classified as expertise
by either definition of expertise: either a pre-select criteria
or the top 5% of detectors. The development of narcotic
detection occurs reliably in clearly specified situations with
distinctive observable characteristics, is reproducible under
controlled conditions, and is predictable and describable by
objective measures. Hence, meeting the criteria outlined by
Ericsson (1996) for phenomena to be studied via scientific
methods.

Discussion
At least in respect to the visual arts, Winner (1996)
argues that talent precedes the hard work that leads to high
achievement. Winner argues that at least in some cases
certain individuals are born with a “rage to master.” It may
be that there is no gene or set of genes for artistic talent, just
as it is unlikely that there is a particular set of genes that
determine a dog’s capacity to make a good narcotic
detector. There probably are genes that regulate the
architecture that is necessary to master a skill, like a good
nose in the case of the narcotic detector, and there may be
genes that regulate the motivation or personality that are
necessary to truly master a domain. Research with skilled
dogs may provide some of these answers, as they seem to
provide a good model for human expertise, and they can be
controlled genetically via selective breeding and
environmentally via living conditions, early role models,
etc.
I suggest the utilization of skilled canines as
research models of expertise development primarily because
they are very practical; my point is not that canines are the
only example of genuine animal expertise. There are many
examples of non-human expert models, including two
species that might ‘instruct’ the skill: chimpanzees and
killer whales.
According to Parker (1996, p.361), “Chimpanzee
mothers expend considerable parental effort apprenticing
offspring to use tools to extract high energy food resources.”
Some chimpanzees fish for insects. The chimpanzee
constructs a wand by selecting a twig or grass stem and
modifies it by removing its leaves. The chimpanzee then
proceeds to use the wand to fish for termites or ants. The
ability to fish for insects appears to require a high degree of
skill, taking a chimpanzee 4-7 years to master. Chimpanzees
also appear in some cases to use stone tools to crack open
nuts. The efficient technique of nut cracking takes 7-8 years
for a chimpanzee youth to master, approaching the rough
ten-year period for human expertise development. Both
insect fishing and nut cracking appear to involve substantial
instruction, similar to many human skills.
Killer whales are known to swim ashore to capture
pinnipeds (seals). These killer whales intentionally beach
themselves in order to catch their prey. This behavior is

554

profitable but extremely risky; killer whales are sometimes
stranded on the beach, unable to return to deeper water,
which leads to their death. To carry off this hunting
operation successfully no doubt requires a great deal of
skill, or as I would argue the development of expertise.
Rendell and Whitehead (2001), in a summary of some
recent research, further argue that killer whales in some
cases actively teach the skill of intentional beaching to their
offspring. Although Rendell’s and Whitehead’s suggestion
that killer whales actively teach this skill (or any skill) is
controversial, the possibility of a naturally occurring
instructed form of non-human animal expertise is intriguing
and could prove useful in helping to open the door on
further investigations of non-human animal expertise.
Killer whales and chimpanzees, however, would
not make easy or convenient research participants in
controlled experiments; the cost of housing them alone
would most likely prove prohibitive. Many other nonhuman animal research models of expertise are possible, it
merely appears to me that canines because of their diversity
of skills, ease of handling, and low cost to house appear to
be the most practical choice. Canine expertise is also not
only of theoretical interest, but is extremely important in
many applied settings, such as narcotic detection, explosives
detection, etc.
Certain species, like canines, are more plastic than
others, such as spiders; hence some species will be better
models for humans, who are highly plastic, than others.
However, most species, even very simple ones, have some
flexibility. The essential survival skills or building blocks
tend to be hard-wired. The ability to construct a web is
hardwired into an orb-web spider, but the refinement of the
web design seems to be left to learning, at least in some
species. The ability of a dog to detect scents is hard-wired.
The dog’s olfactory epithelium is one of the largest among
animals (Prestrude & O’Shea, 1998). The ability to pick out
narcotic scents among all other scents is learned, and
trained. But some dogs are easier to train than others, and
some dogs do not seem to be able to do it at all. This may be
similar to the situation in humans.
For example, Sloboda (1996; 2000) in regard to
musical skills argues correctly against the naïve ‘folk
psychology’ belief in talent, however, he qualifies his
statements, by not denying that inherited differences may
play some role in determining to what extent musical skills
are acquired. Sloboda acknowledges the lack of data that
would determine the inheritability of musical gifts, but
advances an alternative view that music is a speciesdefining characteristic of humans that can be refined by
training, like spinning webs is for spiders, or detecting
scents for canines. His interest is in why so few humans,
who are naturally primed for music, fail to reach a
competent level of achievement. It may be that the time
demands required to master music may not interest people
of certain inherited dispositions. There may have to be an
inherited drive to master music. Training may be able to
instill the drive in those that do not acquire it genetically.

We do not know, but research similar to Slabbert and Rasa’s
(1997) with dogs, especially if designed with those issues
specifically in mind, may be the way to go about
discovering the answer.
Ericsson (1996, p.20) states that, “Even when
individuals have access to a similar training environment,
large individual differences in performance are still
observed.” He also indicates that time spent studying a
discipline is not a reliable predictor for performance. The
discussion of non-human examples of expert development
left us with the equally interesting fact: some dogs are better
at finding narcotics than others. Species clearly differ, but
what about individuals within a species? One of the
suppositions of the Darwinian theory of evolution is that the
initial variation amongst individuals is what natural
selection acts upon. Without variation among individual
organisms the game is over. If every member of a species is
exactly the same, and a new environmental condition occurs
that they cannot handle, the species has ended. The species
that is insured against this via individual differences is more
likely to survive.
One problem with natural occurring variation is the
mechanism by which it comes about. In humans and similar
animals, are personality differences due to genes, culture learning or environmental constraints? Elman et al. (1996)
suggests all three, or more specifically, the interaction
between all three. The unfortunate reality is that we
currently do not know. Likewise, the factors shaping
expertise development are not currently known, however,
the proper employment of non-human animal models may
be able to shine some light on this difficult issue. Nonhuman animal expertise development, unlike human
expertise development, is subject to laboratory
experimentation. One may speculate on why non-human
animal models have not been suggested earlier. Researchers
do not appear to view non-humans as potential experts or
expert models, although there seems to be little difficulty in
referring to computer programs as ‘expert’ systems. Perhaps
most of us are still uncomfortable with the full implications
of Darwin’s theory of evolution. Many of us suffer from
human separatism, a metaphysical artifact of a religious
world -view that promotes the idea that we are closer to
angels than to beasts regardless of the mass of empirical
evidence against such a view (Holcomb, 1996).

Conclusion
I recommend that psychologists take Darwin
seriously and initiate expertise research with non-human
animals. The belief that humans are the only species that
demonstrate expertise is difficult to ma intain in light of the
numerous skills non-humans exhibit to such a high degree.
To apply the term ‘expertise’ only to humans would require
an arbitrary definition newly created for just such a purpose,
which is unnecessary, unless one has a theological axe to
grind.
Agnew, Ford, and Hayes (1997) argue that the
minimum criterion for expertise is to have a reasonably

555

large group of people consider the individual an expert. For
many non-humans a reasonably large group of people
already recognizes their expertise. As early as 945 AD the
Welsh laws of Hywel Dda recognized the difference
between trained expert dogs and untrained dogs by setting
different legal penalties for killing them (Menache, 2000). A
more contemporary example is the high price set for trained
detector dogs, herding dogs, and service dogs. Also, service
dogs have different access rights than non-expert dogs, an
explicit legal recognition of their expertise. Moreover, many
people, including the author, who live with and appreciate
the work of a service dog regard them as experts, thus
comprising a reasonably large group considering them as
such.
Because of their behavioral flexibility, social
similarity to humans, recognized expertise in many fields
similar to human’s, ease of handling and relatively low
economic cost to house, skilled dogs would make excellent
expert models. Research with skilled canines may provide
insights into human expertise development, at the very least
it may provide useful information in the training of canine
experts.

Acknowledgments
I thank Dr. Donald Schumsky at the University of
Cincinnati for providing critical feedback and editing this
article .

References
Agnew, N.M, Ford, K.M., & Hayes, P.J. (1997). Expertise
in context: personally constructed, socially selected
and reality-relevant? In P.J. Feltovich, K.M. Ford,
& R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), Expertise in context (pp.
219-244). Menlo Park, CA; AAAI Press.
Dukas, R. (1998). Ecological relevance of associative
learning in fruit fly larvae. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology, 19, 195-200.
Elman, J.L., Bates, E.A., Johnson, M.H., Karmiloff-Smith,
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking
innateness: a connectionist perspective on
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ericsson, K.A. (1996). The acquisition of expert
performance: an introduction to some of the issues.
In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to excellence:
The acquisition of expert performance in the arts
and sciences, sports and games (pp. 1-50). New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ericsson, K.A. & Charness, N. (1997). Cognitive and
developmental factors in expert performance. In
P.J. Feltovich, K.M. Ford, & R.R. Hoffman (Eds.),
Expertise in context (pp. 3-41). Menlo Park, CA;
AAAI Press.
Gardner, H. (1997). Extraordinary minds: portraits of
exceptional individuals and an examination of our
extraordinariness. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Glaser, R. (1996). Changing the agency for learning:
Acquiring expert performance. In K. A. Ericsson

(Ed.), The road to excellence: The acquisition of
expert performance in the arts and sciences, sports
and games (pp.303-311). New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Harlow, H.F. & Mears, C. (1979). The human model:
Primate perspectives. Washington, DC: V.H.
Winston & Sons
Heiling, A.M. & Herberstein, M.E. (1999). The role of
experience in web-building spiders (Araneidae).
Animal Cognition, 2, 171-177.
Herberstein, M.E. & Heiling, A.M. (1999). Asymmetry in
spider orb webs: a result of physical constraints?
Animal Behaviour, 58, 1241-1246.
Hikosaka, O., Miyachi, S., Miyashita, K., & Rand, M.K.
(1996). Learning of sequential procedure in
monkeys. In J.R. Bloedel, T.J. Ebner, & S.P. Wise
(Eds.), The acquisition of motor behavior in
vertebrates (pp. 303-318). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Holcomb, H.R. (1996). Just so stories and inference to the
best explanation in evolutionary psychology. Mind
and Machines, 6, 525-540.
Howe, M.J.A., Davidson, J.W., & Sloboda, J.A. (1998)
Innate talent: reality or myth? Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 21, 399-422.
Menache, S. (2000). Hunting and attachment to dogs in the
pre-modern period. In A.L. Podberscek, E.S. Paul,
& J.A. Serpell (Eds.), Companion animals & us
(pp. 42-60). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Parker, S.T. (1996). Apprenticeship in tool-mediated
extractive foraging: The origins of imitation,
teaching, and self-awareness in great apes. In A.E.
Russon, K.A. Bard & S.T. Parker (Eds.), Reaching
into thought: The minds of great apes (pp. 348370). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Prestrude, A.M., & O’Shea, J.G. (1998). Dogs in service to
humans. In G. Greenberg & M. A. Haraway (Eds.),
Comparative Psychology: A Handbook (pp. 386392). New York: Garland Publishing.
Rendell, L., & Whitehead, H. (2001). Culture in whales and
dolphins. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 309382.
Shiffrin, R.M. (1996). Laboratory experimentation on the
genesis of expertise. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The
road to excellence: The acquisition of expert
performance in the arts and sciences, sports and
games (pp. 337-345). New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Skoyles, J.R. (1999). Human evolution expanded brains to
increase expertise capacity, not IQ [42 paragraphs].
Psycoloquy [on-line serial], 10. Available E-mail:
http://cogprints.soton.ac.uk/.
Slabbert, J.M., & Rasa, O.A.E. (1997). Observational
learning of an acquired maternal behaviour pattern
by working dog pups: an alternative training

556

method. Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 53,
309-316.
Sloboda, J.A. (1996). The acquisition of musical
performance expertise: Deconstructing the “talent”
account of individual differences in musical
expressivity. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to
excellence: The acquisition of expert performance
in the arts and sciences, sports and games (pp.
107-126). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Sloboda, J.A. (2000). Individual differences in music
performance. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 397403.
Sternberg, R.J. (1999). Intelligence as developing expertise.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 24, 359375.
Wagner, R.K. & Stanovich, K.E. (1996). Expertise in
reading. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.), The road to
excellence: The acquisition of expert performance
in the arts and sciences, sports and games (pp.
189-225). New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Winner, E. (1996). The rage to master: The decisive role of
talent in the visual arts. In K. A. Ericsson (Ed.),
The road to excellence: The acquisition of expert
performance in the arts and sciences, sports and
games (pp. 271-301). New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

