UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Applying Text Comprehension and Active Reading Principles to Adaptive Hyperbooks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25r0h4ws

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Murray, Tom

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Applying Text Comprehension and
Active Reading Principles to Adaptive Hyperbooks
Tom Murray
Hampshire College School of Cognitive Science, Amherst, MA,
tmurray@hampshire.edu, http://helios/hampshire.edu/~tjmCCS

Abstract

metacognitive skills. We will sometimes refer to this general
process as "active reading/learning" to reflect the fact that
active readers of textbooks are proactively trying to
construct new knowledge. Though active reading skills are
important because they lead to more efficient and effective
comprehension and information finding, these skills are not
very advanced in many students (and adults), and it is
important to support, scaffold, and teach these skills.

We show how cognitive and educational research and theory
from the areas of text comprehension and "active reading"
strategies can be applied to the domain of hypermedia
textbooks ("hyperbooks"). We describe our work on the
MetaLinks system, which is an authoring tool and web-based
server for adaptive hyperbooks. In this paper we describe how
findings from text comprehension research are incorporated
into MetaLinks design features, and summarize formative
studies of students using MetaLinks hyperbooks.

Background: Text Comprehension and Active
Reading

Introduction
In this paper we show how cognitive and educational
research and theory from the areas of text comprehension
and active reading strategies can be applied to the domain of
hypermedia textbooks ("hyperbooks"). Though corporeal
books have important affordances not found yet in
hypermedia books, content is increasingly cast in electronic
forms, and more research is needed to understand the
cognitive aspects of both reading and authoring
hyperbooks.1 Despite the large number of research studies
completed and systems built in the area of hypermedia, very
little of it is both based on cognitive theory and built upon
empirical results from studies of learners, as we do here.
We describe our work on the MetaLinks system, which is an
authoring tool and web-based server for adaptive
hyperbooks. In designing the software we have two primary
goals. The first goal is to support active reading and
learning strategies in on-line texts. The second goal is to
take fuller advantage of the unique affordances of digital
media and investigate new ways to author and read that are
not possible in traditional texts. Here we describe how
findings from text comprehension research are incorporated
into MetaLinks design features, and summarize initial
formative studies of students using MetaLinks hyperbooks.
Our theoretical basis comes in part from research in text
comprehension and active reading. "Active reading" (Ohara
1996, Schilit et al. 1999, Roast et al. 2002) refers to a set of
high level reading, searching, problem solving, and
1

We acknowledge that in moving from paper to computer screen
many affordances are lost (see Masten et al. 1997, Schilit et al.
1999) and we do not advocate for the replacement of paper texts
with electronic ones, but we are of the opinion that: a) the
movement of textual material to electronic form is momentous and
inevitable and thus must be investigated, and b) electronic texts
have the potential to support active reading in new and significant
ways.

840

In recent times the traditional behaviorist view of reading as
a decoding process leading to the passive acquisition of
isolated facts and skills has been replaced with a more
cognitively oriented view in which reading is an active, selfregulated meaning-construction process in which the reader
interacts with text in a strategic way (Mannes & Kintch
1987, Kintsch 1998). Processing text is seen as a multilevel cognitive process. Text reading for comprehension is
seen as a process of trying to maintain semantic coherence,
i.e. fitting new information into existing knowledge
structures. At a local!level readers try to fit what are
reading into the context of what they have recently read,
making sense of the progression of related ideas. At a
global level readers try to assimilate new information into
prior knowledge, or accommodate prior knowledge to be
consistent with the new information.
Johnson &
Afflerback's (1985) study investigates the process of
constructing main ideas from texts, which is generally
regarded as the essence of reading comprehension. This
skill, though universally important to reading at all levels, is
actually a complex set of skills that never fully develop in
many readers. Brown et als. (1994) use of reciprocal
teaching in classrooms relied in part upon having students
work actively to create meaning from texts through
collaborative and interpretive iterations.
Throughout the literature one of the primary factors
determining reading behavior and outcomes is background
knowledge. Readers who know more about a domain can
more easily: comprehend content as they read, determine
what they need to know, decide how to find what they need
to know, and anticipate or predict what may come next.
They can make bridging inferences when the flow of text
lacks coherence, and construct macro-representations
(overviews or summaries) of the structure of an entire topic
or document (Kintsch 1998, Royer & Cunningham 1981).
Because learners have different background knowledge,

learning styles, and goals, and because each learner
constructs new knowledge in a personal, idiosyncratic
fashion, the best path through a textual resource may differ
for each learner. "Active reading" is a term used to
emphasize the dynamic, opportunistic processes observed in
non-recreational reading of expository texts as done by
experts and motivated readers. In Table 1 we list a number
of active reading strategies culled from the literature, which
we group into behavioral, cognitive, and metacognitive
strategies (from Collins et al. 1989, Foltz 1996, Mannes &
Kintsch 1987, O'hara 1996; Roast et al. 2002, Schilt et al.
1999). Johnson & Afflerback see reading comprehension
skills as being "eminently teachable."
Behavioral strategies
ß Skimming (for an overview or "forward planning")
ß Scanning (to locate specific content)
ß Reviewing (summarizing to identify main points)
ß Bookending (looking at the beginning and end of a book or
section)
ß Big picturing (going to the table of contents for an overview
of the structure)
ß Deepening (diving deeper or obtaining additional information
on a subject)
ß Refocusing (on a different level of the text)
ß Exploring (taking tangents not immediately related to a high
priority goal)
ß Writing (note taking, annotating, highlighting, etc.)
Cognitive strategies
ß Summarizing & consolidating (identify main points)
ß Connecting (creating meaning and relevance for new
knowledge)
ß Evaluating (critiquing and synthesizing)
ß Questioning (determine what needs to be know, explained, or
justified)
ß Predicting (anticipating where the author is going)
ß Planning (what pages to visit next)
Metacognitive strategies
ß Monitoring coherence, understanding, effort, and efficiency
ß Setting goal and managing goal priority
ß Deciding which behavioral or cognitive strategy to use next

Table 1: Active Reading Strategies
The ability to effortlessly "jump" from one "place" in a text
to another, via hyperlinks or text searching, leads to a wide
array of potential benefits and new problems. Hyperbooks
can contain alternative structures, content, and navigation
paths that emphasize different goals, skill levels, or
perspectives (Conklin 1987, Ferguson et al. 1992; Spiro &
Jeng 1990; Cleary & Bareiss 1996). Learners have the
ability to navigate through the content in ways that match
their goals, interests, and learning styles. Yet the
distinguishing characteristic of hypermedia, i.e. its easy
random access, leads unavoidably to a set of problems, or
"side effects": disorientation, poor narrative flow, poor
conceptual flow, and cognitive overload (Conklin 1987,
Lucklin et al. 1999, Beasley & Waugh 1995, Plowman et al.
1998, Stanton & Baber 1994). These issues are described in
more detail in (Murray 2002, Murray in press). MetaLinks
has several features, described later, that support learners'

841

exploration of hypermedia spaces while ameliorating these
four classic problems.
Studies by Foltz (1996) indicate that users reading
hypermedia documents are active opportunistic problems
solvers who look for cues and navigate with a goal of
maintaining semantic coherence. He identifies a number of
comprehension issues in hypermedia that are related to the
"side effects" mentioned above. A primary goal during
reading is to maintain coherence. Hypermedia jumps can
make it hard to maintain local coherence. These problems
are exacerbated for readers who have inadequate preexisting
conceptual structures into which to fit new knowledge. A
primary goal during reading is to maintain coherence.
Hypermedia jumps can make it hard to maintain local
coherence. These problems are exacerbated for readers who
have inadequate preexisting conceptual structures into
which to fit new knowledge. Jacobson & Archodidou
(2000) extend previous research in Cognitive Flexibility
Theory (Jacobson & Spiro 1995) and assert that hypermedia
texts should reify the deep structural and conceptual aspects
of a domain. Research comparing expert and novice
performance has shown that novices tend to focus on
surface aspects and miss deep structure aspects of problems
and examples (Chi et al. 1981). We believe that scaffolding
that makes the deep structures and concepts of a domain
explicit in a text could help novice learners.

The MetaLinks Adaptive Hypermedia System
The MetaLinks software comprises an authoring tool and
web server for adaptive hyperbooks (Murray and Murray et
al. 1998, 2000, 2002). Adaptive hypermedia systems
compose pages "on the fly" so that the content, style, and/or
sequencing of the page is customized to the needs of the
particular learner and situation (DeBra & Calvi 1998,
Brusilovsky 1998, Spetch & Oppermann 1998). Though
non-adaptive (static) hypermedia has been popular for over
20 years, it is only recently that internet data-base
technologies that enable dynamic configuration and
personalization of web pages have become common. This
new features introduce both opportunities and new problems
for readers, about which little research has been done.
Adaptivity and other MetaLinks features allow us to
design and evaluate digital artifacts that serve multiple
purposes. The same hyperbook can serve as textbook and
reference book; can be equally appropriate for novice and
advanced readers, and can be coherently read from a
number of thematic perspectives. Figure 1 shows a typical
MetaLinks hyperbook screen. From top to bottom, it
contains the navigation bar, the page title, the page text,
"custom depth control" navigation buttons, and a list of
links to children pages. The author can include as many
figures as desired, and specify a scaling factor for each
picture. In addition to the main content window shown in
the figure, there are separate windows for a table of
contents, a search tool, a glossary, and an annotated history
tool. Green colored underlined words correspond to words
in the glossary. When the user drags the cursor over one of

these words its definition pops up as shown in Figure 1.
When the user clicks on the "Related Information" tab, they
sees a list of links to related pages, as shown in the insert to
the right of the figure. The user can navigate through the
book hierarchically using parent, subtopic, and sibling topic
links, and can navigate associateively, through the link list
that pops out in the "Related Inforamtion" menu.

Figure 1: MetaLinks hyperbook as seen in a web browser
The system includes a sophisticated authoring tool that
makes it easy to manage content, media (graphics, applets,
etc.), and hyperlinks. The MetaLinks authoring tool and
web server is built using a FileMaker Pro and JavaScript
coding. All user behavior is recorded in a database, to allow
for adaptivity and facilitate study data collection.
Most texts are structured and conceptualized in terms of
three "epistemic forms" (Collins & Ferguson 1993):
narrative, hierarchy, and network.
Learning has
traditionally been mediated by narrative (or episodic)
structures such as spoken words and books (Luckin et al.
1988); cognition has hierarchical aspects (as indicated in
most theories of cognition and problem solving (e.g.
Ausubel 2000)); and memory and thought have associative
or network aspects (Woods 1975). We have tried to design
MetaLinks to support all three forms, while minimizing the
potential cognitive tensions introduced in having three
different but overlapping formats at once. Mannes &
Kintch (1987) found that outlines reflecting (or consistent
with) the thematic organization of the main text improved
comprehension and verbatim recall. Such hierarchically
consistent outlines are called "advanced organizers"
(Ausubel 2000). Outlines that are organized in a
thematically different way than the main text (thus giving a
alternate or diverging perspectives on the material in a more
associative fashion) encourage deeper processing and are
better for problems solving, inferences, transfer, and

842

integrating new knowledge into existing knowledge.
MetaLinks hyperbooks provide both thematically consistent
(hierarchical) and thematically divergent linking.
Many MetaLinks features are slight modifications of
techniques used in other systems, but three features are
innovations that are more particular to MetaLinks: custom
depth control, thematic links, and narrative smoothing.
Custom depth control supports h i e r a r c h i c a l
conceptualizations of content; thematic links support
associative conceptualizations of content; and narrative
smoothing supports narrative coherence in reading. Below
we describe these three features.
Horizontal Reading and Custom Depth Control. In
MetaLinks hyperbooks the default narrative flow (a linear
navigation path for which the reading or organization of the
content is most natural or perspicuous) is organized for
"horizontal reading." This differs from traditional books
and most other hyperbooks. The default "next" page is the
sibling page, so if one is reading the introduction to Chapter
3 the default next page is the introduction to Chapter 4,
which is navigated to with the "Next" button. Thus the
default is to continue reading at the same level of generality.
This sets the stage for an innovation called "custom depth
control." To the left of the Next button is the "Explain
More" button. This button begins a path across the children
of the current page (by pushing the children on a stack).
When the last child in a sibling sequence is reached the Next
button becomes a Return button, so that the user can easily
return to the parent page where they originally pressed the
Explain More button. Thus, the user has continuous control
over the level of depth at which they are reading.
Supporting thematic relationships. Hierarchies do
not capture the conceptual richness of most domains. There
are multiple perspectives on the material, suggesting
multiple learning paths. Each MetaLinks page has a set of
thematic links (non-hierarchical, associative, or "tangential"
links) to other pages, accessed via a pop-out menu by
clicking on the "Related Information" tab (see Figure 1).
Unlike most other hypermedia, the links are "typed" or
categorized to indicate the type of relationship they
represent. The authoring tool provides a list of possible
link types, but the author can create her own types for each
hyperbook. They allow the learner to maintain a path
through the material that responds to their individual
curiosity and inquiry goals. Thematic links are similar to
those used in ASK systems (Ferguson et al. 1992) but in
MetaLinks the link vocabulary is not fixed, it is determined
by the subject matter expert.
Narrative Smoothing. As mentioned, the narrative of
the hyperbook is written to flow most perspicuously for
users using horizontal reading and custom depth control. If
the reader navigates using any other feature, for example
thematic links or the search engine, then the narrative would
have a discontinuity. We have a simple but elegant adaptive
solution to the narrative flow problem that we call "narrative
smoothing." Each page has associated with it an "intro text"
paragraph that eases the reader into the subject of the page,

giving a little background, context, or introduction. If the
user jumps to that page in a non-standard way, i.e. one that
does not follow horizontal reading, the intro-text is inserted
before to the main text of the page (otherwise it is not
included).
Below we describe how MetaLinks features relate to
four important active reading and learning issues:
coherence, reading strategies, background knowledge, and
exploration.
Supporting local and global coherence. MetaLinks
includes a number of features that support coherence in
reading, and thus better comprehension. Features that
support local coherence include narrative smoothing,
inquisitory page titles in links, pop-up foot notes and
glossary definitions (which alleviate the need to digress to
another page to read a foot note or definition), and custom
depth control (which allows reading or skimming at any
level without interrupting the narrative). To support global
coherence, MetaLinks has an annotated table of contents
(TOC), visual content maps, a page numbering scheme that
identifies a page's position in the hierarchy, and thematic
links that reify the key thematic dimensions of a domain.
Supporting active reading strategies. In the move
from text to hypertext, some issues are trivialized, some are
problematized, and new issues are introduced. The basic
features of MetaLinks hyperbooks practically trivialize the
"behavioral" set of active reading strategies in Table 1.
Skimming is directly supported with the horizontal reading
feature. Scanning (looking for a specific thing) is done
easily with the search engine. Reviewing involves returning
to a previous page (a Back or Return button). Bookending
in MetaLinks books is done automatically due to its
rhetorical structure and custom depth control feature. Big
picturing involves using the TOC tool. Deepening is
supported directly with custom depth control. Exploring is
supported with thematic links. The (non-behavioral)
cognitive and metacognitive active reading strategies are, of
course, less straightforward to support (and more difficult to
measure in both texts and hyperbooks). But we believe that
hyperbooks support these skills. Summarizing is supported
through horizontal reading and the alternative rhetorical
structure of our hyperbooks. Connecting is supported
through the thematic links, which reify important
connections and allow readers to learn about a connected
topic as soon as they become aware of or interested in the
connection. Evaluating/critiquing/synthesizing are also
made easier when important relationships are made more
explicit and easy to follow. Questioning, predicting, and all
of the other cognitive active reading strategies are supported
to the extent that local and global coherence are supported
(as described above). When reading is more coherent it
consumes less cognitive resources, and these resources are
freed up for higher level processes such as critiquing,
synthesizing, etc. The same holds for supporting
metacognitive strategies, which are more difficult to use
when cognitive resources are consumed by lower level
processing.

843

Accounting for background knowledge and
prerequisites. As mentioned above, background knowledge
has a significant impact on learning, coherence, navigation,
comprehension, and strategies. The MetaLinks system
includes several features that allow readers with multiple
levels of expertise to use the text, and it allows readers with
low expertise or missing prerequisite knowledge to learn
what they need to learn. Skimming in the Custom Depth
feature allows readers to read at a level of depth and detail
that fits their prior knowledge. Thematic links can be used
to create "prerequisite" links between pages, making it
explicit to readers what material should come first, and
whether or not they have read this material (the color of the
link text shows if they have been there). The glossary pop
up feature assists the reader in filling in small gaps in
knowledge. The Glossary Base Page feature allows easy
access to additional information.
Supporting exploratory navigation. Above we
identified exploration as one of the strategies used in active
reading. Though most hypermedia projects focus on goaldirected learning and information finding tasks, it has been
our intention to also support behavior that has been called
inquiry-based, discovery-based, or exploratory. Many
learning tasks involve an initial convergent stage of
articulating and refining the goal or question and then
divergently exploring potential sources of information
before returning to convergent thinking and focused search
(Wallace et al. 2000). Exploratory navigation is particularly
appropriate for open-ended questions and/or learning in illstructured domains in which the richness of the content
suggests multiple themes or perspectives (McAleese 1989,
Heller 1990, Spiro & Jehng 1990). MetaLinks supports
exploratory and curiosity-driven behavior in several ways.
Thematic links and inquisitory page titles facilitate
exploring related but tangential topics. Custom depth
control and glossary base pages makes it easy for the reader
to "dive deeper" into topics she is curious about. Finally, to
the degree that many features minimize hypermedia "side
effects" they make it easier to explore tangents while
maintaining coherence and orientation.

Results of Evaluations
To date, MetaLinks has been used to author four
hyperbooks. The largest is the introductory geology
hyperbook Tectonica Interactive, which has approximately
400 pages, 500 graphics and 320 glossary entries (from
Thompson & Turk 1997). We have conducted three
formative studies of the MetaLinks software using
Tectonica Interactive in clinical settings. All were done
with college aged students, and there were 5, 19, and 24
subjects, respectively, in the three studies. Each study
collected data from automatic tracking of navigation,
questionnaires of approximately 50-items, focus group
interviews, and semi-structured interviews. The results (see
Murray 2002) are summarized as follows:
ß Subjects overwhelmingly reported high levels of
usability and perceived learning effectiveness (in

general and on each feature and tool). There were no
significant effects of gender, computer familiarity, prior
knowledge of geology, or preference for Geology on
questionnaire responses, tool use, or navigation
behavior.
ß Subjects demonstrated many navigation styles, and a
wide range of tool preferences. This reflects the variety
of reading strategies seen in the text comprehension
literature, and supports the existence of our variety of
navigation tools. Both focused and exploratory
behavior were observed, supporting our hypothesis that
the tools support a range of learning tasks and goals.
ß Using "ablation studies" and multiple versions of the
software we tried (in study #3) to focus on the effects of
the narrative smoothing and related links features. We
found no significant effects from the use or existence of
these features, but these results were limited by ceiling
effects and the following findings.
ß The custom depth feature was highly used and
significantly correlated to user satisfaction. The related
links were not used very often (1-5% of moves vs. 1015% for children links and custom depth control links.)
In one ablation study we demonstrated that feature
salience had a significant effect on the use of this
feature. The feature was used more when it was shown
on the page and did not require the user to click the
pop-out tab.
Our evaluations thus far have tested the overall usability and
usefulness of MetaLinks features. Our next steps will be to
monitor specific active reading strategies, and analyze how
these relate to session, subject matter, and reader
characteristics.

Future Directions
In the future we plan to conduct additional investigations to:
1) push the tasks and content to more difficult levels; 2)
measure learning effects (we only had user reports of
usability, usefulness, and learning in previous studies--we
did not measure geology knowledge changes), 3) try more
domains to test the generality of the approach; 4) example
the use of active reading strategies; 5) study the authoring
process; and 6) develop and test hyperbooks in actual
classroom situations.

Acknowledgements
Most of the work reported here took place at the University
of Massachusetts Computer Science Department in,
Amherst, MA, with the help of: Professor Chris Condit,
Janette Piemonte Gartner, Tina Shen, Jason Thibedeau, Erik
Haugsjaa, Dr. Phil Kelleher, and Samia Khan. This
material is based upon work supported by the National
Science foundation's under Grant No. NSF DUE-9652993,
and by the Office of Naval Research AASERT grant no.
ONR/N00014-97-1-0815. Disclaimer: Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the author(s) and do not

844

necessarily reflect the views of the Nation Science
Foundation or the Office of Naval Research.

References
Ausubel, David P. (2000). The acquisition and retention of
knowledge: A cognitive view. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Beasley, R.E. & Waugh, M.L (1995). Cognitive mapping
architectures and hypermedia disorientation: An empirical study.
J. of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia 4(2/3), pp. 239255.
Brown, A., Ellery, S. & Campione, J. (1994). Creating Zones of
Proximal Development Electronically. In J.G. Greeni & S.
Goldman (Eds.) Thinking practices: A symposium in
mathematics and science education. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brusilovsky, P. (1998). Methods and Techniques of Adaptive
Hypermedia. In P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, and J. Vassileva
(Eds), Adaptive Hypertext and Hypermedia, Chapter 1, pages 144, Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P. & Glaser, R. (1981). "Categorization and
Representation of Physics Problems by Experts and Novices,"
Cognitive Science, (5).Dong, A. & Agonino, A. (2001).
Chun, D. & Plass, J. (1997). Research on text comprehension in
multimedia environments. Language Learning & Technology,
Vol 1 No. 1. pp 60-81.
Cleary, C. & Bareiss, R. (1996). Practical Methods for
Automatically Generating Typed Links. Proc. of the Seventh
ACM Conference on Hypertext, Washington, DC, March 16-20,
1996.
Collins, A. & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic Forms and
Epistemic Games: Structures and Strategies to Guide Inquiry.
Educational Psychologist, 28(1), 25-42.
Conklin, J. (1987). Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey. IEEE
Computer, September 1987, pp. 17-41.
De Bra, P. & Calvi, L. (1998). AHA: a generic adaptive
hypermedia system. Proceedings of he 2nd Workshop on
Adaptive Hypertext and Hypermedia, Hypertext '98, Pittsburgh,
J u n e ,
1 9 9 8 .
http://www.contrib.andrew.cmu.edu/~plb/HT98_workshop/
Ferguson, W., Bareiss, R., Birnbaum, L, & Osgood, R. (1992).
ASK Systems: an approach to the realization of story-based
teachers. J. of the Learning Sciences 2(1), pp. 95-134.
Foltz, P.W. (1996). Comprehension, coherence, and strategies in
hypertext and linear text. In Rouet, Levonen, Dillon & Spiro
(Eds) Hypertext and Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Heller, R. (1990). The Role of Hypermedia in Education: A look
at the research Issues. J. of Research on Computing in
Education, Vol. 22, 431-441.
Jacobson, M.J., & Spiro, R.J. (1995). Hypertext Learning
Environments, Cognitive Flexibility, and the Transfer of
Complex Knowledge: An Empirical Investigation. J .
Educational Computing Research, 12(4), 301-333.
Jacobson, M.J. & Archodidou, A. (2000). The Design of
Hypermedia tools for Learning: Fostering Conceptual Change
and Transfer of Complex Scientific Knowledge. J. of the
Learning Sciences 9(2) 145-199.

Johnson, P. & Afflerback, P. (1985). The Process of Constructing
Mean Ideas from Text. Cognition and Instruction Vol. 2 No.
3&4, pp. 207-232.
Kintsch, W. (1979). On Modeling Comprehension. Educational
Psychologist! Vol. 14, 3-14.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Luckin, R., Plowman, L., Laurillard, D. Straforld, M., & Taylor, J.
(1998). Scaffolding Learners' Constructions of Narrative.
Proceedings of Int. Conf. of the Learning Sciences, 1998, 181187.
Mannes, S. & Kintsch, W. (1987). Knowledge Organization and
Text Organization. Cognition and Instruction Vol. 4 No. 2, 91115.
Masten, J. Stallybrass, P. & Vickers, N. (Eds) (1997). Language
Machines: Technologies of Literary and Cultural Production.
Routledge Press: NY.
McAleese, R. (1989). Navigation and Browsing in Hypertext.
Chapter 2 in R. McAleese (Ed.) Hypertext: Theory Into Action.
Norwood NJ: Ablex Publ.
Murray, T. (in press). Content Design Issues in Adaptive
Hyperbooks.
International Journal of Computer Aided
Technology.
Murray, T. (2002). MetaLinks: Authoring and Affordances for
Conceptual and Narrative Flow in Adaptive Hyperbooks.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, Vol.
13.
Murray, T., Piemonte, J., Khan, S., Shen, T., & Condit, C. (2000).
Evaluating the Need for Intelligence in an Adaptive Hypermedia
System. In Frasson & Gautheir (Eds.), Proceedings of
Intelligent Tutoring Systems 2000, Springer-Verlag:New York,
pp. 373-382.
Murray, T., Condit, C. & Haugsjaa, E. (1998). MetaLinks: A
Preliminary Framework for Concept-Based Adaptive
Hypermedia. In workshop proceedings for ITS-98 workshop on
WWW-Based Tutoring. San Antonio, August, 1998.
O'Hara, K. (1996). Towards a Typology of Reading Goals. Xeros
Park Technical Report EPC-1996-107.
Plowman, L., Luckin, R., Laurillard, D., Stratfold, M., & Taylor, J.
(1999). Designing Multimedia for Learning: Narrative Guidance
and Narrative Construction, In the Proceedings of CHI 99 (pp.
310-317). May 15-20, 1999, Pittsburgh, PA USA.: ACM.
Roast, C., Ritchie, I. & Thomas, S. (2002). Re-Creating the
Reader: Supporting Active Reading in Literary Research.
Communications of the ACM 45(10) 109-111.
Royer, J. M., Carlo, M. S., Dufrense, R., & Mestre, J. (1996). The
assessment of levels of domain expertise while reading.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 373-408
Royer, J.!M., & Cunningham, D.!J.! (1981).! On the theory and
measurement of reading comprehension.! Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 6, 187-216.!
Schilit, B.N., Price, M.N., Golovshinski, G., Tanaks, K., &
Marshall, C.C. (1999). The Reading Appliance Revolution.
IEEE Computer, January 1999, 65-73.
Specht, M. & Oppermannn, R. (1998). ACE - Adaptive
Courseware Environment. New Review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, Vol. 4, 1988, 141-162.
Spiro, R.J. & Jehng, J.C. (1990). Cognitive Flexibility and
Hypertext: Theory and Technology for the Nonlinear and
Multidimensional Traversal of Complex Subject Matter. In D.

845

Nix & R. Sprio (Eds.) Cognition, Education, and Multimedia.
Erlbaum, 1990.
Stanton, N.A. & Baber, C (1994). The Myth of navigating in
hypertext: How a "bandwagon" has lost its course! J. of
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 3(3/4), pp. 235-249.
Thompson, G.R. & Turk, J.T. (1997). Modern Physical Geology,
Second Edition. Saunders Publishing Co: Philadelphia,
Wallace, R.M., Kuperman, J., Krajcik, J. & Soloway, E. (2000).
Science on the Web: Students Online in a Sixth Grade
Classroom. Journal of the Learning Sciences, Vol. 9 No. 1, 75104.
Woods, W.A. (1975). What's in a Link: Foundations for Semantic
Networks," in D. G. Borrow & A.M. Collins (Eds.)
Representation and Understanding: Studies in Cognitive
Science, pp 35-82. New York: Academic Press.

