UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Assessment of Resource Coordination Effectiveness Through Analysis of Distributed
Cognitive Traces in Team Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rs8g8hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Vick, Rita M.
rosby, Martha E.
Auernheimer, Brent

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Assessment of Resource Coordination Effectiveness Through Analysis of
Distributed Cognitive Traces in Team Decision Making
Rita M. Vick (vick@hawaii.edu)
CIS Interdisciplinary Doctoral Program, 1680 East-West Road, POST 306-D
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Martha E. Crosby (crosby@hawaii.edu)
Information and Computer Sciences Department, 1680 East-West Road, POST 305-D
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA

Brent Auernheimer (brent@CSUFresno.edu)
Computer Science Department, MF109
California State University, Fresno, CA 93740 USA
Abstract
Computer supported collaborative work (CSCW) and
computer supported collaborative learning (CSCL) are
facilitated through deployment of complex multi-user
systems. In order to increase the effectiveness of these
systems, we must know more about how people interact with
structures in the technology and the work space to sustain
interaction, alleviate cognitive load, and enable restructuring
of social and environmental elements thereby creating new
knowledge structures. The present study suggests a way to
capture evidence of artifact usage, emergence of knowledge
and process structures, and resource coordination patterns
during computer-mediated group interaction to better
understand how resource coordination facilitates collaborative
cognitive tasks. It is proposed that interactive use of
emergent and accumulated cognitive information traces in a
virtual decision-making task environment results in formation
of an emergent group mental model through a discoursedriven distillation process. This collective mental model is
the synthesis of the distributed shared understanding of the
collaboratively-negotiated problem solution that is
instantiated in the final decision model as the physical
representation of the problem solution.

Introduction
The availability of advanced communication technologies
that provide effective support for work and learning enables
the movement of knowledge as well as interactive learning
and commercial activities across time, space, and
organizations. Value added in the global economy derives
from effective work processes that enable creation of more
competitive products and services. This productivity is
supported by effective interactive communication
capability. The same environmental factors causing change
in the workplace are also engendering change in education.
Consequently, the advent of computer-supported
collaborative work (CSCW) systems is matched by the
growth of computer-supported collaborative learning
(CSCL) systems as evidenced by the proliferation of
synchronous and asynchronous learning environments
offered by educational institutions as well as those
supporting organizational training programs.

1182

The rapid growth of knowledge increases the need for a
broad range of expertise. Because it is impossible for
individuals to keep up with this growing knowledge base,
there is an increasing need for people to work in virtual
teams to leverage the collective expertise of often widely
dispersed individuals.
Although new technologies enable virtual working and
learning, the body of empirical evidence indicates that
people are resistant to change and that they often find it
difficult to adapt to virtual work and learning situations. By
examining how current technology supports or fails to
support user needs, how people adapt to new work
environments, and how people learn to use available
resources, we can determine how technology can be better
designed in terms of learnability, ease of use, and value
derived from use.
Beyond “ease of use,” however, technology must be
conducive to development of real task understanding and
user awareness of the applied contextual integrity of the
developing solution. As a first step toward understanding
implied feedforward and feedback requirements, the present
study suggests a way to capture evidence of artifact usage,
emergence of knowledge and process structures, and
resource coordination patterns during computer-mediated
group interaction. Because of the centrality of decision
making in everyday activity, this study focuses on how
distributed virtual teams engage in synchronous problem
solving using decision modeling software. The results of
this analysis will assist ongoing work aimed at
understanding how to better facilitate collaborative
cognitive tasks.

Rationale for the Study
This study posits that a residue of information traces is left
as a byproduct of interaction in a virtual work environment
after meaningful activity. This “information trail” reveals
how virtual team resource use evolved over time throughout
the work session. Use patterns can be determined from
these traces. Analysis of the traces reveals a history of how
information-containing artifacts (e.g., online data stores, email, the Web, manuals) were used, re-used, and created
throughout the interaction process. Activated resources

might be internal or external to the work context, or they
might emerge through use and re-use of resources.
The dexterity with which distributed teams coordinate
resources available to them in a virtual work environment
throughout the work process is a significant determining
factor in the quality of their output. Thus, evaluation of
resource coordination as a driving factor in group work
outcomes can provide a history of interaction and use of
information sources to assess the effectiveness of the work
process. Use of a distributed cognition framework such as
that proposed by Wright, Fields, & Harrison (2000) can be
used for analysis of what this paper will refer to as
“cognitive traces,” bits of information present in artifacts
during work and left as residue in the post-work
environment. For purposes of this study, a “cognitive trace”
is considered to be any piece of information that is stored
and re-used during work activity, archived during the work
process, or left in the work environment at the end of a work
session.
“Resource coordination” is used to mean
“managing dependencies between activities” (Malone &
Crowston, 2001, p. 10).
Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh (2000) list core principles of
distributed cognition theory that can be seen as
complementary to the propositions of AST (DeSanctis &
Poole, 1994). It can be said, for example, that the
“structural features and characteristics of technologies”
(DeSanctis & Poole, 1994) are leveraged by people to
“establish and coordinate different types of structure in their
environment” and to “off-load cognitive effort to the
environment” (Hollan et al., 2000, p. 181). At the same
time, information structures exist as abstract concepts (e.g.,
in the form of plans, goals, action-effect relationships, and
possibilities) (Wright et al., 2000). These abstractions
become resources for action as they are put into use and are
modified through re-use.
Addition of a distributed cognition construct makes AST
even more helpful as a way to explain mediated interactive
decision making.
The movement and emergence of
information structures through the work environment
evolves into a representation of the problem solution that is
shared by the group. Intentionally or unintentionally offloaded cognitive information becomes “distributed
cognitive information traces” (DCITs) that are used, reused, and created through use. The addition of a shared
mental model construct to AST provides a mechanism
whereby cognitive information that is stored or emerges
throughout the group work process is “distilled,” forming a
group mental model that is an abstract or, in the case of the
decision models in the present study, a physical
representation of the team problem solution. Together, the
constructs of distributed cognition and the shared mental
model contribute a dynamic element to AST.
It is proposed that interactive use of emergent and
accumulated cognitive information traces in a decisionmaking task environment results in formation of an
emergent group mental model through a discourse-driven
distillation process. This collective mental model is the
synthesis of the distributed shared understanding of the
collaboratively-negotiated problem solution that is
instantiated in the final decision model as the physical

1183

representation of the problem solution. The suggested
investigation of mediated collaborative processes using the
proposed enhanced AST model provide for fine-grained
assessment driven by analysis of interactive use that can
lead to better collaborative system design. Better design
will enable the increasingly important integration of
discrete knowledge distributed among humans and artifacts
in work and learning environments and will motivate greater
acceptance of technology-mediated support for group tasks.

The Naturalistic Decision-Making Paradigm
Naturalistic decision making (NDM) using “ill-defined”
problems was chosen in order to simulate the reality of
constant change and the ongoing potential for unanticipated
problems. Originating in the need for analysis of ways to
improve military and other kinds of critical team operation
decision support systems, NDM differs from traditional
decision research in that NDM positions the balance of
analysis at the front end of the decision process. The reason
for “front-loading” the decision process is due to the chief
concern being situation assessment and “refreshing …
situation awareness through feedback, rather than
developing multiple options to compare to one another.”
The chief problem is that use of “rational standards” and
“formal models” of decision making fail “to take into
account effects of most contextual factors that accompany
decision making in real-world settings, nor do they
adequately model the adaptive characteristics of real-world
behavior (Zsambok & Klein, 1997, p. 4).
Teams engaged in naturalistic decision making are
generally dealing with ill-structured, or “wicked,” problems
and may pursue idea generation and solution formation
intermittently and in a cyclical fashion. The process may
continue until a designated boundary is reached in terms of
time, an intrinsic boundary is reached due to lack of new
ideas, or until some other required input to the decisionmaking process becomes exhausted.
In contrast to the traditional paradigm, NDM research, by
design, selects ill-structured problems that occur in
uncertain and changing conditions and that have
changeable, indefinite or competing goals. These decisions
do not involve one-time problems. Instead, as Figure 1
shows, they imply “action/feedback loops” where several
participants work towards a solution in which they have a
personal interest. The decision-making activity is situated
in reality. Organizational goals are at stake and the decision
is made under time constraints. In addition to these “task
and setting” factors, other characteristics of NDM research
are that participants are experienced decision makers, the
purpose of the research is to discover how “real-life”
decisions are made, and the main focus is on situation
awareness and the decision as an episode rather than as a
selection process (Orasanu & Connolly, 1993; Zsambok &
Klein, 1997, p. 5). Unfortunately, the close focus on
application orientation and differentiation from traditional
decision research has prevented development of a
theoretical foundation for NDM (Zsambok & Klein, 1997,
p. 39).

1
Manuals
Handouts
Notes on Paper

TeamEC TM
Model

A

B

G

Knowledge
Sharing

K

E

F

Goal
Definition

J

D

O

WWW

N

Whiteboard

C
E-mail
(Instructor
Comments)

E-mail
(Instructor
Comments)

TeamEC TM
Model

H

P

L
Whiteboard

M
Whiteboard

Q
TeamEC TM
Model

Application Sharing

I
Good
Enough?

No

1

Yes

Done
Figure 1: Team workflow showing alternating intervals of different types of information gathering, synthesis, and
processing. Dark straight lines represent the linear group work process over time. Curved lines represent use and reuse of distributed cognitive information traces spread throughout the work environment.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I

Clarifying handout instructions by referencing email feedback sent by instructor.
Application-sharing among team members.
Team referencing e-mail feedback from instructor.
Verifying model structure against problem
specifications specified on handout.
Verifying whiteboard model structure against
problem specifications specified on handout.
Referencing glossary on class Web site.
Comparing two versions of the model created
through application-sharing and multi-tasking.
Building the model using application-sharing.
Multi-tasking on the whiteboard via applicationsharing.

1184

J

Discussion of previous TeamEC model building.

K

Referencing Web site for information on current
technology availability.
Comparing TeamEC model against an earlier
example on the Web.
Revising model based on whiteboard information.
Brainstorming on the whiteboard.
Clarifying the whiteboard model structure based on
instructor’s e-mail.
Adding brainstorming on the whiteboard based on
previous entry.
Transferring final contents of whiteboard to final
TeamEC model that will be turned in.

L
M
N
O
P
Q

Groups as Adaptive Decision-Making Systems
While a variety of theories of group communication and
decision-making in small groups have been proposed (e.g.,
Ellis & Fisher, 1994; Hirokawa & Poole, 1996; Klein et al.,
1993), few theories have actually been specifically aimed at
explaining and predicting the effects of technology on
collaborative work. Even fewer theories have focused
specifically on technology-supported group decisionmaking. A relatively recent theory that is of particular value
in analyzing the cyclical nature of small group decisionmaking in the context of computer-mediated decision
support systems (DSSs) is Adaptive Structuration Theory
(AST). Although AST is proposed as a useful general
framework for analysis of cooperative technology
(DeSanctis & Gallupe, 1987; DeSanctis & Poole, 1994;
Poole & DeSanctis, 1992), few empirical studies have
actually tested the theory.
Poole and DeSanctis developed adaptive structuration
theory based on Giddens’ structuration theory of society
(Giddens, 1984, 1993; Giddens & Turner, 1987), which
originated in his attempt to synthesize the functionalstructural orientation of the objectivist (e.g., Marxism,
functionalism, structuralism) and the individual free will
orientation of the subjectivist (e.g., symbolic interactionism,
ethnomethodology) schools of sociological thought. Human
agency (action) is central to Giddens’ theory of society and
exists in conjunction with the roles, rules, and resources that
make up the structure of social systems. Social systems
function through instantiation of social relationships that
develop, are integrated, and persist through interaction over
time and space (Münch, 1994, pp. 176-177; 189).

Coordination Theory
Although there have been diverse efforts at coordination in
specific areas (parallel and distributed computer systems,
human-computer systems), there has been a lack of focus.
The interdisciplinary study of coordination is a research area
that attempts to bring different disciplines together in an
effort to create awareness of the work of one discipline
among other disciplines where similar research streams may
provide mutual insights. The goal of coordination research
is to develop theory to explain how coordination occurs in
different systems. The rationale behind the effort is that it
should be possible to answer the question: “How will the
widespread use of information technology change the ways
people work together” (Malone & Crowston, 2001, p. 8)?
The question is more relevant than ever due to the
networking of the computers to which a large percentage of
the world now has access and because of the growing
number of interrelated global business activities.
If
“coordination” is defined as “managing dependencies
between activities,” it takes on extremely broad
connotations in the growing global network environment.
In order to effectively follow the “plan” imbedded in a
system, the user will need to determine how to conduct
appropriate inquiry-response sequences. Because the user
tends to be encumbered by expectations created during
human-human interaction, the user’s actions are to a large
extent determined by the plan or script the machine

1185

employs: “organization of situated action is an emergent
property of moment-by-moment interactions between
actors, and between actors and the environments of their
action” (Suchman, 1987, p. 179). This is, basically, a
coordination problem.
Another area of concern in coordination theory research is
distributed cognition. Part of the interest here is on the role
played by perspectives (individual world views) and how
they might be visualized to enhance collaborative
communication. This requires determining how best to
support the subjective, interpretive processes of perspective
making and taking:
What is required from information technology in
distributed cognition are facilities of self indication,
reflection, and interpretation – an environment for
active sense making in which individuals can construct
representations of their changing understandings and
can explore them in conversation with others. (Boland
& Tenkasi, 2001, p. 63).

Distributed Cognition
In a recent discussion of the potential for distributed
cognition to serve as a new foundation for HCI research,
Hollan, Hutchins, and Kirsh (2000, p. 175-176) stress the
nature of distributed cognition as a unique perspective that
takes into account all cognition – not only individual
cognition.
The distributed cognition perspective is
distinguished by two principles: (1) distributed cognition
understands cognitive processes as those that are based on
functional relationships among entities working together
within a process and so the boundaries of the unit of
analysis is determined by these relationships rather than
spatial collocation and (2) distributed cognition
encompasses a broad range of objects that may be part of
cognitive processes. This means that cognitive processes
can be distributed across members of a group, they may
involve internal and external structures, and they can even
be distributed through time given the transformational effect
of present events on later events. As part of their effort to
establish an integrated research framework, Hollan et al.
specify four core principles of distributed cognition theory:
1.
2.
3.
4.

people establish and coordinate different types of
structure in their environment
it takes effort to maintain coordination
people off-load cognitive effort to the environment
whenever practical
there are improved dynamics of cognitive loadbalancing available in social organization. (p. 181)

A recent framework for representation of information
structures as abstract concepts but also as resources for
action fits well with the AST model as an analytical tool.
The Distributed Information Resources (DIR) framework
(Wright, Fields, and Harrison, 2000) designates a cycle of
interaction where a given information resource
configuration is brought into coordination for use and
subsequently is recycled through use back into the
interaction process as an updated resource.

Adaptive Structuration Theory (AST)
Other artifacts in a work or learning environment affect
what users do and how and when they do it. The reciprocal
nature of the impact of activity on context and context on
activity is a coordination activity that is central to the
emergence of new social and contextual structures in
Adaptive Structuration Theory (Poole and DeSanctis, 1994).
The original specification of AST, although developed to
describe collaborative activity in general, did not include
representation of the ongoing synthesis of the meaning and
results of activity. The original framework does not
reference the development of a group representation (group
mental model) of the state of the work process. Neither
does the original framework reference the fact that cognition
is distributed in such a system. This study extends AST to
include the group mental model as a distiller of interactive
use of artifacts stored in the collaborative work environment
in the form of “cognitive traces.” This modification of AST
increases its explanatory value and its potential as an
evaluative tool. The term “group mental model” as used
here refers to team work where the team has developed a
shared representation of the task goal, and has developed a
shared understanding of how to best manage the work
process, product, and state of project (including task and
sub-task distribution). The implication is that there is
common understanding of the situated cognition of other
team members with regard to the distribution of task
knowledge, skills, performance capabilities of other team
members, and the distribution of resources among artifacts
and users.
The cognitive information traces stored in the work
environment and team resource coordination patterns can be
used to identify development of effective or problematic
team work styles. The premise of this study is that analysis
of patterns of time and cognitive information trace use and
re-use during the work process can be used to evaluate how
effectively a team manages available resources under a
variety of circumstances. Knowledge of these patterns can
be used to facilitate improved team resource management
through enhanced human and/or computer support.

Method
Participants
The study included 27 senior-level undergraduate students
in an elective course on use and design of computer
supported collaborative work systems. Participants were
randomly assigned to three four-member and three fivemember teams. The six zero-history, self-directed teams
were placed in an unfamiliar work context using unfamiliar
software where they developed decision models to solve
“ill-defined” problem scenarios within specified time
frames. Teams remained intact through a series of 10
simulated synchronous virtual team meetings.
In
preparation for the naturalistic simulation of a distributed
teamwork environment, students received background in
basic business concepts, business models, case studies,
project management, marketing, and systems analysis
techniques during the lecture and discussion portion of the

1186

course. This enabled students to better accomplish the tasks
required by the decision-making scenarios they used during
the laboratory simulation portion of the course. Teams were
autonomous and self-directed. Each team assumed a reallife role within the assigned scenario. The roles were
rotated during the initial training series of team meetings as
well as during the domain-specific work series of meetings.
In this way, each group was exposed to each role by the end
of the series. Laboratory sessions ranged from 38-90
minutes (average 63 minutes) in duration.

The Virtual Team Support System: NetMeeting
In order to create an environment that would enable teams
to simulate synchronous distributed teamwork in a single
computer laboratory, Microsoft NetMeeting was used to
provide communication support via its chat facility and to
enable application sharing so that team members could work
simultaneously on the collaborative building of decision
models. Other features of NetMeeting available for use by
the teams were the whiteboard, shared clipboard, and file
transfer. The teams also had access to the class Web site
and e-mail for referencing class notes and comments on
their prior work. Web access enabled searches for external
information that might assist problem solution.
NetMeeting chat enabled capture of a transcript of the
entire chat complete with speaker identification, date, and
time stamps on each comment. The detailed transcript
along with the model and the whiteboard content were the
deliverables each team was responsible for submitting at the
end of each lab session. These digital records of the team
work process were created in the virtual workspace during
each lab session.

The Decision Support Software: TeamEC
The primary measure of effectiveness of group learning and
performance over time was the soundness of the decision
models produced by the teams. TeamEC, a package of
group decision support software tools produced by Expert
Choice, Inc. (http://www.expertchoice.com/), was used for
analyzing, synthesizing, and justifying complex decisions
and evaluations in a group setting. Among the advantages
of this software are: (1) it brings structure and organization
to the decision-making process and (2) it provides an easily
quantifiable measure of team progress (model score).

Decision Tasks
During a series of five decision-making sessions,
participants were given a decision-making problem
(Scenario 1) that was of a general nature and was removed
from the computer science and engineering learning domain
of the participants. The problem for Scenario 1 was one that
is common to all locations and cultures (revitalizing the
local economy) so that it could be readily understood by all
participants regardless of individual demographic
differences. The sixth lab session of Scenario 1 was a
competition (Face-Off 1), that served as the first benchmark
for the course. The team models produced during the FaceOff were reviewed and ranked in a face-to-face classroom
session to share all model results so that teams could gauge

their progress relative to one another. Scenario 1 was
followed by another problem (Scenario 2) that focused on a
collaborative system design, development, and deployment
decision problem specific to participants’ domain of
expertise. This work series consisted of three role rotations
followed by a second benchmark (competitive Face-Off 2)
to complete the series of ten decision modeling lab sessions.

Results
The dependent variable in this study was the Model Score
achieved by teams during a series of simulated distributed
team decision-making sessions. The independent variables,
were the percentages of meeting time allocated to: Idea
Generation (IG). Model Building (MB), Situation
Assessment (SA), and Resource Coordination (RC). The
repetition of lab sessions over the period of a semester
provided sixty measurements. Descriptive statistics and
frequency analysis were used to explore the overall results
of the study. There were significant differences between
teams on model score. Correlation analysis indicated a
significant inverse relationship between Resource
Coordination (RC) and Idea Generation (IG).

Conclusion
This paper proposes a modification to the original AST
model to include the constructs of distributed cognition and
the group mental model. If progress is to be made in
analysis of how complex systems work and in evaluation of
their effectiveness, it is vital that these constructs be made a
part of the AST model in order to refine the granularity of
the model’s diagnostic value through analysis of the use and
re-use of distributed cognitive information traces. The
distributed information resources framework (DIR) clearly
describes a number of types of information resource on the
abstract level (plans, goals, possibilities, history, actioneffect relations, states) and describes these resources in
terms of their internal (“in the head”) and external (artifacts
in the interface) representations. In parallel with their
internal and external representations, the same resources are
distributed across a given resource configuration in varying
internal and external proportions. This is a useful analytical
device for describing interaction within a team as a complex
system engaged in use of artifacts within a given context
where “structures-in-use” are appropriated for use and are
subject to emergence in changed form. There is good
potential here for explanation of differing group outcomes.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by DARPA grant
NBCH1020004 and ONR grant no. N00014970578 awarded
to Martha E. Crosby.

References
Boland, J., Richard J., & Tenkasi, R. V. (2001).
Communication and collaboration in distributed
cognition. In G. M. Olson & T. W. Malone & J. B. Smith

1187

(Eds.), Coordination theory and collaboration technology
(pp. 51-66). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DeSanctis, G., & Gallupe, R. B. (1987). A foundation for
the study of group decision support systems. Management
Science, 33(5), 589-609.
DeSanctis, G., & Poole, M. S. (1994). Capturing the
complexity in advanced technology use: Adaptive
structuration theory. Organization Science, 5(2), 121-147.
Ellis, D. G., & Fisher, B. A. (1994). Small group decision
making: Communication and the group process (4th ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Giddens, A., & Turner, J. (Eds.). (1987). Social theory
today. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of
the theory of structuration. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Giddens, A. (1993). New rules of sociological method: A
positive critique of interpretative sociologies (2nd ed.).
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hirokawa, R. Y., & Poole, M. S. (Eds.). (1996).
Communication and group decision making (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: Toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction, 7(2), 174-196.
Klein, G. A., Orasanu, J., Calderwood, R., & Zsambok, C.
E. (Eds.). (1993). Decision making in action: Models and
methods. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Malone, T. W., & Crowston, K. (2001). The
interdisciplinary study of coordination. In G. M. Olson &
T. W. Malone & J. B. Smith (Eds.), Coordination theory
and collaboration technology (pp. 7-50). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Münch, R. (1994). Sociological theory: Development since
the 1960s (Vol. 3). Chicago: Nelson-Hall Publishers.
Orasanu, J., & Connolly, T. (1993). The reinvention of
decision making. In G. Klein & J. Orasanu & R.
Calderwood & C. E. Zsambok (Eds.), Decision making in
action: Models and methods (pp. 3-20). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Poole, M. S., & DeSanctis, G. (1992). Microlevel
structuration in computer-supported group decision
making. Human Communication Research, 19(1), 5-49.
Suchman, L. A. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The
problem of human-machine communication. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wright, P. C., Fields, R. E., & Harrison, M. D. (2000).
Analyzing human-computer interaction as distributed
cognition: The resources model. Human-Computer
Interaction, 15, 1-41.
Zsambok, C. E., & Klein, G. (Eds.). (1997). Naturalistic
decision making. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

