UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automaticity of Number Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sj8s484

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Choplin, Jessica M.
Logan, Gordon D.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automaticity of Number Perception
Jessica M. Choplin (jessica.choplin@vanderbilt.edu)
Gordon D. Logan (gordon.logan@vanderbilt.edu)
Vanderbilt University Psychology Department
111 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37203
Abstract
In 2 experiments, the authors investigated whether the
attributes “small” and “large” associated with individual
digits are responsible for the effects of size congruity on
judgments of physical size (Tzelgov, Meyer, & Henik, 1992).
In Experiment 1, a size congruity effect was observed when
participants judged the relative physical sizes of two digits.
However, size congruity effects were just as strong when
participants judged the relative physical sizes of small digits
(i.e., 1-4) paired with letters. In Experiment 2, a similar size
congruity effect was observed when participants judged the
sizes of squares within which individual small digits were
presented.
Consistent with memory-based theories of
automaticity, these results suggest that associations between
the attribute “small” and individual small digits are sufficient
to explain many, if not all, size congruity effects.

Automatic Number Perception

A great deal of research on number perception argues that
numbers automatically – without intention – activate some
form of magnitude representation (Dehaene & Akhavein,
1995; Henik & Tzelgov, 1982; Pansky & Algom, 1999;
Tzelgov, et al., 1992; Tzelgov, Yehene, Kotler, & Alon,
2000). One of the strongest pieces of evidence for the
automatic activation of magnitude representations is the size
congruity effect. In the size congruity effect, participants
observe two digits, one of which is presented in a larger
font size than the other. Participants then judge which of
the two digits is presented in the larger (or the smaller) font
size. Only the physical sizes of the digits are relevant for
this task; the magnitudes represented by the digits are
irrelevant. Nevertheless, a size congruity effect is often
observed such that the time needed to identify the relative
sizes of the digits is faster when the difference in the
quantities represented by the digits is congruent with the
difference in font sizes (e.g., 2 8) than when it is
incongruent with the difference in font sizes (e.g., 2 8).
These size congruity effects also tend to interact with the
distance between the quantities represented by the digits
such that the congruity effect is larger for pairs that are far
away from each other (e.g., 2, 8) than for pairs that are close
together (e.g., 2, 4). These effects demonstrate that
magnitude representations associated with digits intrude in
the judgments even though people are trying to ignore them
and pay exclusive attention to physical size. However, the
nature of these intruding magnitude representations and of
the cognitive processes that operate on them is not well
understood. The purpose of the research reported here was

252

to explore the nature of these magnitude representations and
processes.
Several views regarding the nature of these
representations and processes have been proposed. One
view – henceforth, called the algorithmic model – is that
participants map the quantities represented by digits onto an
analog magnitude representation. The analog magnitude
representation is then used to calculate which is the larger
and which is the smaller of the two. The result of this
calculation is thought to interfere with (or facilitate) size
judgments (Tzelgov, et al., 2000; for related arguments see
Dehaene & Akhavein, 1995). The interaction between size
congruity and distance is often cited as especially strong
evidence for this view, because the larger congruity effects
for digit pairs that are farther away from each other are
believed to reflect faster processing for pairs of digits whose
represented values are more discriminable (i.e., farther
apart) on the analog magnitude representation (Pansky &
Algom, 1999; Tzelgov, et al., 2000).
Previous research suggests, however, that while automatic
processing can associate attributes with items (as in oneplace predicates like small[A]), it cannot handle relational
information (as in two-place predicates like smallerthan[A,B]). By contrast, attentional processing can handle
either attributes or relations (Logan, 1994; Wolfe, Yu,
Stewart, Shorter, et al., 1990). For example, using a visual
search paradigm, Logan (1994) found that attention was
required to identify when a relational target (i.e., a dash
above a plus) was present. Searching for this relational
target never became automatic even after a great deal of
practice. (See also Hummel & Holyoak, 2001, and Hummel
& Choplin, 2000, for a model of the differences in
magnitude-comparison representation under attentional and
automatic processing). This previous research suggests that
while digits might be associated with values on an analog
magnitude representation under automatic, unintentional,
processing, it ought not to be possible to compare values on
the analog representation. Without such comparisons,
represented magnitudes could not interfere with size
judgments.
An alternative to the multi-step algorithm advocated by
Tzelgov and his colleagues (e.g., Tzelgov, et al., 2000) and
Dehaene and his colleagues (e.g., Dehaene & Akhavein,
1995) is suggested by memory-based theories of
automaticity. In these theories, automaticity reflects the
single-step recollection of formerly observed instances from
memory. Memory-based theories seem sufficient to explain
the development of automaticity in tasks such as memory

search (Strayer & Kramer, 1990), category learning (e.g.,
Logan & Etherton, 1994), lexical decisions, (e.g., Logan,
1988), and numerocity judgments (e.g., Lassaline & Logan,
1993; Palmeri, 1997).
Postulating changes in the
algorithms used to perform those tasks has not appeared
necessary to explain the development of automaticity and
there is no a priori reason to think that the automatic
processing of magnitude information in the size congruity
effect should somehow be different. A memory-based
account of size congruity effects would be more consistent
with previous work on automatic processing.
In one such a memory-based account, participants might
associate particular responses with particular sets of
already-grouped digits. For example, after repeatedly
judging that 8 > 2 in contexts in which greater than
responses are appropriate, participants might simply recall
“8” in response to the set of digits {8, 2} and the feature
“greater-than” provided by the context without comparing
the quantities represented by the digits (Logan & Etherton,
1994). The memory that “8” is the appropriate response to
the set {8, 2} could then interfere with participants’
judgment that 2 is physically larger than is 8. However, the
results of Tzelgov, et al. (2000) argue against this view.
They gave their participants extensive training judging the
magnitudes of pairs of arbitrary symbols (i.e., Gibson
figures). Importantly, however, participants only viewed a
subset of the possible Gibson-figure pairings during the
training sessions. Afterwards, participants were asked to
judge the relative physical sizes of novel Gibson-figure
pairings. Size congruity effects were observed. Directly
learned associations between pairings and responses are not
sufficient to explain such an effect (but see the General
Discussion section for a discussion of this effect).
Another way to reconcile size congruity effects with the
previous work on automatic processing is to assume that
attributes associated with individual digits interfere with
size judgments. Tzelgov, et al. (1992) proposed one such
model as a supplement to the algorithmic model described
above. In this model (henceforth, called the laterality
model), digits representing values less than 5 (i.e., 1, 2, 3,
and 4) activate the attribute “small;” and digits representing
values more than 5 (i.e., 6, 7, 8, and 9) activate the attribute
“large.” These associated attributes would facilitate size
judgments when subjects are asked to identify digits as
small that they already associate with the attribute “small”
or identify digits as large that they already associate with
the attribute “large.” They would interfere with size
judgments when subjects are required to identify digits that
activate the attribute “small” as physically large or to
identify digits that activate the attribute “large” as
physically small. Interactions between size congruity and
distance would occur because distance is confounded with
the laterality of the pairs. Of the pairs that have a distance
of two steps between them, only one pair out of seven (14%
of pairs) crosses 5 (i.e., {4, 6} cross 5, but {1, 3}, {2, 4},
{3, 5}, {5, 7}, {6, 8}, and {7, 9} do not). Of the pairs that
have a distance of three steps between them, two pairs out
of six (33% of pairs) cross 5 (i.e., {3, 6} and {4, 7} cross 5,
but {1, 4}, {2, 5}, {5, 8}, and {6, 9} do not), and so forth.

253

Our goal in pursuing the research reported here was to
further investigate the laterality model as one possible
memory-based account of the size congruity effect. If
differences in laterality produce size congruity effects, then
the attributes “large” and “small” hypothesized to be
associated with each of the compared digits ought to be
associated with individual digits as well. These associated
attributes, in turn, ought to interfere with size judgments.
Reaction times ought to be fast for congruent trials in which
size judgments involve small digits (i.e., 1-4) that result in a
judgment of “small” or large digits (i.e., 6-9) that result in a
judgment of “large” relative to incongruent trials in which
size judgments involve small digits (i.e., 1-4) that result in a
judgment of “large” or large digits (i.e., 6-9) that result in a
judgment of “small.” We performed two experiments to test
this prediction. In Experiment 1, small (i.e., 1-4) and large
(i.e., 6-9) digits were paired with letters in addition to being
paired with other digits. One character was larger than the
other and participants identified the larger or the smaller
member of the pair. In Experiment 2, individual digits were
presented alone within either small or large squares and
participants identified the sizes of the squares. If attributes
associated with individual digits are responsible for size
congruity effects in judging the relative sizes of digits
presented in pairs, then size congruity effects also ought to
be observable in conditions in which individual digits are
paired with letters or are presented alone. By contrast, if
comparisons between two digits are responsible for size
congruity effects, then these effects ought not to occur when
individual digits are paired with letters or are presented
alone.

Experiment 1

The algorithmic model assumes that the comparison
algorithm requires two inputs. In this view, size congruity
ought only to occur when two digits are presented together.
By contrast, the laterality model assumes that retrieval of
the attributes “small” and “large” occur in response to
individual digits. In this view, size congruity effects require
only one digit. To test these hypotheses, digits in
Experiment 1 were paired with letters in addition to being
paired with other digits. If size congruity effects occur
when digits are paired with letters, they cannot be due to a
comparison algorithm.

Method

Forty-eight undergraduate students with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision participated in partial fulfillment
of course requirements.
These participants sat
approximately 60 cm in front of a 30 x 40 cm computer
screen. On each of 2016 trials (plus 4 training trials), a
fixation point was presented at the center of the screen for
500 ms followed by two characters. Both characters were
presented at the vertical center of the screen. One character
was presented approximately 1.2 cm left of the horizontal
center of the screen; the other character was presented
approximately 1.2 cm right of the horizontal center of the
screen. One character was presented in Courier 30-font

script (approximately 1.0 x 1.4 cm) and its counterpart was
presented in Courier 40-font script (approximately 1.4 x 2.0
cm). Twenty-four of the participants identified which
character was the smaller of the two and the other twentyfour participants identified which character was the larger
of the two as accurately and quickly as they could. They
did this by pressing the <S> key, which is on the left side of
the keyboard, if the character on the left was the smaller (or
larger) of the two or the <K> key, which is on the right side
of the keyboard, if the character on the right was the smaller
(or larger) of the two. The assignment of characters to
presentation on the left or right side of the screen as well as
presentation in 30 or 40-font script was fully counter
balanced. These characters remained on the screen until the
student responded.
We created three different character-pair conditions. We
created the first condition (henceforth, the NN Condition)
by taking all pairwise combinations involving one digit
from the set {1, 2, 3, or 4} paired with one digit from the set
{6, 7, 8, or 9}. We classified these pairs by the distance
(number of steps) between the members. To assess the
extent to which attributes associated with the small digits
account for size congruity effects, we created the second
condition by taking all of the pairs used in the NN condition
and substituting the letter H for the number 6, the letter N
for the number 7, the letter P for the number 8, and the
letter T for the number 9. This condition will be called the
NL Condition (for Numbers-Letters) because the letters
replaced large numbers. To assess the extent to which
attributes associated with the large digits account for size
congruity effects, we created the third condition by taking
all of the pairs used in the NN condition and substituting the
letter J for the number 1, the letter L for the number 2, the
letter R for the number 3, and the letter V for the number 4.
This condition will be called the LN Condition (for LettersNumbers) because the letters replaced small numbers. Note
that the L’s and N’s in this notation represent the
magnitudes of the numbers that were presented and the
magnitude of the numbers that were replaced, not the
location in which they were presented on the computer
screen. Presentation on the left or the right side of the
screen was fully counterbalanced. To allow us to directly
compare the NL and LN Conditions to the NN condition,
we classified the pairs in the NL and LN Conditions by the
distance (number of steps) between the members of the NN
Condition out of which they were created. We used this
classification scheme to assess the extent to which attributes
associated with individual numbers could explain congruity
effects found for NN pairs. Note, however, that outside of
the context of this experiment it makes little sense to
classify distances between numbers and letters (e.g., the
number of steps between 4 and H).

Results and Discussion

For each condition, congruity scores were calculated by
subtracting the average reaction time on the congruent trials
from the average reaction time on incongruent trials. The
results are presented in Figure 1.

254

A 3 (character-pair type: NN, NL, and LN) x 7 (steps: 2
through 8) Within-Subjects Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
was performed on these congruity scores. This analysis
revealed a significant main effect of character-pair type,
F(2,92) = 79.0, MSE = 1853.1, p < .001. A least significant
difference analysis revealed that the congruity effects were
lower in the LN Condition than in either the NN or NL
Conditions and that the congruity effects in the NN and NL
Conditions were not significantly different from each other.
The congruity effects in the NN and NL conditions were
significantly greater than zero, but the congruity effects in
the LN condition were not. The fact that we found congruity
effects in the NL Condition, but not the LN Condition
suggest that the attribute “small” associated with the digits
1-4 is sufficient to explain size congruity effects—with little
or no influence from the attribute “large.” Separate trend
analyses for each of the three character-pair type conditions
revealed significant linearly increasing trends across steps
for the NL Condition [F(1,47) = 8.79, MSE = 1454.36, p <
.01] and NN Condition [F(1,47) = 6.68, MSE = 883.91, p <
.05] respectively and a significant linearly decreasing trend
across steps for the LN Condition [F(1,47) = 7.97, MSE =
696.75, p < .01]. The fact that we found step effects in the
NL Condition—even though it makes little sense to talk
about the number of steps between numbers and letters—
suggests that these step effects are not due to
discriminability on an analog magnitude representation.
Rather, they appear to be due to associations between small
digits and the attribute “small.” The fact that we found
linearly increasing trends across steps in the NL and NN
Conditions suggests that the associations between each of
the small digits and the attribute “small” are not of equal
strength. It is not immediately clear why we found a
linearly decreasing trend in the LN Condition. Perhaps it is
a statistical aberration.
60
50
40
30

NN
NL
LN

20
10
0
-10
-20
2

3

4

5

Steps

6

7

8

Figure 1. Results of Experiment 1. Congruity effects were
just as large when the digits 1-4 were paired with letters
(NL Condition) as when the digits 1-4 were paired with the
digits 6-9 (NN Condition). Congruity effects were not
significantly greater than zero when the digits 6-9 were
paired with letters (LN Condition).
To make the results of Experiment 1 comparable to the
results of Experiment 2, reaction times for conditions in
which each of the 8 digits were paired with letters (i.e., 1-4
in the NL Condition and 6-9 in the LN Condition) were
analyzed separately. These data are presented in Figure 2.

effects. The algorithm model predicts no size congruity
effects for individually presented digits because the
comparison algorithm requires two digits. By contrast, the
laterality model predicts a size congruity effect for
individually presented digits because only one digit is
required to instigate retrieval of attributes associated with
that digit. To further investigate associations between
individual digits and the attributes “small” and “large,” the
digits in Experiment 2 were individually presented within a
small or a large square. Participants judged the square size.

500
490
480
470
460

40-font
30-font

450
440
430
420
410
400
1

2

3

4

6

7

8

9

Digits

Figure 2. Results of Experiment 1 NL and LN Conditions.
Reaction times to identify the relative sizes of the characters
when the digits were presented in 40-point font was greater
than the time needed to identify the relative sizes of the
characters when the digits were presented in 30-point font
for the digits 1-4, but not for the digits 6-9.
As suggested by Figure 2, a contrast analysis on these
reaction time data revealed that the time needed to identify
the relative sizes of the characters when the digits were
presented in 40-point font was greater than the time needed
to identify the relative sizes of the characters when the
digits were presented in 30-point font for the digits 1-4, but
not for the digits 6-9, F(1,47) = 162.06, MSE = 398.35, p <
.01. Posthoc t-tests with Bonferroni adjustments (α = .05/8
= .006) revealed that reaction times were significantly faster
in response to digits printed in 30-point font than in
response to digits printed in 40-point font for the digits 1-4
[t’s (47) = 9.37, 6.63, 7.24, and 6.79, respectively], but
were not significantly different for the digits 6-9 [t’s (47) =
1.11, 1.58, 1.31, and 1.99, respectively]. A linearly
increasing trend in reaction times across the 8 presented
digits was revealed for pairs in which the digits were
presented in 30-point font, F(1,47) = 33.24, MSE = 368.13,
p < .01; while a linearly decreasing trend in reaction times
across the 8 presented digits was revealed for pairs in which
the digits were presented in 40-point font, F(1,47) = 126.47,
MSE = 469.52, p < .01.
Consistent with the laterality model (Tzelgov, et al.,
1992), these results suggest that the digits 1-4 are associated
with the attribute “small,” but inconsistent with the
laterality model these results suggest that the digits 6-9 are
not associated with the attribute “large.” This finding was
unexpected. We speculate that the reason for this
asymmetry is that the small digits 1-4 are always small (i.e.,
always close to zero). By contrast, the large digits 6-9 are
large in the context of the single digits, but they are not
large in other contexts, such as the numbers 1-100. Notice,
however, that although these results are partially
inconsistent with the laterality model, they are consistent
with the spirit of memory-based models of automaticity in
that the association between the digits 1-4 and the attribute
“small” seems sufficient to explain size congruity effects.

Experiment 2

The purpose of Experiment 2 was to test whether
individually presented digits can produce size congruity

255

Method

Twenty-four undergraduate students with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision participated in partial fulfillment
of course requirements. These participants sat in front of
the same computer screen as that described in Experiment 1.
On each of 1440 trials (plus 6 training trials), a fixation
point was presented at the center of the screen for 500 ms
followed by one character from the digits {1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,
and 9} or the letters {G, K, M, R, S, V, W, and X}
presented in Courier 30-font script (approximately 1.0 x 1.4
cm). This character was either presented inside a small or a
large square. The small square was 3.0 x 3.0 cm; and the
large square was 4.0 x 4.0 cm. Participants pressed the <Q>
key to identify that the square was small and the <P> key to
identify that the square was large or vice versa. The
character and the square remained on the screen until the
student responded.

Results and Discussion

Response times for each of the 8 digits printed within
either a 3.0-cm square or 4.0-cm square are presented in
Figure 3.
540
530
520
510

4 cm
3 cm

500
490
480
470
460
1

2

3

4

6

7

8

9

Digits

Figure 3. Results of Experiment 2. Reaction times to
identify 4.0-cm squares was greater than reaction times to
identify 3.0-cm squares when the digits 1-4 were printed
within them as compared to when the digits 6-9 were
printed within them.
As suggested by Figure 3, a contrast analysis on these
reaction time data revealed that the time needed to identify
4.0-cm squares was greater than the time needed to identify
3.0-cm squares when the digits 1-4 were printed within
them as compared to when the digits 6-9 were printed
within them, F(1,23) = 10.13, MSe = 875.08, p < .01. A
linearly decreasing trend in reaction times was revealed

across the 8 digits presented within 4.0-cm squares, F(1,47)
= 15.57, MSE = 972.48, p < .01. However, contrary to our
predictions no significant linear trend was revealed across
the 8 digits presented within 3.0-cm squares, F < 1.
Nevertheless, these results, along with the results of
Experiment 1, are generally consistent with the view that
the digits 1-4 are associated with the attribute “small,” but
the digits 6-9 are not associated with the attribute “large.”

General Discussion

In 2 experiments, we investigated the laterality model as
one possible memory-based account of size congruity
effects. The reasoning behind these experiments was that if
associations between digits and size attributes (i.e., “small,”
“large”) were responsible for the size congruity effects
observed in pairs of digits as suggested by Tzelgov, et al.,
(1992), then analogous size congruity effects ought to be
observable for individually presented digits. By contrast, if
comparisons between the values represented by the digits
were responsible for the size congruity effects observed in
pairs of digits, then size congruity effects ought not to occur
for individually presented digits.
In Experiment 1,
participants judged the relative physical sizes of two
characters. Three character-pair types were presented:
small digits {1-4} paired with large digits {6-9}, small
digits {1-4} paired with letters, or large digits {6-9} paired
with letters. Size congruity effects were just as large for
small digits {1-4} paired with letters as they were for digits
paired with other digits, but were not reliably greater than
zero for large digits {6-9} paired with letters. In Experiment
2, each of the 8 digits used in Experiment 1 (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4,
6, 7, 8, and 9) was presented individually within small and
large squares. Participants judged the sizes of the squares.
Reaction times to identify 4.0-cm squares were greater than
reaction times to identify 3.0-cm squares when the digits 14 were printed within them as compared to when the digits
6-9 were printed within them. Contrary to the laterality
model but consistent with memory-based models of
automaticity generally, these results suggest that the
associations between the small digits {1-4} and the attribute
“small” are sufficient to explain size congruity effects.
Apparently, associations between the large digits {6-9} and
the attribute “large” play little or no role in size congruity
effects (although the observed linearly decreasing trend
across steps for the LN Condition in Experiment 1 are
intriguing).
Tzelgov, et al. (1992) proposed the laterality model as a
supplement to the algorithmic model. In their view, both
processes operate to produce size congruity effects. The
results of Experiment 1, however, argue against this dualprocess model. If both processes were operating, then,
presumably, both processes would affect reaction times.
However, the size congruity effects in Experiment 1 were
just as large for small digits (i.e., 1-4) paired with letters as
they were for pairs of digits suggesting that associations
between the small digits {1-4} and the attribute “small” are
sufficient to explain size congruity effects. Postulating

256

effects of algorithmic comparison processes appears to be
entirely unnecessary.
Tzelgov, et al.’s (1992) argument for a dual-process
model was highly dependent upon finding size congruity
effects for pairs of which both members were smaller than
or larger than 5. The laterality model as originally
articulated by Tzelgov et al. predicted no size congruity
effects for such pairs because the associations between each
of the small digits (i.e., 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the attribute
“small” as well as between each of the large digits (i.e., 6, 7,
8, and 9) and the attribute “large” were supposed to be
equally strong. However, the linear trends observed in
Experiments 1 and 2 across the 8 presented digits do not
support this prediction of the laterality model as it was
originally articulated. On the contrary, these linear trends
suggest that the associations between digits and the attribute
“small” are not equally strong. It is conceivable, therefore,
that differences in the strengths of the associations between
digits and the attribute “small” could produce size congruity
effects for pairs of which both members were smaller than
5. We should point out, however, that consistently reliable
size congruity effects for pairs of which both members were
smaller than or larger than 5 have rarely been reported in the
literature. Most studies have primarily investigated pairs of
which one member was smaller than 5 and the other
member was larger than 5, failed to find size congruity
effects for pairs of which both members were smaller than
or larger than 5, or reported distance effects that were
confounded with the percentage of pairs that crossed 5 such
that it is impossible to tell whether there were significant
size congruity effects in pairs of which both members were
smaller than or larger than 5 (Algom, et al., 1996; Dehaene
& Akhavein, 1995; Henik & Tzelgov, 1982). Tzelgov, et
al. (1992) themselves only reported size congruity effects
for two pairs of which both members were smaller than or
larger than 5 (i.e., 2, 4 and 6, 8) and failed to report the
significance level of these pairs. In fact, the major finding
they reported with respect to these pairs was that the size
congruity effects for these pairs were significantly smaller
than those observed for pairs of which one member was
smaller than 5 and the other member was larger than 5.
Further research is needed to determine whether size
congruity effects are real for pairs of which both members
are smaller than or larger than 5, and if so, the extent to
which differences in the strengths of the associations
between individual digits and the attribute “small” can
account for them.
Associations between the small digits {1-4} and the
attribute “small” are only one of several memory-based
factors that could produce congruity effects on judgments of
physical size. As mentioned earlier, learned associations
between sets of features (e.g., {8, 2, and greater-than}) and
responses (e.g., “8”) could also interfere with participants’
judgments of physical size (e.g., that 2 is physically larger
than is 8). Tzelgov, et al. (2000) argued against this
possibility by training participants to judge the relative
magnitudes represented by arbitrary symbols (i.e., Gibson
figures). During training, participants only saw a subset of
Gibson-figure pairings. Later, participants judged the

relative physical sizes of Gibson-figure pairs.
Size
congruity effects were observed even for pairs that
participants had not seen during training.
Because
participants had never before seen these pairs, Tzelgov, et
al. argued that the associations between these pairs (e.g.,
{Gibson figure8, Gibson figure2, and greater-than}) and
appropriate magnitude responses (e.g., “Gibson figure8”)
could never have developed and, therefore, could not be
responsible for the observed interference. We might point
out, however, that exemplar-based memory theories, like
Instance Theory, do not claim that the perception of novel
exemplars only initiates retrieval of self-identical exemplars
from memory (Palmeri, 1997). On the contrary, the
perception of novel exemplars tends to initiate retrieval of
similar exemplars from memory. It is, therefore, possible
that the perception of a novel exemplar with features such
as {Gibson figure8, Gibson figure2, and greater-than} could
initiate retrieval of similar exemplars from memory (e.g.,
{Gibson figure8, Gibson figure1, and greater-than},
{Gibson figure8, Gibson figure3, and greater-than},
{Gibson figure8, Gibson figure4, and greater-than}, etc.).
To the extent that these similar exemplars in memory have
been associated with appropriate responses such as “Gibson
figure8,” retrieval of such responses could, in theory,
interfere with judgments of physical size (e.g., that Gibson
figure2 is physically larger than is Gibson figure8). Algorithmic
comparison processes, therefore, are not the only type of
process that can account for the results observed by
Tzelgov, et al.
In fact, preliminary results with a
connectionist simulation of Tzelgov, et al.’s experiment
suggest that memory-based automaticity can produce the
transfer to novel pairs that Tzelgov et al. observed.

Conclusion

Along with previous research, the research we report here
suggests that numbers automatically – without intention –
activate some form of magnitude representation and,
thereby, interfere with judgments of physical size.
However, the magnitude representations that intrude in
these judgments need not involve analog magnitude
representation scales or algorithmic comparisons on these
scales (Dehaene & Akhavein, 1995; Pansky & Algom,
1999; Tzelgov, et al., 2000). Rather, a model based upon
single-stage retrieval of attributes from memory is likely to
prove sufficient to explain size congruity effects as well as
other forms of unintentional semantic interference and
facilitation.

Acknowledgments

We thank Joseph Tzelgov and Stan Dehaene for helpful
discussions. This research was supported by grant no. BCS
0133202 from the National Science Foundation.

257

References

Algom, D., Dekel, A., & Pansky, A. (1996). The
perception of number from the separability of the
stimulus: The Stroop effect revisited. Memory &
Cognition, 24, 557-572.
Dehaene, S., & Akhavein, R. (1995). Attention,
automaticity, and level of representation in number
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 314-326.
Henik, A., & Tzelgov, J. (1982). Is three greater than five:
The relation between physical and semantic size in
comparison tasks. Memory & Cognition, 10, 389-395.
Hummel, J. E. & Choplin, J. M. (2000). Toward an
integrated account of reflexive and reflective reasoning.
In L. R. Gleitman and A. K. Joshi (eds.), Proceedings of
the Twenty-second Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 232-237.
Hummel, J. E. & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). A process model
of human transitive inference. In M. Gattis (Ed.).
Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought, Cambridge,
MA:MIT Press.
Lassaline, M.E., & Logan, G.D. (1993). Memory-based
automaticity in the discrimination of visual numerocity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 19, 561-581.
Logan, G.D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95(4), 492-527.
Logan, G.D. (1994). Spatial attention and the apprehension
of spatial relations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 20(5), 1015-1036.
Logan, G. D. & Etherton, J. L. (1994). What is learned in
automatization? The role of attention in constructing an
instance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 20, 1022-1050.
Palmeri, T.J. (1997). Exemplar similarity and the
development of automaticity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 324354.
Strayer, D. L., & Kramer, A. F. (1990). An analysis of
memory-based theories of automaticity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 291-304.
Tzelgov, J., Meyer, J., & Henik, A. (1992). Automatic and
intentional processing of numerical information. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 18, 166-179.
Tzelgov, J., Yehene, V., Kotler, L., & Alon, A. (2000).
Automatic comparisons of artificial digits never
compared: Learning linear ordering relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 103-120.
Wolfe, J.M., Yu, K.P., Stewart, M.I., Shorter, A.D.,
Friedman-Hill, S.R., & Cave, K.R. (1990). Limitations
on the parallel guidance of visual search: Color x color
and orientation x orientation conjunctions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 16, 879-892.

