UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causality and Reasoning: The Monty Hall Dilemma

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x20z9gg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Burns, Bruce D.
Wieth, Mareike

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causality and Reasoning: The Monty Hall Dilemma
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@msu.edu)
Mareike Wieth (wiethmar@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology; Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1117 USA

Abstract

The Monty Hall dilemma

In the Monty Hall Dilemma (MHD) contestants try to
choose which of three doors conceals a prize. After
selecting a door, one of the other doors is opened by a
host who knows where the prize is, but always reveals
a dud. Contestants are then asked if they want to stay
with their first choice, or switch to the other unopened
door? Switching yields a two-thirds chance of winning,
but most people have difficulty accepting this answer.
Glymour (2001) points out that central to the MHD is a
particular causal structure, the collider principle. We
hypothesized that an isomorphic version of the MHD
that would help participants understand its causal
structure would improve their performance. Making the
MHD a form of competition should be one way to
achieve this. We confirmed this by showing that in a
competition version of the MHD participants were
much more likely to solve the problem, and more likely
to answer a counterfactual question indicating a correct
understanding of the problem's causal structure.
Furthermore, regardless of MHD version, participants
who solved the problem were more likely to also
answer the counterfactual correctly. Thus the MHD can
be seen as an example of people's difficulties with
understanding even relative simple causal structures.

Causality and Reasoning
Wilson and Keil (2000) discuss how explanation pervades
all human activity from the simplest and most mundane to
the most sophisticated and unusual, such as explanations in
science. Yet they go on to point out that explanation
remains one of the most under-explored topics in the
cognitive sciences. When explanation is explored, virtually
all notions of it invoke the concept of cause (Wilson & Keil,
p.105) and the centrality of cause in explanations has also
been emphasized by developmental psychologists.
Baillargeon and Wang (2002) argue that babies as young as
three months are reasoning about causality. Thus, causality
and how it is used is an important topic in cognitive science
as it is critical to understanding how people reason about
events.
Despite its importance, people often find causality hard to
reason about. In this paper we will demonstrate that the
difficulty people have with the well known Monty Hall
dilemma is due to it involving a causal structure that people
find hard to recognize and reason with. The theoretical basis
of our claim that misunderstanding of causality is the key to
this problem will be a recent analysis by Glymour (2001).

198

Like optical illusions, cognitive illusions often persist long
after evidence to the contrary has been presented. This
makes them interesting because, as with visual illusions,
such tenacity should tell us something about the underlying
cognitive system. The Monty Hall Dilemma (MHD) is such
an illusion. Named after the host of the television show
"Let's Make a Deal", it presents a participant with three
doors, one of which hides a prize. The participant selects a
door hoping it conceals the prize, as behind the other two
doors are duds. The host then opens one of the other doors
to reveal a dud. The host knows where the prize is, but of
course never opens the door hiding it or the door the
contestant selected. The participant is then given a choice:
stay with the door initially selected, or switch to the other
unopened door?
When faced with the choice between the two remaining
doors, most people have the very strong intuition that it's a
50% chance either way, and usually they stay with their first
choice. However, participants have a two-thirds chance of
winning if they switch (Selvin, 1975) therefore one should
always switch. The strength of this illusion was perhaps best
illustrated by Marilyn vos Savant who in 1990 published the
dilemma and this answer in Parade magazine (vos Savant,
1997). In response she received 10,000 letters of which
92% from the general public disagreed with the answer.
Empirical reports of this illusion confirm its strength
(Friedman, 1998; Granberg, 1999; Granberg & Brown,
1995; Granberg & Dorr, 1998). In these papers, seven
studies that used isomorphic versions of the MHD were
reported with switch rates ranging from 9% to 17%.
Another noteworthy aspect of vos Savant's letter writers
was that education was not necessarily an antidote to the
illusion. Of letters that had university addresses 65%
disagreed, including ones from statistics and mathematics
professors (vos Savant, 1997). Schechter (1998) in his
biography of Paul Erdős, one of the greatest mathematicians
of the twentieth century and a man who lived to solve
mathematical problems, relates what happened when Erdős
was told the correct solution to the MHD by a fellow
mathematician. Erdős insisted that the answer was incorrect,
and could not be convinced even when it was explained to
him in the language of mathematics. Eventually a computer
simulation convinced him that switching was correct, yet he
remained frustrated by his inability to intuitively understand
why. This peerless authority on probability was only
mollified when several days later another mathematician

friend made him see his error (Schechter, pp. 108-109).
These anecdotes illustrate an important point about the
MHD, that knowledge about probability is useful but not
sufficient for solving the MHD. Thus the tenacity of the
MHD seems not so much due to misunderstanding
probability, but due to a misrepresentation of the problem.

Explanations of the illusion
There have been various attempts to explain this illusion.
One claim has been that the MHD contains ambiguities and
unstated assumptions. Nickerson (1996) pointed out that the
mathematical analysis supporting switching relies on two
assumptions: the host always (or randomly) makes the
switch offer; and, the host always opens a door hiding a dud
prize. Without the first assumption the probability is
indeterminate; without the second it is 50%. Granberg and
Brown (1995) found that most participants gave the
probability of winning if they switched as 50%, rather than
indeterminate or any other number. Therefore participants
seemed to be making the first assumption as were Vos
Savant's (1997) letter writers who strongly insisted that the
probability was 50% because there are two doors left. There
is also no reason to think people fail to make the second
assumption. Whereas thinking that the host could open the
door concealing the prize would make switching a 50%
chance; such behavior would not fit with the concept of a
game show. Empirical studies of the MHD have carefully
made clear that a door is always opened, that the door to be
opened cannot hide the prize, and that a knowledgeable host
always offers the switch choice; yet the illusion persists.
Reliable increases in switching have been observed when
participants experience multiple trials. Granberg and Brown
(1995, Study 2) and Granberg and Dorr (1998, Exp. 1) both
found that after 50 trials participants' mean switch responses
increased to 55%. Friedman (1998) gave participants money
for winning and was able to increase switching to 40% but
only after participants had already been exposed to seven
trials. It is known that people are good at frequency
detection (Hasher & Zacks, 1984) so it is unsurprising that
people learn to increase their rate of making a response
which is successful on two-thirds of the trials. Yet turning
the MHD into a learning problem does not explain why so
few people make switch decisions to start with.
Vos Savant (1997) suggested that if the problem is
modified so that the contestant is faced with many doors, of
which all but one is opened after an initial selection, then
people will better understand that they should switch.
Granberg and Dorr (1998, Exp. 2) found that increasing the
number of doors from three to seven (opening five of seven
means switching yields a 83% chance of winning) increased
switching rates from 11% to 25%, although this difference
was not statistically significant. This modification changes
the problem substantially, but it suggests something
interesting: participants may need to recognize that the
process resulting in the unopened door is crucial.

Why stay?
When asked, most experiment participants say that there is a
50% chance of winning if they switch; yet they almost
always stay. If they truly thought of it as a 50% chance, then

199

one would expect half the participants to switch, but this is
not the case. Just how strong the stay response is was
illustrated by Granberg and Brown (1995) in a modified
card game version of the MHD. Even if the payoff from
winning after a switch was made substantially greater than
that after a stay choice, most participants chose to stay.
This tendency to stay with one's first choice is more
general than the MHD; for example, Mathews (1929) found
that although students believe that it is best to stick with
their first choice on multiple choice tests, 53% of changed
answers gained points and only 21% lost points. This
tendency to stay may be interesting in its own right, but
probably explains little about why the MHD is so hard. The
stay bias does not explain why people say that the
probability of winning is 50% either way. Rather it appears
that two phenomena may combine in creating so many
incorrect answers to the MHD: 1) people assess the
probabilities as 50%, 2) they give staying a higher value.
We will focus on the first phenomenon: why does it seem so
compelling that the probabilities should be 50% once there
are two options? However, the bias to stay will be useful
methodologically as it will allow us to use switch responses
as our dependent variable. As the empirical studies have
shown, most participants will stay in the absence of a strong
and compelling reason to switch.

Why 50%?
Johnson-Laird Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, and Caverni
(1999) discuss the propensity of people to give an equal
chance to all available possibilities they are presented with,
unless individuals have beliefs or knowledge to the
contrary. They pointed out that an analogous principle of
indifference or insufficient reason has a long history in
probability theory. Johnson-Laird, et al. (1999) also
presented some empirical evidence that people tend to
follow this principle, as did Falk (1992) who calls it the
"uniformity assumption." Of course, people do not
necessarily see all possibilities as equally probably, as the
odds-making in sports-betting abundantly demonstrates.
However when people confidently assign each of two
options a 50% chance they are indicating that they can see
no reason to differentiate the options. In the MHD the
mathematical analysis shows that the choices are different,
so we sought a way to make this fact clear.
Johnson-Laird et al. (1999) argued that people's poor
performance on the MHD is due to them not forming the
right representation in terms of mental models. Krauss and
Wang (2003) presented some interesting evidence that
giving people an appropriate representation improved
performance. We do not doubt that if people are provided
with the right set of mental models, then they will probably
be more likely to solve the problem. However, this does not
necessarily answer a more fundamental question, why do
people have such difficulty constructing for themselves the
right representation? Even when told that they are wrong,
people will often be unable to recognize that there is an
alternative to their current representation. We propose that
what blocks generating the right representation is people's
failure to understand the MHD's causal structure.

Causality in the Monty Hall Dilemma
Glymour (2001) suggests that the causal structure of the
MHD is an example of the collider principle, a structure
that Glymour speculates people may often have problems
with. This principle is illustrated by a causal graph in which
two independent variables have an edge ("collide") into a
third variable (Pearl, 2000, refers to these as inverted fork
causal graphs). For example, for a car to start the tank must
not be empty and the battery must have sufficient charge to
turn the starting motor. The two variables of the state of the
fuel tank and the battery are independent, however both
have a causal influence on the car starting. Thus if the car
does not start then the fact that the tank is not empty
provides information about the battery (i.e., it is probably
dead). Thus once knowledge about the car starting is
provided, the states of the tank and the battery are
dependent conditional on that knowledge. A similar causal
structure underlies the Berkson (1946) paradox in
epidemiology. Berkson pointed out that if two diseases are
unrelated but both are causal with regard to putting
someone into the hospital, then the two diseases can be
correlated in the hospital population. Pearl (2000, p.17)
refers to such selection biases as the explaining away effect
as, for example, it can lead to music ability and SAT scores
being negatively correlated at a college that admits students
on the basis of either of these factors. Many people are
familiar with the idea of two variables begin correlated due
to both being caused by a third variable. Such a structure
can be represented by a causal graph in which two outcomes
have causal links from a single factor. In a sense, the
collider principle has the opposite causal structure, one
outcome with casual links from two factors. Fewer people
seem to understand that this structure can also create
correlations between otherwise independent variable.
Glymour (2001) points out that the MHD has a collider
causal structure, as the placement of prize and the
contestant’s initial choice both have a causal influence on
which door the host will open. This results in these two,
otherwise independent, causal factors being dependent
conditional on which door the host opens. Therefore when
the host opens a door information is provided regarding the
placement of the prize, which leads to it being advantageous
to switch.
This analysis leads to testable hypotheses. When
presented with the MHD, if problem solvers do not grasp
that the placement of the prize has a causal influence on
what door the host opens, or they fail to understand the
implications of this causal structure, then they will be likely
to give the wrong answer. If there truly was no causal link
between the placement of the prize and the host’s choice,
then the contestant would be correct to think that it did not
matter which door was the final choice (Nickerson, 1996).
It is unlikely that a single explanation alone accounts for
the difficulty of the MHD, and we are not making that claim
here. Instead our claim is that a major factor behind people's
poor performance in the task is that the standard versions of
the MHD obscure the causal structure of the problem.
Therefore our overall prediction was that presenting
participants with scenarios analogous to the MHD that
increase the salience of the causal structure by having the

200

options compete, should lead to better reasoning than
standard versions of the MHD.

Manipulating Understanding of Causal
Structure
Glymour (2001) did not attempt to provide any evidence
that his analysis explains why the MHD is so hard, nor for
his more general claim that collider structures are difficult
to understand. Burns and Wieth (2000) set out to test the
idea that failure to correctly understand the causal structure
of the MHD was a factor behind the failure of people to
solve it. They did so by creating isomorphic versions of the
problem that varied in terms of likelihood that people would
see the problem in terms of causality. Versions with
isomorphic structures placed in a context that should be
more likely to invoke the right causal structures should lead
to more people solving the problem correctly.
In competitions it seems easier to understand the
implications of the collider principle, perhaps because
people often seem to see competitions in terms of causality
(Lau & Russell, 1980; McAuley & Gross, 1983; White,
1993). For example, in a game between a competitor that
we know has just defeated an opponent versus one who is
yet to play a game, it may seem natural to favor the victor of
the completed game. People may vary in how they explain
such a preference, but to the extent that this preference is
correct (disregarding factors such as practice) it is due to the
collider principle. Who won the previous game is caused by
two factors: which of the three players was not in the game,
and which player is the best (by some relevant criterion).
Thus who won the first game creates a degree of
dependency between who won the previous game and
which of the two remaining options is better, just as the
collider principle does in general. Therefore isomorphic
versions of the MHD that place it into a competitive context
should lead to more solutions.
Burns and Wieth (2000) presented a set of scenarios that
varied in terms of how genuine was the competition
involved. In the strongest version we replaced the three
doors with three boxers who will fight a pair of bouts. One
of the three boxers was so good that he was guaranteed to
win any bout. After the contestant selects one of the three
boxers as his or her pick to be the best, the remaining two
boxers fight. The winner of the first bout will then fight the
boxer initially selected, and contestants win if they chose
the winner of this second bout. However, the contestant is
offered the choice after the first bout: stay with the initial
selection, or switch to the winner of the first bout. This
Boxers version is isomorphic to the MHD: the three boxers
represent doors and the best boxer (i.e., guaranteed winner
of any bout) represents the door concealing the grand prize.
All that varies is how one of the unchosen options is
eliminated: in the MHD the host applies a rule (i.e., open an
unselected door without the prize, or if the initial selection
hid the prize then open a random door) whereas in the
Boxers version the option is eliminated by a competition
(i.e., the single best boxer eliminates the opponent in the
first bout, or if the best boxer is the one initially selected,
then it is random which of the other two is eliminated).
In order to manipulate the degree of genuineness of

competition presented by the scenarios, we also created a
Wrestlers version. The Wrestlers version was identical to
the Boxers version, except that professional wrestlers
replaced boxers, and it was pointed out that the results of
professional wrestling matches are determined beforehand.
So although which of the unselected options is eliminated is
decided by competition, the results of all possible
competitions have been predetermined. To make the
competition even less genuine, a Wrestlers-D version was
created in which the wrestlers defended doors, and the door
concealing the grand prize (placed there before the matches)
was defended by the "best" wrestler. If a wrestler lost a
match, then that wrestler's door was opened. A Doors
version was created identical to the Wrestlers-D version,
except that now the wrestlers were not directly involved in
which door was opened. They just stood in front of doors
and yelled at each other until the predetermined door was
opened by the knowledgeable host. The Doors version was
designed to be closest to the standard versions of the MHD.
Burns and Wieth's (2000) preliminary study found that
51% of participants switched in the Boxers condition, 30%
in the Wrestlers condition, 37% in the Wrestlers-D
condition, and only 15% in the Doors condition. Thus, as
predicted, participants were more likely to solve the
problem correctly when presented with versions that made
the causal structure of the problem easier to understand.
However, we did not directly show that our manipulation
led people to a better understanding of the causal structure
of the MHD.

An Experiment
Burns and Wieth (2000) showed an effect of manipulations
that should increase the likelihood of participants
understanding the causal structure of the MHD. This new
experiment was designed to demonstrate that participants in
a competition condition really did have a better
understanding of the causal structure, and that within each
condition those with a better understanding of the causal
structure would be more likely to solve the problem. In
addition, the experiment was intended to replicate the
difference between the Boxers (competition) condition and
Doors (noncompetition) found by Burns and Wieth.
Glymour's (2001) analysis suggests that the critical
element to understanding the causal structure of the MHD is
the causal link from the location of the best option to which
option is eliminated. If participants fail to understand the
causal implications of this link, then they will not
understand the problem correctly. Thus to probe participants
understanding of this link, we presented them with a
counterfactual: what if this link was random? Thus in the
Doors condition participants were asked whether it would
affect their answer if they learnt that the host indicating
which door to open did not actually know where the prize
was, although fortunately a door without the prize had been
opened. In the Boxers condition participants were told that
all the boxers had the flu, thus who won each bout was
random.
If the competition manipulation was effective in Burns
and Wieth (2000) because it led more participants to
understand the causal structure of the MHD, then more

201

participants in the Boxers than the Doors condition should
indicate that the counterfactual would, or at least might,
affect the answer to the problem that they had already
given. Furthermore, if this understanding is the key to
solving the MHD, then participants in either condition who
gave the right answer should be more likely to indicate that
the counterfactual might change their answer.
One possibility though is that participants in the Boxers
condition simply understood the instructions better, thus
they may simply better understand that there is a nonrandom
link from the option that represents the prize to the option
that is eliminated. To check this possibility, we asked
participants to indicate how random was this link.

Method
Participants. A total of 124 members of the Michigan State
University subject pool participated in the experiment.
Procedure. The study utilized two version of the MHD
used by Burns and Wieth (2000). In each a situation was
first described in which a person is randomly selected at an
event (either a boxing or wrestling night). Each time, this
person is presented with three options, one of which
represents a substantial prize. After an option is selected,
one of the remaining two options is shown not to be the
critical one (prize or best competitor). The person then
always has to make a decision: stay with the first selection,
or switch to the other remaining option? Therefore it was
made clear that the switch offer was always made, as the
competition was conducted in the same way every week.
Participants were then told that he or she was the randomly
selected person, an option was eliminated, and the choice to
"stay" or "switch" then had to be made by the participant.
They were then asked to indicate how many out of nine
people they expected to win if all nine were to stay, and if
all nine were to decide to switch. This gave an indication of
whether participants knew the probability of winning if they
switched. The two versions of the MHD were as follows:
Competition (Boxers): Three boxers will fight. One of the
boxers is so good that he is guaranteed to beat either of the
others, no matter what. If you can select this boxer you win
the prize, but you have no basis at all on which to evaluate
who is the best. First, you select one boxer randomly
(participants are told who they selected), then the other two
fight. The winner of the first contest will fight the one you
initially selected, and the winner of that second bout
represents the best boxer. After the first bout you have to
decide whether to stay with your first selection, or switch to
the winner of the first bout.
Noncompetition (Doors): This condition was closest to
the standard version of the MHD. As in Burns and Wieth
(2000), the wrestlers did not fight but instead just yelled at
each other while standing in front of doors. The host, who
knew where the prize was, indicated which door to open.
Further questions were presented on a second page.
Participants first answered on a six point scale the question
"The process by which Boxer/Door A was eliminated is best
described as." On the scale "1" indicated "completely

random" and "6" indicated "completely nonrandom." This
scale was used by Burns & Corpus (in press) to show
differentiation of scenarios in terms of randomness.
Participants then answered the counterfactual question,
which asked whether it would have affected their answer if
the way an option was eliminated was completely random.
They could answer YES, NO, or MAYBE. In the
Noncompetition condition, the counterfactual was explained
as the host not knowing where the prize was, and in the
Competition condition as the boxers being sick such that
who won any bout was random. In both cases it was
emphasized that this would make it completely random
which option was eliminated, but that luckily the eliminated
option was not the one representing the prize.

Results and Discussion
From Table 1 it can be seen that again participants in the
competition condition performed better in that they were
more likely to decide to switch (42% verse 14%, X2[1] =
12.20, p < .001). In addition, participants in the Competition
condition were more likely to give the correct probability of
winning (16% verse 5%, X2[1] = 4.46, p = .035), in that
they indicated that 6 out of 9 people would be expected to
win if all nine decided to switch. Although relatively few of
those participants who decided to switch could calculate the
correct probability of success, this could be because people
are poor at calculating conditional probabilities in general
(see Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). There was a
greater impact of the competition manipulation on simply
recognizing that the chance of winning when switching
would be greater than 50% (45% verse 19%, X2[1] = 10.14,
p = .001). Thus we replicated the previously found effects
of the competition manipulation.
Table 1: Number of participants choosing each answer to
the counterfactual question depending on their decision to
stay with their first option or switch, for both the
competition and noncompetition conditions.
stay
switch
Competition condition
Counterfactual
Response

YES
MAYBE
NO

Total

4
17
14
35

11
8
6
25

2
14
39
55

2
4
3
9

Noncompetition condition
Counterfactual
Response
Total

YES
MAYBE
NO

Table 1 shows that participants in the Competition
condition were more likely to answer yes or maybe to the
counterfactual question, X2(2) = 15.20, p = .001). In the
Competition condition, 67% recognized that making the
elimination process random at least might make them
reconsider their answer, whereas only 34% did so in the

202

Noncompetition condition. Thus the competition
manipulation did not just produce more correct answers to
the problem, but it also affected participants in the way we
expected it would: it led participants to be more likely to
recognize the implications of the elimination process.
Furthermore, participants who solved the problem were also
more likely to recognize the implications of making the
elimination process random whether they were in the
Competition, X2(2) = 8.27, p = .016, or Noncompetition
conditions X2(2) =6.93, p = .031.
There was no difference in randomness ratings by
participants who decided to stay (M = 4.1, SD = 1.6) or
switch (M = 4.2, SD = 1.6), t(122) =0.24, p = .81.
Participants in the Noncompetition condition actually saw
the process as more nonrandom (M = 4.5, SD = 1.4) than
did those in the competition condition (M = 3.7, SD = 1.6),
t(122) = 3.0, p = .003. Thus the competition manipulation
did not appear to affect participants' understanding that
there was a causal link between the prizes' placement and
which option was eliminated. Instead participants in the
Noncompetition condition were less likely to recognize the
significance of this causal relationship.

Discussion
By presenting participants with a scenario in which they
were better able to understand the causal structure of the
process by which an option was eliminated (as indicated by
responses to the counterfactual question), we were able to
greatly increase the solution rate for the MHD and the
number of participants correctly calculating the probability
of winning if they switched. Furthermore, regardless of
their condition, participants who gave the correct answer to
the MHD were more likely to indicate an understanding of
the casual structure of the MHD. Thus we have evidence for
the hypothesis that a major reason why the MHD is such a
difficult problem is that its casual structure is one that
people have difficulty understanding.
The lack of a differences in the randomness ratings
suggests that it was not a difference in the extent to which
participants saw that process as random that led to any
difference in performance. Instead, it is lack of
understanding of the significance of the causal link between
the elimination of an option and which option was the best.
This is consistent with Glymour's (2001) claim which was
that people find it hard to understand the implications of the
collider principle, not that they fail to recognize the causal
links that exist in a situation. We do not claim that people
get the standard MHD wrong because they think that Monty
acted randomly, but because they fail to understand what
significance the causal structure gives to his actions.
However, the illusion does not "disappear" when
participants are presented with a competition scenario. This
is not surprising given that the counterfactual responses
indicate that our manipulation was not successful in leading
all participants in the competition condition to correctly
represent the causal structure of the MHD. Furthermore, a
correct representation is just one step on the path to a
correct solution, as has been found with other problems for
which an incorrect representation contributes to the
difficulties people experience. For example, Weisberg and

Alba (1980) found no participants who solved the nine-dot
problem without a hint to go outside the square defined by
the nine dots, but even with the hint only 25% of
participants solved the problem. Therefore we did not
expect to completely eliminate a strong illusion with a
simple change to its context.
Giving more direct aids to representation should also help
people solve the MHD, as Krauss and Wang (2003) found.
However, our focus has been on why do people have such
difficulty in setting up the right representation themselves?
We suggest that without an understanding of the causal
structure, participants will be forever plague by the thought
"But why isn't it 50% if there are only two left?"
This first evidence for Glymour's (2001) analysis of the
difficulty of the MHD as due to it involving the collider
principle, suggests that misunderstanding of this form of
causal structure may underlie other reasoning errors. The
hundreds of citation in the medical and epidemiology
literature of Berkson (1946) suggest there is at least one
other form of reasoning error that appears to arise from a
difficulty in understanding the collider principle. Yet the
collider principle seems a relatively simple causal structure,
as it consists of just two causal variables and one outcome
variable. As Pearl (2000) points out, making proper
inferences about causality is the central aim of the physical,
behavioral, social, and biological sciences. However, if the
collider principle can cause huge problem for even experts
in statistics, it may not be so surprising that Pearl also
observes that we have difficulty understanding causality. In
further research we will try to investigate the conditions
under which the collider principle is hard to recognize and
use. In this way we may gain insight into why even simple
causal structure can be hard to understand.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Fernanda Ferreira and Regina
Vollmeyer for helpful comments on an earlier draft.

References
Baillargeon, R., & Wang, Su-hua (2002). Event
categorization in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6,
85-93
Berkson, J. (1946). Limitations of the application of
fourfold table analysis to hospital data. Biometrics
Bulletin, 2, 47-53.
Burns, B. D., & Corpus, B. (in press). Randomness and
inductions from streaks: "Gambler's fallacy" versus "Hot
hand.” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Burns, B. D., & Wieth, M. (2000). The Monty Hall
Dilemma: A causal explanation of a cognitive illusion.
Presented at the Forty-First Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, LA.
Falk, R. (1992). A closer look at the probabilities of the
notorious three prisoners. Cognition, 43, 197-223.
Friedman, D. (1998). Monty Hall's three doors:
Construction and deconstruction of a choice anomaly.
The American Economic Review, 88, 933-946.

203

Glymour, C. N. (2001). The mind's arrow: Bayes nets and
graphical causal models in psychology. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Granberg, D. (1999). Cross-cultural comparison of
responses to the Monty Hall Dilemma. Social Behavior
and Personality, 27, 431-438.
Granberg, D., & Brown, T. A. (1995). The Monty Hall
dilemma. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
711-723.
Granberg, D., & Dorr, N. (1998). Further exploration of
two-stage decision making in the Monty Hall dilemma.
American Journal of Psychology, 111, 561-579.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1984). Automatic processing of
fundamental information: The case of frequency of
occurrence. American Psychologist, 39, 1372-1388.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi,
M. S., & Caverni, J.P. (1999). Naive probability: A
mental model theory of extensional reasoning.
Psychological Review, 106, 62-88.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.) (1982).
Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge, UK: Cambrige University Press.
Krauss, S., & Wang, X. T. (2003). The psychology of the
Monty Hall problem: Discovering psychological
mechanisms for solving a tenacious brain teaser. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 3-22.
Lau, R. R., & Russell, D. (1980). Attributions in the sports
pages. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 39,
29-38.
Mathews, C. O. (1929). Erroneous first impressions on
objective tests. Journal of Educational Psychology, 20,
280-286.
McAuley, E., & Gross, J. B. (1983). Perceptions of
causality in sport: An application of the Causal
Dimension Scale. Journal of Sport Psychology, 5, 72-76.
Nickerson, R. S. (1996). Ambiguities and unstated
assumptions in probabilistic reasoning. Psychological
Bulletin, 120, 410-433.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Schechter, B. (1998). My Brain is open: The mathematical
journeys of Paul Erdős. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Selvin, S. (1975). A problem in probability [Letter to the
editor]. The American Statistician, 29, 67.
vos Savant, M. (1997). The power of logical thinking. New
York: St Martin's Press.
Weisberg, R. W., & Alba, J. W. (1980). An examination of
the alleged role of "fixation" in the solution of several
"insight" problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 110, 169-192.
White, S. A. (1993). The effect of gender and age on causal
attribution in softball players. International Journal of
Sport Psychology, 24, 49-58.
Wilson, R. A., & Keil, F. C. (2000). The shadows and
shallows of explanation. In F. C. Keil, & R. A. Wilson
(Eds.), Explanation and cognition (pp. 87-114).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

