UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Choice set options affect the valuation of risky prospects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9pk2n5sp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Reimers, Stian
Stewart, Neil
Chater, Nick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Choice set options affect the valuation of risky prospects
Stian Reimers (stian.reimers@warwick.ac.uk)
Neil Stewart (neil.stewart@warwick.ac.uk)
Nick Chater (nick.chater@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Abstract
A series of experiments is used to investigate the extent
to which valuation of a risky prospect is affected by the
values from which a participant selects a response. Three
variables were considered: a smaller risk-free amount, a
larger risky amount, and the probability of winning the
larger amount. There were three conditions: in each, two
of the three variables were held constant, and participants
chose the value for the third variable that made the risky
and risk-free options worth the same to them. This was
done first by a free-choice valuation, and then, with
different participants, by choosing one of four options
that were either all below or all above the population
free-choice median. The options presented had a strong
effect on valuation of the missing variable. This effect
remained even when the free-choice and multiple-choice
conditions were presented within subjects. This
demonstrates that people showing rational and consistent
risk evaluation strategies could have their risk aversion
manipulated by context. Overall, the experiments suggest
that people’s propensity for risk aversion is manipulable
by context. This is problematic finding for traditional,
context-independent, theories of decision under risk.

Introduction
From buying a new jacket to deciding whether to invest
in shares or bonds, we have to come to decisions based
on the merits of the different options available to us.
One popular assumption about the decision-making
process is that we examine each option in isolation,
give each option some sort of value based on the
pleasure it would give us, and then choose the one that
scores the highest.
Nowhere is this thinking more apparent than in the
domain of financial decision-making. One of the most
enduring models used in financial decision-making
research is expected utility (EU) theory. EU theory has
been presented as the normative theory of rational
choice in the domain of decision under risk (von
Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947). According to EU
theory, one should select, from a set of options, that
which is associated with the outcome with the
maximum utility. The utility of a probabilistic outcome
is given by its expectation over events. A core
assumption in EU is that the only information used to
evaluate a risky prospect is its potential value and the
probability of it occurring.

988

However, it is clear that other factors can affect
people’s valuation of a risky prospect. For example,
people tend to be risk averse, that is, they prefer a
smaller sure amount compared to the chance of a
obtaining a larger amount when the expected values of
the two are the same. But by reframing a choice, so that
outcomes appeared to be losses rather than gains,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) were able to obtain
preference reversals: Those who had been risk averse
for gains became risk seeking for losses.
Several derivative theories have been developed to
account for violations of this nature. The most notable,
prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Tversky
& Kahneman, 1992), assumes that the subjective
expected utility of gains and losses, rather than absolute
wealth levels, is maximized in reaching a decision.
Other derivatives include rank-dependent utility theory
(Quiggin, 1982; 1993) which was developed to account
for demonstrations of non-linearities in the probability
weighting function. Each of these theories can be
viewed as a derivative of EU theory where one or more
of the underlying axioms has been relaxed. Despite
these relaxations, these theories all still have in
common the key property outlined above: that a
prospect's value or utility depends only on the attributes
of that prospect.
However, these theories are at odds with findings in
other areas of decision research, in which it is clear that
contextual factors, like the values of other options in the
choice set, affect evaluation of an option. Consider a
binary choice between two options, A and B, that vary
on two dimensions, where one option might be higher
on one dimension and the other option higher on the
other dimension. In the similarity effect (e.g., Tversky,
1972), the addition of a new competitive option that is
highly similar to option A, but not option B, can reverse
a preference for A in the binary case to a preference for
B in the ternary case. The attraction effect (e.g., Huber,
Payne, & Puto, 1982) describes the increase in
preference for a dominating option, A, when an
asymmetrically dominated option is added to the binary
set. In the compromise effect (e.g., Simonson, 1989), an
option that represents a compromise between two
alternatives (A and B) may be preferred over the
alternatives in the ternary choice, even though it was
not preferred in either pairwise binary choice.

There is some evidence that effects of adding a third
option to the choice set are found in trade-offs between
risk and reward. In an unpublished study by Payne,
Bettman, and Simonson (reported in Simonson &
Tversky, 1992), participants were asked to make a
choice between a pair of three-outcome prospects.
Adding a third prospect that was dominated by one of
the original prospects, but not the other, significantly
increased the proportion of times the (original)
dominating prospect was selected over the (original)
non-dominating prospect.
More recently, Stewart, Chater, Stott and Reimers
(2003) have shown effects of immediate context in a
simple evaluation of a risky prospect. In one
experimental procedure, participants gave a certainty
equivalent (CE) for a risky prospect. A CE is the
amount they could receive for certain that was worth
the same to them as the risky prospect. Participants had
to choose a CE from a set of four options, manipulated
to be all higher or all lower than the population’s free
choice CE. The results demonstrated that people’s CEs
were, on average, shifted downwards when all the
options were below the free-choice median, and shifted
upwards when the options were above the free-choice
median. Thus, even in a simple evaluation of risky
prospect, the immediate context in which the evaluation
is made affects the value given to a prospect.
The experiments reported here do three things. First
they replicate the original work of Stewart et al. (2003),
showing the effects of context on CE judgements.
Second, they extend the work from CEs to the other two
variables needed to value a risky prospect relative to a
safe amount. Thus in these experiments we also set the
values for risk-free and risky prospects and have
participants give the probability of winning the risky
prospect that makes the two worth the same. And, in
addition, we set the value for the risk-free reward and
the probability of gaining the risky reward, and have
participants give the value of the risky reward to make
the two options worth the same. Third, using the
original CE paradigm, we demonstrate that the results
were not just an artifact of people failing to understand
the task, or the options being too extreme for one to be
detectably better than the others. We do this by using a
within subjects approach, using an individual
participant’s CE to set the values for the high and low
options, also gaining a measure of whether a
participant’s free-choice responses were rational.

Experiment 1A
Experiment 1A used the same procedure as employed
by Stewart et al.’s (2003) Experiment 1. The value and
probability of a risky outcome was given and
participants gave the risk-free amount that was worth
the same to them as the risky prospect. In other words
they gave the CE for the risky prospect.

989

Method
Participants Free-choice CEs were given by 24
undergraduates from the University of Warwick. A
further 24 participants took part in the multiple-choice
component of the experiment, where they chose a CE
from among a set of four options.
Design Twenty prospects were generated by crossing
the amounts £200, £400, £600, £800, and £1,000 with
the probabilities .2, .4, .6, and .8. Free-choice CEs were
obtained from the pretest phase. Multiple-choice
options were generated to be all above or all below the
free choice median, such that the overall range of the
options, from the lowest low option to the highest high
option, was approximately one interquartile range.
Options were rounded to have familiar, easy-to-dealwith values and were evenly spaced across the interquartile range.
Twenty-four new participants were presented with
the prospects and options as generated above, and chose
their CEs from the options. For each participant, a
random ten trials used the values from the high
condition, and ten used those from the low condition.
Presentation order of the high and low trials was
randomized for each participant.
Procedure Participants were tested in a quiet room,
individually or in small groups. They were given
written instructions introducing the idea of choosing
between a smaller risk-free amount and a larger risky
amount, and that the response required in the
experiment was the risk-free amount that was worth the
same to them as the risky prospect. Participants
completed a worked example on the instructions sheet,
and an experimenter went through their response to
ensure they understood the requirements of the task.
Each prospect was presented on a separate page of a
20-page booklet. Probabilities were presented as
percentages, and options were presented in ascending
numerical order, as below:
How much is the gamble
“60% chance of £400”
worth to you?
Is it: £60 £80 £100 £120

Results
The task, including instructions, took approximately ten
minutes to complete. The proportion of times each
options was chosen is given in Figure 1. The labels L1L4 refer to the four below-median options presented in
the low condition, with L1 the lowest. The labels H1H4 refer to the four above-median options presented in
the high condition, with H4 the highest. The analysis
was performed using the following rationale. In the
high condition, choosing H1 means that the CE is, for
that trial, lower than H2. In the low condition, choosing
L1, L2, or L3 means that the CE is, for that trial, lower

than L4. Given that L4 is numerically substantially
lower than H2, in the absence of context effects, one
would expect H1 to be chosen substantially more often
than L1, L2, or L3, or at the very least, equally often. If,
on the other hand, L1, L2, or L3 were chosen more
often than H1, this would demonstrate the existence of
a context effect.

What chance of winning £1000 would make a gamble
worth £400 to you?

Results
The results of Experiment 1B are given in Figure 2. The
same rationale was used in analyzing the results as was
used in Experiment 1A. Participants chose L1, L2, or
L3 on 53% of trials, and H1 on 30% of trials. The
difference was significant t(23)=3.03, p=.006, η2=0.29.
Again, there was also an absolute effect, with the option
closest to the free choice median being chosen more
(39% of trials) than that furthest from the free-choice
median (17% of trials) t(23)=4.62 p=.0001, η2=0.48.

0.6
0.5

Proportion

verbal instructions appropriate to the task, and the trials
were of the following format:

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.6
L1

L2

L3

L4

H1

H2

H3

H4
0.5

Figure 1: Proportion of times each option was chosen
in Experiment 1A

0.4

Participants chose L1, L2, or L3 on 57% of low trials,
and chose H1 on 42% of high trials. A paired-samples ttest showed the difference to be significant t(23)=2.30,
p=.03, η2=0.19. Thus the choice set affected
participants’ CE valuations. There were, however, also
absolute effects present, as shown by participants
choosing the options closest to the free choice median
more often (43% of trials) than those furthest from the
free-choice median (30% of trials) t(23)=3.22, p=.003,
η2=0.31.

Experiment 1B
Experiment 1B was designed to investigate whether the
context effects of Experiment 1A were unique to CEs,
or whether they were also seen when an alternative
variable was used to equate risky and risk-free
prospects. In this case participants were given a small
risk-free amount and a larger risky amount and had to
set the probability of the risky outcome to equate the
two options for themselves.

Method
Participants Twenty-four participants provided freechoice estimates and a further 24 took part in the
multiple-choice part of the experiment. Both groups
were taken from the same population as in Experiment
1A. None had taken part in the previous experiment.
Design and procedure The design was the same as
Experiment 1A, except the twenty trials were
constructed by crossing the risky amounts £200, £400,
£600, £800, and £1,000 with safe amounts that were
20%, 40% 60%, or 80% of the value of the risky
amount. Participants were again given written and

990

Proportion

Option

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
L1

L2

L3

L4

H1

H2

H3

H4

Option

Figure 2: Proportion of times each option was chosen
in Experiment 1B

Experiment 1C
Finally for Experiment 1C, the third variable was
manipulated. This time risk-free amount and probability
of risky success were given and a participant set the
value of the risky outcome to equate it with the risk-free
outcome.

Method
Participants As in previous experiments, 24
participants took part in the free-choice stage and a
further 24 took part in the multiple-choice condition.
None had taken part in Experiments 1A or 1B, but were
drawn from the same population.
Design and procedure The design was the same as
Experiment 1A, except the twenty trials were
constructed by crossing the risk-free amounts £200,
£400, £600, £800, and £1,000 with the probabilities of
risky success of .2, .4, .6, and .8. Participants were
again given written and verbal instructions appropriate
to the task, and the trials were of the following format:
What amount that could be won with a 40% chance
makes a gamble worth £200 to you?

Results
The results of Experiment 1C are given in Figure 3. In
this experiment it seems clear that the multiple-choice
group have a higher risky amount for a given
probability and risk-free amount than the free-choice
group. However, this does not affect the method of data
analysis. The same rationale was used in analyzing the
results as was used in Experiments 1A and 1B.
Participants chose L1, L2, or L3 on 44% of trials, and
H1 on 20% of trials. The difference was significant
t(23)=4.95, p<.0001, η2=0.52. Again, there was also an
absolute effect, with the option closest to the free
choice median being chosen more (38% of trials) than
that furthest from the free-choice median (21% of trials)
t(23)=4.24 p=.0003, η2=0.44.
0.7
0.6

Proportion

0.5
0.4

The latter concern, that all the options seem
inappropriate to the participant, is also unlikely to be a
strong contributor to random responding. The options
were not widely spaced from the free-choice median,
and there was not a large variation in individual
participants’ CE judgements. However, there may have
been some subjects, with extreme risk aversion or risk
proneness, for whom the options were so inappropriate
for them that they gave up trying to perform the task
accurately.
Thus the logical next step would be to attempt the
same type of experiment, but using a withinparticipants design, getting a measure of risk aversion
from the participant, then using it to generate options
for the participant that are all above or all below that
individual participant’s free-choice response. This
would allow one to check that a participant was
responding rationally from the free-choice phase, thus
demonstrating they understood the task, and to ensure
the options presented in the multiple-choice phase were
relevant for the participant. To do this we switched to a
computer-based experimental design.

0.3

Experiment 2

0.2

The design of Experiment 2 follows the same logic as
that for Experiments 1A, 1B, and 1C, except that it was
computer-based, and free-choice and multiple-choice
conditions are within-subjects.

0.1
0
L1

L2

L3

L4

Option

H1

H2

H3

H4

Figure 3: Proportion of times each option was chosen
in Experiment 1C

Method

Discussion
Experiments 1A, 1B, and 1C have demonstrated that
the choice set affects people’s relative valuations of a
risk-free and a risky outcome, a phenomenon described
by Stewart et al. (2003) as prospect relativity. This
replicates the findings of Stewart et al. and
demonstrates that the original work extends to
conditions in which a measure other than CE is used.
These findings are problematic for theories like
expected utility, which assume that people are not
affected by context in evaluating risky prospects.
Although these experiments show a fairly convincing
effect of context on risky prospect valuation, it might be
worth exploring two alternative explanations of the
data. If a subset of participants responded randomly, a
context effect like that observed would be found. The
two most obvious reasons for responding randomly
would be that a participant did not understand the task,
or that he or she felt that all the options were
inappropriate, so there was no point in thinking about
which to choose. It is unlikely, although possible, that
the former is a contributing factor. Participants were
given an example which was explained by the
experimenter. All seemed to understand the task, or if
they gave an irrational response, they seemed to
understand once it was explained.

991

Participants Thirty undergraduate and graduate
students from the University of Warwick took part in
the experiment. Participants were paid for taking part in
a session that included other unrelated experiments.
Design The free-choice phase comprised 16 trials,
generated by crossing the amounts £300, £500, £700
and £900 with the probabilities 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8. For
each trial response, a crude measure of risk aversion, R,
was calculated by dividing the value of the participant’s
response by the expected value of the risky prospect.
Thus sixteen measures of R were obtained from the
free-choice phase, which were used to generate the
multiple-choice options in the following way. The
median (Rm) and upper and lower quartile values of R
were taken from the free-choice data. Thus the medianupper quartile (Rmu) and median-lower quartile (Rml)
ranges could be easily calculated. For the low
condition, options were generated using risk aversion
values of Rm-¼Rml, Rm-½Rml, Rm-¾Rml, and Rm-Rml
were used, and for the high condition, risk aversion
values of Rm+¼Rmu, Rm+½Rmu, Rm+¾Rmu, and Rm+Rmu
were used. This allowed the creation of option sets that
were close to, but all above, or all below, the best
estimate of what the participant’s free-choice response
would be.
Twenty trials were generated by crossing the amounts
£200, £400, £600, £800, and £1,000 with the

Procedure The experiment was implemented in Java,
and run using an IBM-compatible PC running Linux or
Windows NT. Initially a box appeared on the screen
instructing participants to read an instruction sheet next
to the computer, and then press to start. The written
instructions were similar to those from Experiments 1A,
1B, and 1C, except they had no worked example.
Participants were instructed to ask the experimenter if
there was anything they did not understand. There the
followed sixteen free-choice trials in which the prospect
was displayed as follows:
What certain amount of money is worth
the same to you as
a 40% chance of £600
Below was a text field and submit button. A
submitted value was checked to see if it was an integer
and whether it was smaller than or equal to the risky
amount of money. If either was not the case an error
message was displayed and the participant could try
again. After sixteen trials, a box appeared informing the
participant that they should read the second instruction
sheet and press to continue. The second sheet informed
participants that they would now be choosing from
options rather than giving their free-choice response.
Twenty trials followed, of the same format as the freechoice condition, except that the text field and submit
button were replaced by four buttons each labeled with
an amount of money, in ascending numerical order and
the participant had to click on one of the buttons to
continue.

Results
Participants generally took between ten and fifteen
minutes to complete the experiment. The measure of
free-choice rational behavior was whether CEs
increased monotonically with value of risky prospect
(collapsed across probability), and with probability of
winning (collapsed across value). Only one participant
failed to show this effect in both conditions, and was
not excluded because the magnitude of the deviation
was small (<5%) and only occurred in one of the
conditions. The results are given in Figure 4. The
analysis follows the same rationale as in previous
experiments. Participants chose L1, L2, or L3 on 56%
of trials, and H1 on 36% of trials. The difference was
significant t(29)=3.07, p=.005, η2=0.25. Again, there

992

was also an absolute effect, with the option closest to
the free choice median being chosen more (40% of
trials) than that furthest from the free-choice median
(21% of trials) t(29)=4.22 p=.0002, η2=0.38.
0.5
0.4

Proportion

probabilities .2, .4, .6, and .8, with options generated for
each trial using the risk aversion measure described
above. As before, for each participant, a random half
the trials were from the high condition and half from
the low condition. This time, however, participants
were yoked in pairs, both receiving the same trials in
the same order, but where one had a trial on which the
high options were presented, the other had low options
presented.

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
L1

L2

L3

L4

H1

H2

H3

H4

Option

Figure 4: Proportion of times each option was chosen
in Experiment 2.

Discussion
This experiment has shown that people’s valuation of
risky prospects is affected by the choice set even when
they clearly understand the task, and the options
generated for them are close to what they would have
selected in a free-choice condition. It therefore shows
Stewart et al.’s prospect relativity, even when they had
previously been valuing risky prospects entirely
consistently and rationally.

General discussion
The experiments presented here demonstrate that
people’s valuation of a risky prospect is affected by the
choice set. In a series of experiments, participants had
to equate a smaller risk-free sum of money and a larger,
risky sum. They did this either by choosing the risky
amount, given a safe amount and a probability of
winning the risky amount; or by choosing the
probability of winning the risky amount, given a safe
amount and a risky amount; or by choosing the safe
amount, given a risky amount and a probability of
winning the risky amount. In all three conditions, the
options from which participants chose the most
appropriate option affected the value chosen. In
addition, a further experiment was run in which
participants chose a safe amount that best equated with
a given risky amount and probability of winning (i.e. a
CE). In this case the same context effect was found,
even though the options were generated for the
individual participant, and the participant showed
rational behavior in a free-choice version of the task
minutes before.

Implications for existing models
The findings reported here replicate, extend, and
strengthen the work of Stewart et al. (2003), and
illustrate that context affects decision making under

risk. This finding is problematic for theories that
assume people evaluate each option from a choice set
independently of other options and not taking in to
account contextual factors. It is clear that even having
to choose a CE from a set of options rather than
generate it in free-choice situation affects valuation of a
risky prospect – although the selection of a CE from
options has been used in the past (e.g. Tversky & Fox,
1995; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992). Thus traditional
models of decision making under risk, like EU theory
and its derivatives, fail to capture the data presented
here.
There is, however, a class of model that can cope
with the findings. Rather than assume people bring a
preference set to a decision-making situation and use it
to choose the best option, the likes of Slovic (1995) and
Loewenstein (2001) have suggested that people’s
preferences are constructed during the consideration
leading to a decision. Thus their theories of decision
making allow for all factors present in the decision
context to affect the final choice. The data here support
a model of this kind more than they do a traditional,
context-independent model.
Whilst our data and those of Stewart et al. (2003)
demonstrate that prospects are valued, to some extent,
relative to the option set available they do not rule out
the possibility that there some absolute valuation
process, perhaps like EU theory, that also contributes
(indeed we presented some evidence consistent with
this possibility). At this stage it is an open question as
to whether theories where prospects are judged in
purely relative terms can be extended to cover the range
of empirical evidence in the literature currently
accounted for by the existing models.

A more general effect?
These replications and extensions of the basic prospect
relativity finding extend the generality of the result. In
recent work, from our own laboratory, we have found
very similar effects for the valuation of delayed
rewards. In this domain, the normative standard has
been that people discount exponentially. In competition
as a descriptive theory is hyperbolic discounting.
Neither theory can account for the context effects
observed. Thus it appears that the context effects
demonstrated here with risky prospects may just be
illustrating a more general effect of context in decision
making at large. If this proves to be the case, then this
research may make it possible to formulate a more
general model of context effects in decision making by
providing a common psychological framework for
understanding these decisions in more than one domain.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Simon Moore and Henry P.
Stott for their comments and input, and Rod Freeman
and Petko Kusev for their help running the experiments.

993

This work was supported by Economic and Social
Research
Council
Grants
R000239351
and
L328253039.

References
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9, 90-98.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory:
An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,
263-291.
Loewenstein, G. (2001). The creative destruction of
decision research. Journal of Consumer Research, 28,
499-505.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory: An
alternative theory of rational choice under
uncertainty. Economic Journal, 92, 805-824.
Quiggin, J. (1982). A theory of anticipated utility.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organisation, 3,
323-343.
Quiggin, J. (1993). Generalized expected utility theory:
The rank-dependent model. Norwell, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case
of attraction and compromise effects. Journal of
Consumer Research, 16, 158-174.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context:
Tradeoff contrast and extremeness aversion. Journal
of Marketing Research, 29, 281-295.
Slovic, P. (1995). The construction of preference.
American Psychologist, 50, 364-371.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., Stott, H. P., & Reimers, S.
(2003). Prospect relativity: How choice options
influence decision under risk. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 23-46.
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological Review, 102, 269-283.
Tversky, A., & Fox, C. R. (1995). Weighting risk and
uncertainty. Psychological Review, 102, 269-283.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297323.
von Neumann, M., & Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory
of games and economic behavior (2 ed.). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

