UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Co-operation and Co-ordination in the Production of Noun Phrases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3rw55676

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Haywood, Sarah
Pickering, Martin J.
Branigan, Holly P.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Co-operation and Co-ordination in the Production of Noun Phrases
Sarah Haywood (Sarah.Haywood@ed.ac.uk)
Martin J. Pickering (Martin.Pickering@ed.ac.uk)
Holly P. Branigan (Holly.Branigan@ed.ac.uk)
Psychology, University of Edinburgh,
7 George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9JZ, U.K.

Abstract
We investigate the influence of two processes on noun
phrase production during a referential communication task:
priming (co-ordination) and audience design (co-operation).
Participants played a collaborative game that involved
describing picture cards (Experiment 1) or wooden blocks
(Experiment 2). They interacted with a confederate who was
scripted to produce particular kinds of noun phrases. As in
previous studies, participants tended to be primed by the
structure of the confederate’s preceding description.
However, they also showed evidence of tailoring their
descriptions to make it easier for their addressee to carry out
the task at hand.

Introduction
How would you describe the object in Figure 1? You
could either call it ‘a black square’, or ‘a square that’s
black’. What determines which of these different forms
you will produce? We explore two factors that potentially
influence this kind of choice in noun phrase (NP)
production: priming (co-ordination) and audience design
(co-operation).

Figure 1: How would you describe this object?
In language production terms, priming is the tendency
for a speaker to re-use a word or a grammatical form that
they have recently processed (e.g. Bock, 1986). Audience
design is the process of tailoring utterances to ‘fit’ a
particular addressee (Bell, 1984; Clark & Carlson, 1982;
Giles 1980). To date, these two processes have been
studied independently by language researchers, but what
happens when co-ordination and co-operation ‘push’ the
speaker towards different choices in language production?
In this paper, we report two experiments that investigate
the interaction of priming and audience design during a
referential communication task1. We begin with a brief

review of previous research relating to the two
phenomena.

Priming: A Mechanism for Co-ordination
In conversation, interlocutors gradually come to talk about
things in similar ways. Their language behavior appears to
become co-ordinated at a number of levels (Pickering &
Garrod, in press). For example, speakers tend to use
phonological variants, dialect words and grammatical
constructions appropriate to their audience (e.g. Bell,
1982; Coupland, 1980; Labov, 1966). In experimental
studies, interlocutors settle on shared expressions for
referring to objects and entities in a reference array (Clark
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964).
This effect is particularly striking when the objects are
ambiguous, or there are multiple conceptual perspectives
that the speaker could take on those objects. Garrod and
Anderson (1987) explain this in terms of an automatic
input-output co-ordination mechanism that ‘recycles’
material from the comprehension system when generating
utterances for production. Through conversation, speakers
therefore come to share similar mental representations for
the objects they are communicating about (Pickering &
Garrod, in press).
A growing body of evidence suggests that speakers coordinate with an interlocutor at an abstract syntactic level
during dialogue. In a study by Branigan, Pickering &
Cleland, (2000), pairs of speakers took turns to talk about
pictures that could be described using one of two syntactic
forms (e.g. ‘the nurse gave the syringe to the doctor’ or
‘the nurse gave the doctor the syringe’). One of the
participants was a confederate who was scripted to
produce one or the other form as a prime. The results
showed that naive participants tended to repeat the
syntactic form of the confederate’s previous description.
A similar study extended this finding to the production of
noun phrases (Cleland & Pickering, in press). Speakers
were more likely to produce a noun phrase like ‘square
that’s red ’ following a prime with the same syntactic
structure. There is good evidence, then, that speakers coordinate at a number of levels in conversation. Evidence
for ‘co-operation’ in language production, however, is less
clear cut.

1

Referential communication tasks typically involve pairs of
participants discussing an array of picture cards or other visual
stimuli. They often cannot see each other’s array, and have a
goal which can only be achieved by verbally collaborating on

the task, such as arranging the cards in a particular order (e.g.
Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986).

533

Audience Design and Linguistic ‘Co-operation’
Audience design is the process of tailoring utterances to
‘fit’ an audience or addressee, according to their particular
needs (Bell, 1984; Clark & Carlson, 1982; Giles 1980).
An addressee’s ‘needs’ can be determined by a variety of
factors, including their prior knowledge, perspective, and
what information they need in order to most easily
understand the speaker’s message. We can think of
audience design as a co-operative process, because it
often requires the speaker to ‘decentre’, or take a
perspective other than their own (Piaget, 1926).
A very robust finding in the literature is that, during
referential communication tasks, speakers’ descriptions
tend to get shorter and more efficient with repeated
mention (e.g. Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Krauss &
Weinheimer, 1964). However, speakers overcome this
tendency towards increased efficiency, and go back to
using longer, more elaborate references when they start
talking to a new addressee (Brennan & Clark, 1996;
Wilkes-Gibbs & Clark, 1992). This suggests that speakers
are sensitive to how easily their partner will be able to
select the correct referent from an array, and adjust the
length of their description (and the amount of information
it contains) accordingly. They seem to take addressee
needs into account when they decide what to say, then,
but are speakers linguistically co-operative when they
decide how to say something?
There is some debate as to whether speakers take their
addressee’s perspective into account at the level of
grammatical formulation (Levelt, 1989). For example,
Ferreira and Dell (2000) failed to find evidence that
speakers avoid producing syntactic ambiguities (which
might make processing difficult for the addressee), even
when their utterances are being rated for clarity by an
audience. Similarly, Brown and Dell (1987) suggest that
early syntactic choices are not influenced by what the
addressee does or doesn’t know, although Lockridge and
Brennan (2002) have recently presented evidence to
challenge Brown and Dell’s findings.
We wanted to investigate whether speakers show
evidence of audience design at the level of grammatical
formulation. We also wanted to find out how priming and
audience design interact in a dialogue task. Can speakers
simultaneously co-ordinate and co-operate with an
interlocutor? We focus on the production of noun phrases
(NPs) during a referential communication task.
Participants played a collaborative game that involved
describing and selecting picture cards (Experiment 1) or
small wooden blocks (Experiment 2) from an array. Two
players participated in the game. One was a naive
participant, while the other was a confederate who was
scripted to produce particular kinds of NPs. We
manipulated both the structure of the confederate’s
descriptions, and the way the stimulus array was
organised in front of the two players. Naive participants’
utterances were then analysed for evidence of priming
(being influenced by the confederate’s immediately
preceding description) and audience design (producing

descriptions that would be easy for their partner to map
onto the array).

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 32 volunteers from Edinburgh University’s
student community were paid to participate. All were
native speakers of English.

Figure 2: Dividers used to group picture cards by pattern
and then by color in the Pattern Box
Materials and Design Two identical sets of picture cards
were created. Each set contained 64 cards, which
represented every possible combination of 4 colors
(orange, turquoise, yellow and purple), 4 patterns (stripy,
chequered, dotty and wavy) and 4 shapes (square, circle,
triangle and star). Thus each set contained one stripy
orange square, one stripy orange circle, one stripy orange
triangle, and so on. The sets of cards were arranged in two
card file boxes. In the Pattern Box, labelled dividers were
used to group the cards by pattern and then subdivide
them by color (see Figure 2). In the Color Box, similar
dividers were used to group the cards by color and then
subdivide them by pattern. In the actual experiment, the
Pattern and Color boxes were marked ‘1’ and ‘2’
respectively, and numbered stickers on the individual
cards showed which box they came from.
We also prepared two sets of instruction cards. The
confederate’s instructions (the prime set) had written
descriptions printed on them, such that they simply had to
read each instruction aloud from the card, e.g. ‘Box 2,
orange stripy square’. Half of the confederate’s
descriptions contained pattern-first prime NPs (e.g. ‘stripy
orange square’), and half contained color-first primes
(e.g. ‘orange stripy square’). Instructions in the
participants’ set (the target set) showed which picture card
they should describe to their partner on each turn. Half of
the time they had to describe cards from the Pattern Box,
and half of the time they had to describe cards from the
Color Box.
The participant and the confederate each had 64
instruction cards to describe, made up of 16 pairs of cards
in each of 4 conditions. The 4 conditions were defined by
crossing Prime Type (pattern-first vs. color-first) and
Target Box (whether the participant had to describe a

534

target card from the Pattern Box or the Color Box),
yielding a 2 x 2 within-subjects design. An experimental
item was defined as any combination of pattern and color
in the participants’ target cards. For example, the stripy
orange square, circle, triangle and star cards constituted
one single ‘stripy orange’ item. Each item appeared in 4
conditions: (1) pattern-first prime, target card from the
Pattern Box; (2) pattern-first prime, target card from the
Color Box; (3) color-first prime, target card from the
Pattern Box; (4) color-first prime, target card from the
Color Box. Equal numbers of square, circle, triangle and
star cards were assigned to each condition.
An additional between-subjects manipulation was added
to the design; 16 participants interacted with a ‘helpful’
confederate, and 16 interacted with an ‘unhelpful’
confederate. In the ‘helpful’ condition, the confederate
was scripted to produce NPs in which the relative order of
color and pattern adjectives matched the organisation of
the box from which they were describing a card. They
always produced pattern-first primes (‘stripy orange
square’) when describing cards from the Pattern Box and
color-first primes (‘orange stripy square’) when
describing cards from the Color Box. This is helpful
behavior in the sense that the naive participant should
easily be able to map the confederate’s description onto
the structure of the stimulus array from which they must
select a card. In the ‘unhelpful’ condition, the confederate
always produced color-first primes (‘blue wavy circle’)
when describing cards from the Pattern Box, and patternfirst primes (‘wavy blue circle’) when describing cards
from the Color Box. This is ‘unhelpful’ in the sense that
the naive participant cannot straightforwardly map the
confederate’s description onto the stimulus array. The
description will need to be held in memory or the word
order will have to be mentally reversed in order to retrieve
the correct card.
We created 64 pairs of instructions by pairing each
prime card from the confederate’s set with a target card
from the participant’s set. There was no lexical overlap
between the confederate’s prime NP and the participant’s
immediately subsequent target NP. For example, a stripy
prime card would never be followed by a stripy target, a
purple prime would never be followed by a purple target,
and so on. Pairs of instruction cards were randomly
allocated to one of 4 lists, which were presented as 4
separate blocks of 16 trials (or 4 ‘games’) during the
experiment. Within each list, the order of prime-target
pairs was randomised for each participant. At the
beginning of every game, both players were given an
empty 4 x 4 cardboard grid, and were instructed to fill this
up with picture cards working left-to-right, top-to-bottom,
starting in the top-left corner.
Procedure The confederate and participant were seated
on opposite sides of a table, with the two boxes of picture
cards between them. Instruction cards were placed to the
side of the players in card file boxes. Both players read
instructions explaining the aim of the communication

game: to fill up their empty grids with picture cards as
quickly and as accurately as possible. They alternated
between two tasks: describing instruction cards to their
partner, and selecting picture cards to put on their own
grid. The players were invited to look inside the boxes at
the start of the session, to find out what was inside. The
experimenter explained that it was very important when
giving instructions to provide enough information for the
other player to find the right card from the correct box. In
every game, the confederate always gave the first
description. The experiment took about 40 minutes in
total.
Each session was recorded on audio tape and later
transcribed verbatim. We coded the NPs produced by
participants as PATTERN-COLOR (e.g. ‘stripy orange
square’), COLOR-PATTERN (e.g. ‘orange stripy
square’) or OTHER2.

Results
Table 1 reports the percentages of COLOR-PATTERN
NPs produced in each condition. Speakers show a bias
towards mentioning color before pattern in their
descriptions, and this probably reflects the fact that color
adjectives are more frequent (and therefore more
accessible, in production terms) than pattern adjectives3.
Analyses of variance were conducted, with Prime Type
(pattern-first vs. color-first) and Target Box (Pattern Box
vs. Color Box) as within-subjects factors, and Confederate
Type (Helpful vs. Unhelpful) as a between-subjects factor.
Separate analyses treated participants (F1) and items (F2)
as random effects. There was a highly significant main
effect of priming overall (F1 = 11.689, p = .002; F2 =
107.705, p < .001). Participants produced 20% more
COLOR-PATTERN NPs following a color-first prime
from the confederate. There was no significant effect of
Target Box overall (F1 = .136, p = .714; F2 = .228, p =
.640), and no interaction between Prime Type and Target
Box (F1 = .043, p = .8383; F2 = 1.121, p = .306).
However, there were some interesting differences between
the ‘helpful’ and ‘unhelpful’ conditions.

2

NPs were coded as OTHER if the speaker did not produce a
noun phrase of the form ADJECTIVE-ADJECTIVE-NOUN, or
(in a small number of cases) because the target card had not been
preceded by the correct prime description from the confederate.
OTHER responses represented 3% of the data and were
excluded from all analyses, such that percentages of COLORPATTERN and PATTERN-COLOR NPs were complementary.
We therefore report results and analyses for COLOR-PATTERN
NPs only. Of the excluded descriptions, 67% mentioned color
before pattern, and 33% mentioned pattern before color.
3
In a previous study using the same stimuli, speakers
spontaneously produced COLOR-PATTERN NPs on 61% of
trials at baseline, compared to 39% PATTERN-COLOR NPs
(Haywood, Branigan & Pickering, unpublished data).

535

Table 1: Percentage COLOR-PATTERN NPs (SD)
Participant describes target card from:
Pattern Box
Color Box
Helpful confederate
pattern-first prime
46 (31)
48 (30)
color-first prime
74 (29)
79 (26)
Unhelpful confederate
pattern-first prime
color-first prime

49 (27)
62 (32)

46 (27)
56 (30)

In the ‘helpful’ condition, participants produced 30%
more COLOR-PATTERN NPs following a color-first
prime from the confederate (F1 = 11.502, p = .004; F2 =
86.913, p < .001). They also showed a trend (in the
subjects analysis) towards tailoring their NP to fit the box
from which they were describing a card (F1 = 3.577, p =
.078; F2 = .568, p > .1). In the ‘unhelpful’ condition,
participants showed a smaller priming effect (12%, F1 =
2.0303, p = .175; F2 = 31.190, p < .001) and a negative
effect of Target Box (–5%, F1 = 3.428, p = .084; F2 =
7.333, p = .016). In other words, participants interacting
with an unhelpful confederate were less likely to mention
color before pattern when the target card was to be
selected from the Color Box. Most interestingly, there was
an interaction between Confederate Type and Target Box
(F1 = 6.824, p = .014; F2 = 5.550, p = .033); participants
in the ‘helpful’ condition were significantly more likely to
engage in audience design than participants in the
‘unhelpful’ condition (but there was no interaction
between Confederate Type and Prime Type in the subjects
analysis; F1 = 2.037, p = .164; F2 = 16.086, p = .032).

Discussion
Participants produced NPs that were co-ordinated with the
confederate’s descriptions at the level of word order. They
mentioned color before pattern in their target description
about 20% more often following a color-first prime
(‘orange stripy square’) than after a pattern-first prime
(‘stripy orange square’). Participants in the ‘helpful’
confederate condition showed a stronger co-ordination
effect than participants in the ‘unhelpful’ condition (30%
vs. 12%, respectively).
Overall, there was no significant effect of Target Box on
word order. Participants didn’t appear to be tailoring the
relative order of pattern and color adjectives according to
the box from which their partner would have to choose a
card. This suggests that the generation of word order
during language production is not sensitive to information
about what would make the task easier for the addressee.
Alternatively, perhaps participants are simply not
concerned with audience design in this task. However, the
interaction between Target Box and Confederate Type
suggests that information about the addressee’s ‘needs’
does have an effect on word order, so long as the speaker
is interacting with an interlocutor who is also behaving

co-operatively. Participants in the ‘helpful’ condition were
significantly more likely (than participants in the
‘unhelpful’ condition) to mention color before pattern
when they described a card from the Color Box. This
suggests that word order can be sensitive to audience
design, under the right conditions.
We wanted to find out whether audience design has an
influence on grammatical stages of language production.
However, although word order is generally considered to
be a component of grammatical formulation (e.g. Levelt,
1989), we cannot really call our audience design effect a
syntactic phenomenon. COLOR-PATTERN NPs (‘orange
stripy square’) are syntactically identical to PATTERNCOLOR NPs (‘stripy orange square’), so our data do not
speak to the question of whether speakers choose
particular syntactic forms in order to be co-operative
towards an addressee (cf. Brown & Dell, 1987; Ferreira &
Dell, 2000; Lockridge & Brennan, 2002). We therefore
decided to look at audience design using a noun phrase
manipulation that would involve a choice between
different syntactic structures. In Experiment 2, players
took part in a similar kind of communication game, but
this time they talked about small wooden blocks that
differed along just two dimensions: color and shape. The
confederate was scripted to produce descriptions which
either mentioned color first (e.g. ‘red square’) or shape
first (‘square that’s red ’). We wanted to maximise the
likelihood of observing an audience design effect, so we
had all of our participants interact with a ‘helpful’
confederate.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants 16 volunteers from Edinburgh University’s
student community participated for payment. All were
native speakers of English, and none had taken part in
Experiment 1.
Materials and Design 2 identical sets of 16 wooden
blocks were used in the experiment. In each set, there
were 4 square blocks, 4 circles, 4 triangles and 4 bridge
shapes. One of each shape was red, one was blue, one was
green and one was yellow. The two sets were arranged in
cardboard chests of drawers, which were labelled ‘1’ and
‘2’ on the top. Each chest contained 4 pull-out drawers. In
Box 1 (which we’ll refer to as the Color Box), the drawers
were labelled with colored patches to indicate that one
drawer contained all the red blocks (one square, one
circle, one triangle, one bridge), one contained all the blue
blocks, and so on. The drawers in Box 2 (the Shape Box)
were labelled with pictures to indicate that one contained
all the square blocks (one red, one blue, one green, one
yellow), one contained all the circle blocks, etc. Individual
blocks were labelled with numbered stickers to show
whether they came from Box 1 or Box 2.
Two sets of instruction cards were created for the
players to describe. The confederate’s instruction cards

536

(the prime set) had written descriptions printed on them,
so that they could simply read each instruction aloud. The
confederate’s descriptions were written such that they
always used a color-first prime NP (e.g. ‘red square’) to
describe a block from the Color Box and a shape-first
prime (e.g. ‘square that’s red’) to describe a block from
the Shape Box. Each of the participants’ instructions (the
target set) showed a pictorial representation of a 5 x 4 grid
with a wooden block in one square. The picture also
indicated which box the block should come from (1 or 2).
Half of the participants’ instructions showed a block from
Box 1, and half showed a block from Box 2.
32 pairs of instruction cards were created by pairing a
prime card from the confederate’s set with a target card
from the participant’s set. Pairs were constructed so that
there was no lexical overlap between the prime NP and
the target NP. In other words, the color and shape of the
target block were always different to the color and shape
of the block in the immediately preceding prime. An
experimental item was defined as the confederate’s
scripted prime description plus the participant’s paired
target card.
Prime-target pairs were assigned to one of two lists,
which were presented as two separate blocks of 16 trials
(or two ‘games’) during the experimental session. The two
lists were constructed such that every wooden block was
described only once in each list. Within each block, the
order of presentation of prime-target pairs was
randomised for each participant. Both players started the
game with an empty 5 x 4 grid in front of them. The
columns of the grid were labelled with numbers (1-5) and
the rows were labelled using letters (A-D).
Procedure This was almost identical to Experiment 1,
except that there were only 2 blocks of 16 trials. The
confederate always described the first card. Each player
had 4 empty spaces on their grid at the end of a game.
Between games, the experimenter put the wooden blocks
back into the chests of drawers, removed the players’
filled grids and replaced them with empty ones. The
experiment took about 25 minutes in total.
Each session was recorded on audio tape and later
transcribed verbatim. We coded the descriptions produced
by participants as ADJECTIVE-NOUN (e.g. ‘red
square’), NOUN-RELATIVE (e.g. ‘square that’s red ’) or
OTHER4.

Results
Table 2 reports the percentage of ADJECTIVE-NOUN
NPs (‘red square’) produced in each condition. NPs coded
as OTHER are excluded from these percentages, and from
all subsequent analyses. 2 x 2 analyses of variance were
conducted, with Prime Type (color-first vs. shape-first)
and Target Box (Color Box vs. Shape Box) as within4

Descriptions were coded as OTHER if they did not contain
information about both the shape and color of the card.

subjects factors5. These analyses revealed a small but very
reliable main effect of priming (F1 = 7.941, p = .013;
F2 = 12.293, p = .002). Speakers produced 5% more
ADJECTIVE-NOUN NPs (e.g. ‘blue triangle’) following
a color-shape prime than after a shape-first prime. There
was also a significant main effect of Target Box (F1 =
4.410, p = .053; F2 = 98.683, p < .001). Speakers
produced 13% more ADJECTIVE-NOUN NPs when
describing blocks from the Color Box. The interaction
between Prime Type and Target Box was significant by
items but not by subjects (F1 = 3.333, p = .088; F2 =
5.463, p = .027).
Table 2: Percentage ADJECTIVE-NOUN NPs (SD)
Participant describes target block from:
Color Box
Shape Box
Confederate produces:
color-first prime
99 (3)
89 (0.26)
shape-first prime
98 (7)
81 (0.27)

Discussion
Experiment 2 found significant independent effects of coordination and co-operation on noun phrase production.
As in a previous study (Cleland & Pickering, in press),
speakers were more likely to produce a noun-relative
structure (‘square that’s red’ ) after a shape-first prime
than following a color-first prime. We interpret this as a
syntactic co-ordination effect (cf. Branigan, Pickering &
Cleland, 2000). Speakers also produced more nounrelative NPs when describing blocks from the Shape Box.
This suggests that our participants were tailoring their
descriptions to produce NPs that would map easily onto
the array from which their partner would have to select a
block. We take this as evidence that speakers were
behaving ‘co-operatively’ at the level of syntactic choice.
The magnitude of the effects in this experiment are
somewhat different to those we observed in Experiment 1.
The overall priming effect is smaller here, probably
because one of the constructions we were trying to get
participants to produce (‘square that’s red’) is fairly
dispreferred in spontaneous speech (in a previous study,
speakers produced this kind of construction on only 9% of
baseline trials; Haywood, Branigan & Pickering,
unpublished data). Although there seems to be a
preference for producing color adjectives before pattern
adjectives, speakers do spontaneously produce both of the
two word orders we investigated in Experiment 1 (‘stripy
orange star’ vs. ‘ orange stripy star’), and they are
therefore perhaps easier to prime. The co-operation effect
is more reliable in Experiment 2, and this might reflect the
fact that the confederate was modelling the production of
syntactic structures that were obviously very different
from each other (‘red square’ versus ‘ square that’s red ’).
5

The items analyses we report here are between-items
comparisons.

537

This might have the effect of highlighting the target box
manipulation, making it more likely that the naive
participants will pay attention to audience design in their
own utterances.

General Discussion
Two experiments demonstrate that speakers co-operate
and co-ordinate with an interlocutor when they produce
noun phrases. In line with previous research, our data
demonstrate that NP structure can be primed in dialogue
(cf. Cleland & Pickering, in press). This supports the idea
that abstract aspects of linguistic input have an impact on
a speaker’s language output (e.g. Bock, 1986; Garrod &
Anderson, 1987).
Our participants also showed evidence of attending to
audience design in the dialogue task. They tended to
produce NPs that would most easily map onto the
stimulus array for their partner, even when that involved
producing constructions which are rarely used
spontaneously (such as NPs like ‘square that’s red ’).
Speakers appeared to be more likely to engage in audience
design when the contrast between the possible referring
expressions was very obvious (Experiment 2), and when
their partner was also behaving in a linguistically ‘cooperative’ way (Experiment 1). This latter finding
suggests that there may be some element of ‘tit-for-tat’ in
language behavior; speakers may not bother to be helpful
unless the person they are talking to is doing the same.
Co-ordination and co-operation exerted independent
effects in the experiments we report here, and in both
studies, the priming effect was (statistically) more reliable
than audience design. This may well reflect the fact that
priming is thought to operate at an automatic, nonconscious level (Bard, Anderson, Sotillo, Aylett, DohertySneddon & Newlands, 2000; Pickering & Garrod, in
press), whereas audience design is considered to be a
more strategic process (Bard et al., 2000; Horton &
Keysar, 1996) that may require conscious effort on the
part of the speaker. Perhaps people only attend to an
addressee’s perspective when time or processing
resources allow.

Acknowledgements
We thank Sandie Cleland and Manon Jones for their
assistance in running these experiments, and three
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier
version of the paper. This research was supported by an
Economic and Social Research Council Postgraduate
Research Studentship awarded to the first author
(R42200034183).

References
Bard, E.G., Anderson, A.H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M.,
Doherty-Sneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000).
Controlling the intelligibility of referring expressions in
dialogue. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.

Bell, A. (1982). Radio: The style of news language.
Journal of Communication, 32, 150-164.
Bell, A. (1984). Language style as audience design.
Language in Society, 13, 145-204.
Bock, J.K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Branigan, H.P., Pickering, M.J., & Cleland, A.A. (2000).
Syntactic coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.
Brennan, S.E., & Clark, H.H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Brown, P.M., & Dell, G.S. (1987). Adapting production to
comprehension: The explicit mention of instruments.
Cognitive Psychology, 19, 441-472.
Clark, H.H., & Carlson, T.B. (1982). Hearers and speech
acts. Language, 58, 332-373.
Clark, H.H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Cleland, A.A., & Pickering, M.J. (in press). The activation
of syntactic information during sentence production:
Evidence from noun phrases. To appear in Journal of
Memory and Language.
Coupland, N. (1980). Style-shifting in a Cardiff worksetting. Language in Society, 9, 1-12.
Ferreira, V.S., & Dell, G.S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity
and lexical availability on syntactic and lexical
production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic
coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Giles, H. (Ed.) (1980). Accommodation theory: Some new
directions. York Papers in Linguistics, 9, 105-136.
Horton, W.S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers
take into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91117.
Krauss, R.M., & Weinheimer, S. (1964). Changes in
reference phrases as a function of frequency of usage in
social interaction: A preliminary study. Psychonomic
Science, 1, 113-114.
Labov, W. (1966). The social stratification of English in
New York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied
Linguistics.
Levelt, W.J.M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to
articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lockridge, C.B., & Brennan, S.E. (2002). Addressees’
needs influence speakers’ early syntactic choices.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 550-557.
Piaget, J. (1926). The Language and Thought of the Child.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Pickering, M.J., & Garrod, S. (in press). Toward a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H.H. (1992). Coordinating
beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 183-194.

538

