UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Collaborative Learning of concepts in Distance Learning Conceptal Map: Analysis of
prototypes and categorization levels
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v60q4d9
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)
Author
Amoretti, Maria Suzana Marc
Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                               Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                University of California

                        Collaborative Learning of concepts in Distance Learning
                    Conceptual Map: Analysis of prototypes and categorization levels
                                     Maria Suzana Marc Amoretti1
                                                 Abstract
Concept learning supported by computer must take into account the features of the groupware
used, but also the collective semantic universe that is formed. A virtual group of students building
concepts through the Internet, in a distributed and asynchronized manner, may be recognized as
belonging to a given culture through the cognitive dimension expressed by the shared conceptual
maps. This research was performed with the software CMap Tools from West Florida University
used by students of Distance Learning (Specialization) of Informatics in Education at UFRGS,
Brazil. This research is conducted by a vibrant cognitive science team – “LEAD: Distance Learning
Laboratory, Cognitive Science and Semiotics Research”2, a newly established cognitive science
research laboratory devoted to the categorization, visual perception, knowledge management,
computational study of knowledge, language and action. We tried to identify ideological similarity
and cognitive deviation, both based on the prototypes and on the levels of categorization developed
in the maps, with an emphasis in the investigated groups cultural and semiotic aspects.
Keywords: cognitive science, semiotics, share conceptual maps, ideological similarity, categorization, share
learning, distance learning.
                             1. From semantic networks to conceptual maps
          “The notion of knowledge performs a central role in learning. What we know about beings and
things are constituted under the form of concepts, which may organize in different forms. Artificial
Intelligence has been using semiotic or semantic networks to represent the diverse types of knowledge for
years”.3 This is the trend called connectionism, which embraces a network of connected knots whose
networks entries and exits are conceived as representations (Cummins, Robert and Schwatz, and Georg4).
           “The representation of knowledge in networks helps forward, thus, knowledge comprehension,
since human memory recognizes and retains more quickly prototypic models, answering in a more
satisfactory manner the readers’ reality expectations, making the mental process of understanding easier.
The network simulates typical aspects of human cognition, having as essential feature the flexibility in the
modeling of cognitive phenomena, which is the network ability of always completing the concepts
described through the association of new properties to basic concepts”. 5
1
  Cognitive Science Professor at Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul. (UFRGS) and FEEVALE
University Center, Leader of LEAD: Distance Learning Laboratory of Cognitive Science and Semiotics
Research:
2
  LEAD: Distance Learning Laboratory: Cognitive Science and Semiotics Research
http://www.pgie.ufrgs.br
3
  Amoretti, Maria Suzana Marc. Representing knowledge in semantic networks. In The (re) invention of
teaching. A report of the differences and plural possibilities found at UFRGS teaching courses. Booklet
PROGRAD, nº 14, Graduation Pro-Rectorship, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 2000, p.73.
4
  Cummins, Robert e Schwarz, Georg. Connectionism, computing and cognition. In Andler, Daniel.
Introduction to cognitive sciences. São Leopoldo: UNISINOS, translated by Maria Suzana Marc
Amoretti, 1998.
5
  Amoretti, Maria Suzana Marc. Representing knowledge in semantic networks. In The (re) invention of
teaching. A report of the differences and plural possibilities found at UFRGS teaching courses. Booklet
PROGRAD, nº 14, Graduation Pro-Rectorship, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 2000, p.74.
                                                     79

          The work with conceptual maps has as its starting point the previous knowledge of the student
on a given notion. To Novak, the concept is a regularity perceived in facts, objects, memories of past
facts, and which is expressed by a label (Novak, 1998). When concepts to be learnt are not related with
the previous knowledge of the student, what Ausubel calls “rote learning” takes place.
          Thus, when students turn the known concepts into a graphical form of a conceptual map, relating
this initial notion with others also already known, establishing a hierarchy and/or determining properties,
they may organize their knowledge in an autonomous manner, adjusting their own reasoning according to
the map building. This learning concept, based on Ausubel, is called “meaningful learning”.
          In order to perform meaningful learning, conceptual maps proved to be an appropriate tool
because they allow the students (and also the professors) to develop a cognitive process of leaning in
which they guide their acquisition of new information, since this information will be directly related to
their previous knowledge structure. It is important to stress that “previous knowledge structure” is
understood here as that one the subjects hold, at the moment of learning, as a product of their cultural
integration.
          This way of representing the concepts allows what we call “properties heritage”. It is not
necessary to store in the memory the group of properties relating to each concept. The inherent properties
to the base concept are enough as long as the other properties relating the remaining network concepts
may be inferred. It is tough, not to say impossible, to separate semantic networks presentation from the
notion of mental scheme (Schanck, 2000) because schemes are used to express knowledge to understand,
memorize, infer, and also represent the organization of different kinds of knowledge in memory.
                                2.  Cooperation /Collaboration / Autonomy
          Autonomy and cooperation / collaboration are not excluding or contradictory concepts. When
working in teams with conceptual maps, it is important to guide the team members or the students on the
learning and knowledge theory underlying conceptual maps building. The elaboration of a global map by
the group from individual maps or from the building, from the start, of a collective map implies the
inclusion of everyone’s knowledge and the creation, as a team, of new kinds of knowledge, inherent to
the group.
          In this sense, the building of a map involves collaboration, when the students share information,
still without modifying the data, and involves cooperation, when students not only share their knowledge,
but also may interfere and modify the information received from their classmates, acting in asynchronized
way to build a collective map. Both cooperation and collaboration attest the autonomy of the ongoing
cognitive process, the direction given by the students themselves when trying to adequate their knowledge
to their mates’ knowledge.
          CMap Tools, for instance, integrates the concept of hypermedia – aggregation/juxtaposition of
different medias in a sole media with a sole aim – turning each map created into a hyper document,
allowing navigation through the unlimited links that may be used to associate information, respecting the
user’s learning style. However, form the pedagogical point of view, it is not really convenient to offer a
navigation with no restrictions through all the hyper document knots (conceptual map), to avoid that the
student feel confuse by the cognitive overload. Besides, the possibility of the guided multimedia use to
illustrate and enrich the concepts studied allows the students to take part in the teaching and learning
process, determining their own way of studying, according to personal preferences foe the choice of
multimedia references external to the map structure, and being able to review concepts as many times
they wish, even in a simulation environment. Multimedia importance is to encourage the students to
search for other attributes that will enrich and complete their initial concept, which is rather
individualized. The students feel several times shy and unaware of the multitude of relation this concept
could generate.
3.    Research held in the LEAD: Distance Learning Education Laboratory : Cognitive Science and
      Semiotics at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) diagnosing the ideological
      similarity through the analysis of the students’ conceptual maps
By using a collaborative building software via Internet we may verify the ideological similarity among
groups of students by the presence of a common knowledge expressed by the general concept and their
unfoldings, by the existing correlations among the distinctive traces of the fundamental categories (the
abstract ones), evidencing the maps internal cohesion and the presence of mental schemes common to a
                                                      80

given social group, revealing, then, the “ideological similarity” (Stich, 82-83) among some concepts,
which Winograd (Winograd, 75) has denominated as “micro world” in his famous simulation program
SHRDLU and which Dreyfus, later J.-P. Desclés, calls “Referential Universe”.
          In the Post Graduation Program of Informatics in Education at UFRGS I researched conceptual
maps in distance learning lato sensu in the disciplines of Doctorate in which, despite the work performed
during the weekly classes, there is always much to be done for the distance-learning group. This kind of
environment allows a large individual participation, since the students have autonomy to freely organize
their knowledge according to the semiotic outline of their collective and individual culture. At the same
time, it also allows a great interaction among the students as long as this tool, especially with the
innovations brought by version 2.9.1.(CMap Tools) and 3.0, which permit that each concept is discussed
separately, through the resource called “soup”; this software still provides the discussion of the pertinence
of whole sequences, through the resource “thread discussion”.
4.   Difficulties presented during the collaborative work with conceptual maps
          Both the concepts and the chaining and choice of the pertinent attributes discussions are made
completely at distance. When it came to interact in order to create a collective conceptual map, there were
some difficulties among the students, who experienced a certain resistance to the idea of giving up their
identities on behalf of a collective authorship.
          In order to minimize this feeling of identity loss diluted in a superior instance – that of the group
– several conventions were created. These codes established by each group aimed at facilitating the
interaction among the different forms of organizing the students’ knowledge. It is really interesting to
observe that in groups with a weak ideological similarity or with the presence of an element to
characterize the “cognitive deviation” (the word “deviation” is employed here with no value connotation),
the cooperation and collaboration efforts are necessarily bigger and more complex. Professors’ position,
through questions that help students clearly explain what they really want to say with each notion used,
will improve the chances that the group’s efforts result in the creation of a consensual conceptual map.
5.   Metacognition
          The maps collective creation phase (in the process of distance learning) is a really delicate issue,
and it involves several problems and susceptibilities, such as the authorship of a given graphical
configuration. Thus, we tried to reach a previous consensus with the students and certain strategies were
used to preserve the wok authorship before passing to the final phase, in which the map becomes
everyone’s map, with no distinctions. These strategies, defined with the group, are: the use of different
colors for each user, to concede visibility to each one’s contribution (authorship), the use of specific
colors for links, different colors and spatial disposition for attributes and categories.
          We also opted to repeatedly save the maps conceived so all the versions could be compared. This
worry about the creation process memory is a very strong metacognition feature that cannot be neglected
during the concepts learning.
6.   Individual appraisal
          Students’ attitude is autonomous due to the individual appraisal of their work. The student is not
evaluated by the professor. There is not a right or wrong map. There is not a size pattern for the map, or
an exact number of relations among concepts to be established. Students are completely free to organize
their knowledge, change their map as many times as needed till they feel it shows, in a approximate way,
of course, the way they see the world.
          It does not mean, however, that the map should not be evaluated, but not according to traditional
methods of “right and wrong”. Maps must be defined as for the associative character (attributes) or
the classificatory character (categories) prevalence and, from this option, made by the students or
suggested by the professor, their coherence will be evaluated. An excellent map is a coherent, cohesive,
creative expressive, and logical map. Depending on the concept studied and on the class aim, the
adjectives mentioned above will have different weights concerning the map evaluation.
 7. Ideological similarity realized through prototypes and stereotypes
     Ideology is always viewed as a classification, in its verbal or imagetic manifestation, in which one
element, compared to others, is situated in a given semantic category. The values used in this axiology
result from the semiotic articulation of the collective universe in which the subject is inserted – a subject
modeled, mainly, by the actions believe, /want/, /must/ and by /want to do/.
                                                        81

     This categorization approach that discards the myth of the computer and the maps elaboration lack of
ambiguity, attempts to include the prototype presence as the most usual manner of using a given object,
also questioning the strict boundaries among the categories that reflect, before anything else, the
Observer’s perceptive structure and the world social and physical structure. This new point of view,
which has as its forerunners Ludwig Wittgenstein and Eleanor Rosh, does not realize categories as
arbitrary concepts, but as concepts motivated and determined by culture, images, mental models,
appearance, analogies, by the use of metaphors and other mental processes. Concepts common underlying
structural properties turn them into semiotic objects performing a social and cultural role that will reveal
the subject and his/her group.
     Thus, from each subject’s mental schemes, forged by his/her culture, concepts and, particularly,
prototypes, are produced. In most of the cases the terms prototype and stereotype are used indifferently
to designate the two levels. However, we distinguish these two realities defining prototype as the object
that is a category best model and stereotype as our mental representation of this object. Prototype is
defined by extension, it is a referential subcategory, while stereotype is found in the intention level and it
does not correspond to the idea of “best model” common to the subjects belonging to the same
community or, still, as a combination of typical properties.
     A conceptual map organized in categories is necessarily supported by the idea of a prototype,
obeying to the following statements:
     1.   Every category has a prototypical internal structure;
     2.   The level of representation of a model corresponds to its degree of pertinence to the category;
     3.   The boundaries of categories or concepts are vague;
     4.   The embers of a category do not present properties common to all the members. There is a
          “familiarity” that regroups the conjunct;
     5.   Belonging to a category depends on the degree of similarity with the prototype;
     6.   Categories operate in a global manner.
     Deciding whether an element belongs to a category implies the action of verifying if the concept
possesses the necessary attributes that constitute the category common denominator. In order to X
belongs to the dog category, for instance, it is enough to investigate if X possesses the attributes that
correspond to the model of necessary and sufficient conditions (Kleiber, 1990) or to the model of
judicious attributes (Langacker, 1987), i.e., if X is an animal, a mammal, has four feet, barks, has coat,
etc.
     Prototypes
     A concept is a sort of scheme. An effective way of representing a concept is to retain only its most
important properties. This group of “most important” properties of a concept is called prototype. The idea
of prototype makes possible that the subject has a mental construction, identifying the typical features of
several categories and, when he/she finds a new object, they may compare it to the prototype they have in
their memories. Thus, the prototype of “chair”, for instance, allows new objects to be identified and
labeled as chairs. In individual conceptual maps creation, one may confirm the presence of variables for
the same concept.
     Prototype semantics has given way to a true revolution (the Roschian revolution) regarding classic
lexical semantics. If we observe the conceptual map for “chair”, for instance, we will realize that the
choice of most representative chair type, that is, our prototype of chair, supposes a double adequateness:
referential because the sign (concept of chair) must integrate the features retained from the real or
imaginary world, and structural, because the sign must be pertinent (ideological criterion) and distinctive
concerning the other neighbor concepts of chair. When I say that “this object is a chair”, it is supposed
that I have an idea of the “chair sign”, form the use of a lexical or imagetic competence coming from my
referential experience and that my prototypical concept of chair is more adequate than its neighbors bench
or couch because I perceive there is a back part and there are not arms. Then, it is useless trying to explain
the creation of a prototype inside a language, because it is formed from context interactions. The double
origin of a prototype is bound, then, to shared knowledge relation between the subjects and their
community.
     7.   Suggestions to facilitate collaboration using conceptual maps software
         We could realize, for sure, that the essential importance and interest of these structures –
prototype and stereotype – may represent knowledge under the form of hyperonimy relations that make us
infer new relations through logical base mechanisms. This general principle of representing kinds of
                                                      82

knowledge grounds the prototype and stereotype notions and may be developed in several formalisms;
one of them is the CMap Tools software. However, before presenting each conceptual map it is necessary
that its author defines whether he/she is working on a semantic decomposition, in which the attributes are,
thus, features, or whether he/she is demonstrating semantic networks in which the attributes constitute
hierarchical relations among conceptual units. These two types of representation may be, nevertheless,
naturally mixed and there should be a sort of formal mechanism in this software that allowed the passage
of a kind of representation to another.
          It is also important to define properties heritage among different category levels, viewed
throughout hierarchical relations as “it is one” that allowed to “virtually” add certain pairs of value-
attributes from a unit to another. Thus, the sparrow may inherit the property of flying because it is a kind
of bird. We should also think of concepts managing that, in a given category, are considered as an
exception. If we define the ostrich as a kind of bird, we need to indicate, in an explicit manner, that
despite the ostrich is defined as a bird it does not inherit the property of flying. The property of flying, that
could be a value par défaut, would need, then, explicit information to contradict it. It would be necessary
that the software allowed the heritage blockage of certain attributes. The circle has closed and we come
back, then, to the beginning of this text, which deals with prototypes and stereotypes whose basis is the
concepts representation from the heritage par défaut that allows a great economy in the acquisition and
managing of the information. These are just some suggestions.
At the moment we are performing the second phase of this research, comparing the maps that present
ideological similarity and those that are divergent and present a “cognitive deviation” (Cordier, 1989).
We believe to be opening new perspectives to the study of ideological similarity perception as a way to
facilitate the collaborative creation of concepts mediated by computer, both in traditional and distance
learning.
References
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc . Le mode d’emploi ergonomique: discours d’instruction. Contribution
Sémio-linguistique-cognitive. Doctorade Thesis. Limoges University, France, 1995.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc . Protótipos e Estereótipos: Aprendizagem de Conceitos. Mapas
Conceituais: Experiência em Educação à Distância. Informática na Educação: Teoria & Prática. Programa
de Pós-Graduação em Informática na Educação. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, 2001.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc . Representando o conhecimento em redes semióticas . A re-invenção
da docência. Um relato das diferenças e das pluralizações atuantes nas licenciaturas da UFRGS.
FASCÍCULOS PROGRAD. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, n. 14, p. 73-93, 2001.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc . Manual ergonômico: teoria e prática. Processos cognitivos do
discurso de instrução. Vozes, 2003 (in press).
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc; KELLER, Rodrigo; TAROUCO, Liane; KONRATH, Mary Lúcia
Pedroso; FABRE, Marie-Christine J. M. Construção colaborativa de mapas conceituais: similaridade
ideológica. In: XI SIMPÓSIO BRASILEIRO DE INFORMÁTICA NA EDUCAÇÃO. As novas
tecnologias da informação e comunicação na aprendizagem. SBIE 2000, v. 1, p. 105-111, 2000.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc; MACHADO, Alexandre; ROCHA, Karla; ROZADOS, Helen.
Representação de conceitos em EAD: mapas conceituais colaborativos. In: SEMINÁRIOS SOBRE
TECNOLOGIAS DE INFORMÁTICA PARA ENSINO À DISTÂNCIA. Cadernos de informática.
Instituto de Informática. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, v. 2, n. 1, ISSN 1519-132X, p.125-133, 2002.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc; MACHADO, Alexandre. Mapas conceituais: abordagem comparativa
de uma competência. Informática na Educação: Teoria & Prática. Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Informática na Educação. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, v.5, n.1, ISSN 1516-084X, p. 103-129, 2002.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc; SOUZA, Luiz Fernando Coelho. Manual de Instrução: Interface
Máquina-Usuário. In: VI CONGRESSO IBERO-AMERICANO DE EXTENSÃO, UNIFESP, São Paulo,
2001.
AMORETTI, Maria Suzana Marc; TAROUCO, Liane. Mapas conceituais: modelagem colaborativa do
conhecimento. Informática na Educação: Teoria & Prática. Programa de Pós-Graduação em Informática
                                                        83

na Educação. Porto Alegre: UFRGS, v.3, n.1, p. 67-71, 2000.
ANDLER, Daniel (Org.). Introdução às ciências cognitivas. Translate by Maria Suzana Marc Amoretti.
São Leopoldo: UNISINOS, 1998.
ANDLER, Daniel. Science et philosophie. Quinze essais d’épistémologie. Paris: Bibliothèque du CREA,
2000.
CASTELS, Manuel. A sociedade em rede. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 1999. (vol.1)
CORDIER, F. Les notions de typicalité et niveau d’abstracion: Analyse des propriétés des
representations. Thèse de doctorat d’Etat, Universite de Paris-Sud, 1989.
DECLÉS, J. P. Representation des connaissances. Paris: Actes Sémiotiques. v. 2, 1985.
DENHIERE, G. Il était une fois... Compréhension et souvenir de récits. Lille: Presses Universitaires de
Lille, 1994.
DENIS, M. Images et cognition. Paris: PUF, 1989.
DREYFUS, Hubert L. A dimensão filosófica do conexionismo. In: ANDLER, Daniel (Org.). Introdução
às ciências cognitivas. Trad. de Maria Suzana Marc Amoretti. São Leopoldo: UNISINOS, 1998.
GARDNER, Howard. Histoire de la révolution cognitive. La nouvelle science de l’esprit. Paris; Payot,
1993.
GREIMAS, A. J. Semântica Estrutural. São Paulo: Cultrix/EDUSP, 1973.
GREIMAS, Julien Algirdas; FONTANILE, Jacques. Semiótica das paixões. Trad. de Maria José
Rodrigues Coracini. São Paulo: Ática, 1993.
KLEIBER, Georges. La sémantique du prototype. Catégories et sens lexical. Paris, PUF, 1990.
LÉVY, Pierre. O que é o virtual. São Paulo: ed. 34, 1996.
LITWIN, Edith. (Org.). Educação a distância. Temas para o debate de uma nova agenda educativa. Porto
Alegre: Artmed, 2001.
PETERS, Otto. Didática do ensino a distância. São Leopoldo: UNISINOS, 2001.
RASTIER, François. Sémantique et recherches cognitives. Paris: PUF, 1991.
RICH, Elaine; KNIGHT, Kevin. Inteligência artificial. São Paulo: Makron, 1994.
SCHANK, Roger. Virtual Learning: A revolutionary approach to building a highly skilled workplace.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
SCHANK, Roger. Dynamic memory revisited. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
SCHANK, Roger. Designing world-class E-learning. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
SCHANK, Roger; ABELSON, R. Scripts, plans, goals, and understanding. Hillsdale, N. J., Erbaum,
1997.
STICH, S. P. From folk psychology to cognitive science. MIT, Cambridge, Mass, 1983.
                                                     84

