UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraint Satisfaction Processes in Social Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78j7z3jp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Read, Stephen J.
Snow, Chadwick J.
Simon, Dan

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraint Satisfaction Processes in Social Reasoning
Stephen J. Read (read@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1061

Chadwick J. Snow (csnow@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1061

Dan Simon (dsimon@law.usc.edu)
University of Southern California Law School, Los Angeles, CA 90089
Abstract
We show that constraint satisfaction processes (coherence
based reasoning) play an important role in social reasoning,
and that social reasoning violates key assumptions of classic
models of judgment and decision-making. Constraint
satisfaction models predict a bi-directional flow of influence
between evaluations of evidence for a judgment and the
judgment itself, such that an evolving judgment can influence
the evaluation of evidence. In contrast, models of judgment
and decision-making, such as Bayesian models, SEU and
Information Integration Theory assume that the direction of
influence is only from the evaluations to the judgment. We
examined two very different social reasoning tasks, a
judgment about whether a young dating couple would get
married, and a legal case about the guilt of a defendant
charged with murder. In both studies, subjects exhibited
strong coherence effects, such that the evaluation of evidence
shifted over time to become more coherent with the final
judgment. We note the similarity of constraint satisfaction
models to classic cognitive consistency theories in social
psychology, such as Cognitive Dissonance Theory.

Introduction
Everyday social judgments, such as whether a couple we
know is likely to get married or whether someone is guilty
of a crime, often rely on integrating multitudes of pieces of
evidence and inferences to arrive at a choice. Despite the
ubiquity and importance of these kinds of judgments, the
reasoning processes underlying them are not well
understood.
The aim of the current research is to shed further light on
these kinds of reasoning processes. We propose that
reasoning in these kinds of social judgments can be
understood in terms of constraint satisfaction processing
(Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989;
McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986; Read & Miller, 1994;
Read, Vanman, & Miller, 1997; Thagard, 1989, 2000). In a
constraint satisfaction network, nodes (representing
concepts) have positive and negative links with each other,
representing the nature of the relationships among them.
Activation spreads through such a network so as to satisfy
the constraints imposed by the relationships and the
activation of the concepts, and maximize the coherence or
Harmany (Thagard, 1989) of the network (or alternatively,
minimize its energy (Hopfield, 1984).

964

We explicitly contrast the predictions of such constraint
satisfaction or consistency models with classic models of
decision-making, such as Norman Anderson’s (1996)
Information Integration Theory (IIT), Bayesian decision
models, and Subjective Expected Utility Theory (SEU). At
the core of Information Integration Theory is the tenet that
human cognition can be described by simple algebraic rules:
judgments of complex phenomena are the mathematical
product – typically a weighted average – of the respective
psychological valuations. Bayes theorem is based on the
sequential multiplication of probabilistic values and SEU is
based on the multiplication of probabilities and utilities.
IIT explicitly (and the other models implicitly) assume
two central syntactic rules. The first is meaning invariance:
each piece of evidence is evaluated on its own terms, and is
not affected by the other pieces of evidence (unless there is
a pre-existing relationship of interdependency). The second
rule, valuation-integration independence, posits complete
separation between the processes of evaluation and
integration; the evaluation of a piece of evidence is assessed
independently from how it is combined to form the ultimate
conclusion.
This pair of rules logically implies what we describe as
the property of uni-directionality: inferences flow from the
individual pieces of evidence towards a computed judgment,
but the evaluation of the evidence should not be affected by
the emerging conclusion (valuation-integration independence), and there should be no interactions among the pieces
of evidence (meaning-invariance). In contrast to these
assumptions of the classic models, we will show that
decision-making in these kinds of tasks proceeds bidirectionally. That is, not only does the evidence influence
the conclusions, but at the same time, the emerging
conclusion affects the interpretation of the evidence. Such a
finding would be consistent with cognitive consistency and
constraint satisfaction models, but strongly inconsistent with
IIT, SEU theory, Bayesian models, and with other classes of
models that make the same assumptions.
We also examine the possibility that decision-making
affects not only the specific evidence relevant to the task,
but also related beliefs. Constraint satisfaction models raise
the possibility that changes in the evaluation of evidence
may also affect the associated beliefs that are used to
interpret the evidence.

Cognitive Consistency Theories and Constraint
Satisfaction
One strand of research that earlier attempted to explore
processing in such tasks involving multiple variables was
cognitive consistency theories, such as Heider’s balance
theory (1946, 1958), Festinger’s Cognitive Dissonance
Theory (1957) and a number of neo-balance theories
(Abelson & Rosenberg, 1958; Cartwright & Harary, 1956).
At the heart of cognitive consistency theories is the
Gestaltian tenet that human cognition proceeds by mutual
interaction among pieces of psychological knowledge
(Asch, 1946; Wertheimer, 1922).
Cognitive consistency theories were animated by four
principles of structural dynamics. First, cognitive states are
determined holistically through the interaction of cognitive
elements, rather than elementally. Second, structural
properties are dynamic -- the interrelation of cognitive
elements generates forces that determine the configuration
of the structure. Third, the dynamic character of mental
processes is such that they tend to settle at states of “good”
structural properties, namely “Prägnanz” (Wertheimer,
1923), “good figure” (Heider, 1960), consonance (Festinger,
1957), or equilibrium (Rosenberg & Abelson, 1960). These
are quite similar to ideas of coherence found in work on
constraint satisfaction networks (e.g., Thagard, 1989, 2000).
Fourth, and most pertinent to the current experimental
project, these dynamical changes that occur at the structural
level often involve changes, or “reconstructions”
(Rosenberg & Abelson, 1960) of the cognitive elements,
which may involve such things as changes of meaning of
elements or the introduction of new elements.
This fourth aspect is of crucial importance to the proposed
understanding of human cognition: reasoning tasks that
require the integration of multiple pieces of evidence into a
global judgment entail not only making inferences from the
evidence to the conclusion, but they also entail reverse
effects, by which the structural forces that push the system
towards good form impose changes on the values of the
evidence itself. Hence, the dynamical character of cognitive
consistency theories can be characterized as operating in a
bidirectional manner – from evidence to conclusions and
from conclusions back to evidence (Read, Vanman, &
Miller, 1997; Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Simon & Holyoak,
2002).
Readers should recognize these principles from recent
work in cognitive science on coherence based and constraint
based reasoning. Read, Vanman, and Miller (1997) have
extensively discussed the similarities between the Gestalt
principles that formed the basis of much of social
psychology and constraint satisfaction processes.
Cognitive consistency theories were developed as part of
an attempt to develop a general theory of cognition.
However, they were crippled by their inability to represent
rich and complex phenomena, and by the lack of a formal
model for evaluating and computing consistency (Read &
Miller, 1994; Read, Vanman, & Miller, 1997). As a result,
work on cognitive consistency theories largely came to a
standstill by the early 1970s. However, several authors (e.g.,
Read & Miller, 1994; Read, Vanman, & Miller, 1997;
Shultz & Lepper, 1996, 1998; Spellman & Holyoak 1992)

965

have recently demonstrated that constraint satisfaction
processes provide an explicit computational realization for
these classic consistency theories.

Goals
The primary objective of the current research is to
illuminate the nature of making decisions that are based on
multiple judgments and inferences. Specifically, we intend
to test whether the process can be understood as governed
by the Gestaltian principles of structural dynamic models.
Such a finding could support an extension of the classic
cognitive consistency theories to larger, semantically rich,
and more complex tasks than previously conceived. This
examination will also help determine whether the process
conforms to the syntactic rules of meaning invariance and
valuation-integration independence, or whether it is better
characterized as a coherence-driven construction of the
cognitive representation.
In the following experiments, participants were asked to
evaluate a number of pieces of evidence and background
knowledge, first in isolated vignettes that shared no apparent
relationship, and then again as pieces of an overall case
about which they were to make a decision.
In Study 1, the materials recounted a variety of facts
about the relationship of a young dating couple (Jenny and
Mark) and participants were to judge whether they thought
the couple would stay together and get married or would
split up, and they were also asked their evaluation of the
recounted facts. In Study 2, the materials recounted a
murder case against a defendant, Tim O’Reilly, and
participants were to decide whether the defendant was guilty
or innocent of the murder, and to indicate their evaluation of
the pieces of evidence presented in the case. In both
experiments there was sufficient ambiguity so as to support
either outcome.
If reasoning in this task can be characterized by a
constraint satisfaction process, we would expect that the
evaluation of the evidence would shift toward providing
support for whichever judgment was made. Thus, in both
studies we would expect that the evaluations of the evidence
would shift from pre test to post test to become more
coherent with the final judgment.

Study 1
Method
Participants. 183 people participated in this study through
the WWW. Ads were posted on the website “About.com”.
To attract participants, an entry in a $200 lottery was given
to each participant (odds of winning 1/200). Participants
ranged in age between 18 and 65 with a mean of 38.
Procedure. After reading and accepting the online informed
consent, participants either moved immediately to the first
set of materials or were first told that their ability to
accurately determine whether Jenny and Mark stayed
together or split up would be diagnostic of their level of
social intelligence. We hoped that this would motivate
people to think harder about the material so that we could
see if greater motivation would lead to stronger coherence

effects.
All participants were presented with a series of web pages
containing the materials. The sequence of presentation
involved two online questionnaires separated by a distracter
task containing 20 verbal analogies. Once all of the
materials had been completed, participants completed a
series of demographic questions.
The first questionnaire, consisting of a series of unrelated
vignettes involving people in romantic relationships and
people in legal disputes, contained 1 to 4 questions related
to each vignette. Participants responded to these questions
using an 11 point scale ranging from –5 (strongly disagree)
to +5 (strongly agree). Each vignette had 1 to 2 Fact
questions such as, “Zoe's assessment of Michelle is correct.
The fact that Michelle broke up previous relationships
suggests that she is not going to commit herself to a stable
relationship in the near future.” Also included with each
vignette was 1 to 2 Belief questions such as, “Generally
speaking, people who break off a number of lengthy
relationships do so because they have a problem making
commitments.”
After completing the first questionnaire (pretest),
participants then responded to the distracter task, consisting
of 20 verbal analogies from the Miller Analogies Test, on a
new web page. This task was then followed by the second
questionnaire (post test) on a new web page.
The second questionnaire asked participants to imagine
that they were friends with two people named Jenny and
Mark who were romantically involved with each other.
Participants then read a large vignette about Jenny and Mark
that incorporated the same factual elements conveyed
separately in the pretest vignettes. After reading the
vignette, participants were asked if they would be willing to
spend $50 on a necklace as an engagement gift for Jenny. If
a participant chose to buy the necklace, it implied that he or
she felt that the couple would stay together. Not buying the
necklace implied a break up. Following their decision about
the purchase, participants were asked to rate their level of
confidence regarding their decision from low to high, using
a five point scale. The last part of the second questionnaire
asked the same Fact and Belief questions as were asked in
the pretest, but now the questions pertained exclusively to
the relationship between Jenny and Mark. These questions
were either in support of the couple staying together or
breaking up. An example of a Fact question is, “Karen's
assessment of Jenny is correct. The fact that Jenny broke up
previous relationships suggests that she is not going to
commit herself to a stable relationship in the near future.”
An example of a Belief question is, “Generally speaking,
people who break off a number of lengthy relationships do
so because they have a problem making commitments.”
Once the second questionnaire was completed, participants
were presented with a series of demographic questions on a
separate web page. A final web page debriefed participants.
For analyses, participants were divided up into those who
decided to Buy the Necklace and those who decided Not to
Buy the Necklace. Further, responses to questions
consistent with breaking up were reverse coded so that
higher responses were consistent with the couple staying
together. These were averaged with the stay together items

966

to create an overall Stay Together index, in which higher
scores indicated responses consistent with a belief that the
couple would stay together. Therefore, the design of the
study was a 2 (Social Intelligence versus Control, between
subjects) X 2 (Buy Necklace versus Not Buy Necklace,
between subjects) X 2 (pretest questions versus post test
questions, within subjects) factorial. Fact and Belief
questions were analyzed separately.

Results
As expected the implications of the events were somewhat
ambiguous and open to interpretation, as indicated by the
fact that there was a fair amount of disagreement as to what
to do. Sixty-seven subjects (37%) decided to buy the
necklace and 115 (63%) decided to not buy the necklace.
Nevertheless, subjects were quite confident in their
decisions: the distribution of confidence was highly bimodal
with almost no subjects in the middle of the distribution.
The extent of the coherence shift, if any, was tested by a 2
(Social Intelligence versus Control, between subjects) X 2
(Buy Necklace versus Not Buy Necklace, between subjects)
X 2 (pretest questions versus post test questions, within
subjects) ANOVA of the Stay Together index, which is the
average of the interpretation questions. Fact and Belief
questions were analyzed separately. Evidence for a
coherence shift would be provided by a significant
interaction between the two factors of pre test – post test and
whether participants decided to buy the necklace.
As expected this interaction was highly significant, F (1,
178) = 20.78, p < .001. As can be seen in Figure 1, for
those subjects who decided to buy the necklace, their scores
on the Stay Together index increased from pretest to post
test, while participants who decided not to buy the necklace
showed a decrease from pretest to post test on the Stay
Together index.

Figure 1: The Stay Together scores for those who did and
did not decide to buy the necklace.
Contrary to predictions the Social Intelligence
manipulation had no impact. The size of the coherence shift
was equally strong in both conditions. Thus, as predicted,
subjects’ evaluation of the events shifted over time to

become more coherent with their final decision.
Contrary to predictions, there was no evidence of a
coherence shift for the belief items. However, we will
provide evidence of a shift in belief items in the legal case.

Study 2
In this study we examined the role of constraint satisfaction
processing in legal decision-making. We expected that
participants’ interpretations of the testimony in a murder
case would shift over time so as to become more coherent
with their final verdict. We also expected coherence shifts
in participants’ background beliefs.

Method
Participants. A total of 334 people participated in this
study by logging onto our study Web page. Ads were
posted on the website “About.com” to advertise the study.
To motivate participation, a lottery entry of $200 was
granted to each participant with the odds of winning being
1/200. Participants ranged in age between 18 and 69 with a
mean age of 34.
Procedure. After reading and accepting the online informed
consent, participants responded to a series of unrelated
vignettes describing people involved in romantic
relationships or legal disputes. There were 1 to 4 questions
for each vignette. These questions dealt either with the
specific facts of each vignette or general beliefs about the
world related to each vignette. Participants responded using
an 11 point scale ranging from –5 (strongly disagree) to +5
(strongly agree). Each vignette had 1 to 2 Fact questions.
For example, following a vignette about Wendy, who was
asked by her girlfriend to identify the person who left
flowers on her desk, participants were asked to state their
agreement with the following statement: “Wendy's
identification makes it likely that it was Dale who left the
flowers on Jessica's desk.” Also included with each vignette
were 1 to 2 Belief questions such as, “In general, when
people identify someone whom they've seen once or twice
before the identifications are accurate.”
After completing this questionnaire (pretest), participants
were then administered the distracter task, consisting of 20
verbal analogies from the Miller Analogies Test on a new
web page. This task was then followed by the second
questionnaire (post test) on another new web page.
The post test consisted of a large legal case about a
suspect in the murder of a security guard at a company. The
defendant was an employee named Tim O’Reilly. This case
incorporated the same factual elements conveyed separately
in the pretest vignettes.
After reading the case, participants came to a verdict
regarding Tim O’Reilly. Based on their verdict, participants
were divided up as either “Convictors” or “Acquittors”.
Participants were then asked to rate their level of confidence
regarding their verdict from low to high, using an 11 point
scale. The last part of the second questionnaire asked the
same Fact and Belief questions as were asked in the pretest,
but now they instead pertained exclusively to the Tim
O’Reilly case. An example of a Fact question is, “The

967

technician's identification of the defendant makes it likely
that the person hurrying out of the bookkeeper's office was
in fact the defendant.” An example of a Belief question is,
“In general, when people identify someone whom they've
already seen once or twice before the identifications are
accurate.” These questions were worded either in favor of
guilt or innocence. Responses to the questions were later
recoded to create what we called a Guilt score, in which
higher responses were consistent with a verdict of guilty.
Therefore, the design of the study was a 2 (Convictors
versus Acquittors, between subjects) X 2 (pretest questions
versus post test questions, within subjects). Responses to
Fact and Belief questions were separately analyzed. Upon
completion of the materials, participants filled out a series
of demographic questions.

Results
As in Study 1, we were successful in creating a scenario that
seemed somewhat ambiguous, as there was not agreement
as to whether Jason was guilty. 36.4% of the participants
gave a verdict of guilty and 63.6% gave an innocent verdict.
Results were analyzed as 2 (Convictors versus Acquittors,
between subjects) X 2 (pretest questions versus post test
questions, within subjects) ANOVA on the Guilt score.
Note that all items were recoded so that higher scores
indicated that the item favored Guilt. Responses were
analyzed separately for the Fact questions and the Belief
questions.
For the Fact items there was a coherence shift as indicated
by a significant interaction between Pre post and Verdict, F
(1, 332) = 204.17, p < .001. As can be seen in Figure 2, for
the Convictors, there was an increase from pre test to post
test in their Guilt score, whereas for the Acquittors there
was a decrease from pre test to post test.

Figure 2: Agreement with Guilt Score - Facts by individuals
either Convicting or Acquitting
In this study, there was also a coherence shift for the
Belief items, as indicated by a significant interaction
between Pre post and Verdict, F (1, 332) = 60.68, p < .001.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the Belief items exhibited the
same pattern as the Fact items, with Convictors exhibiting
an increase from pre test to post test on the Guilt score and

Acquittors showing a decrease. Not surprisingly, this effect
was somewhat weaker than the effect for Fact questions.

Figure 3: Agreement with Guilt Score - Beliefs by
individuals either Convicting or Acquitting

Discussion
These studies provide further evidence for the important
role of constraint satisfaction processes in social reasoning.
Coherence based reasoning was found both in decisions
about the guilt or innocence of a defendant, as well as in the
predictions of the outcomes of a romantic relationship.
In Study 1, subjects’ evaluations of the events in the life
of Jenny and Mark shifted from pre test to post test to
become more coherent with their decision as to whether or
not to buy the necklace and therefore, implicitly, with their
judgment as to whether Jenny and Mark were likely to
marry or split up. And in Study 2, using a quite different
kind of task, a legal decision making task, we found the
same pattern: Evaluations of the evidence in the murder
trial against Tim O’Reilly shifted over time to become more
coherent with the verdict of guilt or innocence.
The systematic change in the evaluation of the events
from the pre test to the post test in both studies pose a strong
challenge to the two syntactic rules that are central to
Anderson’s (1981, 1996) Information Integration Theory,
Bayesian models of information integration, and SEU
models. These models assume both meaning invariance
and value-integration independence: the meaning of one
attribute should not influence the meaning of another
attribute and the integration of information to make a
judgment should not affect the meaning of the information
going into that judgment.
However, the coherence shifts indicate that our
participants violated both principles. The shift of the
interpretation of the evidence towards the participants’ final
judgment is completely inconsistent with both weighted
averaging and the multiplication of probabilistic values of
the isolated information in the pre test (see also Pennington
& Hastie, 1992). A better interpretation is that during the
reasoning process that led to the final judgment, the pieces
of information interacted dynamically with each other and
with the emerging decision, leading to a change in their

968

meaning.
Our findings and our explanation of them, share some
features with Roe, Busemeyer, and Townsend’s
Multialternative Decision Field Theory, which uses a
recurrent neural network to choose among alternatives (Roe,
Busemeyer, & Townsend, 2001). However, their recurrent
network only applies to alternatives for which valences have
already been calculated by an earlier step in the model.
That is, the network does not represent the relationships
among the attributes that underlie those valences. Thus, in
their model, the evaluation of the different alternatives by
the recurrent network cannot effect the evaluation of the
attributes of the different choices. In contrast, we have
shown that the participants’ judgments influence the
evaluations of the events and evidence.
Our findings are consistent with many of the central
features of Pennington and Hastie’s Story Model. They
support the idea that decisions are determined by the
representation constructed rather than by the “raw
evidence”, that the confidence in the decision is a function
of the coherence of the representation, and that the
judgments in a trial cannot be explained by means of formal
mathematical models (Pennington & Hastie, 1992).
Our findings in the study on legal decision making
suggest that coherence processes can also affect general
beliefs about the world. Shifts in background beliefs from
pre test to post test indicate that these beliefs shifted to
become more coherent with the final verdict. Such shifts in
background beliefs, which we argue are due to the spread of
activation during constraint satisfaction processing, provide
further evidence against formal mathematical models, such
as IIT and Bayesian models. These models have no way of
predicting such shifts in background beliefs.
Our results are clearly consistent with computer
simulations of constraint satisfaction processing (Holyoak &
Simon, 1999; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Read, Vanman, &
Miller, 1997; Thagard, 2000), and with the role of constraint
satisfaction mechanisms in a number of experimental
settings, including causal reasoning (Read & MarcusNewhall, 1993), analogical reasoning (Spellman & Holyoak,
1992), attitude change (Spellman, Ullman, & Holyoak,
1993), and abstract legal reasoning (Holyoak & Simon,
1999; Simon, Pham, Le, & Holyoak, 2001). Finally, given
the similarities between constraint satisfaction processes and
the Gestaltian principles underlying classic cognitive
consistency theories, this research also suggests that insights
from classic cognitive consistency theories in Social
Psychology can be extended to larger and more semantically
rich tasks than previously conceived.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF grant SES-0080424 to
Dan Simon and Stephen J. Read.

References
Abelson, R. P., & Rosenberg, M. (1958). Symbolic psychologic: A model of attitudinal cognition. Behavioral
Science, 3, 1-8.
Anderson, N. H. (1981). Foundations of information

integration theory. New York: Academic Press.
Anderson, N. H. (1996). A functional theory of cognition.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Asch, S. E. (1946). Max Wertheimer’s contribution to
psychology. Social Research, 13, 81-102.
Cartwright, D. & Harary, F. (1956). Structural balance: a
generalization of Heider's theory. Psychological Review,
63, 277-293
Festinger, L (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Heider, F. (1946). Attitudes and cognitive organization.
Journal of Psychology, 21, 107-111.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal
relations. New York: Wiley.
Heider, F. (1960). The gestalt theory of motivation. In
Jones, M. R. (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium of Motivation,
pp. 145-172.
Holyoak, K. J. & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3-31.
Holyoak, K. J. & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hopfield, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded responses have
collective computational properties like those of two-state
neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 81, 3088-3092.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Vol. 2. Psychological and biological models.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1992). Explaining the
evidence: Tests of the Story Model for juror decision
making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 189-206.
Read, S. J., & Marcus-Newhall, A. (1993). Explanatory
coherence in social explanations: A parallel distributed
processing account. Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 65, 429-447.
Read, S. J., & Miller, L. C. (1994). Dissonance and balance
in belief systems: The promise of parallel constraint
satisfaction processes and connectionist modeling
approaches. In R. C. Schank & E. J. Langer (Eds.),
Beliefs, reasoning, and decision making: Psycho-logic in
honor of Bob Abelson. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Read, S. J., Vanman, E. J., & Miller, L. C. (1997).
Connectionism, parallel constraint satisfaction processes,
and gestalt principles: (Re)introducing cognitive
dynamics to social psychology. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 1, 26-53.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001).
Multialternative decision field theory: A dynamic
connectionist model of decision making. Psychological
Review, 108, 370-392.
Rosenberg, M. J., & Abelson, R. P. (1960). An analysis of
cognitive balancing. In M. J. Rosenberg, C. I. Hovland,
W. J. McGuire, Abelson, R. P., & J. W. Brehm (Eds.),
Attitude organization and change: An analysis of
consistency among attitude components. Oxford,
England: Yale University Press.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Cognitive dissonance

969

reduction as constraint satisfaction. Psychological
Review, 103, 219-240.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1998). The consonance
model of dissonance reduction. In S. J. Read, & L. C.
Miller, (Eds.), Connectionist models of social reasoning
and social behavior. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simon, D. & Holyoak, K. J. (2002). Structural dynamics of
cognition: From consistency theories to constraint
satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
6, 283-294.
Simon, D., Pham, L. B., Le, Q. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001).
The emergence of coherence over the course of decision
making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1250-1260.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). If Saddam is
Hitler then who is George Bush? Analogical mapping
between systems of social roles. Journal of Personality &
Social Psychology, 62, 913-933.
Spellman, B. A., Ullman, J. B., & Holyoak, K. J. (1993). A
coherence model of cognitive consistency: Dynamics of
attitude change during the Persian Gulf War. Journal of
Social Issues, 49, 147-165.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12, 435-467.
Thagard, P. (2000). Coherence in Thought and Action.
Boston, MA: MIT Press, Bradford.
Wertheimer, M. (1922). The general theoretical situation. In
W. D. Ellis (Ed.) (1967), A source book of gestalt theory.
New York, Humanities Press.
Wertheimer, M. (1923). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. In W. D. Ellis (Ed.) (1967), A source book of
gestalt theory. New York, Humanities Press.

