UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contingent Behavior, Biases, and Adaptivity in Distributive Negotiation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09b6q0ff

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Del Missier, Fabio
Fum, Danilo

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contingent Behavior, Biases, and Adaptivity in Distributive Negotiation
Fabio Del Missier1,2 (delmisfa@units.it)
Danilo Fum1 (fum@units.it)
1

2

Department of Psychology, University of Trieste, via S. Anastasio 12, Trieste, I 34134, Italy
eCommerce and Tourism Research Laboratory, ITC-irst, via Sommarive 18, Povo, I 38050, Italy

Abstract
Behavioral decision making research on negotiation has
obtained significant results but has not yet been able to
provide a complete picture of the mechanisms underlying
the definition, selection and usage of reference points, or to
specify the processes responsible for the formulation and
evaluation of the negotiators’ offers. We present the results
of an experiment, requiring a bargain between a human
buyer and a computer-simulated seller, in which we were
able to obtain both the notorious biases caused by the initial
offer and the framing effect, and an adaptive behavior
related to the availability of a discount. The effects of
discount, initial offer and framing have been analyzed as a
function of both the reference points and the anchors
utilized by the participants in the different negotiation
phases. The experimental results and the linear models of
the buyer support a contingent view of the negotiation
behavior that affects the definition, selection and usage of
the reference points.

Heuristics, Biases, and Reference Points
According to the bounded rationality approach,
negotiators can be considered decision makers with
limited processing capacities that rely on simplifying
heuristics, and often take into account only part of the
available information. It has been suggested that
negotiators focus on a single predominant reference point
(White, Valley, Bazerman, Neale & Peck, 1994), that they
tend to ignore the opponent’s cognitive processes or that
they are prone to simplifying the contingencies of future
events (Carroll, Bazerman & Maury, 1988).
The use of heuristics is justified by their efficiency, but
it could produce various biases in the negotiation behavior
(Neale & Bazerman 1991). Among the heuristics that can
be found in the literature, here we focus on (a) the
framing effect, and (b) the anchoring and adjustment
process.
The framing effect arises from the evaluation of an
option in relation to a reference point. If the option is
considered as a gain, it is assumed that the negotiator
assumes a risk-averse attitude and is leaning towards
accepting the option. If the option is considered as a loss,
on the other hand, it is supposed that the attitude becomes

a risk-seeking one and the negotiator is likely to look for
further concessions from the opponent. Another
explanation for the framing effect is related to the greater
significance of loss than of gain. The adopted frame
influences the concessions made by the negotiators and
the likelihood of agreement (Neale & Bazerman, 1985).
The use of the anchoring and adjustment heuristics has
been proposed as a partial explanation for some relevant
effects, such as the influence of the initial offer and the
reference points (Kristensen & Gärling, 1997d; Yukl,
1974). This heuristic assumes that negotiators start from a
value that is considered as an “anchor”, and adjust it to
provide the subsequent offers or estimates. The anchor is
set on the basis of the information, sometimes objectively
irrelevant, available to the negotiator. Generally, the
adjustment made during the process is insufficient, with
the negotiator remaining too close to the anchor.
Both anchoring and adjustment and the framing effect
are grounded on the definition and adoption of reference
points. Research on reference points highlighted the role
of the initial offer and the market price (Kristensen &
Gärling, 1997a), of the negotiator’s reservation (White,
Valley, Bazerman, Neale & Peck, 1994; Kristensen &
Gärling, 1997b) and aspiration price (White & Neale,
1994), and of the opponent’s reservation price (Kristensen
& Gärling, 1997c).
While behavioral decision research on negotiation has
obtained significant results, we still lack a complete
picture of the process and of the relations that exist among
its phases. (Van Poucke & Buelens, 2002). Among the
issues that need to be further investigated we can mention:
(a) the mechanisms for the definition and selection of the
reference points, (b) the criteria for evaluating the
received offers, and (c) the processes underlying offer
formulation, as well as anchoring and adjustment.
In this paper we analyze the processes of definition,
selection and usage of the reference points, and their
relationship with the biases and the adaptive behavior
shown by the negotiators. To this end we present an
experiment and some linear models of the negotiator that
have been used to test some specific hypotheses
concerning the reference points and the anchoring and
adjustment process.

324

A Price Negotiation Experiment
The experiment aimed at testing some hypotheses related
to the theoretical perspective described above in a context
of a distributive dyadic negotiation (Raiffa, 1982).
More specifically, we constructed a negotiation
scenario that: (a) could be representative of a real world
situation, (b) could allow for the systematic manipulation
of the availability of cues capable of activating both
adaptive and bias-inducing negotiation strategies, (c)
could provide an adequate experimental control, and (d)
could allow for the unobtrusive collection of the estimates
and of the judgments provided by the participants during
the negotiation process. We adopted a procedure derived
from De Dreu, Carnevale, Emans, & Van De Vliert
(1994), that had been proven adequate (Fum & Del
Missier, 2001). The procedure arranges a negotiation
between a (human) buyer and a (computer-simulated)
seller. The participants are made to believe they are
negotiating with another individual while they are in fact
interacting with a computer program. This program
implements a negotiation strategy whose pattern of offers
is made partly contingent on the buyer’s behavior. The
program also allows for the exchange of offers and
counteroffers during the negotiation process. In addition,
it records the participant’s satisfaction with the received
offers, the value of the buyer’s reference points (i.e., the
reservation price and the aspiration price), the buyer’s
estimates of the seller’s reference points, and the time
associated with each action. Beyond providing the context
for the negotiation, the program is also used as a processtracing tool.

Hypotheses
We systematically manipulated the value of two cues that
are notorious for activating some bias-inducing strategies
in the buyer: (a) the initial offer, and (b) the relation
between the initial offer and the market price.
The initial offer is often considered an anchor in the
process of counteroffer formation (Neale & Bazerman,
1991). The related adjustment process sometimes proves
insufficient, and it can yield an inadequate counteroffer.
Moreover, the value of the initial offer can influence the
setting of the reference points that are utilized to evaluate
the subsequent offers.
The relationship between the initial offer and the
market price can induce a framing effect when the market
price is presented as an objective estimate of the value of
a product, and it is assumed as a reference point (Fum &
Del Missier, 2001; Kristensen & Gärling, 1997d). In
general, when the frame is positive, the negotiator’s
satisfaction increases, and her/his attitude becomes more
cooperative and concessive. This can induce a less rigid
policy when setting the reference points. However, in the
case of a negative frame, a tougher attitude in the
negotiation can generally be found (Bazerman, Magliozzi,

& Neale, 1985; Carnevale & Pruitt, 1992; De Drue,
Carnevale, Emans & Van De Vliert, 1994). This attitude
can yield a decrease in the value of the buyer’s reference
points. It is important to take into account, however, that
the role of the buyer in a negotiation process is always
associated with an implicit negative frame (Neale, Huber,
& Northcraft, 1987) that will most likely influence the
outcome.
In the experiment we manipulated a third cue to
evaluate whether the participants were capable of
modifying their behavior to take advantage of explicit
environmental contingencies. This cue constitutes a
discount mechanism that should allow a substantial
modification in the participants’ behavior because it is
explicitly connected to the results of the negotiation
policy, and because it creates a linkage between the
different negotiation episodes. The discount availability
should induce a more concessive policy and higher values
for the buyer’s reference points.
In the experiment we tested three hypotheses:
H1 (initial offer): the initial offer should affect both the
initial setting of the reference points and the overall
negotiation performance. The higher the initial offer, the
higher the value of the settlement price, the estimates of
the reference points, and the number of negotiation cycles
needed to conclude the deal.
H2 (framing): the frame should affect (especially when its
magnitude is high) the satisfaction concerning the first
offer, and the setting of the reference points. With a
positive frame we expect more satisfaction, higher
reference points and settlement price, and a lower number
of negotiation cycles to reach an agreement; when the
frame is negative, less satisfaction, lower reference points
and settlement price, and a higher number of cycles
should be obtained.
H3 (discount): the presence of a discount mechanism
should produce a higher settlement price, higher values
for the reference points, and a lower number of
negotiation cycles. If the negotiator is adaptive, it is
reasonable to suppose that the gain produced by the
discount will compensate for the concessions made during
the negotiation process.

Method
Participants The participants were 96 undergraduates (66
females and 36 males) enrolled in a psychology course,
ranging from 18 to 37 years of age (median = 20). All
participants were familiar with computers, and were able
to use the keyboard and the mouse.
Procedure The experiment required participants to
negotiate the purchase of some out-of-print books needed
for a course assignment.
A set of instructions were given to each participant,
stating that the information about the market price of the
books would have been provided by a trustworthy source

325

(a student union). The participants were further informed
they would have to negotiate with a seller using a
networked computer. The instructions also explained that
a reward, consisting of extra credits for the course would
have been given to the top scoring participants.
The participants were informed that their negotiation
goal was to make the best deal, i.e. to purchase the four
books at the minimum price. Half of the participants were
randomly assigned to the “discount” condition. The
instructions for this condition stated that a 20% discount
on the total amount due would be given to the participants
if they managed to reach an agreement in the majority of
deals, without receiving an ultimate “take-or-leave” offer
from the seller.
All the participants were also informed that, in the case
of no agreement with the seller for a given book, they had
to purchase the book on the free market. In this case, the
price of the book was set according to a probability
distribution. A distribution graph was shown to the
participants that made explicit the fact that the most likely
price would be the market price (p=0.50), with the
probability of obtaining a more favorable price
diminishing with the increase in the difference between
the market price and the new price.
After reading the instructions, the participants went
through a training trial to acquaint themselves with the
task. The experiment required four negotiation trials to be
performed during which the initial offer and the market
price of a different book were systematically varied.
Each negotiation trial comprised a variable number of
cycles. At the beginning of each cycle, the market price of
the book was presented by the interface. Following this,
the seller’s offer was displayed, and the participants had
to rate it on a five-point scale. They were then asked to
state their reservation price (i.e., “the maximum amount
of money you are willing to spend”), their aspiration price
(i.e., “the best outcome you can reasonably expect”), and
they were also requested to provide an estimate of the
seller’s reservation price (“the minimum amount of
money the seller will be willing to accept”) and aspiration
price (“the best outcome the seller can reasonably
expect”). Finally, the participants could (a) accept the
seller’s offer, (b) break the negotiation trial, or (c) make a
counteroffer. Participants were told that only their reply
would be sent to the seller. After a random time interval, a
new seller’s offer was presented, and another negotiation
cycle started.
To end a trial the participant could accept the seller’s
last offer or break the negotiation. The computersimulated seller could end the trial by accepting the
buyer’s proposal or by sending an ultimate offer. The
communication between the buyer and the seller was
limited to the offer and counteroffer interchange.
A few days after the experiment, the participants were
given detailed information about the research and the true
identity of the seller.

The Computer Negotiation Strategy The strategy
followed by the computer seller was almost identical to
that used in Fum & Del Missier (2001) to which we refer
for a detailed description. The strategy was developed
through a series of empirical tests, and it was judged as
plausible from the point of view of the buyer. Its main
assumptions (Carnevale & Pruitt, 1992: Raiffa, 1982) are
as follows: (a) the seller’s concessions progressively
decrease; (b) the amount of the seller’s concession is
related to that of the buyer’s; (c) a contentious attitude by
the buyer is reciprocated by the seller.
The automated seller followed some simple rules to end
a negotiation trial. It accepted a buyer’s offer when the
offer was equal or higher than the request it would have
made in the following cycle. It sent an ultimatum in the
case of sustained non-cooperation or, in any case, after six
negotiation cycles.
Apparatus A G3 Power Macintosh computer was used
for the experiment. A program implementing the humancomputer interface, the seller’s negotiation strategy, and
the process tracing facilities was written in Common Lisp
and Clim2. It represents a variation of the Java program
used in Fum & Del Missier (2001). The only two
significant differences were as follows: (a) participants
could now move some sliders, instead of typing values, to
express their offers and to make their estimates1, and (b)
the information concerning the last offer received or made
by the participant, and the estimates provided in the last
negotiation cycle were made available as external
memories in the interface (on the sliders and on the
panes). These modifications were introduced to reduce the
errors made by participants in providing their input, and
to eliminate the influence of some memory-related effects
on the decision making and counteroffer formulation
processes (Fum & Del Missier, 2001).
Experimental Design The experiment followed a mixed
2 (Initial Offer: 100,000 vs. 110,000 Italian Lire) x 2
(Discount: yes vs. no) x 2 (Frame: positive vs. negative) x
2 (Frame Magnitude: 5,000 vs. 10,000 Lire) design. The
Discount and Frame factors were between subjects while
the Initial Offer and Frame Magnitude factors were within
subjects.
A framing effect was established by manipulating the
relation between the seller’s initial offer and the market
price: if the initial offer was higher than the market price,
the frame induced in the buyer was negative (loss), if the
market price was higher than the initial offer, the frame
1

At the time the experiment was carried out Italy, as well as
another 11 European countries, had already adopted the Euro as
currency. Given the difficulty encountered by people (and
ourselves) in reasoning with the new currency, we decided to
state all quantities in good ol’ Lire (1 Euro = 1936.27 Lire).

326

was positive (gain). The size of the frame was established
by manipulating the difference between these two
quantities.

Results
Initial Offer (H1) The initial offer affected both the
reference points, and the overall performance (see Table
1). The first counteroffer (i.e. the buyer’s first offer), the
settlement price, and the values of the reference points
were significantly higher when the initial offer was high.
The difference in the number of negotiation cycles needed
to reach an agreement was not significant. These results
corroborate hypothesis H1.
Framing and Frame Magnitude (H2) The frame
affected the initial satisfaction judgment both on its own
(F(1,84)=5.52, MSE=1.53, p<.05) and in interaction with
its magnitude. When the frame was positive, the
satisfaction was higher, especially when the frame
magnitude was high (i.e., 10,000 Lire). The satisfaction
judgment means were as follows: positive frame with a
high magnitude: 1.62, positive frame with a low
magnitude: 1.49, negative frame with a low magnitude:
1.33, negative frame with a high magnitude: 1.15). The
interaction between the frame and its magnitude affected
three out of the four initial reference points: the buyer’s
reservation price (F(1, 84)=10.83, MSE=48, p<.01), the
buyer’s aspiration price (F(1, 84)=9.32, MSE=59, p<.01),
and the seller’s aspiration price (F(1, 84)=4.72, MSE=47,
p<.05), the only unaffected point being the seller’s
reservation price. The interaction produced higher values
when the frame was positive. No significant differences
were obtained in the number of cycles and settlement
prices. These results support hypothesis H2 only for the
setting of reference points, while the predictions
concerning the overall performance are not corroborated.
Discount (H3) The results showed a remarkable effect of
discount upon performance; this factor affected in the
anticipated direction both the settlement price (mean for
the discount condition = 76,097, no discount = 69,165,
F(1,84)=5.42, MSE=774, p<.05) and the number of
negotiation cycles (mean for the discount condition =
4.177, no discount = 5.087, F(1, 84)=7.08, MSE=10.21,

p<.01). There was also a marginally significant effect of
the discount on the buyer’s first counteroffer (F(1,
84)=3.492, MSE=1546, p=.065; mean for the discount
condition = 66,107, no discount = 58,243). Only part of
hypothesis H3 is supported by the experimental evidence.
It seems that the discount availability does not affect the
setting of reference points, but only the performance.
After the application of the discount (whenever
appropriate), a comparison between the settlement prices
for the two conditions (average amount per trial in the
discount condition = 63,114, in the no discount = 69,085)
revealed a significant effect (t(86)=2.39, p<.05).
Participants in the discount condition took advantage of
this opportunity by adopting a policy that avoided
ultimate offers without making excessive concessions.
Negotiation Strategies and Agreements The number of
trials ending without an agreed settlement price was very
low (3% of the total). The prevailing negotiation
strategies were the ‘always increasing concessive’ (i.e. the
participants formulated in every negotiation cycle an offer
that was higher than their previous one: 60% of the trials)
and the ‘monotonic concessive’ (i.e. the participants never
formulated an offer that was lower than a previous one,
even if they occasionally repeated the previous offer: 19%
of the trials). An analysis, carried out on the negotiation
traces with at least three offers and associated with the
‘always increasing concessive’ strategy, showed that the
participants’ reference points were kept constant, or
almost constant throughout the negotiation process. In the
discount condition (n=93) the proportions of traces with
no change was between .75 and .80 (depending on the
reference point). In the no discount condition (n=86) the
same proportion was between .74 and .84.

The Linear Models of the Buyer
In this section we describe the result of a modeling
investigation carried out (a) to test some hypotheses on
the contingent nature of cue selection aimed at explaining
the effect of the discount, and (b) to test some linear
models of the buyer’s behavior in the experimental task.
We tried to achieve these two goals by following the
tradition of linear models of judgment (Cooksey, 1996).

Table 1: Initial Offer main effect.

ANOVA

Mean

High
offer
Low
offer

First
Counteroffer
F(1, 84)=24.29
MSE=64
p<.0001
64.281

Settlement
Price
F(1,84)=79.09
MSE=35
p<.0001
75.463

Buyer’s
Reservation
F(1, 84)=74.16
MSE=43,
p<.0001
79.618

60.069

69.799

73.587

327

Buyer’s
Seller’s estimated Seller’s estimated
Aspiration
Reservation
Aspiration
F(1, 84)=42.23
F(1, 84)=26.04
F(1, 84)=50.79
MSE=50
MSE=53
MSE=43
p<.0001
p<.0001
p<.0001
64.134
74.166
92.913
59.224

70.185

87.915

aspiration price (BA) for H5, and BR, BA, and the seller’s
estimated reservation (SR) and aspiration price (SA) for
H4.

Our hypotheses are based on two assumptions. First, the
buyer adopts a predominant reference point (White et al.,
1994) that we assume will reflect the attitude held during
the negotiation. In the no discount condition it is assumed
that negotiators will essentially focus on their aspiration
price. In case of discount the predominant reference point
will be the reservation price. Second, it is assumed that
the dominant heuristic used to form a counteroffer will be
anchoring and adjustment. (Kristensen & Gärling, 1997d).
These assumptions allow the formulation of three
hypotheses:
H4 (first counteroffer): The buyer’s first counteroffer will
depend on an anchoring and adjustment process, and will
be influenced not only by the initial (i.e., seller’s) offer
but also by the predominant reference point (aspiration or
reservation price).
H5 (stopping rule): In deciding when to stop the
negotiation process, the buyers will rely on their
predominant reference point. Therefore, the settlement
price will be related to the predominant reference point.
H6 (counteroffer generation): The buyers are expected to
utilize an anchoring and adjustment process in
formulating the subsequent counteroffers. For every
negotiation cycle, the anchor could be represented by the
newly received seller’s offer or by the offer formulated by
the buyers themselves in the previous negotiation cycle.
The degree of adjustment will be influenced by the
presence or absence of the discount.
To test these hypotheses we carried out three separate
multiple regression analyses on the negotiation traces
corresponding to the ‘always increasing concessive’
strategy, for both the discount and the no discount
conditions. We applied the forward stepwise method and
then, after the elimination of the negligible predictors
from the resulting models, we estimated the final models
using a standard multiple regression approach. We carried
out the analyses on the first counteroffer (H4), on the
subsequent counteroffers (H6), and on the settlement
price (H5). We used the following predictors: the previous
buyer’s offer (BOt-1) and the current seller’s offer (SO) for
hypothesis H6, the buyer’s reservation (BR) and

Results and Discussion
The results and the final models are presented in Table 2.
The fit of the models varies from acceptable (R2adj=.47) to
excellent (R2adj=.976), a successful outcome considering
the current status of the research on the negotiation
models (Van Poucke & Buelens, 2002).
Our hypothesis concerning the determinants of the first
counteroffer (H4) seems to be supported: the buyer’s
reservation price influences, together with the seller’s
reservation price, the discount condition while the buyer’s
aspiration price plays a significant role in the no discount
condition. It is important to note that the models of the
first counteroffer use both the buyer’s and the seller’s
estimated reference points. This suggests that, in this
context, the first counteroffer could have been generated
by taking into account two reference points, one related to
the participant and the other to the counterpart.
The buyer’s reference points (the aspiration price in the
no discount condition and both the aspiration and
reservation price in the discount condition) are relevant
for the negotiation ending (H5). After the inclusion of the
first counteroffer in the set of predictors, only the effects
of the buyer’s reservation price in the discount condition
remains significant. These results do not support H5
completely.
Finally, the generation of subsequent counteroffers (H6)
was influenced by the buyer’s previous counteroffer and
by the seller’s current offer. The model coefficients for
the two conditions are almost identical. Two models of
simple regression, exclusively focused on the seller’s
previous counteroffer, obtained an equivalent fit (no
discount: R2adj=.974; discount: R2adj=.909) and resulted
very similar (no discount: BOt=6.12+(BOt-1*.95), Beta
BOt-1=.987; discount: BOt=10.51+(BOt-1*.89), Beta BOt1=.95).

Table 2: Multiple regression results for the discount vs. no discount conditions.
CRITERION
First
Final Model:
counteroffer
Parameters:
BO1
Beta:
Model Fit:

DISCOUNT
BO1=-17.62+(BR*.494)+(SR*.517)
BR (p<.001), SR (p<.0001)
BR=.372, SR=.405
R2adj=.47, F(2,90)=41.69, p<.0001

Final Model:
Parameters:
Beta:
Model Fit:

NO DISCOUNT
BO1=-40.55+(BA*1.017)+(SA*.372)
BA (p<.001), SA (p<.0001)
BA=.703, SA=.298
R2adj=.65, F(2,83)=81.22, p<.0001

Counteroffer
BOt

Final Model:
Parameters:
Beta:
Model Fit:

BOt=4.79+(SO*.07)+(BOt-1*.888)
SO (p<.01), BOt-1 (p<.0001)
SO=.051, BOt-1=.95
R2adj =.911, F(2,331)=1717.03, p<.0001

Final Model:
Parameters:
Beta:
Model Fit:

BOt=1.84+(SO*.054)+(BOt-1*.95)
SO (p<.0001), BOt-1 (p<.0001)
SO=.040, BOt-1=.982
R2adj =.976, F(2,335)=6741.47, p<.0001

Settlement
price
SP

Final Model:
Parameters:
Beta:
Model Fit:

SP=37.87+(BR*.225)+(BA*.285)
BR (p<.01), BA (p<.001)
BR=.335, BA=.434
R2adj =.52, F(2,90)=51.2, p<.0001

Final Model:
Parameters:
Beta:
Model Fit:

SP=37.69+(BA*.546)
BA (p<.0001)
BA=.721
R2adj =.51, F(1,84)=90.91, p<.0001

328

These results do not show any difference between the two
experimental conditions in the adjustment processes
occurring during the negotiation.2

Conclusions
As hypothesized, the results show that participants were
able to develop a behavior that produces some of the
known negotiation biases (i.e., framing and initial offer),
while simultaneously adapting to take advantage of
available environmental opportunities (discount). It is
possible to explain this evidence by assuming that the
anchoring and adjustment process and the offer evaluation
rely on reference points that are defined, selected, and
used in a partially contingent way. This contingent
structuring of reference points seems to be affected by
environmental cues such as initial offer, frame, and
discount availability. These cues could induce different
concessive attitudes, yielding to different policies for
anchoring and adjustment in the formulation of the first
counteroffer.
Some useful indications on the nature of reference
points, and how they are utilized, have been obtained by
linear models of the negotiator that have supported some
of the experimental hypotheses, and provided interesting
indications about those which were non corroborated.
The main contribution of our research is the support
acquired for a partially contingent and constructive view
of negotiation that waives the conflict between adaptive
and biased behavior to focus instead on a detailed analysis
of negotiation heuristics.

References
Bazerman, M. H., Magliozzi, T., & Neale, M. A. (1985).
Integrative bargaining in a competitive market.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 35, 294-313.
Carnevale, P. J., & Pruitt, D., G. (1992). Negotiation and
mediation. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 531-582.
Carroll, J.S., Bazerman, M. H., & Maury, R. C. (1988).
Negoziator cognitions: A descriptive approach to
negotiators’ understanding of their opponents.

2

Using a separate slope model, we tested the interaction of the
first offer and discount availability with all the significant
predictors of the linear models. The analysis was carried out on
the buyer’s first counteroffer and showed the significant effects
of each of the three-way interactions (ranging from p<.05 to
p<.0001, with a single p=.07). Furthermore, the initial offer
main effect is no more significant, but the discount main effect
is still significant (p<.05). These results generally support the
joint influence of the initial offer, of the discount and of the
reference points. They are consistent with contingent weighted
adding models, which weights (and cue utilization) depend on
specific configurations of experimental conditions.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 41, 352-370.
Cooksey, R. M. (1996). Judgment analysis: Theory,
methods, and applications. San Diego: Academic press.
De Dreu, C. K. W., Carnevale, P. J. D., Emans, B. J. M.,
& Van De Vliert, E. (1994). Effects of gain-loss frames
in negotiation: Loss aversion, mismatching, and frame
adoption. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 60, 90-107.
Fum, D., & Del Missier, F. (2001). Modeling counteroffer
behavior in dyadic distributive negotiation. Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling (pp. 85-90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kristensen, H., & Gärling, T. (1997a). Adoption of
cognitive reference points in negotiations. Acta
Psychologica, 97, 277-288.
Kristensen, H., & Gärling, T. (1997b). The effect of
anchor points and reference points on negotiation
process and outcome. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 71, 85-94.
Kristensen, H., & Gärling, T. (1997c). Determinants of
buyers’ aspiration and reservation price. Journal of
Economic Psychology, 18, 487-503.
Kristensen, H., & Gärling, T. (1997d). Anchor points,
reference points, and counteroffers in negotiations.
Göteborg Psychological Reports, 27, 1-12.
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. (1985). The effects of
framing and negotiation overconfidence on bargainer
behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 28, 34-49.
Neale, M. A., & Bazerman, M. H. (1991). Cognition and
rationality in negotiation. New York: Free Press.
Neale, M. A., Huber, V. L., & Northcraft, G. B. (1987).
The framing of negotiations: contextual versus task
frames. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 39, 228-241.
Raiffa, H. (1982). The art and science of negotiation.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Van Poucke, D., & Buelens, M. (2002). Predicting the
outcome of a two-party price negotiation: Contribution
of reservation price, aspiration price and opening offer.
Journal of Economic Psychology, 23, 67-76.
White, S. B., & Neale, M. A. (1994). The role of
negotiator aspirations and settlement expectancies on
bargaining outcomes. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 57, 91-108.
White, S. B., Valley, K. L., Bazerman, M. H., Neale, M.
A., & Peck, S. R. (1994). Alternative models of price
behavior in dyadic negotiations: Market prices,
reservation prices, and negotiator aspirations.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 57, 430-447.
Yukl, G. A. (1974). Effects of situational variables and
opponent concessions on a bargainer’s perceptions,
aspirations, and concessions. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 29, 227-236.

329

