UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deference and Essentialism in the Categorization of Chemical Kinds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kh28864

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Braisby, Nick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deference and Essentialism in the Categorization of Chemical Kinds
Nick Braisby (N.R.Braisby@open.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, The Open University, Walton Hall,
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK

Abstract
Psychological essentialism has been subject to much
debate. Yet a key implication – that people should defer
to experts in categorizing natural kinds – has not been
widely examined. Three experiments examine deference
in the categorization of chemical kinds. The first
establishes borderline cases used in the second and third.
These latter show limited deference to experts, and some
deference to non-experts. These data are consistent with
a perspectival framework for concepts in which
categorization is sometimes based on micro-structural
properties and sometimes on appearance and function.

Introduction
According to psychological essentialism (Medin &
Ortony, 1989) people believe that kinds have essences –
things that make an object what it is – and act
accordingly. For example, people might believe that
horses have an essence – that all horses necessarily
have the essence, and that something cannot be a horse
without it. Behaviour is predicated on a belief in the
possession of the essence: people should behave
differently with an animal they come to believe lacks
the horse-essence, and should withhold the word
‘horse’ as its category label. This psychological
essentialism differs from metaphysical essentialism (cf.
Kripke, 1980; Putnam, 1975), which is the view that
natural kinds actually do possess essences. According
to psychological essentialism people believe that kinds
have an essence even if this belief turns out to be false
(cf. Mayr, 1988).
Much evidence has been cited as supporting
psychological essentialism (cf. Gelman, Coley &
Gottfried, 1994). For example, Keil (1989) and Rips
(1989) showed that similarity based on superficial
appearances could dissociate from categorization.
People may go beyond appearances to seek deeper,
causal principles as to why instances belong to
categories. Such principles appear important even for
very young children (Gelman, 2000; Gelman & Medin,
1993). In an influential series of studies, Gelman &
Wellman (1991) showed that 4 and 5 year olds
categorized items according to the nature of their
insides, and their innate potential rather than their
outward appearance or environment.
However, other empirical studies have suggested the
relative unimportance of essences. Smith & Sloman
(1994) showed that Rips’ demonstrated dissociation
between categorization and similarity could only be
obtained under certain task conditions. Malt (1994),
showed that the categorization of instances of water is
not fully explained by the proportion of H2O people

174

believe the instances contain. For example, tears were
less likely to be judged a type of ‘water’ than pond
water, yet tears were thought to contain more H2O. Malt
argued that categorizing liquids as ‘water’ depends not
just on their microstructure, but also on other factors
such as function and source. Braisby, Franks &
Hampton (1996) presented their participants with some
of the thought experiments used by Kripke and Putnam
to articulate, and argue for, metaphysical essentialism.
They found that their participants did not agree with the
intuitions of Kripke and Putnam and argued that their
participants were not truly essentialist, but sometimes
gave more weight to micro-structural properties and
sometimes more to appearance and function (though see
Diesendruck & Gelman, 1999).
There are further difficulties with the evidence
claimed to support essentialism. First, as conceded by
Gelman, Coley & Gottfried (1994), since participants
are unlikely to articulate essentialist beliefs explicitly,
much of the evidence for essentialism is indirect. That
is, there is an inferential step between the information
manipulated in studies, and an essentialist conclusion.
For example, Gelman & Wellman (experiment 2)
manipulated insides and outsides, and argued that the
dependence of categorization on insides supports
essentialism. Yet the argument requires a further
premise – that children regard insides as essential.
Without this, the essentialist conclusion is uncertain. As
Fodor (1998) puts it “What’s further required … is the
idea that what’s ‘inside’ … is causally responsible for
how things that belong to the kind appear…” (p. 154–
155). Similarly Strevens (2001) suggested that the
evidence cited in favour of essentialism can be
explained by the simpler belief that causal laws relate
category membership to appearances, and do not
warrant invoking the notion of essence (see the
discussion between Ahn, Kalish, Gelman, Medin,
Luhmann, Atran, Coley & Shafto, 2001, and Strevens,
2001).
The studies reported here take a different tack. They
focus on a key implication of essentialism that has
remained relatively unexplored. Putnam (1975)
developed a corollary of essentialism that he labeled the
Division of Linguistic Labour (DLL). Though the
arguments were constructed around word meaning, they
have been widely taken to apply to concepts (e.g.,
Fodor, 1998). According to DLL, people should defer
to experts, i.e., those with more knowledge of a
category’s likely essential properties. For instance, if a
metallurgist categorizes a watch as “not gold,” other
things being equal, essentialism requires lay people’s
categorizations to conform.

In spite of theoretical studies of deference (e.g.,
Fodor, 1998; Segal, 2000; Woodfield, 2000), there have
been few empirical examinations either of the extent of
deference, or even whether it occurs. Malt (1990)
presented her participants with objects that were
described as appearing ‘halfway’ between two
categories (e.g., a tree halfway between an oak and a
maple). She asked them to choose one of three response
options to signal how they would resolve the object’s
category membership: ‘ask an expert’, ‘call it
whichever you want’ or judge that, with more time,
they could ‘tell which it is’. For natural kinds, 75% of
participants chose ‘ask an expert’, whereas for artifacts
(e.g., ‘boat-ship’), 63% chose ‘call it whichever you
want’. However, this evidence is only suggestive of the
importance of expert opinion in categorization:
participants could choose not to defer to an expert
whose opinion they sought. Braisby (2001) examined
deference more directly by looking at the categorization
of borderline biological kinds. Around half of his
participants switched their categorization judgments to
agree with those of experts. However, one quarter did
the same with non-expert judgments. Braisby argued
that the data overall did not support psychological
essentialism since participants did not consistently defer
and based their judgments on non-essential properties
such as appearance and function as well as ‘essential’
properties.
This paper focuses on deference in categorizing
chemical kinds. Much of the original argumentation for
essentialism is based on natural kinds, yet empirical
studies have almost exclusively focused on biological
kinds. Yet there are reasons to think that the
categorization of biological and chemical kinds may
differ. First, it has been argued that metaphysical
essentialism is not true for biological species (cf.
Dupre, 1999; Mayr, 1988;), whereas similar arguments
do not appear, for example, for the periodic table.
Second, there is increasing evidence of the universal
and domain-specific nature of biological thought (cf.
Hirschfeld & Gelman, 1994). If biological thought is
domain-specific, then it follows that the principles
governing ‘chemical’ thought may differ. Finally, there
is much evidence that biological thought has a
privileged folk status (e.g., Atran, 1998), though there
have been no similar arguments for chemical kinds.
The first experiment establishes borderline cases of
chemical kinds. The second examines whether people
defer to experts in categorizing these cases. The third
considers whether people also ‘defer’ to non-experts.

Experiment 1

Method
Participants 60 undergraduate psychology students
attending an Open University residential school
volunteered to participate.
Materials Four chemical kinds were chosen, that were
also familiar household items: vitamin C, salt, water
and soap. Scenarios were constructed to describe
transformations of the kinds that were intended to
produce borderlines. An example of an Appearance
Unaltered scenario follows. “You have just bought a
bottle of water from a reputable retailer. On examining
its packaging closely you find that it has been produced
by a new process that involves chemically transforming
water. The transformation is such that the
manufacturers have had to give the liquid a new
chemical formula. However, the liquid looks, feels,
smells and tastes just like water.” For Appearance
Altered scenarios the final sentence was altered – for
example, to “Although the liquid looks, feels and tastes
just like water, you notice that it smells unusual.”
Scenarios were constructed for each kind following the
same template, the only differences being due to the
name of the kind, and this final sentence.
Procedure Participants were presented with 4
scenarios, as above. Half of the participants in each
condition were presented with these scenarios in a
random order; the rest saw them in reverse order. All
participants were given a practice example. After each
scenario, they were presented with a categorization
question (e.g., “is the liquid you have bought water?”)
and asked to give a (forced-choice) Yes/No judgment.
Participants were instructed to answer solely on the
basis of the current scenario, and ignore preceding
scenarios and answers. After completing the task,
participants were asked to rate its difficulty on a 7-point
scale (1 = very easy, 7 = very difficult).

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Appearance
Unaltered

Appearance Altered

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: Appearance Unaltered and Appearance
Altered.

175

Figure 1. Mean no. of Yes responses in experiment
1 by type of transformation (maximum = 4).

Results
The mean difficulty rating for the task was 3.8; this did
not differ for the two transformations. Figure 1 shows
the mean number of Yes responses (maximum = 4).
Both transformations resulted in the chemical kinds
being treated as borderline cases (i.e., the proportion of
positive categorizations was roughly 2, or 50%). A
one-way ANOVA showed that the difference between
the two kinds of transformation was not significant.

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Discussion of Experiment 1
The changes in chemical structure produced borderline
items of the chemical kinds: for both transformations
the proportion of positive categorizations hovered
around 50%. These scenarios are therefore highly
suitable for investigating deference, since the influence
of expert opinion is likely to be greatest for uncertain
categorizations. Moreover, the difficulty rating suggests
participants easily understood the task and scenarios.

Experiment 2
This experiment considers how categorization depends
on information concerning experts’ categorizations.

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: Appearance Unaltered and Appearance
Altered. All participants gave categorization judgments
for both Positive and Negative expert categorizations.

Method
Participants 60 undergraduate psychology students
attending a residential school volunteered to participate.
None participated in experiment 1.
Materials The same chemical kinds and scenarios as in
experiment 1 were used. Scenarios were adapted to
incorporate information concerning the categorization
judgments of scientific experts. To determine which
occupational group would be considered most expert,
30 additional participants (that did not participate in the
other experiments reported here) provided two different
ratings. First, they indicated how knowledgeable they
thought different occupational groups would be of each
of the four kind’s chemical properties. Second, for each
kind, they indicated the extent to which they would
trust the categorization judgments of the different
occupational groups. All ratings were given on a 7point scale (knowledge ratings: 1 = very little or no
knowledge, 7 = extremely knowledgeable; trust ratings:
1 = ‘do not trust members of the profession at all,’ 7 =
‘trust members of the profession absolutely’). The
group with the highest combined knowledge and trust
ratings was ‘Chemists’ (5.7).
Scenarios were adapted to include an additional
sentence prior to the final one. For example, for a

176

Yes
No

Appearance
Unaltered

Appearance
Altered

Figure 2. Mean no. of Yes responses in experiment 2
by transformation and expert judgment (max = 4).
positive Appearance Unaltered scenario the following
sentence was added: “You also discover that according
to most chemists the liquid you have bought is, in fact,
water.” Negative scenarios were obtained by replacing
“is” with “is not”. Appearance Altered scenarios
differed in the final sentence, as for experiment 1.
Procedure A similar procedure to experiment 1 was
used. Participants were presented with 8 scenarios: each
of the 4 chemical kinds was presented twice, once with
a positive and once with a negative expert judgment. As
in experiment 1, participants were instructed to respond
solely on the basis of the current scenario, and ignore
any previous scenarios and responses.
In each
Transformation condition, half of the participants were
presented with scenarios in a random order; the
remainder saw these in the reverse order.

Results
The mean difficulty rating was 3.7; this did not differ
for the two kinds of transformation. The mean number
of Yes responses according to transformation and
expert categorization is given in figure 2. When the
chemists were described as giving positive
categorization judgments, participants tended to give
positive judgments too. Similarly, when the experts
were described as giving negative categorization
judgments, so did participants.
A two-way ANOVA, with Transformation
(Appearance Unaltered, Appearance Altered) as a
between-subjects factor, and Expert Judgment (Yes,
No) as a within-subjects factor revealed no difference
between the two transformation conditions. There was a
significant effect of Expert Judgment however (Yes
condition: mean = 3.0; No condition: mean = 0.4; F =
121.18, df = 1,58, p < 0.001). There was no interaction
between Expert Judgment and Transformation. These
results were confirmed by an item analysis (Expert
Judgment: F = 191.12, df = 1,6, p < 0.001)
Although figure 2 suggests a dramatic switch in
people’s categorization depending on expert judgment,

Switchers

Obdurate

Contrary

interpretation since they only show the effect of expert
judgment on categorization. As suggested earlier,
deference is predicated on perceived knowledge of a
category’s essential properties. It is therefore necessary
to consider whether deference might emerge even in the
absence of expertise. If it does, then the case for
essentialism is correspondingly weakened.

Mixed

40
30
20

Experiment 3

10

This experiment considers how categorization depends
on information concerning non-experts’ categorizations.

0

Design
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: Appearance Unaltered and Appearance
Altered. Participants gave categorization judgments for
both Positive and Negative non-expert categorizations.

Figure 3. Numbers of participants adopting the four
response patterns in experiment 2 (N = 60).
these are group data, and so do not directly reveal the
extent to which individuals switch their categorizations.
Consequently, individuals who adopted a consistent
response pattern across all four kinds were classified
into one of three types: Switchers, who responded Yes
when the chemists’ judgment was Yes and No when the
chemists’ judgment was No; Obdurate, who maintained
their categorizations (either Yes or No) regardless of
the chemists’ judgments; and Contrary, who gave
opposing judgments to those of the chemists. Finally,
those who did not consistently adopt one of these three
patterns were labeled Mixed. Participants’ ratings of
task difficulty did not differ across the four types; the
numbers of participants falling into these types did not
differ by transformation (chi-square(3) = 1.04, p =
0.79). As shown in figure 3, 50% of participants were
Switchers. Of the remainder, 1 was Contrary; 6 were
Obdurate; and 23 (more than one-third) did not adopt a
consistent pattern for all 8 scenarios. Of these latter, 22
showed a pattern of being Obdurate for roughly 50% of
scenarios and Switching for the rest. However, there
was no consistency over which chemical kinds
produced obduracy or switching across individuals.

Discussion of Experiment 2
Overall, information concerning experts’ (chemists’)
categorization judgments appears to exert a dramatic
influence on participants’ categorizations. However,
while these data appear consistent with a division of
linguistic labour, and hence with essentialism, the data
do not offer strong support.
First, the extent of Switching in the group data is
represented by the difference between the Yes and No
conditions, i.e., 3 out of 4 minus 0.4 out of 4 (= 2.6 or
55%). That is, only a small majority of responses
overall show Switching. Second, the group data mask
how expert categorizations influence individuals.
Individuals are influenced in different ways, but only
50% consistently switched their categorizations to agree
with the experts. Moreover, these data need careful

177

Method
Participants 60 undergraduate psychology students
attending a residential school volunteered to participate.
None participated in experiments 1 or 2.
Materials The same chemical kinds in experiments 1
and 2 were used. Scenarios were adapted from those in
experiment 2 to include the categorization judgments of
non-experts. Using the same ratings of occupational
groups described earlier, ‘Shoppers’ was chosen as the
non-expert group because they lack (chemical)
expertise (mean combined knowledge and trust rating =
2.3) yet have considerable familiarity with the chemical
kinds. Scenarios were modified so that the word
‘shopper(s)’ replaced the word ‘chemist(s)’. All other
materials were identical to those of experiment 2.
Procedure This was identical to that of experiment 2.

Results
The mean difficulty rating was 3.5; this did not differ
for the two kinds of transformation. The mean number
of Yes responses according to transformation and nonexpert categorization is shown in figure 4. When the
shoppers were described as giving positive
categorization judgments, participants tended to give
positive judgments too. When the non-experts gave
negative categorization judgments, so did participants.
A two-way ANOVA, with Transformation
(Appearance Unaltered, Appearance Altered) as a
between-subjects factor, and Non-expert Judgment
(Yes, No) as a within-subjects factor, showed there was
no effect of Transformation. There was a significant
effect of Non-expert Judgment however (Yes condition:
mean = 1.9; No condition: mean = 1.1; F = 10.32, df =
1,58, p < 0.01). There was no interaction between Nonexpert Judgment and Transformation. These results

General Discussion
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Yes
No

Appearance
Unaltered

Appearance
Altered

Figure 4. Mean no. of Yes responses in experiment 3
by type of transformation and non-expert
categorization (maximum = 4).
were confirmed by item analysis also (Non-expert
Judgment: F = 4.51, df = 1,6, p = 0.08).
As before, these data were analysed according to the
four individual response types: Switcher, Obdurate,
Contrary and Mixed. Participants’ ratings of task
difficulty did not differ across the four types; the
numbers of participants falling into the four types did
not differ by transformation (chi-square(3) = 3.90, p =
0.27). Numbers of participants falling into these types
of response pattern are shown in figure 5.
Approximately 50% of participants adopted a mixed
pattern of responses. Of these, most participants showed
a pattern of mostly obduracy, with some switching and
fewer contrary categorizations. Of the remainder, 2
participants were Contrary; 15 were Obdurate; and 9
were Switchers.

Discussion of Experiments 2 and 3
Overall participants tended not to switch their
categorizations when given information about nonexpert judgment. Nevertheless, the extent of Switching
in the group data amounts to 0.8 out of 4 (20%); 9
individuals (15%) consistently Switched. Thus there is
evidence of some limited, but surprising deference.
The number of Yes responses for experiments 2 and 3
were analysed in a three-way ANOVA with
Transformation (Appearance Unaltered, Appearance
Altered) and Expertise (Chemists, Shoppers) as
between-subject factors, and Judgment (Yes, No) as a
within-subjects factor. This revealed an effect of
Judgment (Yes condition: mean = 2.42, No condition =
0.73; F = 99.35, df = 1,116, p < 0.001), and an
interaction between Judgment and Expertise (F = 28.64,
df = 1,116, p < 0.001), showing that the patterns in
figures 2 and 4 differ. Item analysis confirmed the
main effect of Judgment (F = 37.61, df = 1,6, p < 0.01)
and the interaction with Expertise (F = 85.07, df = 1,6,
p < 0.001). The numbers of individuals adopting the
four different response patterns also differed by
Expertise (chi-square(3) = 17.62, p < 0.01).

178

Overall these experiments reveal a limited difference in
the way that information about expert and non-expert
categorization
judgments
influences
people’s
categorizations and hence only a limited amount of
deference in categorizing chemical kinds. The group
data suggest that only 45% (i.e., 65% in experiment 2
minus 20% in experiment 3) of categorizations
switched because of the expertise (and presumed
knowledge of essential properties) of chemists; the
individual data suggest that only 35% of Switchers do
so because of the chemists’ expertise.
Why do only a minority of individuals consistently
defer? One possibility is that psychological essentialism
should not be interpreted so strongly. There are some
hints of this in writings supporting essentialism, that
variously refer to an essentialist ‘bias’ or ‘heuristic’.
This move would maintain consistency between
essentialism and these otherwise recalcitrant data, but at
a price. If people are credited as essentialist even when
their categorizations are only sometimes based on
essential properties, then essentialism loses explanatory
value. In these experiments, for example, an appeal to
essentialism would help explain only the minority of
categorizations that involve switching; the remaining
categorizations would still be in need of explanation.
Another possibility is that the connection between
essentialism and deference is weaker than assumed.
The prediction that people should defer to experts is
predicated on a conjunction of beliefs – people believe
that
essential
properties determine category
membership, that experts are knowledgeable about the
relevant essential properties and that, generally
speaking, expert judgment is reliable – and the
presumption of rationality (that people should rationally
follow the implications of their multiple beliefs).
Anyone of these claims could in principle be in error.
If so, these data could point to an elaboration of
psychological essentialism, one that clarifies its
commitments and implications. One possibility is, for
Switchers

Obdurate

Contrary

Mixed

40
30
20
10
0
Figure 5. Numbers of participants adopting the four
response patterns in experiment 3 (N = 60).

example, that essentialism makes different claims for
chemical as opposed to biological kinds.
Alternatively, consistent with the suggestions of
Braisby, Franks & Hampton (1996), these data may
point to the need for an account that treats
categorization as flexible. According to a perspectival
view, concepts have a content that shifts systematically
according to perspective and context (Braisby, 1998).
Concepts may then reflect micro-structural properties
from some perspectives, but appearance and/or
functional properties from others. These findings would
then suggest that, in categorizing chemical kinds,
people experience a conflict between deferring to
experts based on their knowledge of micro-structural
properties and being influenced by appearance and
functional properties. If this is right, then a
comprehensive account of concepts will need to provide
a framework for different kinds of categorization (cf.
Smith & Sloman, 1994) – that is, different ways (both
essentialist and non-essentialist) in which people can
think about chemical kinds.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank members of the Open University’s
Cognitive Science Group and of the London Concepts
Group for helpful discussions of these ideas.

References
Ahn, W., Kalish, C., Gelman, S. A., Medin, D. L.,
Luhmann, C., Atran, S., Coley, J. D. & Shafto, P.
(2001). Why essences are essential in the psychology
of concepts. Cognition, 82, 59–69.
Atran, S. (1998). Folk biology and the anthropology of
science: cognitive universals and cultural particulars.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 547–609.
Braisby, N. (1998). Compositionality and the modelling
of complex concepts. Minds and Machines, 8(4),
479-508.
Braisby, N. R. (2001). Deference in categorisation:
Evidence for essentialism. In J. D. Moore & K.
Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Braisby, N., Franks, B., & Hampton, J. (1996).
Essentialism, word use, and concepts. Cognition, 59,
247-274.
Diesendruck G. & Gelman S. A.(1999). Domain
differences in absolute judgments of category
membership: Evidence for an essentialist account of
categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(2),
338-346.
Dupre, J. (1999). Are whales fish. In D. L. Medin & S.
Atran (Eds.), Folkbiology. Cambridge, MA.: MIT
Press.
Fodor, J. (1998). Concepts: Where cognitive science
went wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gelman, S. A. (2000). The role of essentialism in
children' s concepts.Advances in Child Development

179

and Behavior, 27, 55-98.
Gelman, S. A., Coley, J. D. & Gottfried, G. M. (1994).
Essentialist beliefs in children: the acquisition of
concepts and theories. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A.
Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the Mind: domain
specificity in cognition and culture. Cambridge, CUP.
Gelman, S. A. & Medin, D. L. (1993). What’s so
essential about essentialism? A different perspective
on the interaction of perception, language, and
conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Development, 8,
157-167.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understandings of the nonobvious.
Cognition, 38, 213-244.
Hirschfeld, L. A. & Gelman, S. A. (Eds.) (1994).
Mapping the Mind: domain specificity in cognition
and culture. Cambridge, CUP.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds and cognitive
development. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and necessity. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Malt, B. C. (1990). Features and beliefs in the mental
representation of categories. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 289–315.
Malt, B. C. (1994). Water is not H2O. Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 41-70.
Mayr, E. (1988). Toward a new philosophy of biology.
Cambridge, MA.: Belknap Press.
Medin, D. L. & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1975). The meaning of ' meaning.' In H.
Putnam, Mind, language, and reality: Philosophical
papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and
categorization. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Rosch, E. H. (1975).Cognitive representations of
semantic categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 104, 192-233.
Rosch, E. H. & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Segal, G. (2000). A slim book about narrow content.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Strevens, M. (2000). The essentialist aspect of naïve
theories. Cognition, 74, 149–175.
Strevens, M. (2001). Only causation matters: reply to
Ahn et al. Cognition, 82, 71–76.
Smith, E. E. & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity- versus
rule-based categorisation. Memory & Cognition,
22(4), 377–386.
Woodfield, A. (2000). Reference and deference. Mind
and Language, 15(4), 433–451.

