UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Differences in How English and German Speakers Talk and Reason about CAUSE

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wx078gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Klettke, Bianca
Wolff, Philip

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Differences in How English and German Speakers Talk and Reason about CAUSE
Bianca Klettke (bklettke@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Phillip Wolff (wolff@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
This research identifies how English and German speakers differ
in the range of situations they describe as causal and how these
difference may influence causal reasoning. In Experiments 1 and
2, English and German speakers described 3D animations of
complex events using CAUSE verbs (cause, get) and ENABLE
verbs (let, enable). As predicted, English speakers used CAUSE
verbs to describe a wider range of events than German speakers.
In Experiment 3, English and German speakers viewed 3D
animations of CAUSE and ENABLE events and then estimated
the likelihood of the effect (E) in the presence of the affector
(A), p(E|A), in hypothetical situations similar to the one they
just saw. Given the results of Experiments 1 and 2, we predicted
that German speakers’ estimates of p(E|A) would be higher than
English speakers’ estimates of p(E|A) for ENABLE events, but
not necessarily for CAUSE events. The results were as
predicted. The findings suggest that English and German
speakers differ in the range of situations they describe as causal
and that these differences in linguistic coding may lead to
differences in causal reasoning.

Introduction
Recent cross-linguistic research has found that languages
can differ significantly, and systematically, with respect to
the expression of some of the most fundamental categories
of human experience, including the conceptualization of
space (e.g., Bowerman, 1996; Levinson, 1996), time (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2001; Scott, 1989), and objecthood (e.g., Imai
& Gentner, 1997; Lucy & Gaskins, 2001). In this paper, we
investigated the possibility that languages might also differ
with respect to the expression of CAUSE, and the
possibility that this difference in expression might have
consequences for causal reasoning.
The concept of CAUSE has frequently been treated as a
conceptual primitive in both the linguistic (Dowty, 1979;
Jackendoff, 1990; Levin & Rappaport Hovav, 1995; Pinker,
1989; Pustejovsky, 1991) and psychological literatures (e.g.,
Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976; Norman, Rumelhart, & the
LNR Research Group, 1975; Schank, 1972). Given this
assumption, we might expect that the meaning of words
encoding the concept of CAUSE should be relatively
consistent across languages. However, as argued by Gentner
and Boroditsky (2001), concepts that are not closely tied to
sensory experience lend themselves to cross-linguistic
variation. Indeed, since causal relations cannot be directly
observed (Hume, 1739/1978), they might be the very kind

675

of concept whose expression might vary across languages
(see also Gentner, 1982; Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003).
Exactly how they might differ is suggested by a recent
theory of causal meaning based on force dynamics (Wolff,
2003; Wolff & Song, in press).

The Force Dynamic Model
A theory of force dynamics was first proposed by Talmy
(1988) and has been elaborated by other researchers, most
notably Jackendoff (1990; Pinker, 1989). From a force
dynamic perspective, the concept of CAUSE – as encoded
in words like the verb cause – is one member of a family of
concepts that includes the such concepts as ENABLE and
PREVENT, among others. Each of these concepts
represents an interaction between an affector and a patient.
In an adaptation to Talmy’s theory introduced in Wolff and
Song (in press; Wolff, Song & Driscoll, 2002), we
distinguish the concepts of CAUSE and ENABLE (as well
as PREVENT) in terms of three main dimensions: 1) the
tendency of the patient for a result, 2) the presence of
opposition between the affector and patient, and 3) the
occurrence of a result. The notion of tendency is defined as
the patient’s propensity for the result due to properties or
activities that are internal to the patient (e.g., an object’s
thrust or tendency to move or resist motion due to friction or
inertial forces). Opposition between the affector and patient
is said to be present when the force exerted on the patient by
the affector is not consistent with the patient’s tendency.
The notion of result is defined as a particular endstate that a
patient could enter into. The way in which these dimensions
define and differentiate the concepts of CAUSE, ENABLE,
and PREVENT is specified in Table 1.
Table 1: The force dynamic model’s representations of
CAUSE, ENABLE, & PREVENT

CAUSE
ENABLE
PREVENT

Patient
Tendency for
Result
N
Y
Y

AffectorPatient
Opposition
Y
N
Y

Occurrence
of Result
Y
Y
N

As shown in Table 1, the force dynamic model holds that
CAUSE and ENABLE differ with respect to the patient’s
tendency for the result and the presence of opposition.

CAUSE
Patient opposes affector

INTERMEDIATE
Patient does nothing

ENABLE
Patient pushes along with affector

No
Yes
Yes

?
?
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Tendency
Opposition
Result

Figure 1: Scenes in which the tendency of the patient is varied to produce different force dynamic interactions.
Consider an example of CAUSE as encoded in the sentence
in (1a). In this sentence, the tendency of the patient (the
boat) is not for the result (heeling), but because the tendency
is opposed by the affector (the blast), the result occurs.
(1) a. The blast caused the boat to heel.
b. Vitamin B enables the body to digest food.
In contrast, in the enabling situation described in (1b), the
tendency of the patient (the body) is for the result (to digest
food). This tendency is not opposed by the affector (vitamin
B). Rather, vitamin B is facilitative, and the result occurs.
The two concepts are not interchangeable. It would sound
quite odd to say, for example, “The blast enabled the craft to
heel” or “Vitamin B causes the body to digest food.” In
specifying the dimensions along which these concepts
differ, the force dynamic model suggests how their
expression might vary across languages.

CAUSE-ENABLE series
The situations in Figure 1 depict the crucial way in which
CAUSE and ENABLE situations might differ. In each
panel, a man holding a rope pulls a man on a sled across a
line. However, in the panel on the far left, the man on the
sled resists by pushing backwards. According to the force
dynamic model, people should describe this interaction with
a CAUSE verb (cause, get). In the panel on the far right, the
man on the sled pushes himself toward the line. The force
model dynamic model predicts that people should describe
this interaction with an ENABLE verb (enable, let). In the
middle panel, the man simply sits on the sled. How might
this scene be described? From a force dynamic perspective,
it depends on how the notion of tendency is encoded in the
meaning of causal verbs such as cause and enable. We
conjectured that if languages differ in their meaning of
causal verbs, such differences should be most clearly
revealed by people’s descriptions of such borderline
situations.

676

How CAUSE might differ across languages
In particular, we speculated that English speakers might be
more likely than German speakers to describe force
dynamic interactions with CAUSE verbs than with
ENABLE verbs. This prediction was based, in part, on an
intriguing pattern sometimes found in the linguistic
literature in which German sentences containing ENABLE
verbs are glossed in English with CAUSE verbs. For
example, in Gunkel (1999, p. 134), the German sentence in
(2a), which contains the ENABLE verb lasse (= let), is
glossed in English with the CAUSE verb cause.
(2) a. Ich lasse den Motor aufheulen.
‘I cause the motor to roar.’
b. Der Priester liess mich [den Armen Geld geben].
‘The priest had me give money to the poor.’
In the German sentence in (2b) (Wunderlich, 1997, p. 64),
the ENABLE verb liess (= let), is glossed in English with
the CAUSE verb have. Such examples suggest that the verb
cause and related verbs in English have no direct translation
in German. However, it also possible that such examples
merely reflect less than perfect translations. To determine
whether English and German speakers differ in the range of
events they describe as causing versus enabling, the nature
of the referent needs to be held constant. English and
German speakers can be shown and asked to describe
exactly the same event. If English and German differ
systematically in the meaning of verbs such as cause, then
English speakers may be more likely than German speakers
to describe force dynamic interactions with CAUSE verbs
rather than ENABLE verbs. This possibility was tested in
the next experiment by having English and German
speakers view and describe 3D animations of complex
events.

Breaking a vase with a
ball

1

Proportion of Sents. Chosen

Collapsing a house of
cards

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Figure 2: Two of the animations used in Experiment 1.

Cause
Enable

0.8

English

German

Figure 3: Responses to complex animations in Exp. 1.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants The participants were 16 English
monolinguals attending the University of Memphis and 16
German monolinguals living near Hamburg, Germany.
Materials Twelve 3D animations were made from an
animation package called Discreet 3D Studio Max version
4. Each animation depicted a sequence of events initiated by
a sentient affector. Two sample animations are shown in
Figure 2. The remaining animations included situations such
as extinguishing a flame, waving a flag, dimming a light,
and popping a balloon. The average length of the animations
was 5.6 seconds.
Procedure The animations were presented in random
order on Windows-based computers. After each animation,
participants chose which one of two sentences best
described the animation. Specifically, English speakers
chose from sentences such as “The woman got the house of
cards to collapse” and “The woman let the house of cards
collapse” while Germans chose from the near translations of
these sentences, “Die Frau brachte die Karten zum
Einstürzen” and “Die Frau ließ die Karten einstürzen.” If
participants felt that neither sentence described the scene,
they could choose the option “none of the above” (=“Keine
der Möglichkeiten”). Participants indicated their answers by
clicking a radio button next to their choice.

Results and Discussion
The results were as predicted. As shown in Figure 3,
English speakers (M = .65, SEM = .042) preferred to
describe the animations with CAUSE sentences more often
than did German speakers (M = .42, SEM = .052). This
difference was confirmed by analyses across both
participants, tp(30) = 3.44, p < .01, and items ti(22) = 2.13, p
< .05.1 The results suggest that English and German
speakers differ in the range of situations they describe as
causal (as opposed to enabling). However, the results leave
1

The analyses in Experiments 1 and 2 are based only on people’s
CAUSE sentence choices. To also include ENABLE choices
would be partially redundant since their selection was not wholly
independent of the CAUSE choices.

677

open the possibility that German speakers differed from
English speakers because they were, for some unknown
reason, uncertain about the nature of the task, and so chose
the CAUSE and ENABLE options at chance.
Another issue not addressed by these findings is precisely
how the verbs encoding CAUSE and ENABLE might differ
across languages. As discussed above, the force dynamic
model proposes several dimensions along which the
languages might differ. For example, if causal verbs in
English and German differ in what they encode about the
patient’s tendency, it should be possible to test for this
difference using series of animations like the one in Figure
1. We would predict that English and German speakers
should both prefer to use CAUSE verbs for the animation on
the far left and ENABLE verbs for the animation on the far
right. Their descriptions of the animations at opposite ends
of the CAUSE-ENABLE series would provide a baseline
for examining their responses to the intermediate animation.
If English and German differ systematically in their
meaning of CAUSE and ENABLE verbs, then, this
difference should be greatest for the intermediate animation:
English speakers should be more likely to use CAUSE verbs
relative to German speakers, who should be more likely to
use ENABLE verbs, as tested below.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants The participants were 16 English
monolinguals attending the University of Memphis and 16
German monolinguals living near Hamburg, Germany.
Materials Fifteen animations were used to create five
CAUSE-ENABLE series. One of the series is shown in
Figure 1 and sample animations from the four remaining
series are shown in Figure 4. The average length of the
animations was 6 seconds.
Procedure Participants viewed twelve randomly ordered
animations. After each animation, they chose which of two
possible sentences (or “none of the above”) best described
the occurrence. For CAUSE sentences, the matrix verb was
either cause or get (= “verursachen” or “dazu bringen”)
while for ENABLE sentences, the matrix verb was either let
or enable (= “lassen” or “ermöglichen”).

Pulling a man from out
under a car

Pushing a girl across a
room

1

Proportion of Sents. Chosen

Lifting a woman out of a
chair

Pushing a weight onto a
bench press

Cause
Enable

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

English

German

Figure 5: Responses to intermediate animations in Exp. 2.

Figure 4: Scenes from four of the intermediate
animations used in Experiment 2 and 3.

Results and Discussion
The results, again, were as predicted. Table 2 shows the
percentage of times that English and German speakers chose
the CAUSE and ENABLE sentences for animations at
opposite ends of the CAUSE-ENABLE series.
Table 2: Proportion of CAUSE and ENABLE sentences for
the two ends of the CAUSE-ENABLE series

English
German

Cause
Enable
Cause
Enable

CAUSE END

ENABLE END

.83 (.044)
.13 (.031)
.81 (.064)
.03 (.017)

.09 (.041)
.89 (.036)
.15 (.06)
.81 (.06)

Both groups of speakers strongly preferred CAUSE
sentences to describe animations in which the patient clearly
opposed the affector and ENABLE sentences for animations
in which the affector and the patient were clearly in
concordance. The results support our prediction that
German ENABLE verbs (let and enable) are used more
broadly than English ENABLE verbs. Importantly, these
results also indicate that German ENABLE verbs are not
simply superordinate terms for the range of situations
described by CAUSE and ENABLE verbs in English. If
they were, then German speakers should have been more
likely to describe the CAUSE end of series with ENABLE
verbs, which they were not. The results indicate, then, that
the categories of CAUSE and ENABLE are distinguished
by two, relatively non-overlapping subcategories of verbs in
both English and German.
The results also provide further support for the hypothesis
that the CAUSE and ENABLE verbs in English and
German differ systematically in their meaning. Figure 5

678

shows the proportion of times that English and German
speakers chose CAUSE and ENABLE sentences for the
intermediate animations in the five CAUSE-ENABLE
series. As shown in Figure 5, English speakers (M = .58,
SEM = .06) described the intermediate animation with the
CAUSE sentence more often than did German speakers (M
= .33, SEM = .10), across participants, tp(30) = 2.70, p < .05,
and (marginally) across items, ti(4) = 2.48, p = .068. Thus,
the results indicate that English and German speakers differ
in the range of situations that they classify as causal. In
effect, the results indicate that the verb cause in English has
no direct translation in German.
Might this difference in meaning have consequences for
causal reasoning? One way to investigate this question is
suggested by recent work by Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird
(2001). Goldvarg and Johnson-Laird had participants read
problems consisting of two premises followed by a
question. For example, participants read statements such as
“Eating protein will cause her to gain weight” and “She will
eat protein.” They then answered the question “Will she
gain weight?” Some of the sentences contained the verb
cause (as above) while others contained the verb allow. In
short, participants read a general causal claim, then thought
hypothetically about the likelihood of the effect (E) given
the affector (A) (i.e., p(E|A)). Interestingly, Goldvarg and
Johnson-Laird found that the estimates of p(E|A) were
higher when the main verb was cause than when the verb
was allow (an ENABLE verb). Since p(E|A) plays a key
role in covariational models of causation (e.g., Mandel &
Lehman, 1998), these results show how the concepts of
CAUSE and ENABLE can give rise to different patterns of
causal inference.
If language plays a role in causal reasoning, then speakers
of English and German might differ in their judgments of
causation. We can examine this possibility by showing
English and German speakers animations and then asking
them to think hypothetically. What might happen in
situations in which the affector’s actions are the same as
those depicted in the animation, but the patient’s actions are
unknown? That is, they could be asked to estimate the
probability of the effect given knowledge of only the
affector’s actions, p(E|A). For CAUSE interactions, English

Experiment 3
Method

1

Estimation of p(effect | affector)

and German speakers should be fairly confident of the
occurrence of the effect given knowledge of the affector’s
actions since, in these interactions, the affector brings about
the result even though the patient does not have a tendency
for that result; in other words, the effect occurs regardless of
the patient’s actions. Thus, estimates of p(E|A) should be
high. For ENABLE interactions, in contrast, there is less
certainty about the occurrence of the effect since the effect
may depend on contributions from both the affector and the
patient. Recall that in ENABLE interactions, the patient has
a tendency for the result. While the affector alone might be
capable of bringing about the result, it is also possible that
the result might not occur without the patient’s help.
In estimating p(E|A), people may be biased to imagine
variants of the animations that accord with the typical way
in which force dynamic situations are interpreted and
expressed in their language. Thus, when thinking
hypothetically, English speakers might be more likely to reconstrue ENABLE scenarios as CAUSE interactions than
German speakers, who, in contrast might be more likely to
re-construe them as ENABLE interactions. Specifically,
when thinking hypothetically about ENABLE interactions,
English speakers might be more likely than German
speakers to imagine the patient as not having a tendency for
the effect (thus opposing the affector), while German
speakers might be more likely to imagine the patient as
having a tendency for the effect. As a consequence, in the
case of ENABLE interactions, English speakers’ estimates
of p(E|A) might be lower than German speakers’ estimates.
We don’t expect the language groups would differ with
respect to CAUSE interactions since, in such cases, it makes
little difference whether the patient helps or resists the
affector. To test these hypotheses, English and German
speakers saw animations depicting clear cases of CAUSE
and ENABLE from Experiment 2 then estimated p(E|A).

Cause
Enable

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

English

German

Figure 6: Estimates of p(E|A) for clear
cases of CAUSE and ENABLE
people asked to generate a linguistic description. Rather, all
they did was type in a number.

Results and Discussion
The results were as predicted. Figure 6 shows the estimated
probability that the result would occur given the presence of
the affector based on CAUSE and ENABLE animations. As
expected, both English and German speakers predicted that
p(E|A) should be higher for CAUSE animations than for
ENABLE animations, Fp(1,30) = 25.20, p < .001, Fi(1,4) =
43.76, p < .01. Thus, our results replicate the difference
between CAUSE and ENABLE found in Goldvarg and
Johnston-Laird (2001), except with animations instead of
sentences. Importantly, however, the difference between
CAUSE and ENABLE was greater for English speakers
than for German speakers, as confirmed by a significant
interaction between language and animation type, Fp(1, 30)
= 6.34, p < .05, Fi(1,4) = 40.50, p < .01. As predicted,
German speakers were more likely than English speakers to
imagine that the effect would occur in ENABLE situations,
presumably because they were more likely to view the
patient as having a tendency for the result, which would
then increase the likelihood of the effect.

Conclusions

Participants The participants were 16 English
monolinguals attending the University of Memphis and 16
German monolinguals living in Hamburg, Germany.
Materials The materials were the animations at opposite
ends of each series of animations used in Experiment 2, that
is, the five clear cases of CAUSE and the five clear cases of
ENABLE interactions.
Procedure Participants viewed the ten animations in
random order. After each animation, they were told to
imagine a situation that was very similar to the one that they
just saw. In this imagined situation, participants were told
that “the affector does exactly what he/she did in the
animation while the patient may or may not do what he/she
did in the animation.” Participants were then asked to
“estimate the likelihood of the result by choosing a number
from 0% to 100%.” In no part of this experiment were

679

The results indicate that English and German speakers differ
in their expression of causal interactions. Experiment 1
showed that English speakers described complex causal
chains with CAUSE verbs more often than German
speakers. In Experiment 2, this cross-linguistic difference
was found to be greater when the tendency of the patient
was ambiguous than when the tendency of the patient was
clearly specified. In Experiment 3, German speakers’
estimates of p(E|A) were higher than those of English
speakers in the case of ENABLE interactions, suggesting
that differences in linguistic expression might lead to
differences in causal reasoning.
It might be objected that if German and English speakers
really did think differently about something as fundamental
as causality, then the exercise of looking for any generalities
across the human species would be ill-guided. Importantly,
however, in this research we show how differences in the

expression of causal notions in English and German can be
explained in terms of three underlying semantic parameters.
We show, then, how differences between languages might
occur with respect to underlying, cross-linguistic
commonalities. In showing such commonalities, the current
results support the possibility that the force dynamic
account adopted in this research can be extended beyond
English to the analysis of causatives in other languages.
Our findings suggest that causal verbs in English and
German differ systematically in meaning and that these
differences might have consequences for causal reasoning.
However, the results leave open how these differences in
language might affect thought. On the one hand, it may be
that people often use language to help them to think
hypothetically about a situation, and it is in these verbal rerepresentations that differences between languages have an
effect. Alternatively, it may be that differences in language
promote different habits of thought. In tending to use
ENABLE verbs more often than CAUSE verbs, German
speakers, for example, might be more likely than English
speakers to view patients as having a tendency for a
particular end state, especially when the patient’s tendency
is relatively ambiguous. Differentiating between these
alternative explanations will be the focus of further research.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants awarded to the second
author from The University of Memphis Faculty Research
Fund and ONR (N00014-01-1-0917). The conclusions of
this research do not necessarily reflect those held by these
funding sources. We give special thanks to Tanya Ventura
and Derek Wong for their help in the research.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for
language: A crosslinguistic perspective. In P. Bloom, M.
A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.), Language
and space (pp. 385-436). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Dowty, D. R. (1979). Word meaning and Montague
grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Language in
mind: Advances in the study of language and thought.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.K. II,
Language Development, Vol. 2: Language, Thought and
Culture, (pp. 301-334). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relational relativity and early word learning. In M.
Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition
and conceptual development. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Goldvarg, E., & Johnson-Laird, P. (2001). Naive Causality:
a mental model theory of causal meaning and reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.

680

Gunkel, L. (1999). Causatives in German. Theoretical
Linguistics, 25, 133-159.
Hume, D. (1978). A treatise on human nature. In L.A.
Selby-Bigge (2nd ed.). Second ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. (Originally published 1739.)
Imai, M. & Gentner, D. (1996). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Levin, B., & Rappaport Hovav, M. (1995). Unaccusativity:
At the syntax-lexical semantics interface. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Relativity in spatial conception and
description. In J. J. Gumperz & S. C. Levinson (Eds.),
Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 177-202). Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Lucy, J. & Gaskins, S. (2001). Grammatical categories and
the development of classification preferences. In M.
Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.) Language acquisition
and conceptual development (pp. 257-283). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mackie, J. L. (1974). The cement of the universe. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mandel, D. R., & Lehman, D. R. (1998). Integration of
contingency information in judgments of cause,
covariation, and probability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 127, 269-285.
Michotte, A. (1963). The perception of causality. New
York: Basic Books. (Original work published in 1946.)
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Norman, D. A., Rumelhart, D. E., & the LNR Research
Group. (1975). Explorations in cognition. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The syntax of event structure.
Cognition, 41, 47-81.
Schank, R. C. (1972). Conceptual dependency: A theory of
natural language understanding. Cog. Psych., 3, 532-631.
Scott, A. (1989). The vertical dimension and time in
Mandarin. Australian Journal of Linguistics, 9, 295–314.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
Wolff, P. (2003). Direct causation in the linguistic coding
and individuation of causal events. Cognition, 88, 1-48.
Wolff, P. & Song, G. (in press). Force dynamics and the
semantics of causal verbs. Cognitive Psychology.
Wolff, P., & Zettergren, M. (2002). A vector model of
causal meaning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
944-949). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wolff, P., Song, G., & Driscoll, D. (2002). Models of
causation and causal verbs. In Papers from the 37 the
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, Main Session,
(pp. 607-622). Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Wunderlich, D. (1997). Cause and the structure of verbs.
Linguistic Inquiry, 28, 27-68.

