UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do We Really Reason about a Picture as the Referent?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5hn6q98j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Shimojima, Atsushi
Fukaya, Takugo

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do We Really Reason about a Picture as the Referent?
Atsushi Shimojima1,2 and Takugo Fukaya
1
School of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahi-dai, Tatsunokuchi, Nomi-gun, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
2
ATR Media Information Science Laboratories
2-2-2 Hikari-dai, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan
ashimoji@jaist.ac.jp tfukaya@atr.co.jp
Abstract
A significant portion of the previous accounts of inferential utilities of graphical representations (e.g., Sloman,
1971; Larkin & Simon, 1987) implicitly relies on the existence of what may be called inferences through hypothetical drawing. However, conclusive detections of them by
means of standard performance measures have turned out
to be difficult (Schwartz, 1995). This paper attempts to fill
the gap and provide positive evidence to their existence
on the basis of eye-tracking data of subjects who worked
with external diagrams in transitive inferential tasks.

Schwartz (1995) cites an intriguing example to distinguish what he calls “reasoning about a picture as the
referent” from “reasoning about the picture’s referent.”
Suppose you are given the picture of a hinge in Figure
1 and asked to tell whether the two marks on the legs
will meet if the hinge closes. If, in solving this problem,
(a) you assume that the upper line of the hinge picture
swings down to the lower line, (b) infer that the mark
on the upper line will meet the bottom mark, and then
(c) conclude that the mark on the upper leg of the hinge
will meet the bottom mark, you are reasoning about the
picture as the referent. This is so because (a) you consider a hypothetical (not actual) operation on the given
diagram, namely, the downward swing of the upper line,
(b) you make an inference about the results of this hypothetical operation, and (c) you project this inference to a
inference about the physical hinge.

Figure 1: A schematic picture of a hinge (Schwartz,
1995).
The alternative way to solve this problem is to use the
picture only as an information source or a memory-aid.
You (a) interpret the given picture to obtain information
about the initial state of the hinge, (b) assume that the upper leg of the hinge swings down to the lower leg, and (c)
infer that the mark on the upper leg will meet the mark
on the lower leg. Here again you consider a hypothetical operation and make an inference about it. Unlike

1076

the previous case, however, the hypothesized operation
is not an operation on the hinge picture, but an operation
on the physical hinge the picture depicts. You may refer
back to the hinge picture now and then, but what your inference is about is the movement of the upper leg of the
hinge, not the movement of the upper line of the hinge
picture. You are reasoning about the picture’s referent,
rather than the picture itself.
Well, the concept of “reasoning about the picture itself” is thus clear, but is it real? Are we really engaged
in that type of inferences in some cases? If so, how do
we tell when we are?
Schwartz (1995) himself assumed the existence of that
type of inferences, and went on to investigate what features of pictorial representations encourage it. As it
turned out, however, it was not easy to determine, from
response time and solution performance alone, when a
subject was engaged in the second type of inferences.
The precise nature of this type of inferences is simply
unknown, and we have little clue to its “cash value,”
namely, its impact on subject performance in inferential
tasks. This led Schwartz to coin an operational definition of this type of inferences, identifying it with what he
calls “feature-based reasoning.”
In this paper, we will back up a little and test the existence assumption of the first type of inferences itself.
Our experiment consisted in observing eye-movements
of subjects working with diagrams in transitive inference
tasks, and it was specifically designed to verify whether
the subjects were engaged in reasoning about diagrams
themselves. The issue is important since, as we will see
shortly, a significant portion of the previous accounts of
the inferential utility of graphical representations (Sloman, 1971; Larkin & Simon, 1987; Narayanan, Suwa,
& Motoda, 1995) relies on the existence of such inferential procedures. And for this precise reason, positive evidence for their existence would amount to the discovery
of a new form inferences that generalizes the seemingly
diverse phenomena reported in the diagrammatic reasoning literature. To reason about a picture itself, if it ever
occurs, is to exploit a matching between geometrical or
topological constraints on a graphical representation and
constraints on its referent (Shimojima, 1995), and in that
sense, its discovery would also be the demonstration of
one precise way a cognitive agent interacts with graphical representations to unburden inferential loads.

A little more precisely, the main question of this paper
is whether the following type of inferences really exist:
In the presence of a visually accessible graphical representation, an agent assumes a hypothetical
transformation of the graphic that adds a premise
to it, infers about the result of the transformation,
and translates an obtained conclusion to a conclusion about the referent of the graphic.
In the following, we will call this type of inferences inferences through hypothetical drawing (“HD inference”
for short). We will first clarify the breadth of this concept
by reviewing some representative studies of diagrammatic reasoning and showing the inferential processes
described in them are special cases of HD inferences. We
will then report our main experiment designed to verify
the existence of HD inferences.

Examples
Sloman (1971) presented one of the earliest, yet clearest
discussions on the phenomenon of hypothetical drawing.
He observed that we can solve certain inferential problems more easily when we use diagrammatic representations than when we use only symbolic representations.
For example, if AB in Figure 2 represents a ditch, and
CD represents a movable plank, how should we move
the plank until it lies across the ditch?

Figure 2: The Ditch-Plank Problem (Sloman 1971)
According to him, our ability to solve these problems
efficiently “seems to depend on the availability of a battery of ‘subroutines’ which we can bring to bear on parts
of spatial configurations, transforming them in specific
ways representing changes of certain sorts in other configurations.” In many cases, these subroutines are performed internally: we only “imagine or envisage rotations, stretches and translations of parts” of a diagram.
Thus, for the ditch-plank problem, we can “envisage”
moving the smaller rectangular leftward with a little rotation. This is a hypothetical operation on parts of the
relevant diagram, an instance of hypothetical drawing in
our sense.
Beside their well-known analysis of informationindexing functions of diagrams, Larkin and Simon
(1987) discussed instances of graphical representations
that afford hypothetical drawing. Among them is the
type of graphs commonly used in macro economics (Figure 3), where the abscissa represents the quantity of a
commodity produced or demanded, and the ordinate represents the price at which that quantity will be supplied

1077

or purchased. The line D is a demand curve, and the lines
S and S 0 are supply curves in different conditions, and E
and E 0 are equilibriums in different supply conditions.

Figure 3: A Supply and Demand Graph from MacroEconomics (Larkin and Simon 1987)
Larkin and Simon asked what the effect on the equilibrium will be of imposing a manufacturer’s tax of k
dollars on a unit of the commodity if the initial curve is
S and the initial equilibrium E. Expressing that change
in the graph amounts to moving up the curve labeled as
“S” vertically to the position of the “S 0 ” curve, and it
would move the intersection with the “D” curve to the
position labeled as “E 0 .” This shift of the intersection
in turn means a price increase and a quantity decrease
of the commodity, with the price increase less than the
amount of the tax. Here, a simple operation on an element (the “S” curve) of the graph lets us infer effects
of the corresponding change in a particular market situation. Although Figure 3 actually shows the result of
that operation as the “S 0 ” curve and therefore the operation is not strictly hypothetical, we might well perform
the same inference just by assuming the operation. According to Larking and Simon, the “great utility of the
diagram” arises from “the fact that it makes explicit the
relative positions of the equilibrium points, so that the
conclusions can be read off with the help of simple, direct perceptual operations.” “Perceptual operations” in
this passage are clearly cases of hypothetical drawing in
our sense.
In fact, Larkin and Simon also considered situations
where the demand is more elastic. On the surface of the
graph, this amounts to considering cases where the curve
labeled “D” are flatter. On these assumptions, the vertical distance of “E 0 ” and “E” would be less while their
horizontal distance would be grater. This in turn means
that on such “elastic” demands, the price increase is less
while the quantity decrease is greater as the result of taxing of k. This time, the operations on the “D” curve are
purely hypothetical, and their results are not physically
reflected in the graph. Yet we can “see directly” the effects of such hypothetical operations on the graph, and
infer about different demand situations of the market.
Narayanan et al. (1995) analyzed verbal protocols
of subjects working on “behavior hypothesis problems,”
where they used a schematic diagram of a mechanical
device to predict its behaviors on a given input opera-

tion. For example, subjects were given the diagram in
Figure 4 and asked to predict how the state of the entire
device will change when high-pressure gas is pumped in
through hole A in the direction of arrow.

Figure 4: Diagram for a Behavior Hypothesis Problem
(Narayanan et al. 1995)
The process model proposed by Narayanan and his
colleagues about the inferential procedure in this task
explicitly contains a sub-process which we would call
“hypothetical drawing.” In their model, subjects process
three types of internal representations when solving a behavior hypothesis problem: “conceptual frames” that encode conceptual knowledge about the device, and two
types of “visual representations” that encode information about the given diagram itself, rather than the device depicted by it. In particular, in the process called
“visualization,” subjects simulate spatial behaviors by
incrementally modifying these internal representations
of the diagram. They “transform the represented diagram by manipulating diagram elements that represent
individual components”, where manipulations contains
such general operations as move, rotate, copy, and
delete as well as component specific ones such as
compress-spring.
The influential work on “mental animation” by
Hegarty (1992) might be also taken to refer to a form of
HD-inferences on pulley diagrams, but her own characterization of the process seems neutral about whether the
mental animation is about the movements of the graphical elements of a pulley diagram itself or about the movements of the physical parts of the actual pulley system.
Trafton and Trickett (2001) present interesting research on “spatial transformations”, defined as cognitive
operations on “internal (i.e., mental) image” or “external image (i.e., a scientific visualization on a computergenerated image).” Thus, spatial transformations seem to
comprise hypothetical drawing, except that the latter are
confined to hypothesized operations on external image as
opposed to mental operations on internal image.

Experiment
Assumption Our experiment was based on the
methodological assumption that a mental operation (such
as hypothetical drawing) on a visual scene is correlated
with eye-fixation patterns on the scene, when the mental operation involves a elongated scan of the scene. For
example, when we imagine a person in our visual scene
to walk from the scene’s left end to the right end, we assume that the eye fixation is significantly more likely to
move from the left end to the right end than when no such
imagination takes place.

1078

Figure 5: A vertical position diagram expressing the
premise that X is bigger than Y (left). The result of updating the left picture by adding the second premise that
Z is bigger than X (right).

Of course, there has been significant controversy as to
whether correlations really exist between the content of
mental imaging and eye movements, but recent studies
(Brandt & Stark, 1997; Demarais & Cohen, 1998) started
to reaccumulate positive evidence for correlation at least
in the case of elongated scanning or image movements.
In particular, the experiments by Brand and Stark (1997)
indicate the existence of such correlation when the subjects are engaged in imaging tasks on the base of a given
visual scene (a grid picture), rather than pure imaging
tasks in closed-eye conditions. This provides a strong
support to our methodological assumption.
Main Design Suppose, in a deductive inference task,
you were shown the leftmost picture in Figure 5 in a display, while hearing the premise that X is bigger than Y .
The natural interpretation of the picture is then that the
“aboveness” relation holding between the square labeled
“X” and the square labeled “Y ” means the “bigger than”
relation holding between the objects X and Y . Now suppose you hear the second premise that Z is bigger than
X. You are then asked whether Z is bigger than Y . Since
the aboveness relation means the bigger than relation in
the current semantic convention, if this second premise
is to be added to the picture, a square labeled “Z” should
be placed above the square labeled “X,” resulting in the
updated picture in Figure 5. It would then be easy to answer the question, since the “Z” square is clearly above
the “Y ” square, meaning that Z is bigger than Y .
In our experiment, however, neither the experimenter
nor the subject added this second premise to the picture.
Instead, we observed how the subject’s eyes move when
the second premise was given and when the question was
asked. If a subject is engaged in an HD-inference, then
he or she must assume a hypothetical operation of drawing a “Z” square above the “X” square and then evaluate
how this hypothetical operation would change the configuration of the picture. Thus, on the basis of the methodological assumption described above, we expect that the
subject’s fixation points would move between the blank
area above the “X” square (the “hypothetical drawing
position”) and the “Y ” square. If the subject uses the
picture only as a memory-aid for the first premise or uses
it for no specific purpose, then the fixation points would
not necessarily move in this way. Thus, we expect that
the subject’s eye-fixation pattern should reveal the use of

Table 1: Hypothetical drawing positions (H.D.P.) of each
type of problems used in the experiment.
Type
a
c
e
g

Figure 6: Forms of vertical and horizontal position diagrams used in the experiment. The adjectives (“upper,”
“lower,” “middle,” etc.) expressing different areas of diagrams are also defined.

hypothetical drawing, if it ever occurs.
Preparation of Stimuli We created a total of 48 transitive inference problems as stimuli. Each problem consists of two premises and a yes-no question, where the
first premise relates one object X to the other Y with a
transitive relation R, the second premise relates Y to the
third object Z with the same relation R or its inverse R,
and the question is whether these premises imply that Z
has the relation R or R to the first object X.
A total of 6 pairs of a transitive relation and its inverse were mentioned in the problems: in front of and
behind, to the east of and to the west of, bigger than
and smaller than, brighter than and darker than, heavier than and lighter than. We asked 7 independent subjects to make visualizability and spatializability assessments about each pair of relations (Knauff & JohnsonLaird, 2000). The subjects used the scale from 1 (very
difficult) to 7 (very easy). As the result, the mean ratings ranged from a moderately visualizable pair (5.63 for
bigger than and smaller than) to a moderately unvisualizable pair (2.75 for brighter than and darker than) and
from the highly spatializable pair (6.38 for in front of
and behind) to a moderately unspatializable pair (2.38
for brighter than and darker than).
We designed the problems so that they may systematically vary in two respects. First, they varied in the
syntactic structure of the picture displayed with the first
premise. That is, a half of the problems come with vertical position diagrams such as the left diagram in Figure
6, while the other half come with horizontal position diagrams such as the right diagram in Figure 6.
Secondly, the problems varied in the semantic convention associated with the displayed picture. That is,
for each problem where a syntactic relation R0 indicates
the target relation R, there was a corresponding problem where the same syntactic relation R0 indicates the
inverse target relation R. For example, the problem cited
in the last section has a counter-part problem where the
aboveness relation in the displayed diagram indicates the
smaller than relation rather than the bigger than relation.
Thus, the problems were divided into eight types

1079

Diagram
vertical
horizontal
horizontal
vertical

H.D.P.
uppermost
rightmost
leftmost
lowermost

Type
b
d
f
h

Diagram
vertical
horizontal
horizontal
vertical

H.D.P.
lowermost
leftmost
rightmost
uppermost

a, . . . , h, according to the combinations of the premise
types, the syntactic types of accompanying diagrams,
and the semantic rules associated with them. Note that
different types of problems would have different hypothetical drawing positions, namely, places in diagrams
where new squares would be drawn if second premises
were added. For example, the problem cited in the beginning of this section has the hypothetical drawing position in the uppermost area of the diagram. If, however,
the second premise were that the bear is smaller than the
cat, the hypothetical drawing position would be the lowermost position. Table 1 shows the hypothetical drawing
position for each problem type.
Procedures We asked 10 subjects (2 females and 8
males, ages: 22–28) to solve the 48 problems thus produced. In each case, the subject wore a cap equipped
with NAC eye-tracker EMR-8, facing to a 90-inch projection screen 10 feet away. With the jaw placed on a
fixed support, the subject first solved six practice problems. After the calibration of eye-marks, the subject
then solved 24 problems with horizontal position diagrams and 24 more problems with vertical position diagrams. The premises and the question was given in taperecorded voice, with the first premise accompanied by a
diagram displayed in the computer display. In each trial,
the subject pushed the space bar of a keyboard to proceed
to the next premise, to the question, or to the next problem. The subject pushed the “4” key to answer “yes” to
the question and the “6” key to answer “no.” There was
no key for going back to the previous stage or for correcting the answer. The movement of the subject’s right
eye was tracked and recorded throughout the session.
Due to a calibration failure, we had to exclude the entire data of one subject from our analysis. Of the remaining 432 trials, the subjects gave correct answers in
362 trials (84 %), and we analyzed only these trials. We
avoided trials with incorrect answers in order to exclude,
as much as possible, accidental eye-movements caused
by simple mishearing of premises or questions.

Results
Overall tendency Figures 7 and 8 show typical patterns of eye fixations during individual trials. Each individual figure shows the fixation pattern in the period after
the first premise was presented with the diagram until the
subject pushed an answering key. The sizes of circles express the lengths of fixation durations.
The left figure in Figure 7 shows eye fixations during
a solution of a type-a problem, and it is visually clear
that eye fixations concentrated in the upper area of the

Table 2: Counts of trials classified in terms of the areas
covered by eye fixations and the problem types, where
problems were presented with vertical position diagrams.
type-a & h
type-b & g
total

Figure 7: Eye fixations in a trial on a type-a problem
(left), on a type-b problem (middle), and on a type-a
problem (right); the sizes of circles express durations of
fixations; approximate positions of two squares in the actual diagram are also indicated.

lower
5
(-3.4)
35
(3.4)
40

upper
31
(2.5)
9
(-2.5)
40

entire
8
(0.6)
5
(-0.6)
13

middle
45
(0.4)
40
(-0.4)
85

total
89
89
178

Table 3: Counts of trials classified in terms of the areas
covered by eye fixations and the problem types, where
problems were presented with horizontal position diagrams.
type-d & e
type-c & f
total

right
3
(-3.6)
33
(3.7)
36

left
28
(2.1)
9
(-2.1)
37

entire
11
(1.2)
4
(-1.2)
15

middle
52
(0.4)
44
(-0.4)
96

total
94
90
184

3.47, p < 0.001, two tails), while it is significantly
longer in the leftmost part in type-d and type-e problems
(n = 92, z = 3.06, p < 0.002, two tails). On the other
hand, another majority of trials showed concentrations of
fixation points in the small middle part of the diagram (as
shown in the bottom figure).
Figure 8: Eye fixations in a trial on a type-e problem
(top), on a type-c problem (middle), and on a type-c
problem (bottom).

diagram. The middle figure shows eye fixations during a
solution of a type-b problem, and this time, they gathered in the lower area. Thus, in both cases, the subject eyes moved between the existing squares and the
hypothetical drawing position. In fact, the large-sample
Wilcoxson signed-rank test shows that the net fixation
time is significantly longer in the uppermost part than
in the lowermost part in type-a and type-h problems
(n = 92, z = 3.78, p < 0.001, two tails) while it is
significantly longer in the lowermost part in type-b and
type-g problems (n = 92, z = 3.70, p < 0.001, two
tails).
On the other hand, there are a significant number of
cases where eyes did not move to hypothetical drawing
positions, but concentrated on the small middle part of
the diagram. The right figure shows a typical example of
that fixation pattern.
A similar tendency was found in trials with horizontal diagrams. On the one hand, a majority cases had
eye fixations between the existing squares and the hypothetical drawing positions. See the top and the middle figure in Figure 8. In fact, the net fixation time is
significantly longer in the rightmost part than in the leftmost part in type-c and type-f problems (n = 91, z =

1080

Fixation ranges What range of the diagram did eyes
cover during each trial? Tables 2 and 3 show the counts
of trials classified in terms of the areas of diagrams covered by fixations and the types of problems being solved.
Table 2 shows the case with vertical diagrams, while Table 3 shows the case with horizontal diagrams. As both
tables show, about a half of the trails have eye fixations
concentrated on the middle range of diagrams, consisting of the two squares and the blank space in between.
The other half of the trails, however, had wider fixation
ranges, spreading over either up, down, to the left, to the
right, or to the entire diagram. And in these cases, fixation ranges have a very significant dependency on types
of problems both for the vertical cases (χ2 = 35.59, p <
.001) and the horizontal cases (χ2 = 38.62, p < .001).
That is, when a subject was engaged in a type-b or typeg problem, eye fixations tended to spread over the lower
range of the diagram, while with a type-a or type-h problem, they tended to cover the upper range. With a typec or type-f problem, eye fixations tended to cover the
right-side range of the diagram, while with a type-d or
type-e problem, they tended to cover the left-side range.

Discussions
Overall, the cases in our data can be divided into two
broad classes: the class of cases where fixation points
concentrated on the middle part of the diagram (181
cases in total), and the class of cases where fixation
points spread beyond the middle part (181 cases in total). In the second class of cases, the subject exhibited a

very strong tendency to move their eyes back and forth
between the actual graphical elements (i.e. two squares)
and the hypothetical drawing position.
Now, it is not our concern to investigate what inferential strategy or strategies the subjects were engaged
in the first class of cases, where they fixed their eyes to
the small area consisting of the actually drawn squares.
Whatever the explanation may be, whatever inferential
strategies this class of cases may represent, our data
clearly indicate that, in the second class of cases, where a
subject was not engaged in those inferential strategies, he
or she seems to be engaged in an inference through hypothetical drawing. And this type of cases accounts for a
half of the trials that we observed. So, our results indicate
not only the existence of HD-inferences, but their generality or pervasiveness in this type of inferential tasks.
Moreover, our data indicate that the strong dependency was preserved over a certain syntactic variance of
the displayed diagram: it was observed no matter the displayed diagram was vertical one or horizontal one. Perhaps more importantly, the tendency was preserved over
semantic variances of the displayed diagram too. For example, it was observed both in case the aboveness relation in diagrams means the smaller than relation and in
case the same aboveness relation means the bigger than
relation. This indicates that the observed fixation patterns were controlled by the particular syntactic and semantic rules associated with the diagram itself.
This in turn ensures that the observed eye movements
were indicative of mental operations on the present diagram scene (hypothetical drawing), rather than mental
operations on some other independent image constructed
for the objects or situation represented by the diagram.
For such mental imaging, if it ever existed, would not
change its syntax and semantics as those of the displayed
diagram do, and hence would be reflected in a unified fixation pattern independent of the diagram’s syntactic and
semantic variation. Our data showed that on the contrary,
eye fixation patterns tracked the diagram’s syntactic and
semantic variation.

Conclusions
Thus, our experiment gave clear evidence for the existence of HD-inferences, reasoning about a picture as the
referent. Intuitively, this might come with no surprize,
but its theoretical implications are quite significant.
First, it provides empirical support to the processes
postulated in previous studies of diagrammatic reasoning. The concepts of envisaging operation (Sloman,
1971), perceptual operation (Larkin & Simon, 1987),
and visualizing operation (Narayanan et al., 1995) now
have significant empirical muscle and do their explanatory jobs more convincingly.
Moreover, the concept of HD-inference identifies the
common structure of the seemingly diverse processes
thus postulated, and hence has a potential to make the
existing accounts more systematic. Specifically, to infer through hypothetical drawing is, after all, to exploit
geometrical or topological constraints on graphics to rea-

1081

son about the distal object. Those structural constraints
on graphics serve as scaffolding to one’s deductive endeavor, even if it may be eventually thrown away. Of
course, different types of graphics (e.g., maps, graphs,
line drawings) have different types of structural constraints, and hence the kinds and qualities of supplied
scaffolding must vary accordingly. In particular, the
match and mismatch between structural constraints on
graphics and constraints on their referents will be an
important determinant of the quality of the scaffolding.
Thus, our finding suggests, this factor is one of the dominant ones that regulate the way cognitive agents interact
with external graphics in inferential tasks.

Reference
Brandt, S. A., & Stark, L. W. (1997). Spontaneous
Eye Movements during Visual Imagery Reflect the
Content of the Visual Scene. Journal of Cognitive
Neurosciene, 9(1), 27–38.
Demarais, A. M., & Cohen, B. H. (1998). Evidence for
image-scanning eye movements during transitive
inference. Biological Psychology, 49, 229–247.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental Animation. In Glasgow,
J., Narayanan, N. H., & Chanrasekaran, B. (Eds.),
Diagrammatic Reasoning: Cognitive and Computational Perspectives, pp. 535–575. AAAI Press,
Menlo Park, CA.
Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000). Visual and
Spatial Representations in Relational Reasoning.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 759–
763.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a Diagram Is
(Sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words. In Glasgow, J., Narayanan, N. H., & Chanrasekaran, B.
(Eds.), Diagrammatic Reasoning: Cognitive and
Computational Perspectives, pp. 69–109. AAAI
Press, Menlo Park, CA.
Narayanan, N. H., Suwa, M., & Motoda, H. (1995). Hypothesizing Behaviors from Device Diagrams. In
Glasgow, J., Narayanan, N. H., & Chanrasekaran,
B. (Eds.), Diagrammatic Reasoning: Cognitive
and Computational Perspectives, pp. 501–534.
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). Reasoning about the Referent
of a Picture versus Reasoning about the Picture as
the Referent: an Effect of Visual Realism. Memory
and Cognition, 23(6), 709–722.
Shimojima, A. (1995). Operational Constraints in Diagrammatic Reasoning. In Barwise, J., & Allwein,
G. (Eds.), Logical Reasoning with Diagrams, pp.
27–48. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Sloman, A. (1971). Interactions between Philosophy and
AI: the Role of Intuition and Non-Logical Reasoning in Intelligence. Artificial Intelligence, 2, 209–
225.
Trafton, J. G., & Trickett, S. B. (2001). A New Model of
Graph and Visualization Usage. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 1048–1053.

