UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Sequential Context on Judgments and Decisions in the Prisoner’s Dilemma Game

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4tk2b9cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Vlaev, Ivaylo
Chater, Nick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Sequential Context on Judgments and Decisions
in the Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
Ivaylo Vlaev (ivaylo.vlaev@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3UD, UK

Nick Chater (nick.chater@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV47AL, UK

Abstract
Existing models of interactive game-theoretic decision
making typically assume that only the attributes of the game
need be considered when reaching a decision, i.e., these
theories assume that the utility of a strategy is determined by
the utility of the outcomes of the game, and transforms of the
probabilities of each outcome. The strategic decisions are
assumed to be based on these utilities. The two experiments
presented here provide strong evidence against these
assumptions. We investigated choice and predictions about
the choices of other players in Prisoners Dilemma game. The
cooperativeness of the games in each condition was varied
and the results demonstrate that the average cooperation rate
and the predicted cooperation of the other player in each game
strongly depended on the cooperativeness of the preceding
games, which suggests that games are not considered
independently. It is proposed that people have poor notions of
absolute cooperativeness, risk, and utility, and instead make
their judgments and decisions in relative terms. The proposed
accounts for these results are based on existing
psychophysical and cognitive theories of perception and
judgment of magnitude information.

Introduction
Understanding how people predict others’ behavior and
make choices on the basis of these prediction and the
available opportunities and rewards is a central question
for psychology; but also how people trade off risk and
return when interacting with other people is a central
issue for economics because the foundations of
economic theory are rooted in models of interactive
decision-making, in which the outcome of a situation
depends also on the decisions of others agents (the latter
known as game theory). In economics and part of
psychology the starting point for investigating how
people make decisions under uncertainty has not been
empirical data on human behavior. Instead, the starting
point has been a normative theory of decision making,
expected utility theory and game theory (first
axiomatized by von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947)
which specifies how people ought to make decisions,
and which plays a key role in theories of rational choice
(for a review see Shafir & LeBoeuf, 2002). The
assumption has then been that people make rational
decisions as the theory prescribes, that is, expected
utility theory and game theory can be viewed as a
descriptive, as well as a normative, theories of human
behavior. At the core of expected utility theory is the
assumption that people make choices that maximize
their utility, and they value a risky option or a strategy
by the expected utility (in a probabilistic sense of
expectation) that it will provide. In game theory, which
1194

is based on expected utility theory, the utility from a
strategy is judged on the basis of the sum of each
individual outcomes weighted by their respective
probability (e.g., the agents beliefs about the other
players distribution of choices). In these models the
basic assumption is that each prospect or game is
considered separately and the resulting choice should be
based only on the attributes of the particular prospect or
game.
Stewart et al. (in press) have already described the
phenomenon of "prospect relativity": that the perceived
value of a risky prospect (e.g., "p chance of x") is
relative to other prospects with which it is presented.
This is counter to expected utility theory, according to
which the perceived value of each prospect should be
dependent only on its own attributes. Stewart et al.
suggest that this phenomenon arises in the
representation of the magnitudes that define the
prospects, and suggest that the phenomenon has a
common origin with related effects in the perception of
sensory magnitudes (Garner, 1954; Lockhead, 1995,
Laming, 1997). Importantly, Stewart et al (in press)
found that only the simultaneously considered choice
options affect the decisions about risky prospects,
without finding evidence for sequential effects.
Birnbaum (1992), however, demonstrated that skewing
the distribution of certainty equivalents (CE) offered for
simple gambles, whilst holding the range constant,
influenced the selection of a CE. When the CE options
were positively skewed (i.e., more small values)
gambles were overvalued compared to the negatively
skewed context, consistent with range-frequency theory
(Parducci, 1974).
None of the existing studies however have
investigated whether these context effects also hold
during choice under uncertainty in the context of
interactive decision making (modeled in economics as
game playing). It would of course be difficult
investigate the effects of the immediately available
games in the context of interactive game playing
because games are always played in a sequence.
Therefore we decided to focus on testing the sequential
effects. In particular, this study investigates the
possibility that the previous context influences
decisions in prisoner’s dilemma game, in which players
have to decide whether to cooperate or not in order to
obtain certain payoffs and also to predict their coplayer’s decisions. The context was assumed to be the
cooperativeness of the previously played games in the
sequence while the dependent variables that this context

was expected to affect were the cooperation rate of the
participants and their estimate of the probability that the
other player will cooperate.

The cooperation index scale
The table below illustrates the structure of the
Prisoner’s Dilemma Game, which is the subject of vast
literature in economics, behavioral decision making,
and cognitive and social psychology.

Player 2
Cooperate

Player 1

Cooperate
Defect

C, C
T, S

Defect

S, T
D, D

The game is defined by the chain of inequalities T >C
>D >S, where C is the payoff if both cooperate (C), D is
the payoff if both defect (D), T is the payoff if one
defects and the other cooperates (and its called the
temptation payoff), S is the payoff if one cooperates and
the other defects (and this payoff is also called the
sucker payoff). For example, this inequality could be
represented by the numbers 20 > 10 > 8 >0.
In order to manipulate the cooperativeness of the
games in each session we used a measure developed by
Rapoport (1965) who investigated whether certain
structural properties of the game will affect people’s
propensity to cooperate. He derived a cooperation index
for predicting the probability that people will cooperate
defined by the ratio:
K = (C - D) / (T - S)
This index varies from 0.1 to 0.9 (for simplicity denoted
in the rest of the text with the integers 1 to 9). A game
with index 1 could defined by the inequality 20 > 10 > 8
>0, and is a very non-cooperative one because it is
characterized by high temptation to defect – offering a
potential increase from 10 to 20 points and a low
potential loss if both defect – from 10 to 8 points; while
a game with index 9, which could be defined by the
inequality 20 > 19 > 1 > 0, is very cooperative one
because it is characterized with a low relative gain from
defection – from 19 to 20 points, and a high potential
loss if both defect – from 19 points to 1 point. In a
seminal study Rapoport (1965) demonstrated a linear
relationship between the cooperation index and the
cooperation rate, i.e., people tend to cooperate more
when playing games with a higher index.
In the two experiments presented here various
groups played in conditions with different distribution
of the games along the cooperation index in order to test
whether participants’ cooperation rate and their
predicted cooperation of the other player in each game
strongly depend on the cooperativeness of the preceding
games. Thus, the present research departs
fundamentally from previous work in game theoretic
decision making by trying to model the highly flexible
and contextually variable way in which people represent
magnitudes such as payoffs and probabilities, rather
than assuming that these can be represented on
‘absolute’ internal psychological scales.
1195

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we manipulated the skewing of the
distribution of the values of the cooperativeness index
positive or negative in each session, whilst holding its
range constant. There was also a control condition in
which the values were equally distributed along the
whole scale. If the participant were not affected by the
context provided by the distribution of the
cooperativeness of the games in each condition, then the
responses to any given game in the skewed conditions
would be expected to be similar to the control
condition.

Method
Participants were 96 students recruited from the
University of Oxford student population via a mailing
list of people who have asked to be contacted
participated in this experiment. 48 took part in the
control condition, 24 participated in the first context
condition, and 24 in the second context condition. Each
session took no more than 60 min, and they were paid
in cash at the end of it depending on their performance.
Participants were paid a £2 fixed fee, and could have
gained up to £7 in total, with an estimated average of
£6.
Design There were three conditions in this experiment.
The first aimed to test how people behave when they
play the whole range of the cooperation index from 1 to
9. In the second condition the participants played games
with index 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, while in the third condition
they played games with index 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. In
addition, there were three basic version for each
condition of the experiment.
• Hypothetical play, in which the participants had to
make decisions and judgments without real interaction.
In this setting they made judgments and decisions by
just imagining what would they would do if playing
against a real opponent. This condition aimed to test
whether people would exhibit the same context effects
as in the interactive version of the game, which would
indicate that these effects are due to the perceptual
attributes of the games rather to the dynamics of the
particular interaction in the group.
• Interactive play against anonymous player from the
group. In this condition, the participants were informed
that on each round of the game they would play against
a randomly selected player from a group of between
four to eight people, and therefore it is impossible to
infer the strategy of the other player from the history of
the game. This random matching was intended to
control for possible learning affects of group dynamics
during the play (e.g., a particular group might settle into
particularly cooperative or uncooperative modes thus
biasing our data).
• Play against the computer. In this condition the
computer was pre-programmed to respond with a
strategy reflecting the values of the cooperation index
of each game, which means that when for example the
computer plays games with index .5 the computer
cooperates in 50% of the rounds this game is played.
This condition was designed to test whether the context
effects can overpower the effects of the automated

Results
The results from the control condition are presented in
Figure 1. In general, participants demonstrated linearly
1196

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

C
P

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

cooperation index

Figure 1: Mean cooperation rates (C) and mean
predictions (P) for each value of the cooperation

The mean cooperation rates for the two context
conditions of the interactive design are shown in Figure
2, and for the mean prediction in Figure 3.
0.80
mean prediction

Procedure. The participants were informed that they
would play 56 rounds of the game and on each round of
the game they would play against a randomly selected
player from their group (usually between four and eight
people were in each group). This random matching
makes it impossible to infer the strategy of the other
player from the history of the game and thus controls
for possible learning affects during the play. Thus we
also aimed to prevent people from building a model of
their opponent, which is another significant contextual
factor that has been shown to affect strategic behavior
(e.g., Pruitt and Kimmel, 1977 for a review).
Each condition consisted of a sequence of rounds of
prisoner’s dilemma game in which players make their
choices simultaneously. The games were presented in a
random order and the payoffs differed on each round
depending on the condition of the experiment. In order
to control for the effects related to the absolute
magnitude of the received payoff from each round, the
payoffs of each game were multiplied by the factors 1,
4, 7 and 10, so there were four versions of each game
index in terms of the absolute magnitudes of the
payoffs.
On each round of the game the participants were
presented with a matrix of the game on the computer
screen and they had to make a judgment and a decision.
We used the abstract label 1 to denote the cooperative
response and 2 for the uncooperative one in order not to
prime certain social values in the group, which might
induce certain strategies that could additionally bias the
results. The judgment was to state how probable they
think it is that the other will play 1 in this game. In
order to make an estimation they had to move the slider
on the screen, using the pointer of your mouse, to the
position between 0 and 100%, which reflected their
subjective prediction of the probability (likelihood) that
the other player will choose to play ‘1’ in the current
round. They were awarded points for the accuracy of
these predictions. Then the participants had to choose
their decision strategy (1 or 2), and after both players in
each pair have made their decisions the round ends and
they were informed on the screen about the decision
made by the other player, and their received payoffs
from the game and from the accuracy of their
predictions. The participants were paid for their
participation in cash according to their performance. At
the end of the experiment the accumulated score in
points was transferred into cash according to an
exchange rate, i.e., the experiment was conducted
incentive compatibly.

increasing cooperation rate and predicted cooperation as
the index value increased, which replicated Rapoport’s
(1965) finding that mean cooperation increase as the
index increases.

0.60
pos-skew

0.40

neg-skew

0.20
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Cooperation index

Figure 2: Mean prediction for each index value
in the two contextual conditions with interactive
0.60
cooperation rate

response consistent with the value of the cooperation
index, which would lead participants’ responses to more
in line with the values of the index.
Each subject participated in only one experimental
design (hypothetical play, interactive play, or play
against the computer) and in only one condition of the
experiment, i.e., there were 8 participants in each
design-condition pairing.

0.50
0.40
pos-skew

0.30

neg-skew

0.20
0.10
0.00
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Cooperation index

Figure 3: Mean cooperation rate for each index value
in the two contextual conditions with interactive play

These results demonstrate that games of index 5 that
have a higher rank in the positively skewed distribution
(condition 1) had a significantly higher cooperation rate
and higher mean predictions compared with the games
with a lower rank (condition 2). Another interesting
result is the almost identical pattern between the results
for games with index 1 to 5 in the positive skew and the
results for the games with index 5 to 9 in the negative
skew, which do not increase as in the control condition.
The same pattern appeared in the version involving only

hypothetical play. This result indicates that human
judgments and decisions are relative to the other values
in the context rather than being represented on an
absolute scale.
The mean cooperation rate and mean prediction
values for games with index 5 in the positively and
negatively skewed distributions for each of the three
designs are shown in the Table 1 below.
Table 1. Summary results and statistics for game 5.
Task
Cooperation
Hypothetical
Prediction
Cooperation
Interactive
Prediction
Cooperation
Computer
Prediction
Design

Pos
0.60
0.60
0.48
0.54
0.24
0.54

Neg
0.35
0.51
0.17
0.24
0.27
0.53

t
2.28
2.10
3.19
4.67
.42
.10

p
.021
.049
.002
.0001
.671
.915

The shaded cells indicate the conditions between
which there was a significant difference while the last
two columns present the t tests of the difference
between the two context conditions. In four out of six
comparisons, during the hypothetical and interactive
play, the games with a higher rank in the distribution
(condition 1) had higher significantly higher
cooperation rate and higher mean predictions compared
with the games with a lower rank (condition 2), which
indicates that the interaction was not essential to
produce these effects. In the condition of play against
the computer there is no difference between the groups
suggesting that people are very sensitive to the
automated response that enables them to form an
absolute judgment of the cooperativeness of the games
and the context effects are not strong enough to counter
this effect.

Discussion
The cooperation rate and the predicted cooperation were
strongly influenced by the preceding games in the
sequence, and participants’ behavior in games with the
same level of cooperativeness differed significantly
between the two context groups. In particular, the
games with index 5 had higher values in the first group
in which these games had a higher rank (fifth)
compared with the games having the same index in the
second group but being second in rank. The same
effects were observed when people made only
hypothetical decisions without real interaction.
These results clearly demonstrate that the rank of a
game in the distribution (stimulus set) will significantly
affect participants’ perception of the cooperativeness of
that game and they will be more likely to cooperate and
will predict higher cooperation when the game has a
higher rank. There are well-known theories of context
effect in perceptual judgment and general models of
decision making under risk, which explicitly model and
empirically demonstrate the effects of the ranking of the
stimuli in the distribution like for example Parducci’s
range-frequency theory (1974) and Tversky &
Kahneman’s prospect theory (1992).
1197

Experiment 2
The first experiment showed that games are judged
relative to previously played games. In this experiment
we decided to test whether these context effects are
emerging because people compare and contrast the
current stimulus (game) only with the previous one, or
also whether these effects can appear on a larger scale
when there is (implicit) comparison between two
separate sequences of games. For this study we decided
to use only two types of games, very cooperative ones
with index 9 and very uncooperative ones with index 1,
and we tested whether order in which people played
these games was affecting their choices and predictions.
In order to further accentuate the difference between
the two game types we decided to design the
uncooperative games with negative payoffs. Thus we
expected to provoke bigger perceptual and
reinforcement dissociation between the two games
(although their strategic structure is identical), which
could further enforce the contrast between them. There
were three order conditions in this study. One in which
the two game types were mixed and appeared in random
order in the sequence and thus were contrasted on a trial
by trial basis; second in which the cooperative games
were played first and then the uncooperative ones; and
third condition where the uncooperative games were
played first and then the cooperative ones.

Method
Participants 20 participants took part in each condition
of this study (60 in total). All participants were paid £3
plus performance related winnings of up to £3.
Design The cooperative games were similar to the ones
in the first experiment. In order to make the magnitudes
of the payoffs in the two game types comparable and of
equal importance for the players, we decided that the
low cooperation game should offer similar absolute
amounts as the cooperative game, but the payoffs will
be negative. The following matrix game is an example
of an uncooperative prisoners dilemma game with index
1, which offers negative payoffs.

You

1 -5, -5
2 0, -11

Other
1
-11, 0
-6, -6

2

The payoffs of each game were multiplied by the
factors 1, 4, 7 and 10, as Experiment 1, so there were
four versions of each game index in terms of the
absolute magnitudes of the payoffs.
Procedure The experiment was done interactively in
groups containing 4 to 8 participants and the procedure
was the same as the one in the first experiment. The
only difference is that the participants played 96 rounds
in the session. In the conditions with separate sequence
for the positive and the negative games they played each game
type separately for 48 rounds, while in the mixed condition
the two game types were presented randomly in the sequence.

0.8
cooperation rate

0.7
0.6
0.5

posneg
negpos

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91
round

Figure 4: Running average of the cooperation rate in the
two conditions with separate sequence for the positive and
the negative games

When we compare these results with the outcome
from the condition with mixed games presented in
Figure 5, it immediately evident that the score for the
negative games is very similar and again just below .2,
while the cooperation rate for the positive games
reaches almost .8 (80%) and stabilizes. It appears that in
the mixed condition the contrast was even stronger than
in the negative-positive condition (exceeding it with
more than 20%), which was possibly due to the more
immediate effect of the negative games in the mixed
condition. Another characteristic feature of the mixed
condition is that the cooperation is constant over the
whole session, while in the other two conditions it drops
down as in most experimental findings with prisoner’s
dilemma game.
1198

cooperation rate

1.0
0.8
0.6

positive

0.4

negative

0.2
0.0
1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46
round

Figure 5: Running average of the cooperation rate in
the condition with mixed games

The cooperation rates were averaged for every
subject separately over each game index and were
analyzed in a repeated-measures analysis of variance
with game type (positive vs. negative) as a withinsubjects factor and the experimental condition (pos-neg
vs. neg-pos vs. mixed) as a between-subjects factor. The
interaction between the game type and the experimental
condition was found to be statistically significant,
F(2,57)=37.77, p<.001. Pair-wise comparison post-hoc
test was used between the experimental groups for each
game type. We found a significant difference in the
cooperation rate between the each of the sequence
conditions and the mixed condition for the positive
games (F(2,57)=23.34, p<.001) without however
finding significant difference between the two sequence
conditions. For the negative games the difference was
significant between all groups (F(2, 57)=4.53, p=.01)
except between the neg-pos condition and the mixed
condition. The main effect of the game type was also
significant, F(1,57)=36.09, p <0.001, i.e., the
participants cooperated more in the positive games.
Prediction For this dependent variable, the results
for two sequential conditions were very similar to the
ones for the cooperation rate (Figure 6). Again, in the
neg-pos condition there was a sharp increase with
almost 40% in mean prediction immediately after the
start of the second half of the session when participants
started to play the positive games, which is again above
the level for the positive games in the other condition.
At the same time the level for the negative games in the
pos-neg condition decreases sharply with more than
20% to the level for this game in the neg-pos condition.
0.8
0.7
mean prediction

Results
In order to see how each variable changed over time we
took three types of running average over time. The first
was over the whole sequence of trials up to the current
trial, i.e., averaged over the number of trials so far, the
second also running average over the last 5 trials, and
the third one was over the last 10 trials. Since the three
measures produced almost identical results here we
report only the data from the running average estimated
over the whole sequence of trials. We calculated
separate running average time series for the positive and
the negative games, in order to estimate the trends for
each game type independently of each other (otherwise,
if we take the running average to include both games,
then the effects will be confounded between the positive
and the negative games).
Cooperation rate Figure 4 presents evidence that in
the negative-positive condition the time series results
for the running average of the cooperation rate change
abruptly in the second half of the session after the
participants started to play the positive games (first
playing the negative ones), jumping instantly from just
below .2 to above .5. By contrast, in the positive
negative condition the cooperation rate for the positive
games (played first) is always below .4 and in the
second half, when people start playing the negative
games drops down to the level of the other negativepositive condition, which is below .2. This is clear
evidence of order effects on the behavior in the positive
games.

0.6
0.5

posneg
negpos

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1 10 19 28 37 46 55 64 73 82 91
round

Figure 6: Running average of the cooperation rate in the
two conditions with separate sequences for the positive
and the negative games

The interesting result however was found in the mixed
condition shown in Figure 7, in which the prediction
levels for both game types increased steadily during the
whole session, reaching .8 for the positive games (as
opposed to .4 and .5 in the other conditions), and .6 for
the negative games (as opposed to .1 and .2 in the
sequential conditions). These results are very strong
evidence for the powerful effects of the context
provided by the other games in the sequence.
The prediction levels were averaged for every
participant separately over each game index, and were
analyzed in a repeated-measures analysis of variance
with game type (positive vs. negative) as a withinsubjects factor and the experimental condition (pos-neg
vs. neg-pos vs. mixed) as a between-subjects factor. The
interaction between the game type and the experimental
condition was statistically significant, F(2, 57)=4.32, p
= 0.018. In order to compare the experimental groups
for each game type, a post-hoc test was used. We found
a significant difference in the mean prediction between
the three experimental groups for positive games
(F(2,57)=35.41, p<.001), and for the negative games
(F(2,57)=12.08, p<.001). The difference between the
pos-neg condition and the mixed condition was not
significant. The main effect of the game type was also
significant, F(1,57)=36.09, p < .001. Participants made
significantly higher predictions in the positive games.

General Discussion
Our study investigates sequential context effects on
strategic choice in game playing in combination with
elicitation of players’ beliefs about her opponent’s
decisions. We demonstrated that the attributes of the
previous games influence the judgments and decisions
in the current game. This result implies that games are
not considered independently of the previously played
ones. Thus the present research demonstrates a new and
large anomaly for expected utility theory and game
theory in decision-making under uncertainty.
Specifically, the reported results seem to indicate that
people do not possess a well-defined notion of the
utility of a strategy and the cooperativeness of a game,
and hence they do not view such utilities and games in
terms of expected utility. Instead, people's perceived
utility for a strategy appears highly context sensitive
and it depends on the other games being played.

References

1.00
mean prediction

loss by looking for mutual cooperation (otherwise they
risk ending up with no payment if their final payoff was
negative). When there was transition from positive to
negative games, however, there was probably less
incentive to shift immediately to non-cooperation
because the accumulated positive payoff was not
perceived to be at risk.

0.80
0.60

positive
negative

0.40
0.20
0.00
1 6 11 16 21 26 31 36 41 46
round

Figure 7: Running average of the mean
prediction in the condition with mixed games

Discussion
The results clearly show sequential context effects on
judgment and choice in strategic game playing, which
were significant in all conditions, but particularly
increased in the mixed condition where the contrasting
between the two game types interleaved on a trial by
trial basis. When the games were divided in two
separate sequences then the negative games in the first
half of the session produced powerful contrast effect
with the positive games in the second half---the latter is
considered even more cooperative than normally. There
was also a significant contrast effect in the opposite
direction (if a change is made from a cooperative game
to a non-cooperative one, but the effect was stronger
when the transition was from negative to positive games
than from positive to negative. This asymmetry may
arise because of the way our incentive scheme works.
We pay participants according to their accumulated
payoff in the whole session. Thus when the negative
game was played first, participants initially lose points;
and when the positive games started they might have
immediately seized the opportunity to compensate that
1199

Birnbaum, M. H. (1992). Violations of monotonicity
and context effects in choice-based certainty
equivalents. Psychological Science, 3, 310-314.
Garner, W. R. (1954). Context effects and the validity
of loudness scales. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48, 218-224.
Laming, D. R. J. (1997). The measurement of sensation.
London: Oxford University Press.
Lockhead, G. (1995). Psychophysical scaling method
reveal and measure context effects. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences. Vol 18(3): 607-612.
Parducci, A. (1974). Contextual effects: A rangefrequency analysis. In L. Carterette and M. P.
Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of Perception (Vol. II).
New York: Academic Press.
Pruitt, D. G. & Kimmel, M. J. (1977). Twenty years of
experimental gaming: critique, synthesis, and
suggestions for the future. Annual Review of
Psychology, 28:363-92.
Rapoport, A. (1965). Prisoner’s dilemma: a study in
conflict and cooperation. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Shafir, E., & LeBoeuf, R. A. (2002). Rationality.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 491-517.
Stewart et al. (in press). Prospect Relativity: How
Choice Options Influence Decision Under Risk.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297323.
von Neumann, M., & Morgenstern, O. (1947). Theory
of games and economic behavior. (2nd ed.). Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.

