UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Encoding of Elements and Relations of Object Arrangements by Young Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9484c8sk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Martin, Leslee J.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Encoding of Elements and Relations of Object Arrangements by Young Children
Leslee J. Martin (martin.1103@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University
216 Lazenby Hall, 1827 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract
Two experiments investigate the ability of four-year-old
children to spontaneously process relations as well as
elements in an immediate recognition task. The
experiments also test predictions of a model proposed to
account for differential processing of elements and
relations. Both experiments used a two-item forcedchoice task. In each experiment, children accurately
recognized the target, regardless of whether distracter
items included different elements or different relations.
The results of these experiments suggest that young
children do spontaneously process relations as well as
elements. These findings in conjunction with earlier
results also suggest that more pronounced privileged
processing for elements may not arise from initial
encoding, but rather from events which occur later in
processing such as recoding to a long-term memory
representation, or retrieval from long-term memory.

Introduction
In order to interact with and understand our world, we
must be able to identify the things we encounter, as
well as the relationships between them. We must be
able to process and recognize individual items, or
elements. Also of fundamental importance, we need to
make sense of elements by organizing them and
recognizing the underlying relations between them.
Recognizing relations between elements is
fundamental to many tasks we undertake, such as
mathematics, analogical reasoning, problem solving,
and reading. In mathematics, we need to recognize that
problems with very different elements are often linked
by common relations. For example, understanding how
(5 x 3) is equivalent to (5 + 5 + 5) helps us understand
the relation between other multiplication and addition
problems and allows us to solve new problems more
easily.
What is considered to be an element in one context
may be a relation in another. Relations between
elements in reading allow us to comprehend what an
author is trying to convey. If we were to focus only on
the elements in reading, we would process words or

787

letters alone and find the overall meaning difficult to
grasp. By recognizing the relations between letters,
however, we comprehend words; by recognizing the
relations between words, we comprehend sentences.
There is much evidence that elements are processed
faster than relations across different task types
(Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Ratcliff & McKoon, 1989;
Sloutsky & Yarlas, 2000). Given this, Sloutsky and
Yarlas (2002) propose that there might be invariances
in processing elements and relations that are found
across different domains. To further test this idea, they
investigated processing of elements and relations in a
conceptual domain (i.e., logical relations) and in a
spatial domain (i.e., object arrangements). They found
that though absolute processing time and accuracy are
affected by the specific computations a task requires,
relative processing time and accuracy are equivalent
across these domains. That is, elements are processed
more accurately than relations and elements are
processed prior to relations across domains.
To account for the invariances found in processing
elements and relations across domains, Sloutsky and
Yarlas (2002) have proposed a general model of
processing that occurs when a series of elements are
bound into a relation and are subsequently recalled. The
model consists of an encoding phase and a retrieval
phase. In the encoding phase, items are initially
detected and identified. Next, elements and relations are
bound together to form a representation in working
memory. Finally, a memory trace or category
abstraction is formed and stored in long term memory.
The retrieval phase is initiated when an element or
relation is subsequently encountered. It is similar to the
encoding phase in that it requires the encountered
item(s) to be detected, identified, and bound into a new
representation. This representation, however, is then
compared with an “echo” retrieved from long term
memory and a decision and response are made with
respects to whether the initial and subsequent items are
the same or different.
Sloutsky and Yarlas (2002) conducted a series of
experiments to determine which stage of processing is

implicated in the differential processing of elements
versus relations. In two of their experiments, they
eliminated all processing steps past the first encoding.
That is, the need for forming a memory trace to be
stored in long-term memory, and consequently, the
need for retrieval, was eliminated. This was done by
using an immediate recognition task in which
presentation of a target was followed immediately by
presentation of a comparison item. One task involved
recognition of target propositional arguments; the
second task involved recognition of target object
arrangements. Sloutsky and Yarlas found that, unlike
delayed recognition tasks, the immediate recognition
task resulted in high accuracy for both elements and
relations. They concluded that difficulty of processing
relations may stem from retrieval rather than from
encoding.
The goal of this research is to test this conclusion
with young children. Note that the Sloutsky and Yarlas
work (2002) was done with adult participants. Research
on processing elements and relations in children
indicates that young children (ages 4-6) are less likely
to process relations than older children and adults
(Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996;
Yarlas, 2001; Yarlas & Sloutsky, 2001). However,
based on Sloutsky and Yarlas’ findings, it seems
plausible that under simplified memory demands,
young children would be able to process relations that
they fail to process under conditions where the memory
demands are greater. The reported research tests this
hypothesis by using two relations that adults handle
differentially (Sloutsky & Yarlas). One of these
relations is a symmetrical relation with an A-B-A
pattern arrangement; adults readily processed this
relation even in a delayed recognition condition
(Experiment 1). The other relation is an asymmetrical
relation with an A-B-B pattern arrangement; in a
delayed recognition task, adults had much more
difficulty with this relation than with the A-B-A
relation (Experiment 2).
Both experiments described here investigate the
processing of elements and relations using simple
object arrangements. The task used is an immediate
recognition task where children are asked to remember
a target and are then shown two test items and are asked
to decide which is the same as the target.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to determine
whether young children spontaneously process relations
as well as elements in an immediate recognition task. In
Experiment 1, simple shapes were presented as target
items in an A-B-A relation.

788

Method
Participants Participants were 17 4-year-old children
(11 boys and 6 girls, M = 4.6 years; SD = 0.19 years)
recruited from childcare centers and preschools located
in middle-class suburbs of Columbus, Ohio.
Materials and Design The experiment had a two-item
forced-choice within-subjects design. The dependent
variable was accuracy of responses. All stimuli were
approximately 1.5 x 1.5 cm. Four basic shapes (square,
circle, triangle, and diamond) and four primary colors
(red, green, yellow, and blue) were used. The stimuli
were created in Microsoft PowerPoint and the intensity
of all colors was muted at 50% of normal saturation.
Colors did not vary within each trial, but different
colors were used across trials to help maintain the
child’s attention during the task.
Each stimulus item consisted of a series of three
shapes. The three shapes were centered and equally
spaced in an enclosed line box measuring 2.25 x 7.5
cm.
There were 12 different A-B-A target items (e.g.,
square-circle-square). Each target item was also
presented as a test item with a foil (i.e., distracter) item.
There were three types of foils; E+/R- foils, E-/R+ foils,
and E-/R- foils. E+/R- foils had elements (shapes)
identical to those in the target item, but they were
arranged in a different relation (i.e., in an A-A-B
pattern). E-/R+ items had different elements, however
the relation between those elements mirrored that of the
target item (i.e., different shapes in an A-B-A relation).
Finally, E-/R- items had elements that were different
from those in the target item; additionally, the elements
were arranged in a different relation (i.e., different
shapes in an A-A-B pattern). The E-/R-condition was
included as a control condition to ensure that children
understood the task and were paying attention.
Each target item was presented with each of the
different foil types as a test item on different trials; this
resulted in a total of 36 test trials.
Trials were presented on a Dell laptop computer
using SuperLab Pro software (Cedrus Corporation,
1999). Responses to items were entered by the
experimenter using a Cedrus RB-400 4-button response
box. Reaction times began when the test stimuli
appeared and were collected by the program when a
response was made.
There were two different pseudo-randomized trial
orders. The orders were arranged such that identical AB-A items were not target items on consecutive trials.
Also, while all shapes were the same color within a
trial, no color was repeated on consecutive trials.
Furthermore, the same foil type did not appear on more
than two consecutive trials. Finally, the position of the
correct items was counterbalanced such that on half of
trials, the correct response was to the item on the left

and on the other half of trials, the correct response was
to the item on the right. Correct responses did not
appear on the same side (e.g., left side) for more than
two consecutive trials.
Procedure Each child was tested individually by a
female experimenter in a small, quiet room at the
child’s daycare center. The experimenter explained that
they were going to play a game in which some toys
were missing and the child had to match secret codes to
help find the toys.
All children completed 6 practice trial followed by the
36 test trials. In test trials, children were shown the
target item and then two test items. Their task was to
decide which test item matched the target item they saw
at the beginning of the trial. The sequence of a typical
trial is depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: A typical A-B-A trial with an E+/R- foil.
Target items were presented in the center of the
computer screen for 1700 ms. When the target item
disappeared, an asterisk would appear in the center of
the screen for 250 ms. The asterisk was followed by
two test stimuli, which appeared simultaneously and
were centered horizontally on the computer screen. One
test stimulus was presented on the left and the other was
presented on the right. The test stimuli remained on the
screen until the child indicated which test item matched
the “secret code” presented earlier in the trial by
pointing to one of the two stimuli. The response was
immediately entered into the response box by the
experimenter and a blue screen appeared to mark the
end of the trial. The experimenter then pressed another
key on the response box and the blue screen
disappeared and was replaced by another asterisk which
appeared in the center of the screen for 250 ms. When
the asterisk cleared from the screen, the next target item
appeared. The experiment took approximately 20
minutes to complete. At the conclusion of the
experiment, the experimenter told the child that he or
she had found the missing toys and gave the child a
small prize for helping. The experimenter then returned
the child to the classroom.

789

Results
If children focused on elements to the exclusion of
relations, then it was expected that they would perform
at chance when they were forced to choose target items
which were paired with foil items that included the
same elements, but different relations (E+/R- foils). If
children focused on relations only, then it was expected
that their performance would be at chance when
relations were the same, but elements differed (E-/R+
foils). Finally, if they processed both elements and
relations, then performance was expected to be accurate
across foil types.
Results indicate that children were quite accurate at
recognizing the target item in the test stimuli regardless
of the foil item with which it was presented. A series of
one-sample t-tests revealed that children were
significantly above chance in accuracy for all
conditions. The alpha level for all analyses was set at
p<.05. Recall that there were 12 trials per foil type. For
items accompanied by E+/R- foils, children offered
correct responses 67% of the time (Mcorrect=8.0,
SD=2.3), for items accompanied by E-/R+ foils,
children were correct 62% of the time, (Mcorrect=7.5,
SD=1.9), and for items accompanied by E-/R- foils,
children were accurate 67% of the time, (Mcorrect=8.1,
SD=3.0), all above chance, all one-sample ts > 2.8, ps
< .02.
Repeated measures ANOVA’s revealed no differences
in accuracy across foil types, F(2,32) =1.39, p =.264.
That is, even when the distracters (foils) shared the
same elements or the same relation as the target item,
children were equally accurate in identifying the target
item correctly, regardless of the level of similarity
between target and foil item. Note that although no
significant differences were found across the foil types,
participants were slightly more accurate rejecting E+/Rfoils than they were rejecting E-/R+ foils (Cohen’s d =
0.25). Therefore, participants were more likely to
spontaneously encode relations than they were to
spontaneously encode elements.

Experiment 2
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that children as
young as four do spontaneously process relations
among simple stimuli. The purpose of Experiment 2
was to determine whether young children are able to
process the more difficult A-A-B relation in an
immediate recognition task. Recall that adults typically
perform very well with A-B-A relations, but false alarm
at very high rates with A-A-B relations in delayed
recognition tasks (Sloutsky & Yarlas, 2002). If young
children experience similar difficulties with the A-A-B
relation even though task demands are reduced, it will
provide evidence that preferential processing of
elements occurs as early as the initial encoding.

However, if , under these simplified conditions, young
children are proficient at choosing the target item
regardless of whether the accompanying foil contains
similar elements or similar relations, then it will
provide evidence that difficulties in processing relations
arise from later stages of memory operations (i.e.,
during recoding or retrieval).

Method
Participants Participants were 14 4-year-old children
(M=4.5 years; SD=.23 years; 6 boys and 8 girls)
recruited from daycare centers and preschools located
in the middle-class suburbs of Columbus, Ohio.
Materials and Design Because a few children in the
first experiment were at chance even in the control
condition, we deemed it necessary to modify the task
instructions in order to make them simpler and clearer.
The new instructions indicated that the child was going
to play a matching game, where the task was to pick the
item which was just the same as one just seen. The
design, materials, and procedures of Experiment 2 were
otherwise identical to those in Experiment 1.

Results
Four-year-old children were again very accurate at
choosing the correct test item regardless of which foil
types the target stimuli were compared with. Children
identified the target item correctly 68% of the time
when the target and foil shared common elements, but
had different relations. When the foil shared a common
relation with the target, but had different elements,
children chose the correct item 73% of the time, and
children were accurate 80% of the time when the foil
item contained different shapes in a different
arrangement from that of the target. A series of onesample t-tests revealed that these accuracy rates were
all significantly different from chance: young children
were accurate at choosing the correct item at a level
significantly above chance when elements in the foil
item matched the target, but relations did not,
t(13)=5.30, p=.001; when relations matched the target
item, but elements did not, t(13)=4.55, p=.001; and
when the foil shared neither elements nor relations with
the target item, t(13) =6.47, p=.001.
A repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant
differences in accuracy according to foil type, F(2,26) =
3.75, p=.037. Bonferroni post-hoc tests revealed
significant differences in accuracy in trials involving
E+/R- trials (M = 9.6) versus E-/R- trials, (M = 8.1), p =
.023. That is, children were significantly more accurate
when the shape and order information in the foil item
were completely different from the target item, than
they were when the foil item shared common elements
with the target item. Although the difference between

790

E+/R- (M=8.1) and E-/R+ trials (M=8.7) was not
significant, p=.33, participants were slightly more
accurate rejecting E-/R+ foils than they were rejecting
E+/R- foils, Cohen’s d=0.30. Therefore, unlike
Experiment 1, in this experiment participants more ably
encoded elements than relations.

General Discussion
The fact that children in these studies were highly
accurate regardless of whether distracter items
contained similar elements or similar relations to the
target they processed indicates that children were
processing not only elements, but relations as well. If
children were not processing relations, then they should
have had no preference for the target item over the
distracter item when test items shared the same
elements, but had different relations. The fact that
children were quite accurate in both experiments
regardless of the distracter item present at test indicates
that shared elements between stimuli was not the only
criterion children used to make a positive decision.
Instead, children used information from the relations as
well as from elements found in the stimuli.
The results of these experiments indicate that young
children are capable of readily processing relations in
an immediate recognition task where the involvement
of long-term memory is not necessary. That is, children
as young as 4-years-old are capable of processing
relations as well as elements, even when elements are
similar across test items. In fact, when memory
demands are low as they were in these experiments,
young children are able to handle relations (i.e., A-A-B
relations) which adults find difficult to manage in tasks
where processing beyond initial encoding and
comparison is required.
The fact that children were more accurate with the
more complex relation (i.e., A-A-B) than with the less
complex relation (i.e., A-B-A) appears to be a result of
simpler instructions in Experiment 2 rather than a true
advantage of asymmetrical over symmetrical relations.
A replication of Experiment 1 with the instructions used
in Experiment 2 is planned to determine if this is the
case. It is important to note, however, that the
instructions given in Experiment 1 should not have
biased children to reject one foil type more ably than
the others. This is important because looking at results
from the first experiment shows that children were
more accurate, not less so, when elements in the foil
and target matched, but the relation was different. In the
second experiment, the reverse was found. It is also
important to note that these differences were not
significant in either situation, although effect sizes were
non-negligible. The fact that children show this reversal
may indicate that under some conditions they process
relations more ably than elements, whereas under other
conditions they process elements more ably than

relations. If confirmed, this finding would represent
strong evidence that some relations are processed
independently from their constituent elements..
The length of time which children in these studies
had to process target and comparison items allowed
them to rely solely on working memory and did not
require recoding into a long-term memory
representation, nor did it necessitate any subsequent
long-term memory retrieval. While other studies
indicate a time and/or accuracy
advantage for
processing elements over relations, (Goldstone &
Medin, 1994; Ratcliff & McKoon, 1989; Sloutsky &
Yarlas, 2000), under these less demanding memory
conditions, children showed less privileged processing
of elements over relations than what is found in studies
with adults. The results of the current experiments
support findings by Sloutsky and Yarlas (2002) that the
large differences found for privileged processing of
elements over relations does not appear to be a
consequence of initial encoding, but rather appears to
occur later in processing.
Furthermore, these studies indicate that when young
children fail to process relations, it is not because they
are necessarily incapable of such processing, but rather,
they fail because memory demands are too great. This
is similar to what happens when adults fail to process
certain types of relations (Sloutsky & Yarlas, 2002).
When processing requirements are reduced such that a
working memory encoding is the main task demand,
young children spontaneously process relations as well
as elements. Further research is necessary to test the
idea that increased memory demands affect elements
and relations differentially, as well as to determine how
the different stages of processing contribute to elements
being processed faster and more accurately than
relations.

791

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
James S. McDonnell Foundation and the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

References
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). Time course
of comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition,208, 29-50.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational
similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1982). Speed and accuracy
in the processing of false statements about semantic
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 8, 16-36.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Yarlas, A. S. (2002). Processing of
information structure: Invariances in mental
representations of elements and relations across task
domains. Manuscript under review.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Yarlas, A. S. (2000). Problem
representation in novices and experts: Part 2.
Underlying processing mechanisms. In L. R.
Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 475-480). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Yarlas, A. S. (2001, April). Encoding and access of
elementary and relational features of arithmetic by
preadolescents. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for Research in Child
Development, Minneapolis.
Yarlas, A. S., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2001). Processing of
elements and relations of arithmetic equations by
children and preadolescents. Manuscript under review.

