UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
From Prototypes to Exemplars: Representational Shifts in a Probability Judgment Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9wz316c1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Nilsson, Hakan
Juslin, Peter
Olsson, Henrik

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

From Prototypes to Exemplars:
Representational Shifts in a Probability Judgment Task
Håkan Nilsson (hakan.nilsson@psy.umu.se)
Department of Psychology, Umeå University
SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden

Peter Juslin (peter.juslin@psy.umu.se)
Department of Psychology, Umeå University
SE-901 87, Umeå, Sweden

Henrik Olsson (henrik.olsson@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
SE-741 42, Uppsala, Sweden

Abstract
What information is used to make subjective probability judgments? In this study we test a hypothesis, grounded both in
research on categorization and developmental psychology,
proposing that when first confronted with an environment
people create prototypes and as a function of learning they
start to store concrete exemplars. The hypothesis implies that
this representational shift will appear later in an environment
with more complex stimuli. Therefore the hypothesis was
tested with both a standard stimulus sample and a complex
stimulus sample. The results indicates that more people rely
on prototypes at an early stage in learning than later on, and
that the shift towards more widespread exemplar memory reliance appears later in an environment with more complex
stimuli.

Introduction
People constantly find themselves in situations where they
have to choose one of several alternatives as, for example,
when a physician has to diagnose a patient. The physician
considers possible diseases and decides which disease is the
most likely. This involves assessment of the subjective
probability that the symptoms of the patient are symptoms
of a particular disease. Previous cognitive theories have
emphasized that probability judgments derive from relative
frequencies (e.g., Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, & Kleinbölting
1991; Juslin, 1994) or representativeness, commonly conceived of as the similarity between a probe and the category
prototype (Kahneman, Slovic, & Lichenstein, 1982). More
recent studies have, however, favored exemplar memory as
the basis for subjective probability (Juslin & Persson, 2002;
Juslin, Nilsson, & Olsson, 2001; Sieck & Yates, 2001; se
also Dougherty, Gettys, & Ogden, 1999).
Since the eighties one of the most prominent theories of
categorization has been exemplar theory (Medin & Schaffer;
1978; Nosofsky & Johansen, 2000). The theory states that
when categorizing a patient, the diagnosis is determined by
the similarity of the new patient to memory traces of the
individual exemplars belonging to different disease categories. Minda and Smith (2001), however, argue that the out-

standing success of exemplar theory, in part, derives from
the specific category structures used in most previous studies. They suggest that the reliance on exemplars is preceded
by a stage involving category prototypes. The basic assumption in their argument is that a “novice” bases the judgments
on the similarity to a category prototype, while an “expert”
relies on similarity to individual category exemplars. If
there is a difference between novices and pros, then the proposed shift should appear later in an environment with more
complex stimuli.
A shift from prototypes to exemplars is observed also in
research on early word acquisition. It is proposed that when
learning a word the child initially creates a prototypical representation that has the central features of the objects in the
natural category. The more similar an object is to the prototype for a word the more likely the child is to use that word
to name the object. New words (exemplars) for objects
within a category are learned and defined in relation to their
similarities and dissimilarities to the prototype (Barret,
1986).
If this representational shift reflects a primary aspect of
the biological function of the brain, it is reasonable to hypothesize that it is also a central aspect of the way adults
acquire knowledge. The goal of this study is to investigate
whether such a shift exists and if it appears later in an environment with more complex stimuli. That is with more features and more distinctive feature combination. To do this,
two conditions with the same category structure but with
different stimuli constitution (standard and complex) was
tested. We thus ask: Is there a representational shift from
reliance on the representativeness heuristic (i.e., prototype
similarity) to exemplar memory in probability judgment as
participants develop form “novices” to “pros” in the task?

Exemplar Theory
Both the exemplar and the prototype theory emanate from
the categorization literature and assume that responses are
based on the similarity between a new probe and category
representations (exemplars or prototypes) stored in memory.
Exemplar theories suggest that categories are composed of

868

exemplars of events or objects that we have encountered.
Not all events or objects are stored and the ones stored are
not necessarily complete representations of events or objects. The crucial point is that the representations are of concrete events or items and as a function of exposure to a specific environment the number of stored exemplars will increase. In contrast to most applications of exemplar and
prototype models, in this article these are used to model
subjective probability judgments rather than categorizations.
Consider the following; a physician is assigned to judge
the probability that a patient has got one of two diseases.
Exemplar theory states that to do this he or she retrieves
exemplars of previous patients that had disease A and of
previous patients that had disease B. He or she then compares the new patient to these exemplars and bases his or her
judgment upon the similarity to the exemplars of disease A
and B. The probability judgment will reflect the similarity to
the exemplars of disease A relative to the similarity to the
exemplars of disease B, but it will also reflect the frequency
of previous patient that have had either of the two diseases.
The exemplar model used in this paper is a simplified version of PROBEX (i.e., PRObabilities from EXamplares;
Juslin & Persson, 2002), which in turn modifies the original
context model (Medin & Shaffer, 1978) for application to
subjective probability judgment. The version used here
amounts to using the context model to predict subjective
probability judgments rather than response proportions. The
probability that a new item t belongs to category A is given
by Equation 1.
∑ S (t xi )c( xi ) ,
(1)
p ( A) = I
S
(
t
x
)
∑ i
I

Here xi are the retrieved exemplars (i = 1…I), c(xi) is determining witch category the retrieved exemplar belongs to
(c(xi)=1 if xi belongs to Category A and c(xi)=0 if xi belongs
to Category B), and S(t|xi) is the similarity between the item
and the retrieved exemplar. The similarity is computed by
the multiplicative similarity rule of the context model (Medin et al., 1978):
D
1 if t ⋅ j = x ⋅ j
S (t , x ) = ∏ d j , d j = 
,
j =1
s if t ⋅ j ≠ x ⋅ j

(2)

where D is the number of features (in this study D=4), dj is
1 if the values on feature j match and s if they mismatch.
The similarity value s is a free parameter that can take any
value between 0-1 and reflects the impact of a certain mismatching feature. Thus, the physician would compare new
patient (t) with old patients (xi) and judge the probability of
disease A on the basis of the similarity to the retrieved exemplars.

countered; e.g., Smith & Minda, 1998). According to the
representativeness heuristic the physician would compare a
new patient with the prototype for disease A patients with
the prototype for disease B patients and base the probability
judgment on the similarity to these two (Kahneman, Slovic,
& Tversky, 1982). The probability for an item t to belong to
category A is:
p( A) =

,

(3)

where P is the prototype, S is the similarity of t to P (S is
derived in accordance to Eq. 2). Thus with prototype theory p ( A) does not reflect frequency in the environment,
only the similarity to the most central features within a category.

“The Representational Shift”
Why would there be a representational shift from prototype
to exemplar reliance in a subjective probability judgment
task? In recent years results have emerged in categorization
research indicating a shift from abstract representation, either as rules (Johansen & Palmeri, 2002) or prototypes
(Smith & Minda, 1998), to exemplar representation. Given
the close relationship between the two fields, if the shift
exists in categorization it should appear also in subjective
probability judgment. A theoretical suggestion why such a
shift should appear is that humans tend to assume natural
categories to be linearly separable and decision boundaries
to be linear (Smith & Minda, 1998). In such an environment
it is not efficient to memorize separate exemplars at an early
stage. Instead it is preferable to abstract rules or prototypes
that catch central aspects of the category. It is not until this
category-knowledge is stored that it is possible to easily
discriminate the features within each exemplar.
If there is a shift the initial representation could either be
rules or prototypes. A suggestion that the initial representation is in the form of prototypes is provided in the field of
early lexical development. It is proposed that when learning
the meaning of a word, e.g. “bird”, the child will pair the
word with an object that has got the important feature of the
“bird-category”, a bird prototype. As a function of maturity
the child will first expand its usage of the word to objects in
the category that share many features with the prototype and
then on to objects of the category that share fewer features
with the prototype. Exemplars take over objects previously
represented by the prototype which decreases in importance
(Barret, 1986). This theory has been prosperous in explaining a wide range of frequently observed phenomena in research on lexical development (see Barret, 1996; Meints,
Plunkett, & Harris, 1999; Southgate & Meints, 2000).

Prototype Theory
Prototype theory also states that the response is based on the
similarity to a category member. The difference is that while
the categories in exemplar theory contain several members,
prototype theory suggests that each category is represented
by one member (the prototype). The prototype is an abstraction that reflects the most common features among members
of a category in the environment (or at least of the ones en-

S (t PA )
S (t PA ) + S (t PB )

Complexity
Minda and Smith (2001) criticized the designs normally
used in research on categorization, claiming that exemplar
theory is given such an advantage that a prototype-phase
never gets a chance to be discovered. They argue that the
category structures normally have featured categories with a

869

Category Structure
The core hypothesis that is tested in this paper is whether
there is a representational shift from reliance on prototypes
to reliance on exemplar memory in a probability judgment
task. Therefore a category structure designed to give both
quantitatively and qualitatively different predictions by the
two models was created. The category structure is shown in
Table 1, and it contains a total of 60 exemplars equally divided across two categories. There are 12 distinctive feature
combinations and each exemplar has got four binary features.
Table 1: The 12 distinctive exemplars and how frequently
they appear in each category.
Category A
Category B
Exemplar
Freq.
Exemplar
Freq.
1110
1
1110
5
1000
5
1000
1
1101
1
0010
1
1011
1
0100
1
0111
6
0001
6
1001
1
1001
1
0110
1
0110
1
1111
14
0000
14
The two categories were created around two well separated
prototypes (1111 for category A and 0000 for category B).
To enable a qualitative differentiation between the two
models there are two critical exemplars (1000 and 1110).

These are each very similar to one prototype but appears
more frequently in the other category. Thus, the prototype
model will predict the judgment for these exemplars to be
based on the similarity to the prototype whereas PROBEX
predicts that the judgment will be based on the similarity
and frequency of exemplars in the two categories. The a
priori predictions are presented in Figure 1. The interaction
in Figure 1 is valid as long as s<.3, with s>.3 the prediction
of the prototype model for feature combination 1110 will
always be higher than the prediction by PROBEX, and vice
versa for feature combination 1000.
1
0,8
0,6
P(A)

few low-dimensional stimuli, and that this relative simplicity gives an incitement for exemplar storage.
It is no bold proposition that real-world categories are
normally much more complex than categories in experimental settings (the control of variables is no less than the raison
d´êtere of experiments), and if the success of the exemplar
theory is due to simplicity in experimental categories then
that would be an important finding. In real-world categories
the same feature may have a wide range of appearances, e.g.
all humans have eyes but they differ in color and size. Yamauchi and Markman (2000) have shown that if each feature in a standard categorization task (as in e.g. Minda &
Smith 2001; or Medin & Shaffer, 1978) is given multiple
levels the difficulties of learning increases severely.
In order to examine the effect of an increase in stimulus
complexity we propose a combination of the arguments by
Minda and Smith (2001) and the findings of Yamauchi and
Markman (2000). As mentioned, the previous authors argue
that a more complex category structure with more features
and more exemplars will give the prototype-phase a more
fair chance of being discovered. By increasing the complexity in the same manner as in Yamauchi and Markman
(2000), by introducing multiple feature-levels, this is
achieved. In the eyes of the participant the number of features will increase which will increase the number of distinctive exemplars.

0,4
0,2
0
1110

1000

Critical exem plar

Figure 1: Predictions by PROBEX (white squares) and the
prototype model (black squares) for the two critical exemplars (the predictions are calculated with s=0).
To evaluate the claim that in a more complex environment
people will rely on prototypes for a longer period, there was
one standard stimulus condition and one complex stimulus
condition. In both conditions the same category structure is
used (Table 1). In the standard condition the stimuli were
constituted as they traditionally have been in standard categorization tasks, that is few in number and with a low
amount of features. In the complex condition stimuli was
presented as in Yamauchi and Markman (2000), that is with
multiple levels (six) of each feature, three corresponding to
a 1 in Table 1 and three corresponding to a 0 in Table 1.
This makes it possible to create 81 (3*3*3*3) unique stimuli
equivalent to each of the 12 distinctive exemplars in Table
1. In other words, even if the complex condition is based on
the same category structure as the standard condition the
environment is more complex since the same stimuli never
reappear.

Method
Participants
Thirty undergraduate students (15 men & 15 women) in the
age of 19 to 28 (average age = 23) participated. The participants were paid between 50-100 SEK depending on how
well their probability judgments were calibrated.

Materials and Procedure
The experiment was carried out on a PC-compatible computer. The stimuli used were subspecies of the sometimes

870

poisonous (but fictive) Deathbug (see Figure 2). There were
12 distinctive four-featured subspecies in the standard condition (see Table 1), the features were “leg length and colour” (long light grey vs. short dark grey), “colour and pattern on posterior body” (no pattern on a green body vs.
white dots on brown body), “nose length and colour” (long
grey vs. short blue), and “dots or no dots on anterior body”
(red dots on beige surface vs. no dots on beige surface). The
total number of stimuli in Table 1 (60) was presented four
times (creating four blocks).
In the complex condition there were 240 distinctive subspecies (equivalent to the 60 exemplars in Table 1 presented
four times). The core features (leg length, nose length, dots
or no dots, and posterior body pattern) were identical to
those in the standard condition but the color of the body
parts had three levels of strength (e.g. the short nose could
be light blue, standard blue or dark blue). To further increase the uniqueness of each presented bug they were haphazardly spray painted on the back and each presentation
was rotated (there were 62 possible positions, with a maximum rotation of 90 degrees in each direction).

ences across all four blocks are presented in Figure 3. Positive values indicates that the judgments have been based on
similarity to prototypes while negative values indicate that
the judgments have been made on the basis of similarity to
stored exemplars.
In both conditions, data in Block 1 suggests that the early
judgments were based on similarity to prototypes. Data in
the later blocks implies that an increasing number of participants base their judgment on similarity to stored exemplars when knowledge increases. In other words, there is an
overall trend towards more widespread reliance on exemplars in both conditions. The data in Block 4, however, indicates that the majority of the participants in the complex
condition still base their judgments on prototype similarity
while the majority of the participants in the standard condition base their judgment on exemplar similarity. Thus, the
data in Figure 3 support the hypothesis of a representational
shift as a function of learning and that this shift appears later
in a more complex environment.
0,2

Difference

0,1
0
-0,1
-0,2

Figure 2: An example of one four-featured subspecies of the
Deathbug, as presented to the participants.

-0,3
B1

Design and procedure
The design was a 2*2 mixed design with probability judgments as dependent variable and stimulus complexity (two
levels, between-subjects) and training (four blocks, withinsubjects) as independent variables.
The participants were presented with subspecies as the
one in Figure 2. Initially they were to judge whether this
particular subspecies was dangerous or not (category A or B
in Table 1). When a decision had been made the participants
judged, on a scale from 50-100%, how confident they were
that it was dangerous/not dangerous (this judgment depended on the previous answer). Following each of these
judgments the participants received feedback on the actual
dangerousness of the previously judged subspecies (this
feedback was given when the subspecies was still present on
the screen).
In both conditions the participants encountered 240 bugs.
The order in which they were presented was randomized
across the participants.

Results
Qualitative fit. As mentioned, there were two critical exemplars for which the two models a priori provided contradictory predictions (see Figure 1). The mean probability
assessment of the critical exemplar 1000 was subtracted
from the mean probability assessment of 1110. The differ-

B2

B3

B4

Block

Figure 3: The mean probability assessment for critical exemplar 1000 subtracted from the mean probability assessment for critical exemplar 1110 for both conditions (standard condition = white triangles and the complex condition
= black squares) across all for blocks.
Quantitative fit. To examine the quantitative fit of the
models they were fitted to the data for all 12 exemplars (remember that also in the complex condition there were only
12 distinctive feature combinations) from each individual
participant with Root mean Square Deviation (RMSD) as
error function. The models were fitted with one s-value for
all four features in order to minimize possible problems of
over fitting.
The mean of the individual RMSD of PROBEX was subtracted from the mean individual RMSD of the prototype
model; this is illustrated in Figure 4.
PROBEX shows better fit in all blocks (except for Block
1 in the complex condition). This is in part at contrast with
the findings in Figure 3. However, the overall trend in Figure 4 is equivalent to the trend in Figure 3, hence it indicates
that there is a shift towards more extensive exemplar reliance. Data in Figure 4 indicate a mix of strategies among
the participants, some relying on prototypes and some on

871

exemplars, and that relatively more people rely on protypical representations early on and relatively more people rely
on exemplar representation at a later stage.

Difference in RMSD

0,01
0
-0,01
-0,02
-0,03
-0,04
B1

B2

B3

B4

Block

Figure 4: Mean RMSD for PROBEX subtracted from the
mean RMSD for the prototype model for both conditions
across all blocks, when the models were fitted to individual
data. (standard condition = white triangles and the complex
condition = black squares) across all for blocks.
Both data in Figure 3 and 4 indicate that if a shift exists, it
appears much later in the complex condition than in the
standard condition. An ANOVA with Block and Condition
as independent variables and RMSD as dependent variable
was preformed to examine if there were a significant difference between the two conditions. No interaction effect was
found (F3,84=2.015, p=.12), but as hypothesized both main
effects were significant (Block: F3,84=3.105, p=.03; Condition: F1,28=7.502, p=.01). This further supports the hypothesis that as knowledge increase more and more participants
rely on exemplar representation and that the representational
shift appears later in an environment with more complex
stimuli.
To examine if the findings above was due to increased
knowledge, an ANOVA with proportion correct classifications as dependent variable and block and condition as independent variables was performed. Both main effects and the
interaction effect were significant (Block: F3,84=15.95,
p<.001; Condition: F1,28=3018.3, p<.001; interaction
F3,84=3.115, p=.03). Thus, the knowledge had increased
from Block 1 to Block 4 and the participants in the standard
condition stored information at a higher rate than did those
in the complex condition.
In sum, throughout data there is a trend from reliance on
prototypes towards reliance on exemplar as a function of
learning, indicating that there is a representational shift.
Further more this shift appears later in a more complex environment.

Discussion
Does a representational shift from prototypes to exemplars
appear in a subjective probability judgment task? There
were two prime reasons why we raised this question. First,

in the recent categorization literature there is growing support for a shift with training from abstract knowledge to
exemplars (Johansen & Palmeri, 2002; Minda & Smith,
2001). Secondly, a theory of a shift from prototypes to exemplars has been prominent during many years in developmental psychology (Barret, 1996; Southgate & Meints,
2000; Meints et. al., 1999).
If this representational shift exists, what determines when
it appears? A theory was tested that hypothesized that the
complexity of the environment decides the temporal location of the shift.
Both the qualitative and the quantitative analyses provides
support for the hypothesis that a representational shift, from
prototypes to exemplars, takes place as a function of learning. Throughout data there is a trend from relative support
for the prototype model to relative support for PROBEX as
a function of learning.
A difference between the two conditions was found. Participants in the complex condition appeared to rely on prototypical representation for a longer period. Since the knowledge in the complex condition was poorer it is reasonable to
believe that the delayed shift was due to this inferiority in
stored information.
Therefore, we conclude that the data support the hypothesis of a representational shift from reliance on prototype
similarity to reliance on exemplar similarity in a probability
judgment task as a person develops from “novice” to “pro”.
Furthermore, we conclude that, maybe not surprisingly, it
takes more training to become pro in a complex environment than in a simple.
Presuming that this shift is a core element in the way the
human brain develops an understanding of the world, a sensible (subconscious) strategy is to build up information
about what is common to a phenomenon (category). This
information can then be used to differentiate between the
members within each group. In other words, the exemplars
are placed in a context that is necessary to differentiate them
from other exemplars of the same category. In the case of
the bugs, a prototype containing the central features among
dangerous bugs is created and the exemplars are stored in
relation to this prototype so that the idiosyncratic features of
the exemplars are high lightened. If natural categories
mainly are linear separable this is a more efficient strategy
than trying to store individual exemplars at an early stage
since it separates individual and category features: it is an
ecologically plausible tactic.
Even if the results here suggest that shifts from prototype
to exemplar representations occur in this task there are some
caveats to this interpretation. First, it might be possible for a
more complex version of the exemplar model to account for
early performance in this task. For example, Nosofsky and
Zaki (2002) argued that the exemplar model could account
for the data in Minda and Smith (2001) better than a prototype model if the model is supplemented with a response
scaling mechanism that already is implicit in the prototype
model. To investigate this possibility, however, one must
take into consideration the flexibility of the models. The
best strategy would be to compare the models with fit indexes that take into consideration both the number of parameters and their functional form (Pitt, Myung, & Zhang,

872

2002). Second, the results in Johansen and Palmeri (2002)
suggest that the shift is from simple rule following to exemplar based processing. The category structures in Johansen
and Palmeri, however, were quite different from the one
used here and it is therefore difficult to compare the results
(i.e., in Johansen & Palmeri, 2002, there were few unique
training exemplars and the task involved categorization)
However, Johansen and Palmeri faces one problem, and that
is to explain the support of an initial prototype-phase found
in research on preverbal-children (e.g. Southgate et al,
2000). The findings by Johansen and Palmeri raises the
question if there initially is a qualitatively difference in
category representation between children and adults.
As discussed earlier, real world categories are more complex than experimental categories. When the complexity of
the stimulus was increased so was the support for the shift
hypothesizes. But, PROBEX did explain data best in the
quantitative analyses also in the complex stimulus condition
in al least Block 2-4. One interpretation of this could be that
the stimulus was not complex enough. In order to be able to
draw more secured conclusions the hypothesis has to be
evaluated using even more complex stimulus.

Acknowledgments
The Swedish Research Council supported this research. We
are grateful to Morgan Renman for his assistance in conducting the experiment.

References
Barret, M. (1986). Early semantic representation and early
word usage. In S. A. Kuczaj II & M. D. Barret (Eds.). The
development of word meaning (pp. 39-67). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Barret, M. (1996). Early lexical development. In Fletcher, P.
and MacWhinney, B. (eds.), The Handbook of Child
Language (pp. 362-392). Oxford: Blackwell.
Dougherty, M. R. P., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999)
MINERVA-DM: A memory process model for judgments
of likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180-209.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbölting, H. (1991).
Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian theory of
confidence. Psycological Review, 98, 506-528.
Johansen, M. K., & Palmeri, T. J. (2002). Are there
representational shifts during category learning?
Cognitive Psychology, 45, 482-553.
Juslin, P. (1994). The overconfidence phenomenon as a
consequence of informal experimenter-guided selection of
almanac items. Organizational Behaviour and Human
Decision Processes, 57, 226-246.
Juslin, P., Nilsson, H., & Olsson, H. (2001). Where do
probability judgments come from? Evidence for
similarity-graded probability. In J. Moore & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 471476). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Juslin, P., & Persson, M. (2002). PROBabilities from EXemplars (PROBEX): A “lazy” algorithm for probabilistic
inference from generic knowledge. Cognitive Science, 26,
563-607.

Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.) (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristic and biases. New
York: Cambridge University Press
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Meints, K., Plunkett, K., & Harris, P. (1999). When does an
ostrich become a bird? The role of typicality in early word
comprehension. Developmental Psychology, 35, 10721078.
Minda, P. J., & Smith, J. D. (2001). Prototypes in category
learning: The effects of category size, category structure,
and stimulus complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 775-799.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Johansen M. K. (2000). Exemplarbased accounts of ”multiple-system” phenomena in perceptual categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
7, 375-402.
Nosofsky, R M., & Zaki, S. R. (2002). Exemplar and prototype models revisited: Response strategies, selective attention, and stimulus generalization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
28, 924-940.
Pitt, M. A., Myung, I. J., & Zhang, S. B. (2002). Toward a
method of selecting among computational models of cognition. Psychological Review, 109, 472-491.
Sieck, W. R., & Yates, J. F. (2001). Overconfidence effects
in category learning: A comparison of connectionist and
exemplar memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 10031021.
Smith, J. D., & Minda, J. P. (1998). Prototype in the mist:
The early epochs of category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1411-1436.
Southgate, V., & Meints, K. (2000). Typicality, naming, and
category membership in young children. Cognitive
Linguistic, 11, 5-16.
Yamauchi, T. & Markman, A.B. (2000). Learning categories composed of varying instances: The effect of classification inference, and structural alignment. Memory and
Cognition, 28, 64-78

873

