UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Instructional Focus Does Not Effect Implicit Pattern Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04x54644

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Ash, Ivan K.
Nokes, Timothy J.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Instructional Focus Does Not Effect Implicit Pattern Learning
Ivan K. Ash (iash1@uic.edu)
Timothy J. Nokes (tnokes@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology (M/C 285)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607-7513 U.S.A.

Abstract
Participants performed a dual-component training procedure that
combined a serial reaction time task and an artificial grammar
learning task under two instructional conditions. Participants given
memory-focused instructions performed at the same level as
participants given motor-focused instructions on the serial reaction
time test and grammar sorting task. Both groups performed better
than a control (no training) group. Results suggest that only a
minimal amount of attentional focus on aspects of the stimuli
relevant to the pattern is needed to acquire implicit pattern
knowledge.

Introduction
Understanding and modeling the processes of human
learning, memory, and cognition is the primary focus of
much of research in cognitive science. A large amount of
this research has focused on task performance after the
effortful and intentional study of material. Subjects in these
situations are aware of the relevance of the material they are
learning (such as word lists, or texts) even if they are not
aware of the fact that they are going to be tested on the
material. Participants consciously devote attention to the
learning stimuli and are aware of the knowledge they have
acquired. When an individuals’ performance on the testing
task is improved after the learning task, it is usually due to
them applying their new knowledge to this task. Such
learning and its resulting knowledge are often referred to as
explicit learning and knowledge (Seger, 1994).
However, it appears that consciously attending to
materials or stimuli is not the only method by which humans
are able to acquire and use knowledge. It has been shown
that people can make judgments and increase task
performance based on knowledge acquired without
consciously attending to the relevant information during the
learning phase, or being aware that any knowledge was
acquired (e.g. Reber, 1967; Nissen & Bullemer 1987). This
type of learning and its resulting knowledge are referred to
as implicit learning and knowledge.
The classic example of an implicit learning paradigm is
Reber’s (1967) artificial grammar study. In this study
subjects were asked to memorize strings of letters that were
constructed using a finite-state grammar. This grammar
involved a set of rules by which a sequence of letter strings
was constructed. After memorizing a number of letter
strings in sets of three, participants were informed that the
strings were constructed using a set of grammar rules.

103

Subjects were given an unexpected test in which they were
presented strings constructed using the grammar and
random strings, and asked to indicate whether the string was
constructed following the same rules as the studied list or
not. It was found that subjects could identify the
grammatical strings at better than chance levels even though
most were unable to verbalize any of their decision criteria
or accurately state the grammar rules. This study suggested
that there could be a distinction between the learning
mechanisms involved in explicit tasks and implicit tasks,
which involves learning complex concepts without explicit
knowledge of the rules.
Reber’s (1967) original experiment has led to a growth in
the study of implicit learning. In a recent review, Seger
(1994) suggested three criteria by which to judge whether a
learning task should be considered as implicit. The first
criterion is that the knowledge that is gained in the task is
not fully conscious to the learner. In other words,
participants are unable to provide a full or accurate account
of what they have learned and do not realize that they have
learned anything. The second criterion is that the learned
information or relationships are more complex than simple
frequency counts or associations. This does not imply that
implicit learning cannot take place in those types of tasks,
just that in order to separate implicit learning from very
rudimentary automatic explicit learning, more complex
stimuli must be used. The final criterion is that the
knowledge acquired in implicit learning does not come from
conscious processes such as hypothesis testing, but is
acquired incidentally by just processing the material. This is
to say that just because in retrospect subjects may say that
they noticed patterns in the material does not mean that
implicit learning did not occur. The more important aspect
is the process by which this knowledge came about.
Nissen and Bullemer’s (1987) serial reaction time
experiments are another classic example of an implicit
learning paradigm. In these experiments subjects were asked
to tap a series of four keys in response to the spatial position
of an asterisk on a visual display. The order of the positions
was either random or a complex repeating sequence. It was
found that subjects who practiced in the sequenced
condition had faster reaction times in responding to a spatial
position than those in the random condition. These results
showed that even though subjects were unaware of the
sequential nature of the task they were still able to “learn”
the sequence. This learning was reflected in the shorter
reaction times.

Nissen and Bullemer (1987) offered further evidence that
this task involved a different type of learning than
traditional explicit learning tasks. In this experiment they
gave the serial reaction time task to a sample of Korsakaff
Syndrome patients who had severely impaired declarative
memory. These patients showed the same performance on
the sequenced series task as the non-patient group. The fact
that these patients showed faster reaction times on
sequenced tasks after practice, even though many were
unable to remember the practice session itself, shows that
awareness is not necessary for learning in these types of
tasks. The main conclusion from the implicit learning
research is that people seem be able to detect abstract
patterns in material without having to explicitly, consciously
search for such patterns.
With substantial support that there are mental processes in
which individuals are able to extract and use abstract
information without awareness, the focus of implicit
learning research has begun to move away from simply
attempting to verify the existence of the phenomena. More
researchers have begun to look at the role attention plays in
implicit learning and have been trying to discover the nature
and properties of the processes involved. For example,
Deines, Broadbent, and Berry (1991) had subjects produce
random digits while memorizing artificial grammar strings.
It was shown that this divided attention task interfered with
subjects’ ability to make grammatical judgments between
random and structured strings. It was postulated that both
the memorization of the strings and random digit production
both involved the phonological loop, and therefore not
enough attentional resources could be devoted to the strings
to extract the pattern.
Divided attention procedures have also been conducted in
the serial position tasks. Nissen and Bullemer (1987) added
a tone counting task to the original position location tasks.
They found that this eliminated reaction time advantages on
the sequenced trials when compared to the random trials.
Here as well, it was shown that an attentionally demanding
task interferes with implicit learning. This suggests that
while awareness is not necessary in incidental learning
attention is. It appears that materials must be perceived,
encoded, and perhaps processed in order for patterns to be
extracted.
Separating the concepts of attention and awareness is a
difficult process. Curran and Keele (1993) conducted a
group of experiments using the serial reaction time task and
the tone counting task to separate the effects of attention
from those of awareness. In one experiment they informed
one group of participants about the existence of the pattern
of positions and did not inform another group. After a
training period they found that both groups showed faster
reaction times on sequenced trials as opposed to random
trials. They also found that the aware group had faster
reaction times on sequenced trials than the unaware group.
When both trained groups then performed the serial reaction
task while completing a tone counting task, the sequenced
trial performance was still faster than the random trial

104

performance. However, the aware group performed the
same as the unaware group in the dual task situation. These
results suggest that explicit and implicit learning can happen
in parallel. In situations in which explicit resources are
taxed, implicit knowledge can still be detected.
Salidas, Willingham, and Gabrieli (2000) created a serial
reaction time task to explore the separation between
attention and awareness. This procedure was similar to the
original serial reaction task, only the stimuli were four
colored boxes that corresponded to the keys. Participants
were informed that when the boxes appeared in red they
followed a certain sequence. They were told that when the
boxes appeared in blue they were randomly sequenced.
Unknown to the subjects, certain trials in blue actually
followed a second sequence. This allowed the researchers to
separate explicit (red) from implicit (blue) learning.
After the training period subjects were tested on trials that
were either the explicit sequence in red, the explicit
sequence in blue, the implicit sequence in blue, or a random
sequence in blue. The results revealed that the explicit
sequence in red led to the shortest reaction times. The more
unexpected finding was that the performance on the second
implicit sequence was equal to the explicit sequence when it
was presented in blue, and both were faster than reaction
times on random sequences.
These findings were backed up by fMRI results that
showed activation in the primary motor cortex for the
implicit sequence and the explicit sequence when presented
in blue. The fMRI results showed similar activation in the
primary motor cortex for the explicit sequence when
presented in red, with added activation in areas of the
prefrontal cortex. These results are intriguing for several
reasons. First, they are powerful support that explicit and
implicit learning can proceed in parallel. The fact that the
performance levels on the explicitly learned sequence
dropped down to the implicit level when the explicit cue
was removed is clear support for this parallel learning. The
second intriguing result is that subjects were able to
implicitly learn two separate sequences. This may suggest
that when attention paid to the different stimuli is equal,
people are capable of learning multiple patterns implicitly.
This would mean that implicit learning might not follow the
same rules of interference as explicit learning. In explicit
tasks, the learning of multiple associations of concepts at
once will cause lower performance on tasks involving those
concepts (e.g., the fan effect). This may not be the case in
implicit learning.
Although Salidas et al.’s (2000) serial reaction time
design suggests that people can implicitly learn multiple
patterns at once, there are some limits to this paradigm.
First, subjects are exposed to only one pattern per trial.
Consequently, it cannot truly be inferred that people are
simultaneously learning multiple patterns. Second, while
this paradigm does allow for the manipulation of the
subject’s level of awareness, it does not allow one to
manipulate the amount of attention paid to the different
implicit patterns. Due to these facts, this experimental

approach is not the ideal way to investigate how multiple
implicit patterns are processed and the role that attention
plays in implicit learning.
In order to investigate an individual’s ability to process
multiple patterns, one must create an implicit learning task
in which two separate patterns must be processed
simultaneously. Another key aspect of an effective task is
that the amount of attention paid to each pattern must be
able to be manipulated without having to manipulate the
subject’s awareness of the existence of either pattern. The
present study introduces an implicit learning procedure that
allows for the systematic investigation of the role of
consciously focused attention on implicit learning of
multiple patterns.
Our methodology combines the artificial grammar
procedure with the serial reaction time task. In this design,
strings of letters were presented in a visual display in one of
four spatial locations. Subjects were assigned to one of two
learning conditions. The memory focused learning condition
instructed participants to focus on memorizing the letter
strings while reacting to the screen locations as the
secondary task. It was presumed that the subjects would
devote more attention to the grammar stimuli in this
condition. In the motor focused learning condition
participants were instructed to focus on reacting to the
screen locations as quickly as possible and reading the letter
strings as a secondary task. This would presumably cause
the subject to devote more attention to the reaction time
task. After training, subjects were given an unexpected test
of their ability to make judgments of the grammaticality of
new strings made using the same grammar rules. They were
also tested on serial reaction time on sequenced trials and
random trials. The training groups were compared to a no
training control group that only completed the testing phase.
By using this approach we investigated what role
consciously focused attention plays in implicit learning.

Methods
Participants
Sixty-one participants (memory n = 28, motor n = 18,
control n = 15) from the Subject Pool at the University of
Illinois at Chicago participated in the study as part of a
course requirement in their introductory psychology class.

Materials and Apparatus
All material was presented on a microcomputer with a
SVGA monitor.
The grammar strings were constructed using a finite-state
grammar used by Reber (see Reber, 1967 for details). This
particular grammar generates 43 permissible letter
sequences of three to eight letters in length, which were
used as the structured material. Fifteen of the 43
grammatical strings were selected for the learning phase of
the experiment.

105

The strings were presented as the stimuli in the serial
reaction task. The serial reaction time task was similar to the
task used by Nissen and Bullemer (1987). The stimulus
appeared in one of four quadrants of the screen. Each
stimulus remained on the screen for two seconds regardless
of how quickly the subject reacted, to equate exposure time.
The positions on the screen corresponded to four keys
matching the positions. Participants were assigned to one of
six different sequences to control for any effect of sequence
order. The sequences consisted of six elements. Two of the
four possible positions were repeated while the other two
positions appeared only once. The four spatial positions
from left to right, top to bottom were labeled 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The six sequences were: 1-2-3-2-4-3, 1-2-3-1-3-4,1-4-3-1-32, 1-4-2-3-1-2, 1-3-2-4-1-2, and 4-2-3-2-1-3 (Curran &
Keele, 1993). The training session consisted 60 repetitions
of the six-location sequence for a total of 360 learning trials.
Test Materials. The test letter strings either were new
strings constructed using the same grammar as the training
strings, or were constructed with rules that violated the
grammar. The serial position test presented strings of
asterisks in place of the grammar strings used in the training
materials. The test consisted of two portions. The sequenced
portions presented the asterisks in serial locations that
followed the pattern of the training materials. The random
portion presented the asterisks in serial locations that were
randomly determined.

Procedure
Participants were assigned to one of three training groups,
memory focused, motor focused, and no training control.
The experiment involved two phases. Memory and motor
focused groups first completed a learning phase. All groups
then completed a testing phase. Prior to beginning the
experiment training group subjects were given instructions
for their learning condition. All other aspects of the
experiment were the same for both training groups.
Instructions for memory focused group:
In this study you will be asked to complete a memory
task. A series of letter strings (such as XWSTV) will
appear in various locations on the computer screen. Your
task is to memorize these letter strings. Each string will
only appear on the screen for a short period of time, so
please concentrate on memorizing each string as it
appears. After the training session you will be tested for
your memory of these strings.
During this time you will also be asked to respond to the
location of the string by hitting one of the four
corresponding keys on the keyboard. Please respond to
each location as quickly as possible without sacrificing
accuracy. As you do this remember to read each string
with the intent of learning it for the later recognition test.

Reaction Time (ms)

Memory

1000

Motor
800
600
400
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

Training Block
Figure 1: The effect of instructional focus on learning trial reaction times.
Instructions for motor focused group:
In this study you will be asked to a complete motor skills
task. A series of letter strings (such as XWSTV) will
appear in various locations on the computer screen. Your
task is to respond to the location of the string by hitting
one of the four corresponding keys on the keyboard.
Please respond to each location as quickly as possible
without sacrificing accuracy. After the training session
you will be tested for how quickly your can respond to
various locations on the screen.
During this time you will also be asked to read each letter
string. Each string will only appear on the screen for a
short period of time. So, be sure to attend to and read each
string as it appears. As you do this remember to respond
to the location of the string as quickly as possible with the
intent of improving speed and accuracy for a motor skills
test.
Learning Phase. For each trial, one of the fifteen training
grammar strings was presented in one of the four serial
locations. The order of screen locations followed one of the
six sequenced patterns. Participants responded to the
location by pressing the key that corresponded to the
location. Participants were first given a fifteen trial warm-up
to familiarize them with the task. Then the participants
completed the learning phase. The learning phase consisted
of 15 blocks. Each block consisted of four repetitions of the
six-location pattern. In total participants were presented
with 360 trials (60 repetitions of the location pattern, 24
presentations of each grammar string). The total learning
phase took approximately 12 minutes. The reaction times to
the spatial locations were recorded during the learning phase
to assess the effects of instructional manipulation.
Test Phase. The grammar-sorting task was identical to the
methods used by Reber (1976). Subjects were informed that
the letter strings presented in the learning phase had been
constructed using a set of rules. Twenty-two of the
remaining grammatical items not used in the learning phase
were randomly mixed with 22 non-grammatical strings. The
letter strings were presented one at a time in the center of
the screen. Each of the 44 items was presented twice for

106

grammaticality judgments. This resulted in a total of 88
responses. The dependent measure was the number of
correctly sorted strings.
The serial reaction time test phase consisted of a
sequenced block and a random block. The sequenced block
followed the same serial location pattern as the training
phase. Participants received 10 repetitions of the sixlocation sequence. For the random block participants
received 60 trials for which the screen location was
randomly determined. Participants responded by pressing
the key that corresponded to the screen location. The
dependent measure was the average reaction time on
sequenced and random blocks.

Results
Learning Phase
Learning Trial Reaction Times. In order to investigate the
effects of instructional focus on serial position learning rate
a 2 instructional focus (motor vs. memory) X 15 training
block mixed design analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
conducted on average location reaction times. Results
revealed a main effect of instructional focus, F (1, 43) =
10.84, MSE = 632,710.47, p < .001. There was also a main
effect of training block, F (14, 602) = 2.91, MSE =
33,361.77, p < .001. These results were best explained by
the significant instructional focus X training block
interaction, F (14, 602) = 3.22, MSE = 33,361.77, p < .001
(see Figure 1). Follow-up analysis on the memory focused
instruction group revealed a simple main effect of training
block, F (14, 350) = 4.42, MSE = 31,775.42, p < .001. A
linear trend analysis revealed a linear decrease in reaction
times across training blocks F (1, 25) = 8.99, MSE =
128,306.70, p < .01. Follow-up analysis on the motor
focused instruction group revealed a simple main effect of
training block, F (14, 252) = 2.10, MSE = 35,565.02, p <
.05. In contrast to the memory focused group, the motor
focused group did not exhibit a significant linear decrease in
reaction times, F (1, 18) = 1.57, ns.

Testing Phase

Discussion

70
60
50
40
30
memory
focused

motor
focused

no training

Figure 2: The effect of training group on grammar
sorting.
Serial Reaction Time Task. In order to investigate the
effects of training group (motor-focused, memory-focused,
no training) on serial position learning a 3 training group X
2 test (sequenced vs. random) mixed design ANOVA was
conducted on mean reaction times. Analysis revealed a main
effect of test, F (1, 58) = 37.73, MSE = 7,918.17, p < .001.
Overall reaction times were faster on the sequenced block
(M = 433.49; SD = 140.15) than on the random block (M =
548.19; SD = 133.60). Analysis also revealed a training
group X test interaction, F (2, 58) = 4.20, MSE = 7,918.17,
p < .05 (see Figure 3). Follow-up analyses for sequenced
block revealed a simple main effect of training group, F (2,
58) = 4.57, MSE = 7,918.17, p < .05. Analyses revealed no
difference between memory and motor focused instruction
groups on sequenced block reaction times, t (44) < 1.
However, analyses did reveal faster reaction times for the
memory and motor groups when compared to the no
training group (memory vs. no training, t (41) = -3.92, p <
.001; motor vs. no training, t (31) = -1.73, p < .05). Followup analyses for the random block revealed no simple main
effect of training group, F (2, 58) < 1.

107

We argued that in order to investigate an individual’s ability
to process multiple patterns, one must create an implicit
learning task in which two separate patterns must be
processed simultaneously. Also the amount of attention paid
to each pattern must be able to be manipulated without
having to manipulate the subject’s awareness of the
existence of either pattern. The present study introduced an
implicit learning procedure that allowed for the systematic
investigation of the role of consciously focused attention on
implicit learning outcomes.
This design combined the artificial grammar procedure
with the serial reaction time task. Three types of evidence
of implicit learning can be examined in this design; learning
trial reaction times, grammar-sorting performance, and
serial reaction time task performance.
The learning trial reaction times provide evidence that
instructional focus effected location response behavior
during the learning phase. Recall that both training groups
received the exact same dual-component stimuli (i.e.,
grammar strings and sequenced locations). The difference
between the training groups was the instructional focus. The
memory focused instructions were designed to focus
participants’ attention on memorizing the grammar strings
while making identifying screen locations a secondary task.
The motor focused instructions were designed to focus
participants’ attention on reacting as quickly as possible to
the screen locations while making reading the grammar
strings the secondary task. Those in the memory focused
group showed a linear decrease in reaction times to screen
locations throughout the training task. On the other hand the
motor focused group showed a sudden decrease in reaction
times that remained constant through the rest of the training
Sequenced Block
Random Block
600

reaction time (ms)

Percent Correctly Sorted

Grammar-Sorting Task. In order to investigate the effects
of training group (motor-focused, memory-focused, and no
training) on implicit grammar learning, a one-way ANOVA
was conducted on the percentage of correctly sorted strings.
Results revealed a significant effect of training group, F (2,
58) = 9.03, MSE = 50.64, p < .001 (see Figure 2). Post hoc
analyses revealed no difference in sorting performance
between the motor and memory focused groups, F < 1.
However, both motor and memory focused performed
significantly better than the no training group at the sorting
task (motor vs. no training F (2, 58) = 12.21, MSE = 50.64,
p < .001, memory vs. no training F (2, 58) = 16.24, MSE =
50.64, p < .001).

500
400
300
200
100
memory
focused

motor no training
focused

Figure 3: Effect of training group on reaction
time on sequenced and random blocks.

task. This sudden drop in reaction times indicates that the
motor focused instructions caused participants to attend
more to the serial position aspect of the dual-component
stimuli. Unfortunately the nature of the artificial grammar
learning paradigm does not enable a complementary
measure of on-line learning performance. Therefore, we
have no similar manipulation check of the effects of
instructional focus on grammar acquisition during the
learning phase.
The behavioral differences observed during the learning
phase did not translate into differential performance during
the testing phase. On the grammar sorting task both training
groups showed evidence of grammar acquisition above the
no training control group. However, instructional focus did
not lead to differences in grammar sorting performance
between training groups. This result is surprising, both
common sense and prior research in explicit learning (e.g.,
transfer appropriate processing, Morris, Bransford, &
Franks, 1977) would suggest that focusing attention on the
memorization of grammar strings should lead to a higher
level of pattern learning.
The behavioral differences of the learning phase also did
not transfer to differences in serial reaction time
performance. Once again both training groups showed
evidence of location pattern learning above the no training
control group. However, no differences were detected
between instructional focus groups. Once again, it would
seem (and the learning results suggested) that focusing
attention on reacting to the spatial locations should have led
to superior location pattern learning.
In sum, our study suggests that individuals are able to
implicitly extract multiple patterns from this type of dualcomponent stimuli. In addition, our manipulations of
attentional focus did not have any effect on the nature or
magnitude of this learning. This leads us to postulate that
any type of processing or attentional focus above the point
of apprehension may be enough to lead to implicit pattern
learning.
Prior work in cognitive science has generally investigated
explicit learning and the application of explicit knowledge
on complex tasks. However, there is growing experimental
evidence that explicit and implicit learning can take place in
parallel (e.g., Curran & Keele, 1993; Willingham &
Goedert-Eschmann, 1999). It has also been shown that
implicit knowledge can affect task performance in situations
in which individuals are not using their relevant explicit
knowledge on the task. In the present study we showed that
multiple implicit patterns can be acquired from a single task
with minimal amounts of attention or mental processing
devoted to the relevant aspects of the stimuli.
Therefore in any learning situation, outcome measure
performance may be due to both the deliberate application
of declarative or procedural knowledge, and the incidental
application of implicit knowledge. Therefore in
methodologies where the learning stimuli contain repeating
or underlying structure or statistical patterns, performance
differences due to implicit knowledge acquisition must be

108

accounted for before one can make conclusions about the
effects of higher-level explicit knowledge. Therefore it is
important for researchers attempting to explain or model
any learning phenomena to consider the potential impact of
implicit learning in both the design of the learning
materials/situations and the interpretation of any learning
outcome results.

References
Berry, D. C., & Broadbent, D. E. (1984). On the relationship
between task performance and associated verbalizable
knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36A, 209-231.
Curran, T. & Keele, S. W. (1993). Attentional and
nonattentional forms of sequence learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19, 189-202.
Deines, Z., Broadbent, D. E., & Berry, D. C. (1991).
Implicit and explicit knowledge bases in artificial
grammar learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 875-887.
Knowlton, B. J., Ramus S. J., & Squire, L. R. (1992). Intact
artificial grammar learning in amnesia: Dissociation of
classification learning and explicit memory for specific
instances. Psychological Science, 3, 172-179.
Morris, C. P., Bransford, J. D., Franks, J. J., (1977). Levels
of processing versus transfer appropriate processing.
Journal of Verbal Learning &Verbal Behavior, 16, 519533.
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from performance
measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 317327.
Reber, A. S. (1976). Implicit learning of synthetic
languages: The role of instructional set. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
2, 1, 88-94.
Salidas, J., Willingham, D. B., & Gabrieli, J. (2000,
November) fMRI of implicit and explicit sequence
learning: Evidence for parallel systems. Paper presented
at the 41st annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
New Orleans, LA.
Seger, C. A. (1994). Implicit learning. Psychological
Bulletin, 115, 163-196.
Willingham, D. B., & Goedert-Eschmann, K. (1999). The
relation between implicit and explicit learning: Evidence
for parallel development. Psychological Science, 10, 531534.

