UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Processing of Morphosyntactic Features in the Bilingual Lexicon

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36q8s87b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Scheutz, Matthias
Eberhard, Kathleen
Targowski, Kathleen

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Processing of Morphosyntactic Features in the Bilingual Lexicon
Matthias Scheutz (mscheutz@nd.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Kathleen Eberhard (keberhar@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Kathleen Targowski (ktargows@nd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
Abstract
We investigated whether morphosyntactic representations in
bilinguals’ native language become activated by form-related
representations in their second language. Specifically, we
examined whether, relative to English monolinguals, GermanEnglish bilinguals would exhibit a bias to initially interpret
English nouns ending in –er as referring to a male due to the
association of masculine gender with this ending in German.
This question was tested by recording bilinguals' and
monolinguals' eye movements as they read English sentences
containing a stereotypically male, female, or neutral –er noun
that was an antecedent of a gender-matching or –mismatching
reflexive. The bias to initially interpret the –er nouns' referent
as male was assessed by the size of the "mismatch effect" or
the difference between the participants' total fixation duration
on feminine versus masculine reflexives. The results showed
a positive mismatch effect for both the bilinguals and
monolinguals in the stereotypical male condition, no
mismatch effect for either group in the neutral condition, and
a mismatch effect only for the monolinguals in the
stereotypical female condition. The results were simulated
using a connectionist interactive activation model, and the
implications for future study are discussed.

Introduction
A central question in bilingualism research concerns the
extent to which the processing of lexical representations in
the two languages occurs independently or interactively,
and, if the latter, whether the interaction is bi-directional
(i.e., processing of representations in the first language (L1)
affects processing of representations in the second language
(L2) and vice versa). A complementary question concerns
whether the lexical representations in the two languages are
stored together or separately.
The contrasting views have been tested predominately
with tasks that measure the speed of bilinguals' recognition
or translation of individual L2 and L1 words. For example,
studies employing translation tasks have shown that, during
the early stages of L2 learning, translation of L2 words into
L1 words is faster than translation of L1 words into L2
words. However, as proficiency in L2 increases, translation
in both directions becomes equally fast. Kroll and
colleagues (e.g., DuFour & Kroll, 1995; Kroll & Stewart,

1041

1994) proposed that the initially faster translation from L2
to L1 is due to strong associative links between lexical
representations in the two lexicons, which arise from an
early emphasis on retrieving the meanings of L2 words by
translating them into their L1 equivalents. However, as
experience with L2 increases, direct associative connections
between L2 lexical representations and their concepts
become stronger, resulting in independence of processing in
the L2 lexicon (e.g., Altarriba & Mathis, 1997; FrenckMestre & Prince, 1997; Kroll & Curley, 1998).
However, results of studies employing word recognition
tasks suggest that processing in the L2 lexicon never
becomes completely independent. The evidence comes
primarily from studies that measure the speed and accuracy
of bilinguals’ recognition of cognates and interlingual
homographs or “false friends”. Cognates are translation
equivalents with identical (or nearly identical) orthography
and phonology in both languages (e.g., partner in German
and English), whereas false friends have identical
orthography and phonology in both languages but different
meanings (e.g. teller in German and English). Studies by
Dijkstra and colleagues (Dijkstra, Grainger, & Van Heuven,
1999; Dijkstra, Timmermans, & Schriefers, 2000; Dijkstra,
Van Jaarsveld, & Ten Brinke, 1998; Van Heuven, Dijkstra,
& Grainger, 1998) have shown faster recognition of
cognates relative to noncognates but slower recognition of
false friends relative to noncognates. On the basis of these
findings, Dijkstra et al. (1999) proposed that cognates share
a single lexical representation in both the L1 and L2
lexicons whereas false friends have separate lexical
representations in each lexicon. Because the false friends'
separate lexical representations share connections to
sublexical representations, both lexical representations
become activated when either is encountered, resulting in
interference. Dijkstra et al.'s proposal of
interactive
processing of separate lexical representations was supported
by the simulation results of a bilingual interactive activation
(BIA) model, which was adapted from McClelland and
Rumelhart’s
classical
interactive-activation
model
(McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981; Rumelhart & McClelland,
1982).
Although, overall, the evidence from word-recognition

studies supports an interactive view of processing in
bilingual memory, the results of individual studies vary
depending on specific manipulations, such as the nature of
the response, the ratios of different types of L1 and L2
words presented in the lists, and the particular instructions
given to the bilingual participants. Consequently, the
findings from these studies may reflect the nature of the
strategic processing employed in specific experimental
circumstances (e.g., Dijkstra, Grainger & Van Heuven,
1999; Dijkstra, Van Jaarsveld, & Ten Brinke, 1998; Green,
1998). A goal of the current study was to seek converging
evidence for the interactive view using in a sentence
comprehension task.
In particular, we examined whether morphosyntactic
representations associated with L1 words interfere with
processing morphologically similar L2 words. More
specifically, we investigated whether fluent German-English
bilinguals would exhibit a bias to interpret English animate
nouns ending in –er as referring to a male due to the
association of masculine gender with the -er endings of
nouns in German.

Gender and Sex in English and German
The morphological markings of gender on words reflect a
grammatical or syntactic property, which, in the case of
masculine or feminine gender, may not be correlated with a
semantic property of male or female sex. Aside from the
pronominal system in English, only a few English nouns are
morphologically marked for gender (e.g., actor/actress,
waiter/waitress, host/hostess). The markings on these nouns,
as well as on the pronouns, are determined by the semantic
sex of the referent.
In German, all nouns as well as pronouns possess one of
three classes of grammatical gender: masculine, feminine, or
neuter. Nouns that refer to inanimate entities may be
masculine e.g., der Stock (the stick), feminine e.g., die
Gabel (the fork), or neuter e.g., das Obst (the fruit), and
therefore, their gender has no semantic correlate. However,
the gender of most nouns that refer to human entities does
correlate with the referent’s sex; for example Schwester
(sister) is feminine and Bruder (brother) is masculine.
Exceptions include Weib (woman or wife), which is neuter,
and diminutive nouns such as, Mädchen (girl), which are
also neuter.
The grammatical gender of German nouns is based on a
complex set of rules, which include a semantic rule that the
gender of a noun referring to a human entity must match the
sex of the referent (e.g., Zubin & Köpcke, 1986). So, for
example, masculine nouns such as, Partner (partner) and
Student (student), refer to males whereas the feminine
nouns, Partnerin and Studentin, refer to females. Additional
rules concern other semantic properties of nouns as well as
their morphological or phonological properties. Across the
different levels of rules there are a number of consistencies.
For example, most nouns ending in -er are masculine
regardless of whether they refer to an animate or inanimate
entity. Exceptions include Butter (butter), Leiter (ladder),

1042

Mutter (mother), which are feminine. Evidence that the –er
ending of nouns is strongly associated with masculine
gender comes from studies showing that German speakers
will use the masculine article der with nonsense –er nouns
and with -er nouns that are borrowed from other languages
(Mills, 1986; Salmons, 1994).

Experiment
The experiment used the association of masculine gender
with the –er ending of nouns in German to test the
predictions of the interactive view of bilingual memory.
According to this view, when German-English bilinguals
read an English noun ending in –er, which has no gender in
English, the ending should nonetheless activate the
masculine gender feature associated with it in German. If
the –er noun refers to a human entity, then, the activated
masculine gender feature should activate the corresponding
semantic feature for male sex, thus biasing a male
interpretation of the noun. This bias, in turn, should cause
interference if the –er noun is an antecedent of a subsequent
feminine pronoun, such as herself.
To test this prediction, we compared the eye movement
patterns of German-English bilinguals and English
monolinguals when they read English sentences such as the
following:
(1) The butcher accidentally cut himself/herself with a knife.
(2) The cheerleader injured himself/herself during the final
game.
(3) The speaker introduced himself/herself to the audience.
As shown by the examples, the critical sentences began with
an –er noun that referred to a human entity. The –er nouns
represented three stereotypical sex conditions: male (1),
female (2), or neutral (3), and each was an antecedent of
either the feminine reflexive, herself, or the masculine
reflexive, himself. Previous studies involving only English
monolinguals have shown that mismatches between a
pronoun's gender and an antecedent noun's stereotypical sex
results in comprehension difficulty (e.g., Kerr &
Underwood, 1984; Osterhout, Bersick, McLaughlin, 1997).
In studies that have recorded readers' eye-movements, the
difficulty is reflected in both longer and more frequent
fixations on a mismatching pronoun than on a matching
pronoun (Kerr & Underwood, 1984). Thus, in the current
study, we assessed the degree of bias to initially interpret the
sex of the –er nouns as male by the size of a "mismatch
effect", calculated by subtracting the participants' average
total fixation duration on himself from their average total
fixation duration on herself.
We expected that both the German-English bilinguals and
English monolinguals would exhibit a positive mismatch
effect for sentences containing a stereotypical male -er noun
as the antecedent of herself. However, only the GermanEnglish bilinguals were expected to show a positive
mismatch effect for sentences containing a stereotypical
neutral –er noun that was the antecedent of herself. Finally,
only the English monolinguals were predicted to show a
negative mismatch effect for sentences containing a

stereotypical female –er noun that was the antecedent of
himself. German-English bilinguals were not expected to
exhibit any mismatch effect because the male bias from the
masculine gender associated with –er should attenuate any
interference arising from a mismatch between the nouns'
stereotypical female sex and a masculine reflexive.

Method
Participants
Twenty native English monolinguals and 20 fluent GermanEnglish bilinguals participated in the experiment. All had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and received payment
in exchange for their participation. The twenty English
monolinguals (6 male and 14 female) were between the ages
of 18 and 21 and were tested at the University of Notre
Dame. None had any formal experience with German. The
20 German-English bilinguals (8 male and 12 female) were
between the ages of 17 and 25 and were tested at the
University of Vienna in Vienna, Austria. They had an
average of 9 years of formal English instruction (range 5-14
years). The average age at which English instruction began
was 8 (range 5-10).

Materials
The materials consisted of 30 pairs of English sentences.
Each sentence began with a definite noun phrase containing
an -er noun that referred to a human entity and was the
antecedent of a reflexive pronoun. Ten of the –er nouns
were German-English cognates, ten were semi-cognates,
(i.e., similar but not identical orthography), and ten were
non-cognates, with only the –er ending common to the
nouns in both languages). The sentences within a pair were
identical except for the reflexive's gender. The 30 pairs
represented six conditions created from crossing the two
levels of the reflexive’s gender (himself or herself) with
three levels of the stereotypical sex of the antecedent –er
noun (male, female, or neutral). The initial assignment of
the nouns to a stereotypical sex condition was based on the
experimenters’ intuitions and subsequently verified with the
results of a rating task described below.
The materials also consisted of 46 filler sentences and 30
yes/no comprehension questions. All of the filler sentences
began with a definite noun phrase containing an –er noun
that referred to a human entity. None of the -er nouns
occurred in the critical sentences and they were never
antecedents of pronouns. The 30 yes/no comprehension
questions were designed to encourage the participants to
read for meaning. Twenty questions referred to the meaning
of a preceding filler sentence, and 10 referred to the
meaning of a preceding critical sentence. For example, the
critical sentence, "The hunter hurt herself after falling out of
a tree." was followed by the question, "Did the hunter get
hurt while climbing a tree?"
Two 106-item lists were constructed. Each list contained
30 critical sentences, one from each pair, all 46 filler
sentences, and all 30 comprehension questions. Within each

1043

list, five critical sentence represented each of the six
conditions, and across both lists, each critical sentence
occurred once. The lists began with four filler questions,
two of which were followed by a comprehension question.
The order of the remaining critical and filler sentences was
random except for the constraint that two critical sentences
could not occur consecutively.
After the reading task, the participants completed a rating
form. The form listed the 30 critical –er nouns in random
order with a 9-point scale next to each one. The end points
of the scale were labeled as "1 = always male" and "9 =
always female". The instructions printed at the top of the
rating form were as follows: "Please rate the following
words for how often, in your experience, they have been
used to refer to a male or a female. If, in your experience,
the word is always used to refer to a male, then circle the
number 1 on the rating scale next to it. If the word is always
used to refer to a female, then circle 9. Feel free to use the
full range of numbers on the scale." The bilinguals
completed an electronic version of the rating form and
indicated their rating by selecting a box beneath a number
on the scale. In addition, each noun on the bilinguals' forms
was preceded by a selection box that was to be selected if
the noun was unfamiliar.

Procedure
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the two
lists, with an equal number of bilingual and monolingual
participants assigned to each list. The participants were
seated in front of a computer monitor at a comfortable
viewing distance. They were told that a list of sentences
would be presented to them one at a time in the center of the
monitor. They were instructed to read each sentence and
then press the “b” key on the computer’s keyboard to
advance to the next sentence. They were told that some of
the sentences would be followed by a yes/no comprehension
question, which they were to answer by pressing either the
"z" key, which was labeled “yes” , or the ‘/’ key, which was
labeled “no”.
The sentences appeared individually on a single line in
the center of a 15” computer monitor. They were displayed
in 14 point black font against a white background at
640X480 screen resolution. The critical –er nouns and the
reflexive pronouns each subtended approximately 1.05o X
2.87o of visual angle. The participants' key-press responses
were recorded for each trial.
The participants' eye movements were recorded using a
free-head
eyetracking
system
(Applied
Science
Laboratories, Model 501). The system consists of a
lightweight eye camera attached to an adjustable headband
that is worn by the participant. The eye camera is positioned
above the participant's left eye and captures an infrared
image of the eye at a 60 Hz sampling rate. The distance
between the centers of the corneal and pupil infrared
reflections are used to calculate the relative eye-in-head
position. The position of the participant’s head with respect
to the computer monitor was simultaneously measured

Results and Discussion
Rating Task There was a high degree of consistency
between the English monolinguals' and German-English
bilinguals' ratings of the –er nouns' stereotypical sex (r =
.93, p < .0001). The largest difference between the two
groups' ratings occurred with the nouns, gardener and
horseback rider, both of which were semi-cognates. The
German-English bilinguals' average ratings of these nouns
were 3.30 and 3.65, respectively, indicating a "male"
association, whereas the English monolinguals' average
ratings were 4.85 and 5.95, respectively, indicating a
"neutral" association. Both groups' ratings conflicted with
the initial assignment of the two nouns to the stereotypical
female condition. Because of the discrepancies between the
groups' ratings of these nouns, and the nouns' initial
assignment to the female condition, they were eliminated
from the analyses of the reading task data, reducing the
number of items representing the female condition to eight.
The correlation between the German-English bilinguals' and
English monolinguals' average ratings of the remaining set
of 28 –er nouns was .96. Table 1 shows the groups' average
ratings of the nouns in each stereotypical sex condition.
Table 1. Average ratings (standard deviations) of the
critical –er nouns in each stereotypical sex condition
(1 = always male; 9 = always female).
Stereotypical Sex
Male
Neutral
Female

English
Monolinguals
2.58 (.84)
4.70 (.69)
7.48 (.68)

German-English
Bilinguals
2.38 (.61)
4.52 (.32)
7.27 (1.10)

Reading Task A total of 14 trials were eliminated because
German-English participants indicated on their rating forms
that they did not know a critical –er noun. Thirty-five trials
were eliminated from the German-English data and 31 trials

1044

were eliminated from the English data because of a
degraded eye-tracking record.
For the remaining trials, fixations that occurred on or
between the character spaces immediately preceding and
following the reflexives were scored as fixations on the
reflexive. For each participant and for each critical sentence,
the total duration of all fixations on a reflexive were
calculated. Differences between the mean fixation durations
on the masculine versus feminine reflexives in each
stereotypical sex condition were analyzed by paired t-tests.
In each stereotypical sex condition, the mismatch effect
was calculated by subtracting the average total fixation
duration on himself from the average total fixation duration
on herself. Thus, a positive mismatch effect corresponds to
longer fixations on herself, and a negative mismatch effect
corresponds to longer fixations on himself. Figure 1 shows
the average mismatch effects in the three stereotypical sex
conditions for the English monolinguals and the GermanEnglish bilinguals.

herself - himself (ms)

using a magnetic head-tracking device (Acension
Laboratories). The measurements from the headtracker and
eyetracker were recorded in real time as a serial data stream
to a PC. An analysis program converted the data stream into
the XY coordinates of the participants’ fixations, sampled
every 16.67 msec. A videotaped record of the participants’
fixations was also made. This record consisted of the image
of the sentences displayed on the computer monitor in front
of the participant (the scene image) and a superimposed set
of cross-hairs indicating the participant’s line of gaze. The
video record was recorded onto Hi8 video tape and frameby-frame playback was used to verify the accuracy of the
fixation data computed from the data stream recorded onto
the PC. At the beginning of an experimental session a twominute calibration routine was conducted to map nine eye
position coordinates onto nine corresponding scene image
coordinates. The accuracy of the resulting eye fixation
record is approximately 0.500 over a range of ±200.

200
150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150

Male
Neutral
Female

English

German-English

Figure 1: English monolinguals' and German-English
bilinguals' average mismatch effects and standard errors in
the three stereotypical sex conditions.
The English monolinguals' positive mismatch effect of
107 ms in the stereotypical male condition was reliable
(t(19) = 4.40, p < .01 one-tailed by participants; t(9) = 3.00,
p < .01, one-tailed by items). Likewise, the German-English
bilinguals' mismatch effect of 150 ms was significant (t(19)
= 3.38, p < .01 one-tailed by participants; t(9) = 1.99, p <
.05, one-tailed by items). Contrary to expectations, neither
group exhibited a reliable mismatch effect in the
stereotypical neutral condition. However, as predicted, only
the English monolinguals' showed a reliable mismatch
effect (–66 ms) in the stereotypical female condition (t(19)
= 1.93, p < .05 one-tailed by participants; t(9) < 1.00 by
items). The absence of a mismatch effect in the female
condition for the German-English bilinguals provides
evidence that the male bias from the masculine gender
associated with the –er nouns countered the bias from the
stereotypical female sex of the nouns' referents.
Figure 2 shows both the monolinguals' and bilinguals'
average mismatch effect for each of the 28 –er nouns plotted
as a function of the groups' average stereotypical sex rating
of the nouns. The solid regression line for the English data

shows a 0 ms mismatch effect corresponding to a rating of
approximately 5.5, which is in the neutral range. In contrast,
the dashed regression line for the German-English data
shows a 0 ms mismatch effect corresponding to a rating of
approximately 8 (female), reflecting a neutralizing effect of
the masculine gender associated with the –er. Figure 2 also
shows that, for the bilingual data, one neutral item (i.e.,
passenger) exhibited a large negative mismatch effect (-342
ms). When this outlier is excluded from the analysis of the
overall mismatch effect in the neutral condition, the average
mismatch effect increases to 74 ms, which is marginally
significant (t(8) = 1.60, p = .07, one tailed).

herself - himself (ms)

600

Concept
Level

babysitter

B

-er

BABYSITTER

A

B

Y

S

I

T

3
f

2
´ 4

Letter
Level

200

m

1

Lexical
Level

German-English
English

400

for butcher and the m-node). In the model, the weights for
connections (1) and (2) ranged from 0.0 to 0.1 in increments
proportional to the participants' average rating of a
particular word. For babysitter, the weights of the
connections to the m- and f-nodes were 0.017 (1/9) and
0.083 (8/9), respectively, based on the German-English
bilinguals' average rating of 8 on a scale of 9 for this word.

T

E

R

2

R = 0.03

0
-200

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Figure 3: The IAC model of the representations of the word
babysitter in German-English bilingual memory.

9
R2 = 0.30

-400
-600

Figure 2: The 28 –er nouns' average mismatch effect
plotted as a function of their average stereotypical sex rating
(1 = always male; 9 = always female).

Preliminary Model for the –ER Effect
To further examine hypotheses about the effects of the
grammatical gender associated with the –er ending of nouns
in German, we constructed a interactive activation
connectionist (IAC) model. Figure 3 shows the relevant
aspects of the model, which was fit to the data given in
Table 2 below.1 As usual, lines terminating in arrows
indicate excitatory (positive) connections while lines
terminating in filled circles indicate inhibitory (negative)
connections. Only three basic levels of representation were
included in the model: letter, lexical, and concept. The –er
node at the lexical level corresponds to the masculine
gender node, which becomes activated via excitatory
connections with the "er" letter nodes. The “m-node” and
“f-node” at the concept level represent the male and female
sex properties, respectively, that are associated with the
lexical-concept node. The weights of the positive
connections (1 and 2) from the lexical-concept node to the
m- and f-nodes reflect the associated distribution of male
and female referents in the category corresponding to the
lexical concept. These connections' weights are altered
through experience with different exemplars (e.g., most
butchers are male, and, therefore, a larger weight will be
associated with the connection between the lexical concept
1

The complete model includes many additional concept and lexical
nodes.

1045

The connection (3) between the m- and f-nodes is
inhibitory because the nodes are mutually exclusive. Finally,
the excitatory connection (4) between the –er node and the
m-node has a fixed weight of 0.035. The –er node and its
connection to the m-node are absent from the IAC model of
English monolingual memory.
Four versions of the IAC model were constructed, two
representing bilingual memory and two representing
monolingual memory. For each type of memory, one model
simulated the processing of a stereotypical female –er noun
and the other simulated the processing of a stereotypical
male –er noun. The simulations involved presenting both
the masculine and feminine reflexives for each type of noun.
Specifically, external input was presented to the model for a
time analogous to the average initial fixation duration on the
–er nouns in the particular stereotypical sex condition (one
update cycle corresponded to 100 msec). For the models of
bilingual memory, the -er node also received excitatory
input during this time. The input was then terminated, and
the network was allowed to settle for about 7 cycles (a time
corresponding to the time it took participants to read the text
between noun and reflexive). Then, the activation resulting
from reading the reflexive was simulated by adding external
input and measuring the time (in terms of cycles) it took for
the f- or m-node to reach an activation level greater than 0.8,
which was stipulated as the level at which the network
resolved any conflict between the reflexive's gender and the
semantic sex of the antecedent –er noun.
Table 2 shows the English monolinguals' and GermanEnglish bilinguals' average fixation durations on the
matching and mismatching reflexives for sentences with the
four –er nouns rated most highly as stereotypically male and
female, respectively. It also shows the total number of
update cycles (scaled by 100) in the model before the f- or
m-node's activation level exceeded the critical value of 0.8

for resolving the conflict between sex/gender agreement.
The correlation between the simulation results and the data
is marginally significant for the German-English data (p =
0.07) and significant for the English data (p = 0.01).
Table 2. Results of model simulations of the monolingual
and bilingual total fixation durations on the reflexives.
English
Stereotypical
Sex/ Reflexive
Male/herself
Male/himself
Female/herself
Female/himself

Data Model
542
600
477
500
457
400
668
800

German-English
Data
1005
715
923
1173

Model
1000
600
700
1200

Conclusion
Our experimental results provide converging evidence for
interactive processing of L1 and L2 lexical representations
in bilingual memory. This evidence is consistent with
results of other recent studies that also have used sentence
comprehension tasks rather than individual word
recognition or translation tasks (e.g., Spivey & Marian,
1999). Contrary to the results from translation tasks, we did
not find evidence of independence of L2 processing in
highly proficient L2 speakers. Independence may be
particularly difficult to achieve when morphological endings
are associated with gender in one language but not in the
other. Furthermore, the difficulty may depend on whether
the gender association occurs in the bilingual's first (native)
or second language. Thus, a future study will examine
whether native English speakers who are proficient L2
speakers of German also exhibit effects of an association of
–er with masculine gender in German.

Acknowledgments
We thank Abigail Gottschalk for assistance with data
collection. A subset of the results reported here was
presented at the 15th Annual CUNY Sentence Processing
Conference, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY
(March, 2002). The research was supported by the
University of Notre Dame Graduate School's Faculty
Research Program Grant awarded to the first two authors.

References
Altarriba, J., & Mathis, K. M. (1997). Conceptual and
lexical development in second language acquisition.
Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 550-568.
Dijkstra, T., Grainger, J., & Van Heuven, W. (1999).
Recognition of cognates and interlingual homographs:
The neglected role of phonology. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 496-518.
Dijkstra, T., Timmermans, M., & Schriefers, H. (2000). On
being blinded by your other languages: Effects of task
demands on interlingual homograph recognition. Journal
of Memory and Language, 42, 445-464.

1046

Dijkstra, T., Van Jaarsveld, H., & Ten Brinke, S. (1998).
Interlingual homograph recognition: Effects of task
demands and language intermixing. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 1, 51-66.
DuFour, R., & Kroll, J. F. (1995). Matching words to
concepts in two languages: A test of the concept
mediation model of bilingual representation. Memory and
Cognition, 25, 166-180.
Frenck-Mestre, C., & Prince, P. (1997). Second language
autonomy. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 481501.
Green, D. W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexicosemantic system. Bilingualism, 1, 67-87.
Kerr, J. S., & Underwood, G. (1984). Fixation time on
anaphoric pronouns decreases with congruity of
reference. In A. G. Gale & F. Johnson (Eds.), Theoretical
and applied aspects of eye movement research.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Kroll, J. F., & Curley, J. (1998). Lexical memory in novice
bilinguals: The role of concepts in retrieving second
language words. In M. Gruneberg, P. Morris, & R. Sykes
(Eds.), Practical aspects of memory: Current research
and issues. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part I. An account of basic findings.
Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.
Mills, A. E. (1986). The acquisition of gender: A study of
English and German. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Osterhout, L., Bersick, M., & McLaughlin, J. (1997). Brain
potentials reflect violations of gender stereotypes.
Memory and Cognition, 25, 273-285.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1982). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part 2. The contextual enhancement effect
and some tests and extensions of the model., 89, 60-94.
Salmons, J. (1994). Sketch of an interlanguage rule system:
Advanced nonnative German gender assignment. In C. A.
Blackshire-Belay (Ed.), Current issues in second
language acquisition and development. Lanham, MD:
University Press of America.
Spivey, M. J., & Marian, V. (1999). Cross talk between
native and second languages: Partial activation of an
irrelevant lexicon. Psychological Science, 10, 281-284.
Van Heuven, W., Dijkstra, T., & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word
recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 458483.
Zubin, D., & Köpcke, K. (1986). Gender and folk
taxonomy: The indexical relation between grammatical
and lexical categorization. In C. Craig (Ed.), Noun classes
and categorization. Amsterdam: Benjamins.

