UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanisms of long-term repetition priming and skill refinement: A probabilistic pathway
model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x42m0fz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Mozer, Michael C.
Colagrosso, Michael D.
Huber, David E.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanisms of long-term repetition priming and skill refinement:
A probabilistic pathway model
Michael C. Mozer+∗ , Michael D. Colagrosso+∗ , David E. Huber#∗
+
Department of Computer Science
#
Department of Psychology
∗
Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
{mozer,colagrom,dhuber}@colorado.edu
Abstract
We address an omnipresent and pervasive form of human learning—skill refinement, the improvement in performance of a cognitive or motor skill with practice. A
simple and well studied example of skill refinement is the
psychological phenomenon of long-term repetition priming: Participants asked to identify briefly presented words
are more accurate if they recently viewed the word. We
simulate various phenomena of repetition priming using
a probabilistic model that characterizes the time course of
information transmission through processing pathways.
The model suggests two distinct mechanisms of adaptation with experience, one that updates prior probabilities
of pathway outputs, and one that increases the instantaneous probability of information transmission through a
pathway. These two mechanisms loosely correspond to
bias and sensitivity effects that have been observed in experimental studies of priming. The mechanisms are extremely sensible from a rational perspective, and can also
explain phenomena of skill learning, such as the power
law of practice. Although other models have been proposed of these phenomena, we argue for the probabilistic
pathway model on grounds of parsimony and the elegant
computational perspective it offers.

Acquisition of a cognitive or motor skill occurs in several stages. First, an individual must learn the conceptual structures required for the task, including the basic
knowledge necessary to perform the task. Then, over a
long period of practice, the skill is refined, leading to
more fluent, efficient, and robust performance. Skill refinement is an omnipresent and pervasive form of learning. Although skill refinement is sometimes deliberate,
e.g., rehearsing a musical piece, it is often implicit, e.g.,
when typing, driving, reading, playing video games, etc.
Understanding skill refinement is fundamentally about
discovering the mechanisms by which one trial or performance of the skill leads to improvements on the next.

Long-term repetition priming
Perhaps the most direct and easily studied manifestation of skill refinement in the psychological literature is
the phenomenon of long-term repetition priming. In the
priming paradigm, participants engage in a series of experimental trials, and experience with a stimulus or response on one trial results in more efficient processing
on subsequent trials. Efficiency is characterized in terms
of faster response times, lower error rates, or both. A typical long-term perceptual priming experiment consists of

828

a study phase in which participants are asked to read
a list of words one at a time, and a test phase, during
which they must respond to a series of brief, masked target words. Repetition priming occurs when a word from
the study phase influences performance during the test
phase. These experiments often vary the flash duration,
the time between target and mask onsets, and also utilize
a variety of response paradigms, including speaking the
target identity aloud (naming) and forced choice identification between two alternatives (2AFC).
Priming is an implicit memory phenomenon: participants are not told the study and test phases are related,
and they do not try to recall study words during the test
phase as a deliberate strategy for performing the task.
Thus, priming is incidental to the test phase of the experiment; it comes about as a result of experience and is
thus a form of skill refinement, where the “skill” here is
perceptual processing of a letter string.
A key question concerning repetition priming is
whether priming is due to increased bias or increased
sensitivity. Although the terminology is borrowed from
signal detection theory, the meaning of these terms in the
context of priming is somewhat different. Bias means
that participants are more likely to report studied items
regardless of what word is presented for identification.
Sensitivity means that participants become better at perceptual discrimination of the studied items. In a word
naming task, improved performance following priming
could be due either to increased bias or increased sensitivity. Consequently, experimental paradigms have been
designed to unconfound these possibilities. The basic
result found in the long-term repetition priming literature is that priming reflects both increased bias and increased sensitivity, although the sensitivity increase is robust only for low-frequency words or novel items.
The goal of this paper is to introduce a model of performance and refinement of simple cognitive skills, such
as word reading. The model has two distinct learning
mechanisms which contribute to skill improvement with
practice. The model explains various data from psychological studies of long-term repetition priming. In this
paper, we model two experiments isolating bias and sensitivity components to priming, and show a rough correspondence between our two learning mechanisms and
these two effects. We compare our model to existing
models in the literature; our model shares aspects of ex-

1

Y0

P(Output)

0.8
0.6
0.4

Y1

Y2

Y3

X1

X2

X3

DIED

LIED

0.2

(a)

0

KICK
Time

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of a perceptual pathway when the visual word DIED is presented. The three curves show the
probabilities of alternative pathway outputs as a function of processing time. In this example, the pathway asymptotes
to the correct output with probability 1. (b) An HMM implementation of a pathway
isting models, but has an elegant and concise formulation
that makes it preferable on grounds of parsimony.

Modeling long-term repetition priming
The model we present is distilled from a broader theory
of cortical information transmission (Colagrosso, 2002).
The theory posits that cortical computation is performed
by a set of functionally specialized pathways. Each pathway performs a primitive cognitive operation, e.g., visual word-form recognition, identification of semantic
features of visual objects, computation of spatial relationships, or construction of motor plans. To model the
effects of long-term repetition priming, we propose a
model with two pathways in cascade: a perceptual pathway that maps visual features to word identities, and a
response pathway that takes the output of the perceptual
pathway and maps it to a task-appropriate response. We
assume the pathways communicate continuously during
processing and that communication is unidirectional.

Pathway as a dynamic belief network
We present a probabilistic model of a pathway, which
characterizes the time course of information processing
in a single stimulus presentation.
The inputs and outputs of a pathway are represented as
probability distributions over distinct alternatives. Formally, the input and output states of a pathway at a particular time t, denoted Xt and Yt , respectively, are discrete random variables. Each variable can take on one
of a finite set of values selected from a multinomial distribution, with set size NX and NY for Xt and Yt , respectively. We wish to model the temporal dynamics of a
pathway, i.e., how Xt and Yt−1 combine to determine Yt .
To link this notation to the repetition priming paradigm,
consider a perceptual pathway. To model the processing of some word x for a brief duration d, we would set
X1 = X2 = . . . = Xd = x (i.e., assigning the random
variables a particular value x); to model the masking of
the word, Xt for t > d is reset to a uniform distribution
over alternatives. Given this input sequence corresponding to a single trial, we can then observe the temporal
evolution of the pathway output (Figure 1a).
The relationship among the input and output variables is specified by the graphical model in Figure 1b,
known as a dynamic belief network (Dean & Kanazawa,
1989; Kanazawa, Koller, & Russell, 1995). Each ar-

829

row corresponds to a conditional probability distribution
specifying the relationship between two dependent variables. For the reader unfamiliar with graphical models,
one should not be concerned with the direction of the
arrows. Casting the model as a generative process—
where the arrows flow from outputs to inputs in Figure 1b—has certain benefits. Nonetheless, inference can
be carried out in either direction: the graphical model allows us to infer the probability distribution over Yt given
X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt , denoted P(Yt |X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt ). This
computation is performed via iterative Bayesian belief
revision. Figure 1b is simply a hidden Markov model
(HMM), used in a novel way. In typical usage, an HMM
is presented with a sequence of distinct inputs, whereas
we maintain the same input for many successive time
steps. Further, in typical usage, an HMM transitions
through a sequence of distinct hidden states, whereas we
attempt to converge with increasing confidence on a single state.
In Figure 1b, the set of arrows from Xt to Yt corresponds to P(Xt |Yt ), the instantaneous transmission
probability between Xt and Yt . The set of arrows
from Yt−1 to Yt corresponds to P(Yt |Yt−1 ), and can
be thought of as a short-term memory in the pathway
output. In dynamic belief networks, it is typical to assume temporal invariance of the conditional distributions, i.e., P(Xt |Yt ) = P(X|Y ) and P(Yt |Yt−1 ) =
P(Y |Yprev ) for all t. This assumption is equivalent to stating that the parameters of these distributions are homogeneous—the relationship between pathway inputs and
outputs does not change on the brief time scale of information processing modeled. The two distributions,
P(X|Y ) and P(Y |Yprev ), embody the knowledge in a
pathway. In the following two sections, we discuss these
forms of knowledge, which constitute the central claims
of the model.
Instantaneous transmission probabilities The instantaneous transmission probability between some X =
i (the random variable X taking value i) and some Y = j
is formulated as P(X = i|Y = j) ∼ 1 + αij where αij
denotes the association frequency, and is assumed to be
related to the number of previous experiences with the
association between X = i and Y = j. (The probability
must be normalized; hence the definition is formulated
in terms of a proportionality instead of an equality. The

k

Short-term memory We assume that the transition
probability matrix from Yprev to Y acts as a memory with
diffusion. That is, with probability β, Y is reset to its
initial state and with probability (1 − β), Y remains in
the same state as Yprev :
P(Y = i|Yprev = j) = (1 − β)δij + βP(Y = i)
where β is the diffusion constant, P(Y ) is the prior distribution (the output of the pathway in the absence of any
input), and δij is the Kroniker delta (δij = 1 if i = j or
0 otherwise). If β = 0, the transition matrix acts as a
perfect memory.
Processing dynamics The distribution over Yt given
the input sequence, Xt ≡ {X1 , X2 , . . . , Xt }, can be
derived from Bayes’ theorem, based on the information
transmission probabilities, P(X|Y ), the pathway output
transition probabilities, P(Y |Yprev ), and the prior distribution P(Y = k) ≡ P(Y0 = k|X0 ):


NX
X
P(Yt = k|Xt ) ∼ 
P(Xt = j)P(Xt = j|Yt = k)
j=1

"N
Y
X

#

P(Yt−1 = i|Xt )P(Yt = k|Yt−1 = i)

i=1

To model two pathways in cascade, such as the perceptual and response pathways, the output of the perceptual pathway is provided as input to the response pathway. Although the two pathways could be coupled into
a single graphical model, inference in this model is intractable. Consequently, we approximate inference by
assuming that at each time step the perceptual pathway
output is copied to the response pathway input. This decoupling corresponds to the assumption of limited communication between pathways.

Learning mechanisms
Our simulations assume that the model has already acquired the basic knowledge necessary to perform a task.
Thus, the αij are initialized such that the model produces
the correct association asymptotically. Because the αij
are presumed to reflect the frequency with which an association has been exercised in the past, we initialize highfrequency associations to have larger values.

830

0.6

0.6
P(Y)

➚

1

0.8

➚

1

0.8

P(Y)

constant 1 prevents renormalization by zero.) Increasing αij increases the instantaneous probability of information, and thus increases the rate at which information
about X is communicated to Y .
Although the input representation is localist, in that
there is one value of X for each possible input, one can
achieve the similarity structure inherent in a distributed
representation using explicit terms, γik , that specify the
similarity between input states i and k:
X
γik αkj
P(X = i|Y = j) ∼ 1 +

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

(a)

0

(b)

0

Time

Time

Figure 2: Change in the time course of activation of a
pathway resulting from (a) an adjustment to the instantaneous transmission probabilities and (b) an adjustment
to the priors
How does experience affect parameters of the model?
Based on the parameter definitions, two sets of parameters might logically be adapted: the association frequencies and the priors. By definition, αij reflects the frequency that an association has been experienced. Consequently, it should increase with each experience. Also by
definition, the output priors, P(Y ) should reflect statistics
of the environment. In a normative model, these statistics should be updated over trials to accommodate nonstationary and unknown environments.
For the association frequencies, we chose the simple
rule in which αij is incremented by the constant ∆α following a trial in which input i leads to activation of output j. To form an analogous rule for the prior, we define
the prior P(Y = j) in terms of secondary parameters,
P(Y = j) ∼ 1 + ρj , and update ρj by the constant ∆ρ.
These two adaptation mechanisms cause the transmission of signals to become more efficient with experience,
i.e., pathway accuracy increases given a fixed amount
of processing time, or pathway response time decreases
to achieve a desired level of accuracy. Efficiency is reflected in a leftward shift of the curve relating processing time to output probability. The association-frequency
update results in a more rapid integration of the output
probability (Figure 2a); the prior update raises the initial
probability of the response (Figure 2b).

Simulations
We explain data from two key studies of long-term repetition priming. The purpose of presenting these simulations is establish the plausibility of the model. Other
models have been developed to explain the same phenomena, although our model can explain a broader range
of data (not presented in this paper). We we will conclude by discussing reasons to prefer our model.
Our simulations utilized two pathways which were
identical, except for the diffusion rates in the perceptual
and response pathways, β p = 0.05 and β r = 0.01, respectively. The pathways were designed to produce 1-1
mappings, with NX = NY = 20 input and output states
for each pathway. We assume a similarity structure in
which each input state is reciprocally similar to two others with a uniform similarity coefficient γ = 0.8. Rather
than assuming independent αij parameters for each association, we used two values, one for high-frequency

1

P(Correct Response)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Congruent
Neutral
Incongruent

0.4
0.3
0

10

20
30
Flash Duration (msec)

40

50

Figure 3: Accuracy of response for congruent, incongruent, and neutral conditions of the Ratcliff & McKoon (1997, Experiment 3) study of bias effects in priming. The points are results from human subjects, and the
curves are produced by our model.
words, αhigh = 7.5, and one for low-frequency words,
αlow = 1.25, with ∆α = .625. Finally, the prior update rule has one free parameter, ∆ρ = 3.3. In total, the
model had seven independent parameters, although the
model’s behavior was insensitive to the exact parameter
values. One additional constraint was that we chose parameters such that one simulation time step corresponds
to one millisecond in the experimental studies.

Simulation 1: bias effect
One explanation for the facilitatory effect of repetition
priming is that study of the prime introduces a response
bias that increases the probability of reporting the prime
in the future. Ratcliff and McKoon (1997, Experiment
3) explored the bias account of priming in a 2AFC
paradigm. During the test phase, masked target words
were briefly presented, followed by a two alternative
forced choice between the target and a distractor alternative. The target and distractor were orthographically
similar, making the discrimination more difficult.
Three experimental conditions were contrasted: In the
congruent condition, the target was presented during the
study phase. In an incongruent condition, the distractor
was presented during the study phase. In a neutral condition, neither was previously studied. For example, if
DIED was studied, then target DIED with distractor LIED
would be a congruent trial; target LIED with distractor
DIED would be an incongruent trial; and target KICK with
distractor SICK would be a neutral trial. The experiment
also manipulated the flash duration, the asynchrony between target and mask onset.
Human performance in the experiment is indicated by
the points and error bars in Figure 3 for flash durations
of 15, 25, 35, and 45 msec. Across flash durations, the
accuracy benefit on congruent trials relative to neutral trials is matched by an accuracy cost on incongruent trials,
diagnostic of a bias effect.
Our model produces an excellent fit to the data, as
shown by the curves in Figure 3. The stimulus presen-

831

tation durations are modeled by setting the perceptual
pathway input distribution such that P(Xt = i) = 1
for stimulus i over the flash duration, and following that
time, resetting the pathway input to the state of no information, the uniform distribution. Figure 4a illustrates the
operation of a perceptual pathway for the stimulus DIED
with a flash duration of 25 msec. Following the removal
of the stimulus, the perceptual pathway decays back to its
prior distribution at a rate proportional to β p . In this example, DIED has been previously studied, as indicated by
the fact that DIED has a higher probability at t = 0 than
any other word. The response pathway, shown in Figure
4b, accumulates evidence from the perceptual pathway,
reaching an asymptote as the perceptual pathway decays.
To produce a 2AFC response, we adopt the normative assumption that the 2AFC response is computed from the
response pathway output, conditional on the output being
one of the two response alternatives.
Although two mechanisms of adaptation are built into
the model, the prior update rule is almost entirely responsible for the differences in performance among conditions. Setting the association-frequency adjustment,
∆α, to zero has little impact on the simulation results.
Thus, the prior update rule roughly corresponds to the
notion of bias. Indeed, one can see this bias manifested
at t = 0 in Figure 4a. However, with increased flash
duration, the probability of correct identification of the
target approaches asymptote, the differences among conditions diminish, and the bias disappears. A simple rule
that adjusted response probabilities independent of flash
duration could not account for the data; the temporal dynamics of the model are essential to explaining the phenomenon.

Simulation 2: sensitivity effect
As a complement to the bias effect, the sensitivity effect is an improvement in perceptual discrimination of an
item as a result of previous study. To determine if a sensitivity effect contributes to priming, several studies (Bowers, 1999; McKoon and Ratcliff, 2001, Experiment 2;
Wagenmakers, Zeelenberg, and Raaijmakers, 2000) explored a 2AFC task in which a comparison is performed
between a condition in which both response alternatives
are primed and a condition in which neither response
alternative is primed (both and neither primed, respectively). Any difference between these conditions could
not be attributed to a bias effect, because—by the simple
notion of bias—the bias effect should cancel when both
alternatives are primed. A reliable benefit in the bothprimed condition relative to the neither-primed condition
is therefore diagnostic of a sensitivity effect. We model
the study of (McKoon & Ratcliff, 2001), which included
a word frequency manipulation.
The human data shows a reliable benefit of study
for low-frequency words (e.g., WOMB, TWIG), but not
for high-frequency words (BEEN, THAN), as shown in
Figure 5a. (The difference between both and neither
conditions for high frequency words is nonsignificant.)
Thus, priming can improve the discriminability of low-

1

DIED
LIED
others

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

P(Word)

P(Word)

1

0.4

0.2

DIED
LIED
others

0.4

0.2

0

0
0

(a)

5

10

15
20
25
30
35
Flash Duration (msec)

40

45

50

0

(b)

5

10

15
20
25
30
35
Flash Duration (msec)

40

45

50

0.84

0.84

0.82

0.82
P(Correct Response)

P(Correct Response)

Figure 4: Output of the perceptual and response pathways (left and right panels) for a 25 msec presentation of the
target DIED on a congruent trial

0.8
0.78
0.76
0.74
0.72

low

(a)

0.76
0.74
0.72

Both primed
Neither primed

0.7

0.8
0.78

0.7

high

(b)

Word Frequency

Both primed
Neither primed
low
high
Word Frequency

Figure 5: 2AFC accuracy for both- and neither-primed conditions, for low- and high-frequency words. (a) human data
from McKoon and Ratcliff (2001); (b) simulation results from our model.
frequency words.
Our model produces the same qualitative pattern as the
experimental data. The benefit of study diminishes with
word frequency, as reflected in the convergence of the
two curves in Figure 5b. This result is due to the adjustment of association frequencies: if the adjustment of
priors is turned off by setting ∆ρ = 0, the qualitative
pattern of results in Figure 5b is unaffected.
Because of the assumption that α is proportional to
frequency, each experience with an item must result
in a fixed increment to α. However, the fixed increment has a greater effect on performance for small α
than large α, due to the normalization of the conditional
transmission probabilities: for the correct association,
P(X|Y ) = α/(α + NX ). The derivative of this expression, ∂P(X|Y )/∂α = NX /(α + NX )2 , specifies
the boost in transmission probability with a fixed increment in α. The derivative drops quadratically with α,
but the effect on performance is even greater because
this transmission probability influences the model’s output on each of hundreds of time steps. A simple simulation shows the frequency effect more clearly. Figure 6
simulates the accuracy for a fixed stimulus presentation
duration as a function of α. For equal increments in α,
the accuracy gain is greater for a low frequency word
than for a high frequency word. Figure 6b is a log-log
plot of accuracy versus α. The straight line indicates a
power law of practice emerging from the model. (A plot

832

of response time versus α yields the same result.)

Discussion
We described a probabilistic model that offers a compact,
formal language for characterizing the time course of information transmission, and the changes in information
transmission due to long-term repetition priming. The
model explains key phenomena in the long-term repetition priming literature, including: the bias and sensitivity effects, the dependence of the sensitivity effect on
word frequency, and the time course of priming within
a trial. We (Colagrosso, 2002; Mozer, Colagrosso, &
Huber, 2002) have used this model to address other priming phenomena, including: the effects of target-distractor
similarity, the decay of bias effects over time, alternative response paradigms including naming and matching,
and response priming effects. The elegance of the model
stems in part from the Bayesian framework, which dictates the mechanisms of inference within a pathway, and
in part from parameters that correspond directly to quantities of psychological interest, such as interitem similarity (γ) and degree of experience (α).
Other models have been proposed to explain the data
addressed in in this paper, most notably REM (Schooler,
Shiffrin, & Raaijmakers, 2001) and the counter model
(McKoon & Ratcliff, 2001; Ratcliff & McKoon, 1997).
Our model has some similarities with these models: we
share the assumption with REM that perceptual and

1

0.7

-log(P(Correct Response))

P(Correct Response)

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3
0

(a)

0.6

20

40
60
Asscociation strength

80

100

0

(b)

1

2
3
log(Asscociation strength)

4

Figure 6: (a) The accuracy of the model as a function of association frequency, α, for a fixed flash duration. (b) A
log-log plot of accuracy versus association frequency.
memory systems adapt to achieve optimal performance
over evolution and development; and we share the assumption with the counter model of gradual accumulation of decision-making evidence over time. However,
the existing models have some serious weaknesses. REM
makes the unparsimonious assumption that an item’s lexical trace is augmented with context, which allows the
model to behave as if it is taking into account prior probabilities, whereas we model the priors directly. Further,
although REM is based on a probabilistic framework, it
gets much less leverage from the framework than does
our model. The counter model operates in a currency
of counts, and the rules for accruing counts are somewhat arbitrary, e.g., the stealing of counts by a studied
item from visually similar neighbors. Neither model offers a natural explanation for increased sensitivity to lowfrequency words. And most importantly, neither model
has intrinsic temporal dynamics that lead to strong predictions concerning performance as a function of stimulus exposure duration.
Our model has two virtues. First, despite its parsimony, it offers a broad conceptual framework, not restricted to a particular experimental paradigm or task.
Second, the two distinct mechanisms that explain bias
and sensitivity effects were introduced not simply to explain the data, but are motivated on logical grounds, in
contrast to the existing models. The mechanisms—one
that adjusts the pathway output prior probabilities and
the other that adjusts transmission probabilities within
a pathway—are extremely sensible mechanisms for an
adaptive system. The priors can be viewed as a simple
model of the environment, and updating this model is
appropriate if encountering an object in one’s environment implies that one is more likely to encounter the
object in the future. The transmission probabilities can
be viewed as a limited-capacity resource, and allocating
this resource to recently performed cognitive operations
is judicious assuming that they are likely to be required
again. These primitive mechanisms subserve not only
long-term priming, but also offer insight into the more
general phenomenon of skill refinement. One example of
this claim is the power law of practice the model exhibits,
ubiquitous in human performance. Another example is

833

the prediction of the model that associative strengthening due to priming should be longlasting and association
specific. These properties appear to be robust characteristics of skill learning (Healy & Bourne, 1995).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant 97–18 from the
McDonnell-Pew Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, NSF
award IBN–9873492, and NIH/IFOPAL R01 MH61549–01A1.

References
Bowers, J. S. (1999). Priming is not all bias: Commentary
on Ratcliff and McKoon (1997). Psychological Review,
106, 582–596.
Colagrosso, M. D. (2002). A rational theory of skilled performance and practice: Modeling long-term repetition
priming. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University
of Colorado.
Dean, T., & Kanazawa, K. (1989). A model for reasoning
about persistence and causation. Artificial Intelligence,
93, 1–27.
Healy, A. F., & Bourne, L. E. (1995). Learning and memory of knowledge and skills: Durability and specificty.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kanazawa, K., Koller, D., & Russell, S. J. (1995). Stochastic simulation algorithms for dynamic probabilistic networks. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference
on Uncertainty in AI (UAI) (pp. 346–351). Montreal,
Canada.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (2001). Counter model for word
identification: Reply to Bowers (1999). Psychological
Review, 108, 674–681.
Mozer, M. C., Colagrosso, M. D., & Huber, D. E. (2002).
A rational analysis of cognitive control in a speeded
discrimination task. In T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, &
Z. Ghahramani (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 14. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1997). A counter model for implicit priming in perceptual word identification. Psychological Review, 104, 319–343.
Schooler, L. J., Shiffrin, R. M., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W.
(2001). A Bayesian model for implicit effects in perceptual identification. Psychological Review, 108, 257–
272.
Wagenmakers, E.-J. M., Zeelenberg, R., & Raaijmakers, J.
G. W. (2000). Testing the counter model for perceptual
identification: Effects of repetition priming and word
frequency. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7, 662–
667.

