UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanisms of induction in children and adults: Evidence from the study of memory
distortions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66s2b38b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Fisher, Anna V.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanisms of induction in children and adults: Evidence from the study of
memory distortions
Anna V. Fisher (fisher.449@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science & Department of Psychology
Ohio State University
1961 Tuttle Park Place, 210E
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University
1961 Tuttle Park Place, 208C
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
participants treat labels as markers of categories.
Therefore, labels are especially helpful when entities
are novel or ambiguous: labels point to common
categories even if perceptual information does not.
In short, under this view, induction is a function of
categorization.
Another possibility is that children perform
induction by computing similarity among presented
entities. Because members of the same category
often happen to be more similar to each other than
they are to members of other categories, young
children are more likely to induce properties to
members of the same category. Under this view,
labels are heavily weighted attributes contributing to
the overall similarity (Sloutsky & Lo, 1999), and this
overall similarity drives both induction and
categorization.
In much of the previous research, the role of
conceptual and perceptual information in induction
was studied by directly pitting perceptual similarity
and labels against each other, by employing the
“triad” task (Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky,
Lo, & Fisher, 2001). In this task, participants are
presented with a target and two test stimuli. Then
participants are familiarized with some facts about
the test stimuli, and asked to make an inference to the
target. The most important feature of the task is that
the Target stimulus shares perceptual similarity with
one Test stimulus, whereas it shares the same label
with the other Test stimulus. The dependent measure
in this paradigm is the proportion of label-based
responses.
Overall, results indicate that children rely
heavily on labeling information under a no-conflict
condition (for instance, when the Target and both
Test items look alike), whereas the proportion of
label-based responses drops when one test item is
similar to the Target, whereas the other test item has
the same label (Gelman & Markman, 1987; Sloutsky,
Lo, & Fisher, 2001).

Abstract
This paper examines mechanisms underlying
induction in young children and adults. Predictions of
two alternative theories of induction were tested on 37
young children and 51 adults using the DRM
paradigm. The findings indicate that young children
are more likely to perform similarity-based induction,
and adults are more likely to perform category-based
induction. Also, the reported experiment demonstrates
that under certain conditions young children exhibit
better memory performance than adults.

Introduction
Our ability to perform inductive inferences, that
is to form generalized conclusions from particular
instances, is crucial for survival: “our knowledge that
leopards can be dangerous leads us to keep a safe
distance from jaguars” (Sloman, 1993, p. 321).
Previous studies demonstrated that even infants are
capable of performing simple inductions about
objects’
unobservable
properties
(Baldwin,
Markman, & Melartin, 1993; Mandler and
McDonough, 1996; Graham, Kilbreath, & Welder,
2001). However the precise mechanism that allows
children to perform inductive generalizations remains
unknown.
One possibility is that people, including young
children, first identify presented stimuli as members
of categories, and then perform inductive inferences
on the basis of categorization (Gelman, & Markman,
1986; Gelman, 1988). For example, when presented
with two rabbits and a dog and told that one of the
rabbits has hollow bones inside its body, a child is
more likely to generalize this property to another
rabbit than to a dog because she (presumably)
understands that both rabbits belong to the same
category, and members of the same category share
many properties. According to this view, when
presented entities are labeled by count nouns,

402

during the study phase.
This is because
categorization tasks may facilitate category-level
representation instead of item-level representation of
individual stimuli. Therefore this variant of the DRM
paradigm may help distinguishing between the two
theoretical approaches to induction. Suppose that
during the study phase, the task is to perform
induction. If participants perform induction on the
basis of categorization, then their accuracy should
decrease compared to the regularly memory or
baseline condition: they should wrongly recognize
new members of the target category as old items. At
the same time, if participants perform induction on
the basis of similarity, the introduction of induction
in the study phase should not change their accuracy.
Therefore, the “induction-via-categorization”
position would predict that both children (as well as
adults) should exhibit a decrease in accuracy when
asked to perform induction during the study phase of
a DRM-type task. At the same time, the similaritybased position predicts a significantly larger drop off
in accuracy in adults than in young children precisely
because young children perform similarity-based
induction, whereas adults perform category-based
induction.
Furthermore, under the induction
condition young children may exhibit greater
accuracy than adults.
To test this hypothesis we constructed a task that
consists of a study phase and a recognition phase.
The task was presented under three conditions:
induction, blocked categorization, and memory, or
baseline.
These conditions had an identical
recognition phase, but they differed in the study
phase. Both the study and recognition phases used
pictures of highly familiar animals, whose familiarity
was established in a separate calibration study with 5year-olds. In this calibration study, participants were
presented with pictures of cats, bears, and birds, and
were asked to name them. Over 86% of the pictures
of bears, 94% of the pictures of birds, and 99% of the
pictures of cats were correctly identified and labeled
by young children. Because, these animals are so
familiar and easily namable, young children should
easily identify these animals as members of
respective categories. Therefore, if induction in
young children is category-based, and the typical role
of labels is to denote common categories, then these
pictures should prompt category-based induction
even in the absence of labels.
In the study phase of the Induction condition,
participants were presented with a picture of a Target
animal (a cat), and were told that this animal has a
certain biological property. Participants were then
presented with pictures of animals from three
different categories: cats, bears, and birds. When
each picture was presented, participants were asked

These results, however, are inconclusive in that
proponent of either position could claim these results
as supporting evidence. Proponents of the former
(i.e., “induction-via-categorization”) position could
argue that labels are “central” properties denoting
categories, and therefore, results indicate that, under
most conditions, induction is a function of
categorization.
Proponents of the latter (i.e.,
“similarity-based”) position could argue that because
participants exhibit flexible reliance on labels, it
seems unlikely that labels are “central” properties.
In short, the “triad” task is somewhat limited in
that both positions make quantitatively, but not
qualitatively, different predictions regarding young
children’s induction performance.
To further
differentiate between these two theoretical positions,
we deemed it necessary to create a task that would
elicit conflicting predictions from the two theoretical
positions. One possibility is to study memories
created as a result of performing an induction task.
The rationale for using such tasks is that processing
of perceptual and conceptual information may
manifest itself in different memory traces, in such a
way that perceptual processing should lead to
creation of memory traces that contain more
perceptual information about the stimulus than
conceptual processing, thus allowing us to
differentiate between category-based and similaritybased inductive inferences.
One possible candidate is a memory task based
on the DRM paradigm. The DRM paradigm was
originally developed by Deese to study intrusions in
free recall (1959), and recently used by Roediger and
McDermott (1995) to demonstrate high levels of false
recognition in the domain of word learning (hence
obtaining its name: DRM for Deese, Roediger, and
McDermott). The DRM task usually consists of two
parts. In the first part participants are asked to listen
to a list of words (i.e. “bed”, “rest”, “awake”, etc.),
with every list composed of associates of one word
(i.e., “sleep”) that is not presented. The first part of
the experiment is immediately followed by a recall or
a recognition task. The finding is that participants are
very likely to recall or recognize with confidence the
associates of study items that had never been
presented. This phenomenon proved to hold true
outside of the verbal domain, and was recently
demonstrated with pictorial stimuli. Koutstaal and
Schacter (1997) obtained high levels of false
recognition using colored pictures representing
different object categories (i.e., boats, cats, shoes,
etc.).
It seems likely that if participants exhibit a high
level of false alarms under regular memory
conditions, they should exhibit even higher levels of
false alarms if they are forced to categorize entities

403

rate for children who should be quite accurate across
these conditions. Furthermore, due to the increased
levels of false alarms for adults, but not for children
in the Induction condition, we expect children to
exhibit greater accuracy than adults in the Induction
condition. In short, we expect children to form itemspecific representations and adults to form categorylevel representations in the Induction conditions,
which, in turn, should affect their recognition
accuracy.
This research has, therefore, two goals. Our first
goal is to present evidence that that mechanisms
underlying induction differ for young children and
for adults. Our second goal is to demonstrate that
this difference in induction manifests itself in
different memory representations. These different
representations may result in greater memory
accuracy in children than in adults. Therefore, this
research will help to differentiate between to
alternative theories of induction in young children
and contribute new knowledge to the studies of
memory in children and adults.

whether or not the animal in question had the same
property as the Target animal. They were then
provided with feedback, such that only members of
the same biological kind (i.e., cats), but not of other
kinds (i.e., bears and birds) had this property.
In the study phase of the Blocked Categorization
condition, participants were presented with a picture
of a Target animal (a cat), and were told that this
animal is young. They were then presented with
pictures of animals from three different categories,
cats, bears, and birds. When each picture was
presented, participants were asked whether or not the
animal in question is young. They were then
provided with random feedback. In this condition,
categorization based on the natural kind membership
was blocked: participants were forced to look for
cues distinguishing young and mature animals across
categories. We expected that this manipulation
should facilitate item-level processing and would
block categorization.
Finally, in the study phase of the Baseline
condition, participants were asked to remember the
animals and they were told they their memory would
be tested.
During the recognition phase, which was
identical for all three conditions, participants were
presented with pictures half of which they had seen in
the study phase, whereas the other half consisted of
new pictures. Participants were asked whether or not
they had seen each picture during the study phase. If
induction in the study phase is indeed based on prior
categorization, the rate of false recognition of novel
items from the Target category (i.e., cats) in the
Induction condition should increase compared to the
Blocked Categorization condition. This is because in
the Induction condition participants perform
category-level processing, and form category-level
representations,
whereas
in
the
Blocked
Categorization condition they should perform itemlevel
processing,
and
form
item-specific
representations. If, however, induction is based on
the computation of similarity, the proportion of false
alarms should not increase in the Induction condition
compared to the Blocked Categorization condition: in
both conditions participants should be rather accurate
in distinguishing old items from new items. This is
because under both conditions, participants should
perform item-level processing and from item-specific
representations.
Because we expect children to perform
similarity-based induction and adults to perform
category-based induction (cf. Sloutsky, et al., 2001),
we predict a marked increase in false alarm rates in
the Induction condition compared to the Blocked
Categorization or Baseline conditions for adults. At
the same time, we predict no increase in false alarms

Method
The goal of the reported experiment is to demonstrate
that different mechanisms underlie inductive
inference in children and adults. This general claim
leads to two specific predictions with regards to the
DRM procedure.
First, the nature of a task
(Induction vs. Blocked Categorization vs. Baseline)
should alter adults’ but not children’s memory
performance. Second, adults should exhibit greater
decrease in accuracy in the Induction condition
compared to the Block categorization and Memory
conditions than children. And third, in the Induction
condition, children would exhibit greater memory
accuracy than adults.

Participants
Participants in the experiment were young children
from the suburbs of Columbus (18 girls and 19 boys,
M = 5.3 years, SD = .25 years), and introductory
psychology students who received a partial credit for
completing the task (33 women and 18 men, M =
19.2 years, SD = 1.2 years)

Materials and Design
Materials in this experiment were color
photographs of animals presented against white
background. A total of forty-five photographs were
used in Experiment 1. The include photographs of
cats, birds, bears, and squirrels. As mentioned above,
to ensure that each item is familiar to young children,
we also ran a calibration study, in which young

404

none of which was presented in the study phase),
96% of children and 93% of adults accurately
rejected these new items. Therefore, the majority
of children and adults took the task seriously and
paid attention to stimuli during the study phase. In
addition, the majority of children and adults
accurately performed induction in the Induction
condition (85% of children and 89% of adults).
At the same time, participants exhibited
different accuracy for the Target items and critical
distracters (i.e., distracters coming from the same
category as the Target items). Note that correct
detection of an Old Target represents a hit, whereas
an erroneous recognition of a new critical distracter
as an Old Target represents a false alarm.
Proportions of hits and false alarms by age and
experimental conditions are presented in Table 1.
Note that in the Induction condition, adults had
20% higher false alarm rate than children, whereas
there were no differences in the other conditions.
Proportions presented in Table 1 were
averaged across participants in each condition, and
then used to compute A-prime values, which are
non-parametric analogues of the d-prime statistic.
Mean A-prime values by age and experimental
conditions are presented in Figure 1.

children were asked to label each of the presented
items.
The task consisted of two phases (i.e., Study and
Recognition), and there were three between-subject
conditions (i.e., Baseline, Induction, and Blocked
Categorization). In the Induction condition
participants were first shown a picture of the Target
animal (a cat in this case) and told that the animal has
beta-cells inside its body. After that participants were
presented with 30 pictures of animals from three
different categories (cats, bears, and birds) and asked
whether each depicted animal also had beta-cells
inside its body. Feedback was provided after each
trial. Participants were told that they were correct if
they judged a cat, but not a bear or a bird to possess
the Target biological property.
In the Blocked Categorization Condition
participants were told that the Target animal is
young. After that participants were presented with 30
pictures of animals from three different categories
(cats, bears, and birds) and asked whether the animal
in each picture was young or grown-up. Five animals
from each category were randomly assigned to the
“young” or “grown-up” status, and random feedback
was provided to participants after each trial.
In the Baseline (or Memory) condition,
participants were asked to accurately remember each
picture for a future recognition test.
The recognition phase of the experiment
immediately followed the study phase, and was
identical for both conditions. Participants were
presented with pictures, one at a time, some of which
they saw in the first phase of the experiment (pictures
of previously seen cats and bears; 7 pictures per
category) and some of which were completely new
pictures (pictures of novel cats and squirrels; 7
pictures per category). Participants were presented
with a total of 28 pictures in the recognition phase of
the experiment. They were asked to identify whether
each presented picture was “old” (previously seen
during the study phase) or “new” (not seen during the
study phase). No feedback was provided in the
recognition phase of the experiment.

Table 1. Mean proportions of Hits and False
Alarms (FA) by age and experimental condition.
Children
Hits
FA

Hits

Adults
FA

Induction

.72

.41

.83

.76

Blocked
Categoriza
tion
Baseline
(Memory)

.75

.54

.80

.50

.77

.50

.88

.47

A-prime values were submitted to the two-way
(age level by experimental condition) ANOVA.
The analysis indicated a significant age by
condition interaction, F (2, 137) = 4.8, MSE = .268,
p < .01. This result supports our qualitative
prediction, indicating that the change in the task
affected performance of adults but not children.
The main effect of the experimental condition was
significant, F (1, 137) = 3.6, MSE = .199, p < .03,
whereas the main effect of age was not, F (1, 137),
MSE = .121, p < .143. Interaction is the most
important: as predicted, A-prime in children did
not differ across the conditions, whereas A-prime
in adults was markedly lower in the Induction
condition than in the other two conditions, F (2,

Procedure
All stimuli were presented to participants on
computer screens. Young children were interviewed
by female experimenters in quiet rooms of several
childcare centers. Introductory psychology students
were tested individually, and had all instructions
presented to them on a computer screen.

Results and Discussion
Both children and adults were very accurate in
rejection of non-target distracters (i.e., squirrels,

405

consistent with the similarity-based model of
induction as they indicate that even at 5 years of age,
there are many children who, unlike adults, perform
induction by comparing each item in question with
the Target.

140) = 3.5, MSE = .207, p < .03. Furthermore, as
predicted, in the Induction condition young
children exhibited greater accuracy than adults,
one-tailed t = 1.8, p < .06. Finally, there were
more young children exhibiting near ceiling
accuracy in rejecting critical distracters in the
induction condition than there were adults: 41% of
young children had A-prime values > .8, while
only 10% of adults did. Also, only 8% of children
had A-prime values < .25, whereas over 24 % of
adults had these low A-primes.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
James S. McDonnell Foundation and the National
Science Foundation (BCS # 0078945) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

Figure 1. Mean A-prime values by age and
experimental condition in the recognition phase.
Induction

1
0.9
0.8

References

A dult B aseline
(M emo ry Co nditio n)

Blocked Categorization
Children B aseline
(M emo ry Co nditio n)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Adults

Children

Overall, these results indicate that the study phase
task does not affect memory performance of young
children – across tasks they distinguished Old Targets
from distracters equally well, whereas adults
performed significantly better under the memory and
blocked categorization conditions than they did under
the induction condition. When the task was to induce
biological properties from one member of a category
to the other members of this category, adults were
significantly more likely to false alarm on the
members of this target category during recognition
than in the other two conditions. Therefore, it seems
likely that adults performed induction on the basis of
categorization. At the same time, when the task was
to induce biological properties, young children did
not increase the rate of false alarms compared to the
other conditions. Furthermore, in this condition,
young children exhibited greater overall accuracy
than adults, there was a greater proportion of young
children than adults exhibiting near ceiling accuracy,
and there was a smaller proportion of young children
than adults exhibiting near floor accuracy.
These finding indicate that while adults construct a
category–level representations, young children
construct item-level representations when performing
induction. Therefore, these findings do not support
the theory that young children’s induction is
categorization-based.
These findings are rather

406

Baldwin D. A., Markman E. M., & Melartin R. L.
(1993). Infants' ability to draw inferences about
nonobvious object properties: Evidence from
exploratory play. Child Development, 64, 711-728.
Brainerd, C. J., Reyna, V. F., & Forrest, T. J. (2002).
Are young children susceptible to the falsememory illusion? Child Development, 73, 13631377.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 17-22.
Gelman S. A., & Markman E. M. (1986). Categories
and induction in young children. Cognition, 23,
123-209.
Gelman S. A., & Markman E. M. (1987). Young
children's inductions from natural kinds: The role
of categories and appearances. Child Development,
58, 1532-1541.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction
within natural kind and artifact categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 65-95.
Graham S.A., Kilbreath C. S., & Welder A. N.
(2001). Words and Shape Similarity Guide 13
month-olds’ inferences about nonobvious object
properties. Proceedings of the XXIII Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 352357.
Koutstaal, W., & Schacter, D. L. (1997). Gist-based
false recognition of pictures in older and younger
adults. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 555583.
Mandler J. M., & McDonough L. (1996). Drinking
and driving don't mix: Inductive generalization in
infancy. Cognition, 59, 307-335.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995).
Creating false memories: Remembering words not
present in lists. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21,
803-814.
Sloman, A. S. (1993). Feature-based induction.
Cognitive Psychology, 25, 231-280.

Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y-F. (1999). How much does
a shared name make things similar? Part 1.
Linguistic labels and the development of similarity
judgment. Developmental Psychology, 6, 14781492.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001).
How much does a shared name make things
similar? Linguistic labels, similarity, and the
development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117, 34-50.
Underwood, B.J. (1965). False recognition produced
by implicit verbal responses. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 70, 122-129.

407

