UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental metalogic and its empirical justifications: The case of reasoning with quantifiers and
predicates

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vc0q850

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Yang, Yingrui
Bringsjord, Selmer

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental metalogic and its empirical justifications:
The case of reasoning with quantifiers and predicates
Yingrui Yang 1,3 and Selmer Bringsjord 1,2,3
yangyri@rpi.edu • selmer@rpi.edu
1

Department of Cognitive Science
Department of Computer Science
3
Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA
2

Abstract
We report on a series of experiments designed to test
a new, unifying theory in psychology of deductive
reasoning: mental metalogic (MML, for short; Yang
& Bringsjord, 2001), which marks the unification of
mental logic (ML) and mental model (MM) theory,
and stands in part on the strength of empirical
investigation of strategic interactions between logical
syntactic and logical semantic processes in human
reasoning. MML promises to resolve the longstanding controversy between ML and MM.

I. Introduction
Few would dispute the claim that reasoning,
including deduction (which is the focus of the present
paper), is a fundamental human ability. But how do
people reason deductively, by applying inference
schemas or by constructing mental models? (In
asking this question we are not begging the question
against those who hold that deductive reasoning
proceeds neither by the application of schemas nor by
the principled use of mental models. It’s just that
herein we are specifically concerned with MM and
ML. We return to this issue in the final section.) In
the last three decades, the psychology of reasoning
has produced countless papers in psychological
journals (such as Psychological Review, Science, and
Behavioral & Brain Sciences) aimed at providing an
answer to this question. Alas, the answer and
explanation have never arrived. We have proposed a
new theory, mental metalogic (MML), which
attempts to integrate current mental logic and mental
models theories, and aims to study the interactions
between syntactic and semantic processes in human
deductive reasoning (Yang & Bringsjord, 2001,
2003).
Mental metalogic is based on both Braine’s
mental logic theory (an alternative mental logic
approach is given by Rips, 1994) and JohnsonLaird’s mental models theory. This integrated theory
strikes us natural, from the standpoint of modern
symbolic logic, because without either formal syntax
(here taken to include proof theory, based on rules of
inference) or formal semantics (which includes
model theory), it would be impossible to have any

1275

metatheory — and advancing metatheory has become
the essence of the field of logic.
In order to see more specifically, first, how
MML accounts for empirical results that ML and MM
handle, consider some of the recent psychological
literature on quantified predicate reasoning from the
standpoints of both ML and MM: e.g., Yang, Braine,
& O’Brien, 1998; Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2000a,
2000b, 2001. The experimental materials in question
share the same surface content (viz., attributes of
beads, a group of children and its subgroups, such as
boys and girls). To show that ML can accommodate
this material, we conducted a large-scale empirical
investigation (i.e., Yang, 1996) of Braine’s mental
predicate logic system (Braine, 1998). This work
established a parametrical model, which predicts
problem difficulties by using schema-weights
generated from perceived difficulty ratings. This
methodology is now well-established in the
psychological literature on reasoning (e.g., see
Osherson, 1975; Rips, 1994; Braine, Reiser, &
Rumain, 1984; called “BRR data” for mental
propositional logic). The results provided not only
direct empirical evidence in support of mental logic,
but also challenged mental model theory. The
challenge was that most inferences tested concerned
quantified compound statements (e.g., a quantified
disjunction), but mental model theory at that time
only provided initial model representations for
quantified atomic statements.
On the mental models side, in recent years
the most significant developments have pertained to
illusory
inference.
Johnson-Laird
and
his
collaborators have published a dozen articles on this
topic, including the widely read one in Science (2000).
Sensitive to these developments, we empirically
confirmed a number of MM-based predictions
regarding human illusions in quantified reasoning —
predictions flowing, in large part, from the Principle
of Truth (POT): viz., that people construct mental
models based mostly on what is true but not what is
false (Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2000a). In this work,
predictions about the antidotes to these illusions were
specifically confirmed (2000b). These results showed
not only the explanatory power of mental model
theory, but also seriously challenged mental logic
theory. The challenge was that no co-current mental
inference schemas could account for the Principle of

Truth, which can be used to predict both the controls
and the illusions; the principle thus seems to be
fundamentally semantic.
So, at this point there is data explained by
ML, data explained by MM, and phenomena to
challenge both theories. From our point of view, the
challenge to each side required a solution, and we
propose a fairly radical one: a new theory of
reasoning: mental metalogic. The initial stage for
building MML was to modify the MM and ML
representations in order to account for up-to-date
empirical data. A new representation scheme able to
bridge the separate syntactic and semantic
representational systems was needed, and is now
accomplished. But in this paper we focus on part of
the next, and probably harder, stage, namely, the
empirical investigation of the syntactic-semantic
interactions predicted by MML.

II. Empirical Program and Results
MML theory has been developed into a principled
framework to account for the interactions between
logical syntactic processes and logical semantic
processes in reasoning (Yang & Bringsjord, 2001a,b).
Two issues are worth addressing here, one theoretical,
the other empirical. The theoretical issue concerns
so-called logical rationality: What logical expectation
in human deductive reasoning does a psychological
theory imply? Mental logic theory is committed to
the logical expectation that people reason
strategically by applying inference schemas. Mental
model theory is committed to the logical expectation
that people reason by constructing mental models. As
a meta-theory, MML is committed to the logical
expectation that human deductive reasoning may
involve strategic interactions between applying
inference schemas and constructing mental models.
Note that MML allows purely syntactic or purely
semantic processes as its special case in modeling.
The empirical issue is about the problem types, which
we suggest is a key notion in conducting empirical
research on human reasoning: What problem type can
a psychological theory account for? Psychology of
reasoning is an empirical science. Even in large-scale
empirical research, only a limited number of
reasoning problems, rather than a logical system, can
be examined. (The space of problems is surely
infinite.) Thus, the notion of problem type is
essential to empirically test MML: What problem
type would demand mixed strategies between
applying inference schemas and constructing mental
models? This paper will identify five problem types.
The first three problem types are given immediately
below. Problem Type 3 was used in Experiment Sets
1 and 2. Problem Type 4 (used in Experiment 3) and
Problem Type 5 (used in Experiment 4) can both be
seen as variants of Problem Type 3, as will be seen.

1276

Problem Type 1 is a set of experimental
problems used to examine one mental predicate logic
theory (Braine, 1998; Yang, Braine, and
O’Brien,1998). Here is an example:
All the beads are wooden or metal.
The wooden beads are red.
The metal beads are green.
The square beads are not red.
Are the square beads green?
By mental logic theory, this is a three-step problem.
Each step involves applying an inference schema: by
Premises 1-3 one could infer “all the beads are red or
green”, from which one could infer “All the square
beads are red or green”, then by Premise 4 one would
answer “yes” to the question.
Problem Type 2 is a set of experimental
problems used to examine some illusory inference
predicted by the mental model theory (Yang and
Johnson-Laird 2001). Here is an example:
Only one of the following statements is true:
Some of the plastic beads are not red, or
None of the plastic beads are red.
Is it possible that none of the red beads are
plastic?
To solve this problem correctly, one has to consider
two possible cases: when the first premise is true and
second premise is false, and when the first premise is
false and the second premise is true. Mental model
theory predicates that this is an illusory problem by
the semantic hypothesis known as Principle of Truth:
People often represent only what is true, not what is
false (Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2001).
Problem Type 3 can now be constructed by
simply integrating Problem Types 1 and 2, an
instance of which is given below:
The premises given below are either all true
or all false:
All the beads are wooden or metal.
The wooden beads are red.
The metal beads are green.
The square beads are not red.
Is possible that the square beads are green?
As we pointed out in the introduction, either mental
logic theory or mental model theory alone would have
some difficulty accounting for this new problem type.
MML claims that based on the current mental logic
and mental model theories, Problem Types 3 may
demands a mixed strategy between applying inference
schemas and constructing mental models. Some more
detailed analyses will be given in the discussions
following Experiments 1 and 2.

Experiment 1
Problem Type 3 can be used to manipulate three
independent variables, explained as follows. The first
independent variable is about the order of true/false
in the heading statement. The heading statement in
the above example can also be stated as: “The
premises given below are either all false or all true”.
The second independent variable is about the set of
premises. For a given problem, it can have the set of
original premises, or the denials of these premises.
The third independent variable is how a question is
presented. It can take the form, “Is it possible
that …” or “Does it necessarily follow that …”. Thus,
by manipulating these three independent variables,
eight sub-types for a given problem are produced. For
example, consider the instance of Problem Type 3
above; its “false/true, denial, and necessity” version
is:
The premises given below are either all false
or all true:
Some of the beads are neither wooden
nor metal.
Some of the wooden beads are not red
Some of the metal beads are not green.
Some of the square beads are red.
Does it necessarily follow that the square
beads are green?
Design A 2x2x2 between-subjects design
was used to manipulate the three independent
variables in eight conditions according to the 8
problem types explained above. 18 original multistep problems similar to the example above were
carefully selected from Yang, et al. (1998; Appendix
1, where the 18 problems were listed as: 17, 18, 3538, 40, 41, 43-45, 55-57, and 59-62) in conformity to
the following criteria: (1) The conclusion deductively
follows from the premises given in each problem
(called “true problems” in Yang, et. al., 1998). (2)
For each problem, simultaneously denying each of
the given premises forms a consistent set, i.e., no
contradiction ensues. (3) For none of the problems
does the conclusion follow from the set of denied
given premises. Each of the 18 original problems was
edited into 8 problem types. Doing so yields eight
sets of 18 experimental problems with the same type.
Materials. Each of these sets was printed in
a booklet with one problem on each page, with
enough space for the participants to make notes. The
participants were given a single booklet of problems,
so they encountered only one problem type in the
experiment.
Procedure. The participants were tested
individually in a quiet room. They were given written
instructions, which included one practice problem.
They were encouraged to write or to draw on the
problem page whatever they had in mind during the
course of solving a problem. Their task was to choose

1277

among the given responses (i.e., Yes, No, or Can’t
tell).
Participants. Eight samples of 20 RPI
undergraduates were paid to participate in the
experiment. They had no formal training in logic.
Results. The mean accuracy for each subproblem type is given in Table 1 (follows Experiment
2). For each two problem sets with the same types of
premises and question, order of true/false in the
heading statements had no effect. Thus, we combined
Data Sets 1&2, 3&4, 5&6, and 7&8 as listed in the
table above into four data sets. The results are clearcut. For the problems using original premises, the
problem type of possibility was evaluated
significantly more accurately than the problem type
of necessity (Mann-Whitney Uz = 5.17, p < .001). For
the problems using the denials of the original
premises, the problem type of necessity was evaluated
significantly more accurately than the problem type
of possibility (Mann-Whitney Uz = 5.14, p < .001). In
addition, there was a reliable interaction. The
difference between problem types of necessity and
possibility for the problems using original premises
was greater than for the problems using the denials of
the original premises (Mann-Whitney U = 44, p <
0.01).
Experiment 2
This is a cross-variant validation test relative to
Experiment 1 by using a within-subject design. All
the 18 experimental problems used in Experiment 1
involved only monadic predicates, which denotes
properties such as “All the beads are red”. Each
problem can have a variant involving dyadic
predicates, which denote relations such as “All the
children found red beads”. For example, a dyadic
version of the above instance (of Problem Type 3) is:
The premises given below are either all true
or all false:
All the children found either wooden beads
or metal beads
The wooden beads are red.
The metal beads are green.
The boys did not find red beads.
Is possible that the boys found green beads?
A set of 20 dyadic problems (of which 18 parallel the
set of monadic problems used in Experiment 1) was
constructed; two additional problems were selected
from the same Appendix (Yang, Braine, & O’Brien,
1998), because a within-subject design was used in
Experiment 2. Five data sets were collected following
a procedure similar to that employed in Experiment 1
(all the experimental sessions were individually
administered). Because Experiment 1 eliminated the
possibility of any order effect between the wordings
“all true or all false” and “all false or all true” in the
heading statements, only two independent variables
were manipulated this time: original premises vs.

their denials, and possibility questions vs. necessity
questions; this resulted in four sub-problem types. In
collecting each of the first four data sets, the booklets
included two sub-problem types (half & half). The
booklets used in collecting Data-Set 5 included all
four sub-problem types (5 for each). Figure 1 shows
that the results are highly correlated with the results
from Experiment 1.
Table 1. The mean accuracies for Experiments 1, 2,
and 4.
Problem type
Original &
Possibility
Original &
Necessity
Denial &
Possibility
Denial /
Necessity

% of
Accuracy
Type 3
monadic
91

Type 3
dyadic
86

Type 5
dyadic
88

46

32

29

60

66

75

83

75

81

Figure 1.

Discussion (Exp 1 & 2)
Before we start to discuss the results, one should
keep the following convention in mind. When we
talk refer syntactic processes, we mean the
application of some inference schemas proposed by
mental logic. When we refer to semantic processes,
we mean either: the application of some relevant
semantic principle (such as the Principle of Truth
proposed by mental model theory); the representing
of a problem in mental models; or the processing of
an inference in the manner proposed by mental model
theory. In other, and shorter, words, the discussions
will be based on the current theories of mental logic
and mental models.
The results can be viewed in showing
interactions of syntactic and semantic processes in a

1278

number of ways. First, remember that all the 18
original problems are soluble by applying the
inference schemas proposed by Braine’s theory of
mental predicate logic (1998), and reasoners can
solve these problems almost errorlessly (Yang, Braine,
& O’Brien, 1998). Now consider the problem type
generated by using the original premises with the
necessity question first. To solve problems of this
type correctly, one has to consider both the case in
which all the premises are true, and the one in which
all the premises are false. In this situation, mental
model theory, by virtue of its Principle of Truth,
holds that people often fail to cope with the “allfalse” case (Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2001a,b). This
principle can account for the fact that 55% of
participants responded “Yes” to the problems of
“original-necessity” type. But notice that the illusory
inference of this kind is very compelling, in the sense
that in order to answer “Yes,” reasoners still need to
solve the problem while attending to the face value of
each premise. At this “local situation,” reasoners may
likely apply inference schemas. However, another
fairly large portion of participants (45%) responded
“No” to the problems of this type, and would have
needed to consider the “all-false” case. In this local
situation, there are no inference schemas currently
available to deal with the denials of the original
premises, and reasoners may likely construct mental
models.
Second, consider the problem type of using
the original premises only. The results showed that
participants evaluated the possibility problems much
more accurately than the necessity problems. This
confirmed the prediction by mental model theory that
a possibility problem should be easier than its
necessity counterpart; this is the case because a
possibility problem requires only one model (in this
case, one general model for the situation of “all the
premises are true,” but a necessity problem requires
an additional model for the situation of “all the
premises are false”). Nevertheless, after reasoners
frame a single general model for the “all-true” case,
by our previous point, a reasoner could still apply
inference schemas in this semantically local situation.
Third, consider the problem type using the
denials of the original premises only. Contrary to the
previous point, the results showed that this time
necessity problems were evaluated more accurately
than possibility problems. It is easy to understand that
for the necessity problem with the denials, there are
no inference schemas that can apply, and a reasoner
could construct mental models based on the
immediate case in facing the denials of the original
premise. However, notice that a fairly large portion of
participants (60%) got the possibility problems right.
In this case, some participants might guess by looking
at the “all-true” case for the denials. Otherwise, a
reasoner would also need to look into the “all-false”
case for the denials; when this happens, which might

well be the case, the original premises would be
recovered and then inference schemas can apply.
In sum, we conclude that the performance of
the participants in this experiment could be heavily
bounded by the semantic principles proposed by the
mental model theory, but could also be explained by
the syntactic capacities claimed by mental logic
theory.
Experiment 3
The above discussions were largely based on the
Principle of Truth, which implies that most subjects
failed to consider the “all false” situations. But is this
the case? Experiment 3 was designed to test this
underlying hypothesis by following the same
procedure as Experiment 2. The same set of
experimental problems were used, except that instead
of using modal questions involving possibility and
necessity, this time each of the 20 problems followed
an indicative question started by: Does it follow
that …”. We count problems of this type as Problem
Type 4. Recall that half of the problems used original
premises, from which the putative conclusion
logically follows; and recall as well that half of the
problems (different problems) used the denials of
their original premises, from which the putative
conclusion doesn’t logically follow. The results were
clear-cut: 75% of participants answered “Yes” to the
problems with original premises, and 72% of
participants answered “No” to the problems with the
denials of their original premises. In the case of
denials, if participants looked at the “all false”
situation, their original premises could be recovered,
and they would answer, “Yes”, as they did in the case
of originals. By the same token, participants would
answer, “No”, if they looked into the “all false”
situation as they did in the case of denials. Thus, this
result provides clear evidence in support of the
proposition that the Principle of Truth was indeed
used in our previous analyses.
Experiment 4
Problem Type 5 was also constructed based on
Problem Type 3; the difference was that this time for
each problem, a modal operator, “possibly”, was
inserted (once or twice) into the premises. Here is an
example:
The premises given bellow are either all true
or all false:
All the children found either wooden
beads or possibly metal beads
The wooden beads are red.
The metal beads are possibly green.
The boys did not find red beads.
Is possible that the boys found green beads?
Experiment 4 was intended to enable further
examination of the reliability of our discussions for

1279

Experiment 1 by using this new problem type. A set
of 20 Type 5 problems were constructed parallel to
the set of Type 3 dyadic problems used in Experiment
2. The same procedure as Experiment 2 was used, and
the results did not show significant difference in
comparison with either Experiment 1 or 2 (see Table
1). Notice that inserting modal operators into
premises might change their internal logical structure,
and in turn, it might cause certain framing effects. But
it didn’t happen. Our explanations of this are two-fold.
On the one hand, it shows that the phenomena
observed in Experiments 1 and 2 are very robust, and
it makes us more confident about the MML analyses.
On the other hand, we suspect that the result is due to
the fact that Problem Types 3 and 5 share the same
modal questions. (For instance, the accuracies for the
sub-problem types such as the original/possibility and
the denial/necessity were high, which did not leave
much room to improve. An interesting experiment for
further research would be using a new problem type
integrating Problem types 4 and 5, which is Problem
Type 6 with modal premises and indicative questions.)

III. Brief reply to potential objections
Space constraints preclude anticipating and rebutting
the inevitable objections, but we will say a few words.
The current version of mental metalogic theory is
based in significant part on the current schism
between mental logic and mental model theories; we
refer to this dichotomy as the “paradigm.” In general,
objections to MML will come from both inside and
outside this paradigm. From the inside, some mental
logicians and/or mental model theorists will resist an
integrated approach. They will insist that one theory
(either ML or MM) is sufficient to explain all the
relevant data. A detailed reply to this position
includes a discussion of problem types that are
solvable – whether tackled by human or machine –
only through reasoning that is at once syntactic and
semantic; for an example see (Bringsjord & Yang,
forthcoming). In these problems, on the one hand
solutions require reasoning that proceeds in step-bystep fashion using schemas, yet on the other hand the
schemas reference not only linguistic patterns, but
also models. We know that explicitly teaching this
kind of hybrid reasoning can produce reasoners who
are immune the Wason selection task and the various
problems taken to show that human’s reasoning skill
can be largely improved through training of hybrid
reasoning strategies. (Rinella, Bringsjord, Yang,
2001).
What about from outside the mental
logic/model clash? One objection from outside the
paradigm might be that both mental logic and mental
model theories are true (despite the fact that those
inside the paradigm energetically repeat that the
theories are outright competitors), and MML is just a
simple combination of the two. Hopefully the
empirical work reported above shows that such an
objection is mistaken. Some reviewer had a more

serious charge on MML that mental logic and mental
model theories are indistinguishable, referring to
Stenning and Yu (1997) and other logicians. To our
opinion, this is even more seriously mistaken. Briefly,
three points are worth noticing here. First, Stenning
and Yu (1997) only studied the case of simple
syllogisms, while the problem structure used in our
experiments are more complex. Second, there are
certain limitations for using graphical method such as
Vann Diagrams to represent complex compound
statements. Third, one the one hand, even with
Smullyan tree method, we don’t think logicians
would neglect the distinction between formal syntax
and formal semantics; on the other hand, as we
pointed our earlier, at the mental representation level,
mental logic can be seen as a partial selection of
formal syntax in logic and mental models as partial
selection of formal semantics, and thus there is not
current tree method to account for the function to
integrate the two partial selections. Fourth, The
present authors are highly respect and value Stenning
and Yule proposal. We regard that the determination
from choosing between their program and our MML
program is an empirical question, as both programs
are hypothetical about mental presentations and
mechanisms; and finally, we do appreciate reviews’
points and are thankful for offering us a chance to
report the empirical work on MML. As to those who
accept neither ML nor MM, sustained debate will be
required. We plan to defend the mental logic/model
paradigm against those taking a thoroughgoing
probabilistic, heuristic, or verbal approach –
approaches
we
cluster
together
under
“eliminativism.”
Explicit reasoning, whether
syntactic or semantic, or whether deductive,
inductive, or abductive, does seem to us to be an
undeniable part of human cognition, but full
treatment of this profound issue goes beyond this
short paper, and we refer the reader to (Yang and
Bringsjord, 2003)

Acknowledgment
We are grateful to P.N. Johnson-Laird for very
helpful comments and suggestions.

References
Braine, M.D.S. (1998). Steps toward a mental
predicate-logic. In M.D.S. Braine & D. P.
O’Brien (Eds.), Mental Logic. pp. 273-331.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bringsjord, S. & Yang, Y. (forthcoming) “The
Problems that Generate the Rationality Debate
are Too Easy, Given What our Economy Now
Demands," Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Braine, M.D.S., and O’Brien, D.P., (Eds.) (1998).
Mental Logic. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

1280

Johnson-Laird, P.N., Byrne, R.M.J., and Schaeken,
W.S. (1994) Why models rather than rules give a
better account of propositional reasoning: a reply
to Bonatti, and to O'Brien, Braine, and Yang.
Psychological Review, 101, 734-739.
Johnson-Laird, P,N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V. and
Legrenzi, M.S. (2000). Illusions in reasoning
about consistency. Science, Vol. 288, pp531-532.
O’Brien, D.P., Braine, M.D.S., and Yang, Y. (1994)
Propositional reasoning by mental models?
Simple to refute in principle and in practice.
Psychological Review, 101, 711-724.
Rinella, K., Bringsjord, S. & Yang, Y. (2001)
“Efficacious Logic Instruction: People are not
Irremediably Poor Deductive Reasoners,” in
Moore, J.D. & Stenning, K., eds., Proceedings of
the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates), pp. 851-856.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stenning, K. and Yule, P. (1997). Image and language
in human reasoning: A syllogistic illustration.
Cognitive Psychology, 34, 109-159.
Yang Y., Braine, M.D.S., and O'Brien, D.P. (1998).
Some empirical justification of one predicatelogic model. In M.D.S. Braine & D.P. (Eds.)
Mental Logic, pp. 333-365, Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Yang, Y., & Bringsjord, S. (2001). Mental MetaLogic:
A new paradigm for Psychology of reasoning.
The Proceedings of the Third International
Conference of Cognitive Science. USTC Press:
Beijing, China.
Yang, Y. & Bringsjord, S. (2003). Mental metalogic:
A new, unifying theory of human and machine
reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Yang, Y. and Johnson-Laird (2000). Illusions in
quantified reasoning: How to make impossible
seem possible, and vice versa. Memory &
Cognition. 28 (3), 452-465.

