UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
No Unified Scales for Perceptual Magnitudes: Evidence from Loudness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nk5702x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Stewart, Neil
Chater, Nick

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

No Unified Scales for Perceptual Magnitudes: Evidence from Loudness
Neil Stewart (neil.stewart@warwick.ac.uk)
Nick Chater (nick.chater@warwick.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Abstract
In this article we consider whether perceptual
magnitudes are represents on unified underlying scales.
We exploit the ubiquitous sequential effects seen in
judgments concerning the attributes of simple perceptual
stimuli. Participants made judgments about the intensity
of sinusoidal tones and white noise hisses. On each trial
in Experiment 1, participants heard a tone and a hiss and
judged which was the louder. The loudness of a stimulus
was assimilated much more towards a stimulus of the
same type on the previous trial, compared to a stimulus
of the other type. In Experiment 2, the effect of the
stimulus on the previous trial in an absolute
identification of loudness task was larger when previous
and current stimuli were of the same type. The
attenuation of sequential effects by a switch of stimulus
types suggests that the loudness of tones is not
represented in the same way as the loudness of hisses.
We argue that these sequential effects are indicative of
the relativity of perceptual judgment.

The experiments in this article were designed to
address two questions about the representation of
simple perceptual stimuli. First, are perceptual
magnitudes represented on the same underlying,
unified psychological scale or dimension? An
alternative way of framing this question is to ask
whether stimulus attributes can be abstracted from one
another and represented independently. Second, are
stimulus attributes judged according to their absolute
magnitudes or judged relative to other recent or
contextual stimuli? Both of these issues have received
some attention in the literature. Here we introduce two
new experimental procedures that reexamine these
questions.

Integrality and Separability
For some pairs of psychological dimensions, judgment
of the level of a stimulus on one dimension is not
interfered with by irrelevant variation on another
dimension. Such dimensions are said to be separable.
For other pairs of dimensions, orthogonal variation on
one dimension interferes with judgments of the level of
a stimulus on the other dimension. Such dimensions are
said to be integral. It seems that, for integral stimuli,
stimulus attributes are not represented independently of
one another.
A classic example of these phenomenon is the
Garner and Felfoldy (1970) card sorting task.
Participants sorted stimuli presented on cards on the
basis of one dimension. Within the set of cards to be

1116

sorted, the level of the stimulus on another dimension
was either held constant, varied in a correlated way, or
varied in an orthogonal way. When sorting stimuli that
were either single Munsell colour chips that could vary
in value and chroma, or dots that could vary in
horizontal and vertical position, facilitation was seen in
the correlated condition and interference in the
orthogonal condition. However other dimension pairs
(the value and chroma of separate Munsell colour
chips; circle size and diameter angle) showed little or
no facilitation or interference in these conditions.
Garner and Felfoldy noted that in direct stimulus
scaling studies, for the dimension pairs they tested,
integral stimuli gave a Euclidean metric and separable
stimuli gave a city-block metric thus building a
relationship between two previously disparate
concepts. Considerable empirical and theoretical work
has been done in this area - most notably with the
distinction between perceptual and decisional
separability by Ashby and his collegues (see, e.g.,
Ashby & Maddox, 1994; Ashby & Townsend, 1986) but the basic concepts of integral and separable
dimension pairs remain.
In both of the experiments we present in this article,
we will demonstrate a different, but related
phenomenon. However, before introducing these
experiments we review evidence of the rather
ubiquitous sequential effects seen in many
psychophysical tasks.

Sequential Effects in Psychophysics
The enterprise of psychophysics sought to find a lawful
relationship between physical stimulus intensity and
the psychological percept of the stimulus. The
enterprise began with Fechner's (1860/1966) law,
which relates the physical stimulus intensity to the
psychological sensation of the stimulus using the
logarithm transform. Almost 100 years later, Stevens
(1957) showed that direct judgments of stimulus
magnitudes conformed better with a power law. Both
of these laws have in common the idea that
representation is absolute: the percept of a stimulus's
magnitude is based on its physical intensity.
In many psychophysical tasks, judgments of a
stimulus's magnitude are strongly influenced by either
the stimuli or responses from immediately preceding
trials. Baird, Green, and Luce (1980) demonstrated that
two-thirds of the variability in loudness estimates was
explained by the variability in the previous estimate
when loudnesses were similar. In absolute

identification tasks, where participants are typically
asked to respond to stimuli with the rank of their
magnitude, responses are typically biased towards the
immediately preceding stimulus (assimilation: see, e.g.,
Garner, 1953; Holland & Lockhead, 1968; Long, 1937;
Luce, Nosofsky, Green, & Smith, 1982; Stewart, 2001;
Ward & Lockhead, 1970, 1971). Assimilation to
preceding items is also observed in magnitude
estimation tasks (e.g., Jesteadt, Luce, & Green, 1977),
in matching tasks (Stevens, 1975, p. 275), and in
relative intensity judgment tasks (Lockhead & King,
1983).
Authors differ in their accounts of these sequential
effects. Some authors dismiss these effects as biases of
absolute judgment. For example, Stevens is careful to
randomize the order of stimulus presentation and then
average across many trials in obtaining his power law
data, thus ignoring sequential effects present in his
data. Others view the biases as a consequence of
memory processes (e.g., Holland & Lockhead, 1968;
Lockhead & King, 1983) or as attentional processes
(e.g., Luce, Green, & Weber, 1976) or decision
processes (e.g., Treisman, 1985) operating within a
modified Thurstonian framework. An alternative is that
these sequential effects are revealing the basis of
absolute judgments: that stimuli are judged relative to
recent stimuli (see, e.g., Helson, 1964; Laming, 1997;
Stewart, Brown, & Chater, 2002). This is an idea that
we return to in the General Discussion.

Experiment 1
The intuition motivating Experiment 1 is that there are
no common scales for basic psychophysical properties
such as loudness, brightness, and weight. Instead, the
idea is that stimulus attributes are not abstracted from
one another. Under such a hypothesis the loudness of
pure sinusoidal tones, for example, would not be
represented in the same way as the loudness of white
noise stimuli.
On each trial in Experiment 1, participants were
presented with two stimuli: a pure sinusoidal tone and a
white noise hiss. Participants' task was to decide which
stimulus was the louder of the two. We examined the
sequential effects caused by the immediately preceding
trial. In absolute identification and magnitude
estimation, the current stimulus is typically assimilated
towards the previous stimulus. For example, a
moderate stimulus is judged quieter after a quiet
stimulus and louder after a loud stimulus. If the
absolute magnitude of the intensity of tones and hisses
is represented on a common scale, then the tone and the
hiss should both be affected in the same way by the
tone and the hiss from the previous trial. Alternatively,
if the loudness of tones is represented at least partially
independently from the loudness of the hiss, then the
tone should be assimilated towards the tone on the
previous trial and the hiss should be assimilated
towards the previous hiss.

1117

Method
Participants Thirty two students from the University
of Warwick participated for payment.
Stimuli Two sets of seven stimuli were constructed:
512-Hz sine wave tones and white noise hiss sounds.
The stimuli were generated using Mathematica 4.2
software and stored on a PC in WAV file format with a
sample depth of 16 bits and a sample rate of 44100 Hz.
The amplitudes were selected carefully to avoid
possible artifacts due to sample rate and depth during
digital sampling. All stimuli had a duration of 500 ms.
The amplitude of stimuli was linearly ramped from
zero to maximum in the first 50 ms of the stimulus and
from maximum to zero in the last 50 ms of the stimulus
to prevent click artifacts at the stimulus onset and
offset. Stimuli were transduced using a Creative Labs
Ensoniq CT5880 audio PCI sound card and Sennheiser
eH2270 headphones. The loudnesses of the tones were
72.0, 78.0, 82.0, 84.5, 87.0, 89.0, and 90.0 dB, and the
loudnesses of the hisses were 60.0, 64.0, 70.0, 72.0,
74.0, 76.0, and 78.0 dB. These values were selected so
that tones and hisses of equal rank sounded
approximately equally loud, although this assumption
is not crucial to the design.
Design Each trial consisted of a tone and a hiss. The
experimental trial pairs comprise T4 and H4 preceded
by either T1 and H7 or T7 and H1. Under the
hypothesis that a stimulus is assimilated towards the
stimulus of the same type from the preceding trial, T4
should seem quieter when it follows T1 and louder
when it follows T7. Similarly, H4 should seem quieter
when it follows H1 and louder when it follows H7.
Thus when comparing the loudness of T4 and H4 on
the last trial in any experimental pair, T4 should be
judged louder than H4 when the preceding trial
contains stimuli T7 and H1. Alternatively, T4 should
be judged quieter than H4 when the preceding trial
contains stimuli T1 and H7.
The design also included control trial pairs. These
pairs differ from the experimental pairs in that the
stimuli on the first trial in the pair both have the same
rank loudness. Following the assimilation argument
outlined for the experimental trial pairs leads to the
prediction that, on the last trial in any control pair, T4
and H4 should seem equally loud. The allocation of
tones to ears was counterbalanced.
Participants experienced six blocks of 112 trials.
Together, the experimental and control trials number
32. These trials were placed at random in the sequence
of 112 trials, with the constraint that the pairs of trials
must remain consecutive. The remaining trials were
deemed filler trials. Stimuli were filled in at random in
the left-ear and right-ear slots in each trial, with the
constraint that within an entire block each stimulus
appeared 16 times.

Procedure Participants were instructed that on each
trial they would hear a tone in their left ear and a hiss
in their right ear or vice versa, and that they were to
judge which seemed louder to them. Each trial began
with the two stimuli and a '?' prompt. Participants
pressed key z, which was labeled 'T', to indicate that
the tone was the louder of the pair, or key m, which
was labeled 'H', to indicate that the hiss was the louder
of the pair. After their response the '?' prompt was
removed, and there was a 500-ms pause before the next
trial began automatically. No feedback was given. The
breaks between blocks were self timed by participants.

Results
Here we consider performance on the control and
experimental trial pairs. On the last trial, trial n, in
these pairs T4 and H4 were presented. On the
experimental trials either T1 and H7 or T7 and H1 were
presented on the previous trial, trial n-1. On the control
trials either T1 and H1 or T7 and H7 were presented.
The proportion of hiss responses on trial n is shown as
a function of stimuli on trial n-1 in Figure 1.

Proportion of Hiss Responses

1.0

.8

Experimental
Same

Control

Swap

Same

Swap

.6

= 24.68, p < .01. The remaining two-way interaction,
trial pair type by ear, was not significant, F(1, 31) =
0.01, p = .93. The three-way interaction was
significant, F(1,31) = 21.27, p < .01, showing that the
assimilation effect only occurred for experimental pairs
when the type of stimulus presented to each ears was
constant across the trial pair.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 were as expected under the
within-type assimilation hypothesis. If T4 and H4 were
presented on trial n, the proportion of times the hiss
was judged louder was higher when the preceding trial
comprised T1 and H7, compared to T7 and H1. The
loudness of the tone on trial n assimilates much more to
the loudness of the tone on trial n-1 compared to the
loudness of the hiss, and the loudness of the hiss on
trial n assimilates much more to the loudness of the
hiss on trial n-1 compared to the loudness of the tone.
This within-type assimilation effect only occurred
when stimuli of the same type on consecutive trials
were presented to the same ear. Thus, the locus of the
within-type assimilation effect must occur early in the
auditory pathway before information from the two ears
is integrated (i.e., the cochlea nucleus), with only a
very small contribution after (i.e., the superior olivary
nulceus, the medial geniculate nucleus, or the auditory
cortex).

Experiment 2
.4

.2

.0
T1H7T7H1

H7T1H1T7

T1H1T7H7

H1T1H7T7

Stimuli on Trial n-1

Figure 1: The proportion of hiss responses
to stimuli T4H4 on trial n.
The leftmost two bars show the effect when the tone on
trial n was presented to the same ear as the tone on trial
n-1.The results are consistent with the assimilation of
stimuli on trial n toward only stimuli of the same type
on trial n-1. When the type of stimuli played in each
ear was swapped (third and fourth bars), the effect was
greatly attenuated, and no larger than on control trials
(rightmost four bars). This pattern was confirmed by a
three-way ANOVA (trial pair type: experimental or
control x ear: same or swapped x stimuli on trial n-1).
There was a significant main effect of trial pair type,
F(1, 31) = 8.79, p < .01. There was no significant main
effect of ear, F(1, 31) = 1.62, p = .21. There was a
significant main effect of the stimuli on the previous
trial, F(1, 31) = 43.13, p < .01. These effects were
qualified by significant two-way interactions between
trial pair type and the stimuli on trial n-1, F(1, 31) =
21.31, p < .01 and ear and stimuli on trial n-1, F(1, 31)

1118

We designed Experiment 2 to investigate further the
hypothesis that there are (at least partially) independent
scales for representing the loudness of different types
of stimuli using an alternate task. As described in the
Introduction, in absolute identification tasks, stimuli
are typically assimilated towards the previous stimulus.
However, in these experiments stimuli only differed on
the attribute that they were identified on. In Experiment
2, eight tones differing in loudness were identified
along with eight hisses differing in loudness. We
hypothesized that the magnitude of a stimulus would
only be assimilated towards the previous stimulus
when both stimuli were of the same type if the
loudnesses were represented on different scales.
Alternatively, if loudness is abstracted from the other
attributes of the stimulus, then assimilation should not
be attenuated when stimuli are of different types.

Method
Participants Twenty students from the University of
Warwick participated in this experiment for payment.
Stimuli Two sets of eight stimuli were constructed as
in Experiment 1. The loudnesses of the tones were
67.0, 74.0, 77.0, 80.0, 82.0, 84.0, 86.0, and 87.0 dB and
the loudnesses of the hisses were 60.0, 64.0, 67.0, 69.0,
71.0, 73.0, 74.0, and 75.0 dB.

Procedure Participants were tested individually in a
quiet room. Participants experienced six blocks of 80
stimuli. On each trial a stimulus was selected at random
from the set of 16. On each trial the stimulus was
played and accompanied by a '?' prompt on the screen
until participants responded. Participants were free to
respond from the onset of each tone using the number
keys '1'-'8' along the top of a standard keyboard.
Participants were instructed to press '1' for the quietest
stimulus through to '8' for the loudest stimulus. The
correct response (i.e., the rank of the amplitude of the
stimulus within its own type) was displayed on the
screen for 500 ms after the end of the tone or the
response, whichever was later. There was a 500-ms
blank screen before the next trial began automatically.
The breaks between blocks were self timed by
participants.

Results

Coefficient Magnitude

1.0

Same
Different

0.8

than the effect of the stimulus on the previous trial,
F(1, 19) = 910.62, p < .0001 ( 2 = .98). The effects of
the previous and current stimuli were smaller if they
were of different types, F(1, 19) = 12.25, p < .0001 ( 2
= .87). Finally - and of most interest to the current
hypothesis - the drop in coefficient between the current
and previous trial was larger if the stimuli on those
trials were different, F(1, 19) = 12.12, p = .0025, ( 2 =
.39). Two planned t tests demonstrated that the effect of
the current stimulus was not significantly smaller when
the previous and current stimuli were of different types,
t(19) = 0.46, p = .6480 (a difference of .03 can be
detected with 80% power), and that the effect of the
previous stimulus was significantly smaller when the
previous and current stimuli were of different types,
t(19) = 4.83, p = .0001 ( 2 = .55).
The accuracy on trial n was also examined as a
function of the type of stimuli on trials n and n-1. The
proportion of correct responses on trial n was
significantly higher when the previous stimulus was of
the same type as the current stimulus (mean = .36, SE =
.01) compared with the case where the types differed
(mean = .34, SE = .01), t(19) = 2.25, p = .0364 ( 2 =
.20).

Discussion
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Trial n

Trial n-1
Coefficient

Figure 2: Regression coefficients for the current and
previous stimuli when predicting the current response.
The sequential effects were examined by fitting four
linear regression models to the data from each
participant. Specifically, the response on trial n was
predicted as a function of the stimulus on trial n-1 and
the stimulus on trial n. The four fits corresponded to
the four different possible combinations of trial pairs:
TT, HH, TH, and HT. Coefficients were averaged
across trials where the stimuli on trials n-1 and n were
the same, and trials where the stimuli on trials n-1 and
n were different. The coefficients for trial n-1 and trial
n are shown in Figure 2. The large coefficients
(approaching 1) for the stimuli on the current trial show
that the current stimulus is a strong predictor of the
current response. The smaller positive coefficients for
the previous stimuli show that there is an assimilation
effect: The current response is biased towards the
previous stimulus. A two-way ANOVA (the same or
different stimuli on trials n-1 and n x coefficient for the
stimulus on trial n-1 or trial n) was run. The effect of
the stimulus on the current trial was significantly larger

1119

The assimilative effect of the previous stimulus on the
current stimulus was significantly attenuated when the
current and previous stimuli were of different types
compared with when the current and previous stimuli
were of the same type. This is consistent with the
hypothesis that the representation of the loudness of
tones is qualitatively different from the representation
of the loudness of hisses. Although sequential effects
were larger on tone-tone or hiss-hiss trial pairs,
accuracy was also higher on the last trial in these pairs
compared with tone-hiss and hiss-tone pairs. In the
Introduction we described two different interpretations
of sequential effects. Under one interpretation, absolute
magnitudes of stimulus properties are assumed to form
the basis of judgments, and sequential effects are
viewed as some kind of bias on these judgments. If this
view is correct, then it is not clear how a reduction in
sequential effects on a switch of stimulus type, and thus
a reduction in the bias, can lead to decreased accuracy:
Surely a removal of bias should increase accuracy?
Instead we feel that these data sit more comfortably
with the alternative interpretation: Sequential effects
should be viewed as revealing the relativity of
psychophysical judgment.
The data from Experiment 2 are consistent with the
findings of Luce and Green (1978). Their task was a
standard magnitude estimation task for tones differing
in loudness. However, two different frequencies of tone
were used (1 and 4 kHz). They obtained a high
correlation between the previous and current responses
when successive loudnesses were similar (consistent
with Baird, Green, & Luce, 1980) that was attenuated

when the previous and current stimuli were of different
frequencies (reflecting our regression coefficients).
Also, the coefficient of variation (the standard
deviation divided by the mean) of the ratio of
successive responses was smaller when the previous
and current stimuli were of similar magnitude, and this
reduction was abated when the previous and current
stimuli differed in frequency (reflecting our accuracy
data).

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, on each trial, participants were
presented simultaneously with a tone and a hiss and
asked to judge which was louder. The loudness of the
tone on the current trial was assimilated towards the
loudness of the tone on the previous trial.
Independently, the loudness of the hiss on the current
trial was assimilated towards the loudness of the hiss
on the previous trial. In the absolute identification task
in Experiment 2, the assimilation of the current
stimulus towards the previous stimulus was attenuated
when the current and previous stimuli were of different
types, as was the accuracy of responding on the current
trial. Together these data suggest that information
about the loudness of a stimulus is not represented
separately from the information about other stimulus
attributes. If the information was represented separately
then, for example, the effect of a tone or a hiss (of
equal loudness) on the previous trial should have been
the same. We suggest that there may not be a single
underlying scale representing loudness independently
of other stimulus attributes.
In the Introduction we described how, for integral
dimension pairs, the level of a stimulus on one
dimension can interfere with judgments concerning
only the other dimension. It is as if dimensions which
can be physically independently manipulated are
psychologically fused: a within-stimulus effect. Our
own data concern between-stimulus effects. A previous
stimulus biases judgments of the level of a current
stimulus on one dimension only if the stimuli are
similar on other dimensions.

A Paradox?
Typically sequential effects in an absolute
identification task are larger (in absolute terms) when
stimuli differ more. For example, in a typical absolute
identification experiment of 10 tones differing in
frequency from our own lab (Stewart, Brown, &
Chater, 2003) if Stimulus 10 was preceded by Stimulus
1, then the response to Stimulus 10 typically
underestimated the stimulus by one point on the scale.
If instead the preceding stimulus was Stimulus 5, then
the underestimation was only half a point. Similar
effects are seen in loudness identification (see, e.g.,
Ward & Lockhead, 1970, 1971). If these frequency and
loudness effects are additive, then the maximal

1120

sequential effect should be given when the preceding
stimulus differs in both frequency and loudness.
However, our data and those of Luce and Green (1978)
suggest that a change in frequency should attenuate the
effect of the previous stimulus's loudness, and a change
in loudness should attenuate the effect of the previous
stimulus's frequency. An account of these sequential
effects in terms of a confusion in memory would need
to explain why only stimuli matching on all but the
judgment
dimension
are
confused,
whilst
simultaneously there is a larger effect if stimuli differ
more on that dimension. We are not sure how to
resolve this issue.

A Neural Population Code Hypothesis
Neurophysiological,
anatomical
and
cognitive
neuropsychological studies have provided a reasonable
understanding of which sensory information is coded in
which neural populations. For some attributes, such as
the loudness and frequency of a tone, this information
is coded within the same population: Signals in the
same auditory fibers must be attended to deduce
loudness and frequency information. Luce and Green
(1978) proposed a neural attention hypothesis for
auditory psychophysics. Under this hypothesis, a set of
auditory fibers from the total population may be
attended. Attention is assumed to be dwell on the fibers
that were activated by recent stimuli. Thus if successive
stimuli are similar, then the information contained in
last stimulus in any similar pair will be attended to. If
the successive stimuli are different, then attention will
have been directed away from the last stimulus by the
first stimulus. Using this hypothesis they provide an
account their effects (described in the Discussion of
Experiment 2). It may well be possible to use
information about neural populations to make a priori
predictions about novel dimension pairs that will and
will not show effects of the sort we describe here. The
existing evidence that some dimension pairs are
integral and others separable suggests that our findings
may be limited only to integral dimension pairs. Claims
concerning generalization to other attributes must wait
for demonstrations with other stimulus types.

Assimilation or Priming?
Traditionally, assimilative effects are accounted for by
assuming that the representation of the current stimulus
is confused with the previous stimulus. An alternative
explanation of these data is that tones prime the
perception of subsequent tones and hisses prime the
perception of subsequent hisses. (We thank an
anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.) Suppose loud
stimuli prime more than quiet stimuli. Then, for
example, T1 would only prime a little and T7 would
prime a lot. Thus, T4 would seem louder after T7,
when it was primed a lot, compared to T1, when it was
only primed a little. Under this account, priming can
account for the assimilation seen in Experiments 1 and

2. Whether it is priming during the perception of a
stimulus that leads to a biased representation, or
alternatively confusion with other representations, our
central claim - that the loudness of a stimulus is not
represented independently of other stimulus attributes still stands.

The Relativity of Judgment
In our recent work (e.g., Stewart, Brown, & Chater,
2002, 2003) we have been pursuing the idea that
absolute categorical judgments are relative (see also
Laming, 1997). Stimuli seem to be judged relative to
other simultaneous or recent contextual stimuli. The
finding in Experiment 2 - that when sequential effects
are attenuated by a change of stimulus type accuracy is
significantly reduced rather than increased - would
seem to be problematic for those accounts that suggest
such sequential effects should be considered as a
biasing of absolute judgment. A relative judgment
account can accommodate these data: When there is a
change in the stimulus type, removing at least part of
the context used to make a relative judgment, then
there will be a reduction in accuracy.

Acknowledgments
We thank Simon Moore, Stian Reimers, and Henry P.
Stott for their comments and Rod Freeman and Petko
Kusev for their help running the experiments. This
work was supported by Economic and Social Research
Council Grants R000239351 and L328253039 and by
European
Commission
Grant
RTN-HPRNCT-1999-00065.

References
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (1994). A response
time theory of separability and integrality in speeded
classification. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
38, 423-466.
Ashby, F. G., & Townsend, J. T. (1986). Varieties of
perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93,
154-179.
Baird, J. C., Green, D. M., & Luce, R. D. (1980).
Variability and sequential effects in cross-modality
matching of area and loudness. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 6, 277-289.
Fechner, G. T. (1966). Elements of psychophysics (H.
E. Adler, Trans.). New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston. (Original work published 1860)
Garner, W. R. (1953). An informational analysis of
absolute judgments of loudness. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 46, 373-380.
Garner, W. R. (1954). Context effects and the validity
of loudness scales. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 48, 218-224.

1121

Garner, W. R., & Felfoldy, G. L. (1970). Integrality of
stimulus dimensions in various types of information
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 1, 225-241.
Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation-level theory. New York:
Harper & Row.
Holland, M. K., &, G. R. (1968). Sequential effects in
absolute judgments of loudness. Perception and
Psychophysics, 3, 409-414.
Jesteadt, W., Luce, R. D., & Green, D. M. (1977).
Sequential effects of the judgments of loudness.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 3, 92-104.
Laming, D. R. J. (1997). The measurement of
sensation. London: Oxford University Press.
Lockhead, G. R., & King, M. C. (1983). A memory
model of sequential effects in scaling tasks. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 9, 461-473.
Long, L. (1937). A study of the effect of preceding
stimuli upon the judgment of auditory intensities.
Archives of Psychology (New York), 30, 209.
Luce, R. D., & Green, D. M. (1978). Two tests of a
neural
attention
hypothesis
for
auditory
psychophysics. Perception & Psychophysics, 23,
363-371.
Luce, R. D., Green, D. M., & Weber, D. L. (1976).
Attention bands in absolute identification.
Perception & Psychophysics, 20, 49-54.
Luce, R. D., Nosofsky, R. M., Green, D. M., & Smith,
A. F. (1982). The bow and sequential effects in
absolute identification. Perception & Psychophysics,
32, 397-408.
Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law.
Psychological Review, 64, 153-181.
Stevens, S. S. (1975). Psychophysics. New York:
Wiley.
Stewart, N. (2001). Perceptual categorization.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Warwick, Coventry, England.
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2002).
Sequence effects in categorization of simple
perceptual stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28,
3-11.
Stewart, N. Brown, G. D. A., & Chater, N. (2003).
Identification of simple perceptual stimuli: A new
model of absolute identification. Unpublished
manuscript.
Treisman, M. (1985). The magical number seven and
some other features of category scaling: Properties
for a model of absolute judgment. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 29, 175-230.
Ward, L. M., & Lockhead, G. R. (1970). Sequential
effect and memory in category judgment. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 84, 27-34.
Ward, L. M., & Lockhead, G. R. (1971). Response
system processes in absolute judgment. Perception
& Psychophysics, 9, 73-78.

