UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reasoning from Causal and Noncausal Conditionals: Testing an Integrated Framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45g2k40s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Weidenfeld, Andrea
Oberauer, Klaus

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reasoning from Causal and Noncausal Conditionals:
Testing an Integrated Framework
Andrea Weidenfeld (aweiden@rz.uni-potsdam.de)
Allgemeine Psychologie I, University of Potsdam
PO box 60 15 53, 14415 Potsdam, Germany

Klaus Oberauer (ko@rz.uni-potsdam.de)
Allgemeine Psychologie I, University of Potsdam
PO box 60 15 53, 14415 Potsdam, Germany

of the mental model theory of conditional reasoning.

Abstract
We suggest and test an integrated framework explaining
how the interpretation of and the reasoning from causal
conditionals (e.g., "If you fertilize a flower it will
bloom") depend on exceptions. In the model availability
of exceptional situations (e.g., "the flower was not
watered enough") reduces the subjective conditional
probability of the consequent given the antecedent,
P(q_p). The conditional probability corresponds to the
subjective degree of belief in the conditional, P(poq).
The degree of belief in the conditional affects the
willingness to accept the valid inferences modus ponens
(MP) and modus tollens (MT). Additionally to this
probabilistic pathway the framework contains a mental
model pathway: a direct influence of exceptional
situations on the willingness to accept MP and MT.
Three internet-based experiments supported the framework for causal but not for arbitrary conditional
statements in which no meaningful relation between
antecedent and consequent was present.

Towards an Integrated Model of Interpretation
and Reasoning with Causal Conditionals

Introduction
Reasoning tasks constitute a mixture of interpretation
and drawing a conclusion, because prior to any
reasoning per se the meaning of the premises has to be
understood and represented adequately.
In this paper we propose an integrated framework of
interpretation of and reasoning from causal conditional
statements. The model understands the interpretation of
a causal conditional and the reasoning from the
statement as distinct steps in a successive sequence with
the final result of accepting or rejecting an inference.
This sequence depends crucially on the availability of
exceptions to the causal relation that is described in the
conditional statement. The availability of exceptions
has been identified as an important determinant of
people’s readiness to accept a conclusion by researchers
emphasizing the content and context of the conditionals
used as premises (Cummins, 1995; Thompson, 1994).
Our model integrates this approach with probabilistic
accounts of the meaning of if (Evans, Handley, & Over,
2003; Oberauer & Wilhelm, in press) and with variants

1212

"If you fertilize a flower, then it will bloom" according to recent theories in philosophy and
psychology this sentence is true for a garden in which
most of the flowers that have been fertilized will bloom.
It is not necessary that all fertilized flowers bloom,
since the conditional in everyday language does not
imply a deterministic reading. A conditional statement
"If p then q" conveys the meaning that the conditional
probability of the consequent q given the antecedent p,
P(q_p) is high. A believable conditional statement is
characterized by a high conditional probability, P(q_p),
an unbelievable conditional by a low value of P(q_p).
The probabilistic approach assumes that the conditional
probability P(q_p) is closely connected to the overall
belief in the conditional statement (Edgington, 1995;
Evans, Handley, & Over, 2003; Oaksford & Chater,
2001; Oberauer & Wilhelm, in press).
The conditional probability account not only allows
for exceptions, e.g. fertilized flowers that do not bloom,
but assigns them a crucial role. The more exceptions
there are, the less believable a conditional statement
becomes. We denominate as exceptional situations
circumstances that have the power to generate
exceptions, e.g.,
- the flower has not been watered enough
- the flower suffers from varmints
Exceptional situations take on the semantic role of
disabling conditions according to the terminology of
Cummins (1995) for forward causal conditionals like
"If you fertilize, then a flower it will bloom". For
backward causal conditionals like "If a flower blooms,
then it has been fertilized" exceptional situations
constitute alternative causes, e.g. "the flowers grows in
fertile ground".
Modus ponens (MP: "if p then q, p therefore q") and
modus tollens (MT: "if p then q, not-q therefore not-p")

have been shown to be suppressed in experimental
conditions with unbelievable conditional premises,
which means that they have lower acceptance rates than
with believable premises (Cummins, 1995; Stevenson
& Over, 1995; Thompson, 1994). For causal
conditionals the availability of exceptional situations
has been shown to suppress MP and MT (Cummins,
1995; Cummins, Lubart, Alksnis, & Rist, 1991;
Thompson, 1994). With availability we mean the ease
with which many different situations can be brought to
mind. One obvious way to understand this finding is to
assume that
exceptional situations reduce the
believability of the conditional premise, which in turn
reduces the perceived acceptability of the conclusions.
The reflections hitherto can be integrated into the
probabilistic pathway in the framework we suggest (see
Figure 1): The availability of exceptional situations
negatively affects the subjective conditional probability,
P(q_p), which correspond to the subjective degree of
belief in a conditional, P(poq). The degree of belief in
a conditional statement has a direct impact on the
willingness to accept the valid inferences MP and MT.
Markovits and Barrouillet (2002) suggested a mental
model account of causal conditional reasoning. In line
with the tradition of the mental models theory by
Johnson-Laird (1983), the authors assume that humans
reason from a set of mental models, each model
representing a situation that fulfils the truth-condition of
the premises. When reading or hearing a causal
conditional with realistic content, relevant aspects of
the context and content are automatically activated in
our memory. For a causal relation exceptional situations
are highly relevant and are therefore automatically
activated. Hence it is likely that an exception is
integrated into the current set of mental models. An
exceptional situation is equivalent to a counterexample
to the conclusions of the valid inferences MP and MT.
The authors assume that if a counterexample to the
conclusion is present in the mental model(s) of the
premises an inference will be rejected. This effect is not
necessarily mediated through changes in the subjective
conditional probability of q, given p, or the degree of

Causal Link

?

belief in the conditional. To test this idea we include a
direct inhibiting pathway from exceptional situations to
the acceptance of MP and MT in our framework, which
we call the mental model pathway.1
The mental model account and the probabilistic
account agree that exceptional situations have an
influence on the willingness to accept a valid inference,
but they do not agree on how this influence is exerted.
The relative merits of the two families of theories can
be assessed by estimating the relative weights of the
direct and the indirect pathway in our framework.
The framework is in agreement with available results
in the literature obtained with causal conditionals (e.g.,
Cummins et al., 1991; Thompson, 1994). But what
about arbitrary conditionals? In arbitrary conditional
statements there is no link between antecedent and
consequent other than that expressed in the "if...then"
statement itself, e.g. "If dogs know how to swim, then
Greenland is inhabited". In agreement with other
researchers, we suspect that arbitrary conditionals are
fundamentally different from causal ones (Cheng &
Holyoak, 1985; Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002;
O’Brien, Costa, & Overton, 1986; Peel, 1967).
Even if two conditionals shared the same conditional
probability P(q_p), the presence or absence of a causal
link could make a psychological difference for how
conditionals are understood, and how inferences are
drawn from them. For our experiments we varied this
factor by using the very same conditionals once in a
context pointing out a causal link between antecedent
and consequent (causal conditionals) and once in a
context providing no link at all (arbitrary conditionals).

Experiments
The main goal of the experiments reported here was to
test the integrated framework experimentally. A second
goal was to explore the role of causal links between
antecedent and consequent in conditionals. Therefore,
we compared the same conditionals with forward causal
links (i.e., if cause, then effect), backward causal links
(i.e., if effect, then cause)2, and without causal link
between antecedent and consequent.
To achieve the latter goal we embedded the same
wording of a conditional statement in slightly different
cover stories. An experimental item consisted of a cover
story plus a conditional statement. To test our
framework, we computed a path analysis over experi____________________________
1

Exceptional
Situations

Subjective
Probability
P(q | p)

Belief in the
Conditional

Acceptance
of MP+MT

P(p oq)

Figure 1: Integrated Framework of Causal Conditionals

1213

Another revised mental model theory that yields the same
prediction was recently suggested by Schroyens and Schaeken
(2003).
2
For the sake of brevity and clarity we abstain here from
reporting theoretical considerations and empirical results on
the differences between forward and backward causal
conditionals.

mental items.
In Experiment 1 participants estimated the conditional probability of the consequent q given the antecedent p, that is P(q_p). In Experiment 2 they estimated
the degree of belief in a conditional, that is, the
probability of the conditional being true, P(poq).
Additionally all participants in Experiments 1 and 2
rated the availability of exceptional situations. In
Experiment 3 participants solved conditional reasoning
problems.

Method
Participants and Material. The experiments were
conducted through the internet. 205 and 230 people
participated in Experiments 1 and 2, respectively, and
1068 in Experiment 3.
Each item consisted of a pseudo-naturalistic cover
story followed by a conditional statement, e.g., If a dog
suffers from Midosis then one finds Xathylen in its
blood. For each conditional statement we created three
slightly different cover stories. The basic paradigm was
adapted from Waldmann (2001). We used two sorts of
causal stories (implying forward and backward
direction of causality) and a neutral cover story
introducing the conditional as an arbitrary connection
between two elementary propositions. The word
"cause" was not used in any of the cover stories.
The critical passage of one story with forward causal
link was:
A laboratory in Australia has recently discovered a
new allergic disease in dogs. The new disease has
been named Midosis. [...] The scientists have
detected that the disease makes an affected dog’s
blood produce the formerly unknown substance
Xathylen.
Following this cover story a protagonist uttered the
conditional as a hypothesis. The protagonist was always
unrelated to the former story, for example:
Sara is a practicing veterinarian. She assumes that
it generally holds that:
"If a dog suffers from Midosis
then one finds Xathylen in its blood".
The second causal cover story for the same conditional
was almost identical to the first, but instead of Midosis
producing Xathylen, the story explained that Xathylen
is the substance that leads to the symptoms of the
allergic disease Midosis. The critical passage read:
In the blood of the affected dogs, a formerly
unknown substance called Xathylen is produced.
This substance leads to the multiple symptoms of
Midosis.

1214

The causal roles of the two events are reversed, instead
of "If cause then effect" the conditional now had the
form "If effect then cause".
The neutral cover story for the arbitrary conditionals
was similar to the causal stories. The major difference
was that the story did not suggest any causal link
between Midosis and Xathylen. The critical passage
read as:
The laboratory has recently discovered a new
allergic disease in dogs called Midosis. A different
department has detected a formerly unknown
substance in the blood of cats and has named it
Xathylen. During the last weeks the scientists
explored whether Xathylen is found in dog’s
blood as well.
Nine scenarios were used embedding conditionals with
very different matters, e.g., biological, physical, and
social relations. With a large variety of scenarios we
hoped to provide a fair test for a general model. The
combination of nine conditionals with three cover
stories resulted in a total of 27 different combinations of
conditional statement plus cover story. To control for
differences in the order of the terms in the conditional
statement, we furthermore used both possible orders of
terms in the conditional statement: "If Midosis then
Xathylen" as well as "If Xathylen then Midosis".
Therefore our item pool consisted of 54 items. All
materials were written in German.
Procedure. In Experiments 1 and 2 each participant
received six items (two forward items, two backward
items, and two arbitrary items), each from different
scenarios, randomly selected. The items were presented
in random order, each one on a separate screen. Each
item consisted of a cover story, the conditional, and
four questions. Participants in Experiment 1 estimated
the conditional probability of the consequent given the
antecedent, P(q_p):
A dog is randomly selected from the lab’s kennel.
It turns out that this dog suffers from Midosis.
How likely do you think it is that one finds
Xathylen in its blood?
Participants in Experiment 2 estimated the probability
of the conditional being true, P(poq), instead. This is
the subjective degree of belief in a conditional. For
example:
How likely do you think it is that Sara’s statement
holds true?
It was explained that the estimate should be given on a
scale from 0 ("totally impossible") to 100 ("absolutely
certain").
We asked participants for an estimate of the
availability of exceptional situations in both

Experiments 1 and 2. The question read:
For the next question please assume that Sara’s
statement is true. Can you imagine conditions
under which the following instance is possible?
A dog suffers from Midosis, but no Xathylen is
found in its blood.
Participants indicated how many conditions they could
think of on a 5-point rating scale from "very few" to
"very many", with an additional option provided "No, I
cannot imagine such a situation". To ensure that
participants carefully considered the conditions, we
asked them to describe one situation in short keywords.
Furthermore, in Experiments 1 and 2 there was a
rating of the perceived causal strength and a rating of
the availability of alternative situations (cases of q but
not-p).
In Experiment 3 participants solved conditional
reasoning problems. One group of participants decided
whether the conclusion followed from the statements
with logical necessity (logic instruction, n = 569).
Another group decided whether they would accept the
conclusion within an everyday conversation context
(plausibility instruction, c.f. Rips, 2001, n = 499). In
both instructions it was stressed that the relation in an
if-sentence is not necessarily reversible. Each
participant then received three items (one forward, one
backward, and one arbitrary item). Each item was
followed by four inference problems with forced choice
answers (Yes or No): MP, MT, AC (acceptance of the
consequent, "if p then q, q therefore p") and DA (denial
of the antecedent, "if p then q, not-p therefore not-q")3.
To control for order effects we used two orders of
inferences: MP-AC-MT-DA or DA-MT-AC-MP. Within each participant order of inferences was held
constant.

Results
In order to test our framework for conditionals we
conducted a path analysis on the correlations over
items. For each of the 54 items mean values of
estimates for the variables in the model were computed
(for an overview over the means and standard
deviations see Table 1).
We had different groups of participants estimate the
conditional probability, the probability of the truth of
the conditional, and the acceptability of the four
inferences, in order to avoid transfer effects within
participants that would artificially increase the
____________________________
3

It can be suggested that the framework proposed here for
MP and MT inferences can be transferred symmetrically to
AC and DA inferences by replacing exceptional situations
through alternative situations and exchanging p and q in all
variables.

1215

correlations between these variables. Therefore, we
could compute correlations between these variables not
across participants, but only across items. One
consequence of this is a relatively small sample size of
items. We hoped to compensate this by highly reliable
estimates of correlations, since each data point rests on
aggregated responses from 20-30 participants.
We fitted the path model depicted in Figure 2 to the
overall data, allowing different path coefficients for the
causal statements (taking forward and backward
causality together) and the arbitrary statements. Figure
2 displays the standardized path coefficients and the R2
values for the dependent variables for the causal submodel. The overall X2-value indicated an acceptable
model fit (X2 = 29.77, df = 22, p = 0.18) as did the
RMSEA index (RMSEA = 0.08)4. The model fit to the
causal conditionals alone had a good fit (X2 = 10.6, df =
11, p = 0.48; RMSEA = 0.00). Furthermore, inspection
of Table 2 reveals that for the causal conditionals all
path coefficients except one were significantly larger
than zero.
For the model with the arbitrary conditionals only,
the model fit is not convincing (X2 = 19.8, df = 11, p =
0.06; RMSEA = 0.21). Among the few paths that
received significant coefficients are those connecting
exceptional situations, subjective conditional probability, and the degree of belief in the conditional, that
is the first steps in what we called the "probabilistic
pathway" above.
The emphasis on logic versus plausibility in the
instruction had a small but reliable effect on the
reasoning performance. In the logic group there were
about 5 % more answers in agreement with the
normative standard of material implication. Thus,
Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations for Variables
in the Model (for Abbreviations see Figure 2)
Conditionals
Causal
Arbitrary
Variable (from Exp. 1-3)
(n = 36)
(n = 18)
Exceptional Situations (0-5) 1.92 (0.59) 2.33 (0.66)
Subjective Probability
74.0 (12.2) 55.8 (17.0)
Belief in the Conditional
66.0 (15.4) 38.7 (18.0)
MP_L
80.9 (13.8) 73.0 (15.5)
MT_L
56.7 (14.5) 49.1 (15.9)
MP_P
72.6 (15.1) 63.1 (14.8)
MT_P
57.8 (15.9) 43.6 (11.0)
Note. Subjective Probability and Degree of belief in
the conditional were estimated on a scale from 0 to
100. For the inferences percentage of YES-answers
are displayed (max. 100).
____________________________
4

RMSEA < 0.05 indicates a good fit, RMSEA < 0.08
indicates an acceptable fit. RMSEA > 0.10 displays a poor fit.

participants were sensitive to the difference in the
instructions. Nonetheless, in the results of the structural
equation models no difference between the instruction
groups is apparent. The left side of the path diagram,
with inferences from the logic instruction group as
dependent variables, does not differ from the right side,
where the dependent variables are inferences drawn in
the plausibility instruction group. When the
probabilistic pathway and the mental model pathway
for the logic group were fixed to be equal to the
corresponding paths for the plausibility group, the
overall model fit decreased only negligibly (X2 = 31.5,
df = 26, p = 0.21; RMSEA = 0.06). With this plausible
constraint, the pattern of path coefficients is clear-cut:
For the causal conditionals all path coefficients received
significant weights. For the arbitrary conditionals all
path coefficients received significant weights except for
the paths from the belief in the conditional to the latent
variables "Logic" and "Plausibility" that correspond to
the proportions of participants that accepted the
inferences MP and MT.
The path coefficients between exceptional situations,
conditional probability, and the belief in the
conditional, that is the first steps in the probabilistic
pathway, can be constrained to be the same in both
models (causal and arbitrary) without any loss of fit.
Interestingly, the described patterns of results do not
change if we swap the roles of subjective conditional
probability and degree of belief in the conditional
within the framework.

Exceptional Situations
-.73

.54

subj. Probability
P(q_p)
.81

e1
.66

Belief in the conditional
P(poq)

e2
-.53

-.57
.28

.44

.59

.75

Logic

d1

Plausibility

.85

.94

MP_L MT_L
e4

e5

.79

.93
.72

.89

.86

MP_P
e6

d2

.62

MT_P
e7

Figure 2: Structural equation model and standardized
results for the causal conditionals. "Logic" is a latent
variable defined by the proportion of participants in the
group instructed to reason logically who accepted MP
and MT. "Plausibility" is the corresponding latent
variable for the group instructed to assess the
argument’s plausiblity.

General Discussion
We developed and tested an integrated framework
bringing together probabilistic, semantic, and mental
model theories on the interpretation of and the
reasoning from causal conditional statements.
The model was supported for causal conditionals, but
not for arbitrary conditionals. The analysis for causal
conditionals yielded significant weights for the indirect

Table 2: Standardized Path Coefficients and p-Values for Causal and Arbitrary Items

Path
Exceptional Situations
- Subjective Probability
Subjective Probability
- Belief in the Conditional
Exceptional Situations
- Logic
Belief in the Conditional - Logic
Exceptional Situations
- Plausibility
Belief in the Conditional - Plausibility
Logic
- MP_L
Logic
- MT_L
Plausibility
- MP_P
Plausibility
- MT_P
Note. * p > 0.05

1216

Causal Items (n = 36)
p
Estimate
-0.73*
0.00
0.81*
0.00
-0.57*
0.00
0.28*
0.07
-0.53*
0.00
0.44*
0.00
0.94*
(fixed)
0.85*
0.00
0.93*
(fixed)
0.79*
0.00

Arbitrary Items (n = 18)
p
Estimate
-0.54*
0.01
0.85*
0.00
-0.08*
0.68
0.30*
0.13
-0.76*
0.00
-0.01*
0.95
1.19*
(fixed)
0.66*
0.15
0.69*
(fixed)
0.89*
0.01

probabilistic pathway as well as for the direct mental
model pathway. This supports the interpretation that for
causal conditionals both families of theories are
warranted, they are not mutually exclusive. This raises
the question how to reconcile the two groups of
theories. At the moment, we can only speculate about
this question. Reasoning from a conditional statement is
different from evaluating a conditional's believability or
its truth. A major difference is that a minor premise
comes into play as well. With reference to recent
findings of Markovits and Potvin (2001) it is plausible
to assume that representing a minor premise (re)activates the whole knowledge structure in semantic
memory associated with the conditional statement.
Exceptional situations are part of this knowledge
structure and this additional activation through the
minor premise could explain why the availability of
exceptional situations has an effect on reasoning that is
independent from its effect on the believability of the
conditional statement.
The model for the arbitrary conditionals differed
from the model for causal conditionals in two major
aspects. First, the model fit for the arbitrary items was
poor. Second, after the direct effect of exceptional
situations on the acceptance of MP and MT was
partialled out, there was no significant effect mediated
through subjective probabilities. If this finding turns out
replicable, it would contradict the probabilistic theory
of conditional reasoning (Oaksford & Chater, 2001).
The observed differences between causal and arbitrary
conditionals encourage further research about the role
of a semantic link between antecedent and consequent
in conditionals.
The present empirical test of the suggested
framework is based only on correlational data. In
follow-up experiments we are using an experimental
variation of probability distributions of antecedent and
consequent terms (c.f. Oberauer & Wilhelm, in press) to
investigate the impact of the conditional probability on
belief in conditionals and conditional reasoning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, grant FOR 375 1-1). We thank
Mirko Wendland for helpful advice during the
programming of the experiments and for running the
experiments in his online lab (www.w-lab.de).

References
Cheng, P.W., & Holyoak, K.J. (1985). Pragmatic
reasoning schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391416.
Cummins, D.D. (1995). Naive theories and causal
deduction. Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
Cummins D.D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R.
(1991). Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory

1217

and Cognition, 19, 274-282.
Edgington, D. (1995). On Conditionals. Mind, 104,
235-329.
Evans, J., Handley, S.J., & Over, D.E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 321-335.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models.
Cambridge: University Press.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The
development of conditional reasoning: A mental
model account. Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Markovits, H., & Potvin, F. (2001). Suppression of
valid inferences and knowledge structures: The
curious effect of producing alternative antecedents on
reasoning with causal conditionals. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 736-744.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2001). The probabilistic
approach to human reasoning. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 349-357
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (in press). The
meanings(s) of conditionals-conditional probabilities,
mental models, and personal utilities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition.
O'Brien, D.P., Costa, G., & Overton, W.F. (1986).
Evaluations of causal and conditional hypotheses.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Experimental Psychology, 38A, 493-512.
Peel, E. A. (1967). A method for investigating
children's understanding of certain logical
connectives used in binary propositional thinking.
British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical
Psychology, 20, 81-92.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (in press). The
meanings(s) of conditionals-conditional probabilities,
mental models, and personal utilities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition.
Rips, L.J. (2001). Two kinds of reasoning.
Psychological Science, 12, 129-134.
Schroyens, W., & Schaeken, W. (2003). A critique of
Oaksford, Chater, and Larkin's (2000) conditional
probability model of conditional reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 140-149.
Stevenson, R.J., & Over, D.E. (1995). Deduction from
uncertain
premises.
Quarterly
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Human Experimental
Psychology, 48A, 613-643.
Thompson, V.A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22,
742-758.
Waldmann, M.R. (2001). Predictive versus diagnostic
learning: evidence from an overshadowing paradigm.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 600-608.

