UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Research Laboratories as Evolving Distributed Cognitive Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g45c6wx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Nersessian, Nancy J.
Kurz-Milcke, Elke
Newstetter, Wendy C.
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Research Laboratories as Evolving Distributed Cognitive Systems
Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Program in Cognitive Science, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA

Elke Kurz-Milcke (kurzmi@cc.gatech.edu)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA

Wendy C. Newstetter (wendy@bme.gatech.edu)
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0535 USA

Jim Davies (jim@jimdavies.org)
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA

Abstract
We are carrying out a research project aimed at understanding
reasoning and representational practices employed in problem
solving in biomedical engineering (BME) laboratories. These
laboratories are best construed as evolving distributed
cognitive systems: the laboratory is not simply a physical
space, but a problem space, the components of which change
over time; cognition is distributed among people and artifacts;
and the cognitive partnerships between the technological
artifacts and the researchers in the system evolve. To
investigate this evolving cognitive system we use both
ethnography and cognitive-historical analysis. Understanding
practices in innovative research laboratories requires in-depth
observation of the lab as it presently exists, as well as research
into the histories of the experimental devices used in it. We
are aiming here for relational accounts (‘biographies’) of the
distributed cognitive systems within the lab as they change in
time. In this we find that one cannot divorce research from
learning in the context of the laboratory, where learning
involves building relationships with artifacts.

1. Introduction
Science and engineering research laboratories are prime
locations for studying the role of environment in cognition.
Clearly laboratory practices are located in mico and macro
social, cultural, and material environments. So too, these
practices employ cognitive representations and processes in
developing and using knowledge to solve research
problems. We are carrying out a research project aimed at
understanding reasoning and representational practices
employed in problem solving in biomedical engineering
(BME) laboratories. We have begun working in multiple
sites, but here report on our research on a specific tissue
engineering laboratory, ‘Lab A’, that has as its ultimate
objective the eventual development of artificial blood
vessels. The daily research is directed towards solving
problems that are smaller pieces of that grand objective. The
problem solving in these laboratories is best characterized as

857

situated and distributed. These activities are situated in that
they lie in localized interactions among humans, and among
humans and technological artifacts. They are distributed in
that they take place across systems of humans and artifacts.
BME is an interdiscipline in which the melding of
knowledge and practices from more than one discipline is so
extensive that significantly new ways of thinking and
working are emerging. Significantly, innovation in
technology and lab practices occurs continually, as does
learning, development, and change in lab researchers. Thus,
we characterize the labs as “evolving distributed cognitive
systems”. Investigating and interpreting these kinds of
systems requires innovation on the part of cognitive science
researchers studying them as well. As an interdisciplinary
team of researchers, ourselves, we struggle with myriad
methodological and conceptual issues. Two issues we will
discuss in this paper are (1) to capture the “evolving”
dimension of the labs we have developed a “mixed-method”
approach, integrating ethnography and cognitive-historical
analysis and (2) to develop the “distributed cognitive
system” analysis of the labs we are recasting some useful
traditional interpretive notions employed in cognitive
science, especially as they relate to the customary
internal/external distinction; in particular, ‘problem space’
and ‘mental model’.

2. Integrating Methods to Investigate Evolving
Cognitive Systems
In carrying out this case study we have been conducting
both cognitive-historical analyses of the problems, objects,
and models employed in the research and ethnographic
analyses of the day-to-day practices in the lab. Cognitivehistorical analysis uses the customary range of historical
records to recover how the representational, methodological,
and reasoning practices have been developed and used by
practitioners in a domain. The practices are examined over
time spans of varying length, ranging from shorter spans

defined by the activity itself to spans of decades or more.
Cognitive-historical analysis aims to interpret and explain
the generativity of these practices in light of salient
cognitive science investigations and results (Nersessian
1992, 1995). Saliency is determined by the nature of the
practices under scrutiny. Cognitive-historical analyses are
not historical narratives. Rather, the objective is to enrich
understanding of cognition through examining the
development of cognitive practices in science and
engineering domains.1 Existing studies have tended to focus
on historical individuals, including Faraday, Maxwell, and
Bell, and on developing explanatory accounts of concept
formation, concept use, and conceptual change (Gooding
1990, Gorman & Carlson, 1994, Nersessian 1992, 1999,
Tweney 1985). In our study of BME practices thus far, the
cognitive-historical analyses are focused on the
technological artifacts that push BME research activity and
are shaped and re-shaped by that activity. These artifacts
become and remain part of the lab’s history. How the
members of the lab appropriate the history and employ the
artifacts in their daily research is subject to ethnographic
analysis.
Ethnographic analysis seeks to uncover the situated
activities, tools, and interpretive frameworks utilized in an
environment that support the work and the on-going
meaning-making of a community. Ethnography of science
and engineering practices aims to describe and interpret the
relations between observed practices and the social, cultural,
and material contexts in which they occur. Ethnographic
studies of science and engineering practices abound (See,
e.g, Bucciarelli 1994, Latour & Woolgar, 1986, Lynch,
1985). However, studies that focus on situated cognitive
practices in these areas are few in number. And, existing
observational (Dunbar 1995) and ethnographic studies (See,
e.g., Goodwin 1995, Hall et al., in press, Ochs & Jacoby
1997) of cognition lack attention to the historical dimension
that we find important to our case study.
We find the ‘mixed methodology’ approach essential to
developing an integrated understanding of the reasoning and
representational practices in the cognitive systems of the
BME lab. Ethnographic analysis allows us to develop traces
of transient arrangements of the components of the
cognitive system, such as evidenced in laboratory routines,
the organization of the workspace, the cultural artifacts in
use, and the social organization of the lab at a time, as these
unfold in the daily research activities and ground those
activities. Cognitive-historical analysis enables us to follow
trajectories of the human and technological components of
the cognitive system on multiple levels, including their
physical shaping and re-shaping in response to problems,
their changing contributions to the models that are
developed in the lab, and the nature of the concepts that are
at play in the research activity at any particular time.

1

For a comparison of cognitive-historical analysis to other
methodologies – laboratory studies, observation, computational
modeling – employed in research on scientific discovery, see Klahr
& Simon, 1999.

858

None of the conceptions of distributed cognition in the
current literature account for systems the components of
which are evolving in time. In studies of distributed
cognition in work environments, for instance the cockpit or
on board a ship, the problem solving situations change in
time. The problems faced, for example, by the pilot change
as she is in the process of landing the plane or bringing a
ship into the harbor. However, the nature of the technology
and the knowledge the pilot and crew bring to bear in those
processes is relatively stable. Even though the artifacts have
a history within the field, such as Hutchins documents for
the instruments aboard a ship, they do not evolve in the dayto-day problem solving processes on board. Thus, the
cognitive system is dynamic but largely synchronic. The
cognitive systems of the BME research laboratory are
dynamic and diachronic in that, although there loci of
stability, during problem solving processes they undergo
development and change over time. The technology and the
researchers have evolving, relational trajectories that must
be factored into the understanding of the cognition at any
point in time. It is the cognitive-historical analyses
performed on these trajectories that we refer to as
biographies. BME researchers, assistants, and students have
biographies that, in part, become a piece of the lab history;
as do the multiple and diverse objects that are manipulated
and transformed in the lab. The researchers, for instance,
include Post-docs, Ph.D. students, and undergraduates, all of
whom have learning trajectories. These trajectories, in turn,
intersect with the developmental trajectories of the
technological resources within the lab. In this case, the user
of the artifacts also re-designs some of them. In order to
begin research, a new participant must first master the
relevant aspects of the biography of an artifact necessary to
the research and then figure ways to alter it to carry out her
research project as the new research problems demand.
For example, one highly significant artifact in Lab A is
the flow loop, a device that emulates the shear stresses
experienced by cells within blood vessels. A Ph.D. student
we interviewed discussed how the researcher prior to her

Figure 1: Diagram and photograph of a flow loop
had modified the block to solve some technical problems
associated with bacterial contamination - a constant problem
in this line of research. The flow loop, as inherited by the
new student had previously been used on smooth muscle

cells. The new student was planning to use the flow loop to
experiment with vascular constructs of endothelial cells that
are thicker than the muscle cells, and not flat. To begin that
research, she, together with another new student, had to reengineer the flow loop by changing the width of the flow
slit that holds the spacers. Because the vascular constructs
are not flat, spacers need to be used between the block and
the glass slides in order to improve the flow pattern around
the boundary to bring the in vitro model more in accord with
the in vivo model.
Making sense of the day to day cognitive practices in a
BME laboratory and bringing biographies of scientific
objects to life are prime facie separate tasks. We experience,
however, that the research process in this distributed
cognitive system evolves at a fast pace, which necessitates
going back and forth between the two endeavors. The
ethnographic study of the development, understanding, and
use of particular devices by various lab members, as well as
ethnographic interviews have allowed us to conjoin the
cognitive-historical study of biographies of lab members,
lab objects, and the lab itself with an eye on the perception
of these entities by the lab members themselves. We are
using the notion 'biography’, in distinction to 'history', to
emphasize that at this point we are most interested in the
developing relationship between the researchers and their
artifacts. We are aiming here for an account of the lived
relation of the researchers with specific artifacts, rather than
for an account of the developing knowledge about these
artifacts per se.
Setting 'biography' and 'history' apart in this fashion,
however, does not suffice for the relational account of
distributed cognitive systems that we are attempting to
articulate. In fact, the mixed-method approach that we have
been utilizing entails the distinction between the two
categories as well as recognition of the need for their
orchestration in the meaning-making processes occurring
around the artifacts in the laboratory. On this account,
relating to an artifact entails an appropriation of its history,
which chronicles the development of the problem situation
including what is known about the artifacts in question. In a
way then biography comes to include history.

3. The BME Lab as an Evolving Distributed
Cognitive System
3.1. The Lab as Problem Space
The laboratory, as we construe it, is not simply a physical
space existing in the present, but rather a problem space,
constrained by the research program of the lab director, that
is reconfiguring itself almost continually as the research
program moves along and takes new directions in response
to what occurs both in the lab and in the wider community
of which the research is a part. Researchers and artifacts
move back and forth between the wider community and the
physical space of the lab. Thus the problem space has
permeable boundaries.

859

For instance, among the most notable and recent artifacts
(initiated in 1996) in Lab A are the tubular-shaped, bioengineered cell-seeded vascular grafts, locally called
‘constructs’. These are models of native blood vessels the
lab hopes to engineer, eventually, as viable implants for the
human vascular system. The endothelial cells the lab uses in
seeding constructs are obtained by researchers going to a
distant medical school and bringing them back into the
problem space of the lab. Occasionally, the constructs or
substrates of constructs travel with lab members to places
outside of the lab. For instance, one of the graduate students
takes substrates of constructs to a laboratory at a nearby
medical school that has the elaborate instrumentation to
perform certain kinds of genetic analysis (microarrays). This
line of research is dependent on resources that are currently
only available outside Lab A, here in the literal, spatial
sense. The information produced in this locale is brought
back into the problem space of the lab by the researcher.
At any point in time the lab-as-problem-space contains
resources for problem solving which comprise people,
technology, techniques, knowledge resources (e.g. articles,
books, the internet), problems, and relationships. Construed
in this way, the notion of ‘problem space’ takes on an
expanded meaning from that customarily employed by the
traditional cognitive science characterization of problem
solving as search through an internally represented problem
space. Most importantly, in our characterization, the
problem space comprises models and artifacts together with
a repertoire of activities in which simulative model-based
reasoning assumes a central place (Nersessian 1999).
Following Hutchins (1995), we analyze the cognitive
processes implicated in a problem-solving episode as
residing in the cognitive systems comprising both one or
more researcher and the cognitive artifacts involved in the
episode. In line with his analysis, ‘cognitive systems’ are
understood to be socio-technical in nature and ‘cognitive
artifacts’ are material media possessing the cognitive
properties of generating, manipulating, or propagating
representations. In contrast to the systems he as studied,
though, ours are communities focused on innovation.
Determining the cognitive artifacts within any cognitive
system involves issues of agency and intention that are
pressing questions for cognitive science research, both in the
development of the theoretical foundations of distributed
cognition and in relation to a specific case study. To better
understand such issues we have been focusing on the
technology employed in experimentation. During a research
meeting with the lab members, including the PI, we asked
them to sort the material artifacts in the lab according to
categories of their own devising and rank the importance of
the various pieces to their research. Their classification is
represented below (Table 1).
Additional ethnographic observations have led us to
formulate working definitions of the categories employed
by Lab A’s researchers. ‘Devices’ are engineered facsimiles

that serve as in vitro models and sites of simulation.2
‘Instruments’ generate measured output in visual,
quantitative, or graphical form. ‘Equipment’ assists with
manual or mental labor. Much to the surprise of the PI, the
Table 1: Sorting of lab artifacts by the lab members

ONTOLOGY OF ARTIFACTS
DEVICES

INSTRUMENTS

flow loop
bioreactor
bi-axial strain
construct

confocal
flow cytometer
coulter counter
“beauty and beast”
mechanical tester
LM5 (program)

EQUIPMENT
pipette
flask
refrigerator
sterile hood
water bath
camera

computer

newer Ph.D. students initially wanted to rank some of the
equipment, such as the pipette, as the most important to
their research; whereas for him the devices the lab engineers
for simulation purposes are the most important.
The cognitive artifacts in the distributed systems in the
lab cut across these distinctions, though most are devices or
instruments. Analysis of the ethnographic data has focused
our attention on the devices, all of which we classify as
cognitive artifacts. Devices serve as sites of experimentation
with cells and constructs under conditions simulating those
found in the vascular systems of organisms. It is in relation
to the researcher(s)’s intent of performing a simulation with
the device in order to create new situations that parallel
potential real-world situations, and the activity of the device
in so doing, that qualify a device as a cognitive artifact
within the system that employs it. For example, as a device,
the flow loop represents blood flow in the artery. In the
process of simulating, it manipulates constructs which are
representations of blood vessel walls. After being
manipulated, the constructs are then removed and examined
with the aid of instruments, such as the confocal
microscope, which generates images for many color
channels, at multiple locations, magnifications, and gains.
Thus, the manipulated representation of the flow loop is
propagated within the cognitive system.

3.2 Distributed Mental Modeling3
An in vivo/in vitro division is a significant component of the
cognitive framework guiding practice in Lab A. Because the
test bed environment for developing artificial blood vessels
cannot be the human body in which they will ultimately be
implanted, the BME researchers have to design facsimiles of
the in vivo environment where the experiments can occur.
These devices provide locally constructed sites of
experimentation where in vitro models are used to screen
and control specific aspects of the in vivo phenomena they
want to examine. The researchers in the lab call the process
of constructing and manipulating these in vitro sites “putting
a thought into the bench top and seeing whether it works or
not.” These instantiated “thoughts” allow researchers to
perform controlled simulations of an in vivo context, for
example, of the local forces at work in the artery. The
“bench top”, as one researcher explained, is not the flat table
surface but comprises all the locales where experimentation
takes place.
Devices perform as models instantiating current
understanding of properties and behaviors of biological
systems. For example, the flow loop is constructed so that
the behavior of the fluid is such as to create the kinds of
mechanical stresses in the vascular system. But devices are
systems themselves, possessing engineering constraints that
often require simplification and idealization in instantiating
the biological system they are modeling. For example, the
bioreactor, as used in Lab A, was designed for “mimicking
the wall motions of the natural artery.” It is used to expose
the constructs to mechanical loads in order to improve their
overall mechanical properties. The researchers call this
process “mechanical conditioning” or as one researcher put
it “exercising the cells.” Preferably, this is done at an early
stage of the formation of the construct, shortly after seeding
the cells onto a prepared tubular silicon sleeve. In vivo,
arterial wall motion is conditioned upon pulsatile blood
flow. With the bioreactor, though, which consists of a
rectangular reservoir containing a fluid medium (bloodmimicking fluid) in which the tubular constructs are
immersed and connected to inlet and outlet ports off the
walls of the reservoir, “fluid doesn’t actually move,” as one

2

We are using the term ‘device’ because this is how the
researchers in the lab categorized the in vitro simulation
technology. This notion differs from the notion of “inscription
devices” that Latour & Woolgar (1987, p. 51) introduced and that
has been discussed widely in the science studies literature. The
latter are devices for literally creating figures or diagrams of
phenomena. The former are sites of in vitro simulation, and further
processing with instruments is necessary to transform the
information provided by these devices into visual representations
or quantitative measures.

860

Figure 2: Photograph of a bioreactor
3

Of course, we use the term ‘mental’ metaphorically here, as a
rhetorical move to connect our discussion with aspects of the
traditional notion of mental modeling and extend the notion for use
in the distributed cognition framework.

lab member put it, “which is somewhat different from the
actual, uh, you know, real life situation that flows.” The
bioreactor is a functional model of pulsatile blood flow.
The sleeves are inflated with pressurized culture medium,
under pneumatic control (produced by an air pump). The
medium functions as an incompressible fluid, similar to
blood. By pressurizing the medium within the sleeves, the
diameter of the silicon sleeve is changed, producing strain
on the cells, similar to that experienced in vivo.
Many instances of model-based reasoning in science and
engineering employ ‘external’ representations that are
constructed during the reasoning process, such as diagrams,
sketches, and physical models. These can be viewed as
providing constraints and affordances essential to problem
solving that augment those available in whatever ‘internal’
representations are used by the reasoner during the process.
A device is a kind of physical model employed in the
problem solving in Lab A. Within the cognitive systems in
the lab, devices instantiate part of the current model of the
phenomena and allow simulation and manipulation. The
intent of the simulation is to create new situations in vitro
that parallel potential in vivo situations.
In previous research Nersessian (2002) characterized the
reasoning involved in simulative model-based reasoning as
a form of dynamic mental modeling employing iconic
representations. That analysis used the traditional notion of
mental modeling as an internal thought process. Here we
expand the notion of simulation of a mental model to
comprise both what are customarily held to be the internal
thought processes of the human agent and the processing of
the external device. Simulative model-based reasoning
involves a process of co-constructing the ‘internal’
researcher models of the phenomena and of the device and
the ‘external’ model that is the device, each incomplete.
Understood in this way, simulating the mental model would
consist of processing information both in memory and in the
environment (See Greeno 1989 for a similar view). That is,
the mental modeling process is distributed in the cognitive
system.

3.3 Evolving Cognitive Partnerships
Devices, such as the construct, the flow loop, and the
bioreactor are constructed and modified in the course of
research with respect to problems encountered and changes
in understanding. These devices have a history within the
research of the lab. For example, the flow loop was first
created in this particular lab to simulate “known fluid
mechanically imposed wall sheer stress,” in other words to
perform as a model of hemodynamics. We have traced
aspects of its development since 1985. The constructs were
first devised in 1996 as an important step in the overall
objective of creating implantable vascular substitutes. They
afford experimentation not only on cells, but on structures
more closely related to the in vivo model. The bioreactor,
though having a longer and more varied history outside the
lab, first made its appearance in this lab in conjunction with

861

the tubular constructs and was not used anywhere before for
that purpose.
Newcomers to the lab, who are seeking to find their place
in the evolving system, initially encounter these devices as
materially circumscribed objects. As they begin to interact
with these devices, the newcomers, almost as a rule,
experience them as fraught with intricacies that withstand
their easy handling: Tubes leak, sutures don’t keep,
reservoirs overflow, pumps malfunction, the available
spacers don’t fit, and, as if this were not enough, cells “go
bad.” On the other hand, newcomers find themselves in an
environment in which everybody else, including the most
experienced old-timer, is constantly struggling to get things
to work—a serious fact about laboratory life (not always
handled with dead seriousness in this environment).
Growing cognitive membership in the lab involves a
gradual process of coming to understand these objects as
devices - as objects with evolving trajectories, constructed
and employed to respond to problems, to help answer
questions, and to generate new ones. Thus, we find that one
cannot divorce research from learning in the context of the
laboratory, and learning involves building relationships with
artifacts. We characterize the relationships between the
technological artifacts in the cognitive system and the
researchers as cognitive partnerships. Over time
understandings are constructed, revised, enhanced, and
transformed through partnerships with the artifacts in the
community. As relationships change, so too do knowledge
and participation. It is because these lived relationships play
out in time that we have dubbed our analyses of them
‘biographies’.
Learning is central in the partnering process. One new
undergraduate research scholar from mechanical
engineering, who was about to use the mechanical tester – a
device used to test the strength of the constructs –
responded:
A2: ….I know that we are pulling little slices of the construct –
they are round, we are just pulling them. It’s the machine that is
right there before the computer in the lab. The one that has the
big “DO NOT TOUCH” on it.
I: Is it the axial strain (mechanical tester)?
A2: I know it has a hook in it and pulls

That the novice researcher describes the mechanical tester at
this point in time as nothing more than parts suggests that
she has yet to partner with the device. In contrast, a senior
Ph.D. researcher, at that point in time considered the
“resident expert” on the bioreactor, was able easily to
discuss the artifact and some of its history:
I: Do you sometimes go back and make modifications? Does
that mean you have some generations of this?
A 12: Uh yes I do. The first generation and the second
generation or an offshoot I guess of the first generation. Well
the first one I made was to do mechanical loading and perfusion.
And then we realized that perfusion was a much more intricate
problem than we had - or interesting thing to look at - than we
had guessed. And so we decided okay we will make a
bioreactor that just does perfusion on a smaller scale, doesn’t
take up much space, can be used more easily, can have a larger
number of replicates, and so I came up with this idea.

He continued by pulling down previous versions of
bioreactor (made by earlier researchers as well) and
explaining the modifications and problems for which design
changes were made. His account suggests a developed
partnership.
The cognitive partnerships transform both researcher and
artifact. A researcher who some months earlier was a
newcomer and who saw the artifacts as just many kinds of
machines and objects piled on shelves and on the bench top,
now can see a device as an in vitro site for “putting a
thought [his thought] into the bench top and seeing whether
it works or not.” During the problem-solving processes
involved in instantiating a thought and seeing if it works,
devices are re-engineered as exemplified with the flow loop
in Section 2. And, potential device transformations can be
envisioned, as with one undergraduate research scholar we
interviewed about the bioreactor:
A16: ..I wish we could accomplish - would be to actually suture
the actual construct in there somehow. To find a way not to use
the silicon sleeve….That would really be neat. Um, simply
because the silicon sleeves add the next level of doubt. They’re
– they are a variable thing that we use, they’re not always 100%
consistent. Um the construct itself is not actually seeing the
pressure that the sleeve does. And because of that you know, it
doesn’t actually see a – a pressure. It feels the distention but it
doesn’t really feel the pressure. It doesn’t have to withstand the
pressure. That’s the whole idea of the sleeve. And so, um, I
think that it would provide a little bit more realism to it. And uh,
because that also, a surgeon would actually want to suture the
construct into a patient. And um, because of that you’re also
mimicking the patient as well - if you actually have the construct
in the path. I think another thing is to actually have the flow
because um, so this flow wouldn’t be important with just the
sleeve in there. But if you had the construct in contact with the –
with the liquid that’s on the inside, you could actually start to
flow media through there.

In this case an undergraduate student has been transformed
over the course of several semesters to a BME researcher,
contributing to immediate research goals; who transforms
artifacts in his immediate research; who understands the
outstanding problems and objectives; and who can envision
how a device might change from a functional model to a
model more closely paralleling the in vivo situation to push
the research along. At this point in evolution, thinking is
taking place through the cognitive partnering of the
researcher and device. The partnership provides the means
for generating, manipulating, and propagating representations within the distributed cognitive systems of this
research laboratory.

4. Conclusions
A relational account of distributed cognitive systems
characterizes cognition in terms of the lived relationships
between the “players” in these systems, people and artifacts.
In the research laboratories that we have been studying,
these relationships evolve in significant ways for the
individual lab members and for the community as a whole.
In their established form, relationships with artifacts entail

862

cognitive partnerships that live in interlocking models
performing internally, as well as externally.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kareen Malone and Eteinne Pelaprat for their
contributions to the research on this project. We thank our
research subjects for allowing us into their work environment and
granting us numerous interviews. We gratefully acknowledge the
support of the National Science Foundation ROLE Grant
REC0106773.

References
Bucciarelli, L. L. (1994). Designing Engineers. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in
real-world laboratories. In R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The
Nature of Insight. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goodwin, C. (1995). Seeing in depth. Social Studies of Science, 25, 237274.
Gooding, D. (1990). Experiment and the Making of Meaning: Human
Agency in Scientific Observation and Experiment. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Gorman, M. E., & Carlson, W. B. (1990). Interpreting invention as a
cognitive process: The case of Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas Edison,
and the telephone. Science, Technology, and Human Values, 15, 131164.
Greeno, J. G. (1989). Situations, mental models, and generative knowledge.
In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex information processing.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hall, R., Stevens, R., & Torralba, T. (in press). Disrupting representational
infrastructure in conversations across disciplines. Mind, Culture, and
Activity.
Klahr, D. & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of Scientific Discovery:
Complementary Approaches and Convergent Findings. Psychological
Bulletin, 125 (5), 524-543.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of
Scientific Facts. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lynch, M. (1985). Art and Artifact in Laboratory Science: A Study of Shop
Work and Shop Talk in a Research Laboratory. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Nersessian, N. J. (1992). How do scientists think? Capturing the dynamics
of conceptual change in science. In R. Giere (Ed.), Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy of Science). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Nersessian, N. J. (1995). Opening the black box: Cognitive science and the
history of science. Osiris, 10 (Constructing Knowledge in the History of
Science, A. Thackray, ed.), 194-211.
Nersessian, N. J. (1999). Model-based Reasoning in Conceptual Change. In
L. Magnani & N. J. Nersessian & P. Thagard (Eds.), Model-Based
Reasoning in Scientific Discovery. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Nersessian, N. J. (2002). The cognitive basis of model-based reasoning in
science. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, & M. Siegal, eds., The Cognitive
Basis of Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ochs, E. & Jacoby, S. (1997). Down to the wire: The cultural clock of
physicists and the discourse of consensus. Language in Society, 26, 479505.
Tweney, R. D. (1985). Faraday's discovery of induction: A cognitive
approach. In D. Gooding & F. A. J. L. James (Eds.), F a r a d a y
Rediscovered. New York: Stockton Press.

