UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Illusion in Sentence Processing: a Right-Hemisphere Mechanism?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9984n94v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Hoeks, John C.J.
Prinsen, Ingeborg
Stowe, Laurie A.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Illusion in Sentence Processing: a Right-Hemisphere Mechanism?
John C. J. Hoeks (hoeks@let.rug.nl)
Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Ingeborg Prinsen (prinsen@let.rug.nl)
Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Laurie A. Stowe (stowe@let.rug.nl)
Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.
Abstract
Recent research on sentence processing using ERPs
(Event Related brain potentials) has shown that there are
situations in which the semantic relationships between
words in a sentence are so strong that they can block the
semantic interpretation that is actually prescribed by the
syntactic structure of that sentence (Hoeks, Stowe, &
Doedens, 2003; Kolk, Chwilla, van Herten, & Oor, in
press). As syntactic processing is the assumed province
of the left hemisphere (LH), it was hypothesized that this
so-called 'semantic illusion' might result from a transient
but apparently rather influential non-syntactic sentence
representation formed in the right hemisphere (RH). Two
reaction time experiments using the Divided Visual Field
paradigm only partially supported this hypothesis, as
they showed that it is the LH that is most sensitive to
semantic illusion.

Introduction
Readers do not wait with the interpretation of a sentence
until they have received the final word. On the contrary,
the process of understanding sentences occurs in a
highly incremental fashion, approximately as each word
is encountered (e.g., Altmann & Steedman, 1988). The
partial sentence representations that are produced by
this continuous process of interpretation have been
shown to facilitate the processing of upcoming words.
For instance, Duffy, Henderson, & Morris (1989)
showed with eye tracking that if a new word is
semantically related to two or more words in the
preceding sentence context, it is fixated for a
significantly shorter time than in a semantically 'neutral'
context. This kind of facilitated processing, possibly
originating from some kind of rather 'coarse' semantic
representation based on all preceding lexical items taken
together, was called 'lexical' facilitation.
Following up on Duffy et al., Morris (1994) showed
that semantic relations indeed play an important
facilitatory role in sentence processing, but that this
effect is mediated by the 'message-level' representation
of a given sentence, that is, the representation in which
both semantic and syntactic information are taken into
account. To illustrate, in a sentence such as The
gardener talked as the barber trimmed the
MUSTACHE, the presence of barber and trimmed
facilitated the processing of the target word mustache.
If, however, syntactic structure was slightly altered, as
in The gardener talked to the barber and trimmed the

MUSTACHE, the semantically related words remained
the same and in approximately the same position, but
the representation at the sentence-level changed
considerably before the final word is reached: Not the
barber, but the gardener is doing the trimming here.
Morris showed that mustache is not facilitated under
these circumstances. In other words, facilitation is
governed by the message-level representation of a
sentence.
However, a recent study by Hoeks, Stowe, &
Doedens (2003) using ERPs (Event Related brain
Potentials) found evidence that seems to contradict this
'message-level hypothesis'. In their experiment they
used the N400 amplitude evoked by the final word was
used as a dependent measure; the N400 being a negative
component of the ERP that peaks some 400 ms after
presentation of a stimulus and is highly sensitive to
semantic processing: the easier it is to process a given
item semantically, the smaller the N400 (e.g., Kutas &
Hillyard, 1984). Hoeks et al. used materials like the
following (lit. = literal English translation of the Dutch
example sentence):
1. Plausible & Related
Het brood werd door de bakkers GEBAKKEN.
lit. The bread was by the bakers BAKED.
2. Implausible & Related
Het brood heeft de bakkers GEBAKKEN.
lit. The bread has the bakers BAKED.
3. Implausible & Unrelated
Het brood heeft de bakkers BEDREIGD.
lit. The bread has the bakers THREATENED.
According to the 'message-level hypothesis', N400
amplitude to the target word baked in sentence 1 should
be smallest, as this word is very easy to process; in
contrast, the final words in sentences 2 and 3 should
give rise to much larger amplitudes because they
obviously do not fit into the existing message-level
representation; both are equally implausible as
ascertained in a separate rating study. Surprisingly,
however, no significant difference in N400 amplitude
was found for the final words of sentences 1 and 2,
while both differed significantly from the N400 elicited
by control sentence 3. It was only some 700 ms after
presentation of the final word that the ERP waveforms

563
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version
http://www.fineprint.com

for plausible sentence 1 and implausible sentence 2
started to diverge (a positive shift was observed that
might indicate processing difficulty related to, e.g.,
syntactic structure building, or reanalysis). Thus it is
very likely that, at least temporarily, sentence 2 was
wrongly taken as highly plausible. In other words, these
results point to a phenomenon that may be called a
temporary 'semantic illusion'. See Figure 1 for the
results (in microvolts) at electrode Pz (i.e., an electrode
near the top of the head that is generally highly sensitive
to modulations of the N400).

Pz-electrode
+5

200
-5

600

1000 ms

N400

plaus-rel
implaus-rel
implaus-unrel

Figure 1. ERP waveforms from the Hoeks et al. study
Note that after reading these sentences participants were
required to make a plausibility judgment. The majority
semantic illussion sentences were correctly classified as
being implausible (i.e., 89 %), indicating that the
illusion is really a temporary phenomenon.
Hoeks et al. argued that in order to find a semantic
illusion effect, two conditions should be met. First,
there must be some problem in the timely construction
of a message-level representation. For sentence 2 this
difficulty might arise from the fact that the thematic
relations (i.e., 'who is doing what to whom') in this
sentence are not at all clear: the syntax prescribes that
the inanimate entity (the bread) should do something to
the animate entities (the bakers), which is not the usual
state of affairs. The second condition is that all words in
the sentence should fit together semantically (not
necessarily associatively; more like fitting into one
concept or scenario) thus facilitating the processing of
the target word. So if the construction of a valid
message-level representation is hampered or seriously
delayed, there can be significant lexical facilitation if
the words fit together.
This was not the only demonstration of the semantic
illusion effect. In fact, the Hoeks et al. (2003) results
were practically replicated by the results of another
recent study by Kolk and co-workers (Kolk, Chwilla,
van Herten, & Oor, in press). They used sentences such
as the following, and measured the N400 on the target
word hunted:
4. De stroper die op de vossen joeg ...
lit. The poacher that on the foxes hunted ...
5. De vos die op de stropers joeg ...
lit. The fox that on the poachers hunted ...
As in the Hoeks et al. study, Kolk et al. did not find any
evidence for an N400 difference between these

sentences, even though sentences such as 5 were rated
as highly implausible. Instead, they found a late positive
component they interpreted as indicative of syntactic
processing difficulty. Again, the prerequisites for the
semantic illusion effect are present: thematic processing
difficulty (cf., foxes that hunt poachers in 5 vs. poachers
that hunt foxes in 4) and words that are highly
semantically related.
To briefly summarize, we have seen that during some
phase of sentence interpretation, effects of semantic
relatedness can 'overrule' syntactic structure, that is,
even if the syntactic structure of a sentence permits only
one interpretation, a strong semantic relatedness
between the content words in the sentence can
temporarily overturn or even block this obligatory
interpretation. Perhaps it is possible that there are
actually two mechanisms of sentence interpretation: one
responsible for a message-level representation (with
syntax) and one for a coarse-grained semantic
representation that does not need syntax. And perhaps
each of these mechanisms is housed in a separate
hemisphere. As syntactic processing is assumed to be
the province of the left hemisphere (LH), it may be
hypothesized that the 'semantic illusion' results from a
transient but apparently influential coarse-grained
semantic sentence representation formed in the right
hemisphere (RH). This might seem farfetched, but in
the next paragraph we will explain why we think this is
a plausible hypothesis.

A Right Hemisphere Phenomenon?
In the last thirty years a lot of research has been
dedicated to unraveling the linguistic capabilities of the
RH, as compared to the language-dominant LH. The
general picture that emerges from the literature is that
though the two hemispheres collaborate closely during
language processing, they have a specific division of
labour. For instance, it has been argued that left
hemisphere language processing takes place at the
message-level where both semantic and syntactic
information are integrated, while processing in the RH
proceeds in a more global manner, and is more geared
toward semantic coherence (e.g., Beeman et al., 1994).
Given the evidence for the different modes of
language processing in the two hemispheres, Hoeks et
al. (2003) speculated that there might actually be two
mechanisms for sentence interpretation that, in spite of
their close cooperation, are nevertheless dedicated to
different aspects of the interpretation process. One of
these mechanisms, in the LH, would then be responsible
for creating the message-level representation (i.e., with
the use of syntax), whereas the other, located in the RH,
continuously creates a coarse-grained semantic
representation into which all content words are
integrated, thus more or less representing the 'gist' of the
sentence. If, for some reason or other, the LH is not able
to produce a valid message-level representation quickly
enough, the RH temporarily takes over to guide the
integration of incoming lexical items. This could
explain why there is a semantic illusion effect in the
experiments discussed above.
To test the hypothesis that a RH mechanism is
responsible for the semantic illusion effect, two
experiments were performed using the divided visual

564 http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version

field technique. In these experiments, the final word of a
centrally presented sentence was flashed in either the
left visual field (LVF, directly connected to the RH) or
the right visual field (RVF, directly connected to the
LH). Information presented in either of the two
hemifields is initially available only to the contralateral
hemisphere. In Experiment 1 participants were asked to
judge whether the final word was a real Dutch word or
not (lexical decision); in Experiment 2 they judged
whether or not a sentence made sense (plausibility
judgment).

Experiment 1
In the first experiment the lexical decision technique
was used where participants are presented with
letterstrings and asked to decide whether a specific
letterstring is an existing word in their language (here:
Dutch) or not. This task has been shown to be sensitive
to the semantic processing of a word in relation to its
preceding context in the following sense: If a target
word is semantically congruent with the preceding
context, deciding that it is a word occurs faster than in a
neutral context; on the other hand, if the word does not
fit into the context, decision times are longer as
compared to a neutral context (e.g., O'Seaghdha, 1997).
So in general target words occurring in implausible
sentences receive much longer decision times than when
occurring in plausible sentences. In this experiment we
will test whether this is true for all implausible
sentences or whether we can find evidence for the
semantic illusion effect. In that case we expect shorter
decision times and less errors in the implausible-related
condition than in the implausible control condition,
possibly even close to the performance in the plausiblerelated condition. If there is a semantic illusion effect,
we expect it to be predominantly present in the
LVF/RH.

Method
Participants Fourty-eight native speakers of Dutch
were paid for participating in this experiment (36
female; mean age 21 years, age range 18-30). All were
currently receiving a university education. Participants
were righthanded, had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and did not report having (had) neurological
problems.
Materials & Design The complete set of materials of
the Hoeks et al. (2003) study were used, consisting of
112 sentences. In the present study there were three
factors. The first factor, sentence type, had three levels:
1) plausible with related final word, 2) implausible with
related final word (the 'semantic illusion' condition), and
3) implausible with unrelated final word. Examples of
these three conditions are given by sentences 1-3
respectively (see Introduction). For the present
experiment two other factors were added: field, with
levels LVF and RVF, and word, with levels word and
pseudoword.
For
the
pseudoword condition,
pseudowords were constructed that could have been
words according to Dutch phonotactic constraints but
that were not (e.g., "Het brood werd door de bakkers
geparft").

Experimental lists were constructed with an equal
number of items per condition, and no list containing
more than one version of a given item. Filler sentences
were added such that each list contained an equal
number of plausible and implausible items. The order in
which experimental and filler items appeared was
determined semi-randomly and was the same for each
list. Each list was presented to an equal number of
participants and each participant only saw one list.
All target stimuli (i.e., final words of the experimental
sentences) were carefully matched with respect to
length (in characters), frequency of occurrence, and
plausibility of the sentence was taken into account
(rated on a scale from 1=highly implausible, to
5=highly plausible).
Table 1: Stimulus Characteristics of the materials in
Experiments 1 and 2: length, log-frequency and rated
plausibility (standard deviation in brackets).
length
related
unrelated

logfreq

implaus plaus

8.1 (1.5) 1.4 (0.7) 1.4 (0.4) 4.5 (0.5)
8.0 (1.2) 1.4 (0.7) 1.4 (0.5) ---

Note. implaus = plausibility rating for related and
unrelated words in implausible sentences; plaus =
plausibility rating for related words in plausible
sentences.

A practice session consisting of 47 items preceded the
actual experiment.
Procedure Participants were seated behind a computer
screen (distance to screen = 60 cm) in a sound-proof
cabin. A chin-rest helped them to keep their head in the
same optimal viewing position while doing the
experiment. Sentences were presented word-by-word
(480 ms per word; 246 ms on screen, followed by a 234
ms blank screen) in the center of the screen, except for
the final word which was flashed either left or right of
the center (at a horizontal visual angle of 2o) for a
duration of 200 ms. Participants were instructed to press
either a red ("word") or a green ("non-word") button on
a keyboard with their right index finger or their right
middle finger, respectively.
Participants were asked to read the sentences
carefully and to respond as quickly as possible without
compromising accuracy. After a response was made, the
word knipper (i.e., "blink") appeared for 3 sec., as
participants were encouraged not to blink during
reading to avoid them missing any of the final words.
After that, an asterisk appeared for 1 sec. to indicate that
the next sentence was imminent.
A video-camera was installed on top of the computer
screen to keep track of the participants' eye movements.
Participants were instructed not to move their eyes to
the words flashed in either LVF or RVF, and were
trained during the practice session until they no longer
did so. During the actual experiment the participants'
eye movements were continuously monitored and
saccades were counted. No participant was observed to
make more than 10 saccades during the entire
experiment (i.e., including filler sentences).

565 http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version

Sentences were presented in four blocks of 56
sentences each. After each block participants could take
a short break. In all, the experiment took approximately
45 min.

Results
Analysis The reaction time data were screened for
outliers. In addition, mean error percentages in each
condition were calculated for both participants and
items. Figure 2 presents mean RTs and error
percentages per condition of Experiment 1. Two
ANOVAs (Analyses of Variance) were performed. The
first analysis involved testing whether the semantic
illusion effect, that is, shorter RTs and less errors for
implausible-related sentences than for implausibleunrelated sentences was different for RH than for LH;
this is the field (2) x relatedness (2) analysis. The
second analysis looked into the difference between the
plausible condition and the two implausible conditions;
this is the field (2) x sentence type (3) analysis. These
two analyses were performed on reaction times and
error percentages. Normally these analyses are based on
both participant (F1) and item means (F2). However,
due to the relatively large number of errors made by the
participants there were not enough observations per
condition per item to perform statistically valid analyses
on the item means for the reaction times. Therefore we
will only report the outcomes of the analyses by
participants in the paragraph on reaction times.
1300
1200
P-R

1100
RT

I-R
1000

I-U

900
800
LVF

RVF

20
15
P-R
I-R

ER 10

I-U
5
0
LVF

RVF

Figure 2. Reaction times (upper panel) and Error
percentages (lower panel) for Experiment 1.
P-R=plausible-related; I-R=implausible-related; IU=implausible-unrelated. LVF=left visual field;
RVF=right visual field.
Reaction Times The field/relatedness analysis
produced an interaction between field and relatedness
on reaction times, which was marginally significant
(F(1,42)=2.9; p=.096). A post-hoc analysis revealed a

significant semantic illusion effect for stimuli presented
to the RVF (F(1,44)=9.8; p<.005), and a statistical nulleffect for the LVF (F<1). As to the other effects, there
was a marginally significant main effect of relatedness
(F(1,42)=3.2; p=.08), reflecting a trend for shorter RTs
in the implausible-related condition than in the
implausible-unrelated condition (a difference of 43 ms).
The main effect of field, finally, was highly significant
(F(1,42)=9.6; p<.005): RTs were longer when target
words were presented to the LVF (1166 ms) than to the
RVF (1086 ms), a difference of 80 ms.
No interaction was found in the field/sentence type
analysis (F < 1). There was a main effect of field
(F(1,42)=16.2; p<.001) and of sentence type
(F(1,42)=27.5; p<.001). The first main effect indicated
the slower processing of LVF stimuli (LVF: 1120 ms;
RVF: 1030 ms), the main effect of sentence type
reflected the much faster times for the plausible
sentences (implausible-related: 1104 ms; implausibleunrelated: 1147 ms; plausible-related: 974 ms).
Error Percentages The field/relatedness analysis did
not reveal significant interactions between field and
relatedness in the error data (F1(1,47)=1.8; p=.19;
F2<1). However, both main effects, of field
(F1(1,47)=30.5; p<.001; F2(1,111)=22.1; p<.001) and
relatedness were highly significant (F1(1,47)=33.8;
p<.001; F2(1,111)=44.3; p<.001): target words
presented to LVF were more often incorrectly classified
as pseudo-words (i.e., 33 % of the time) than when
presented to RVF (22 %). More importantly, target
words that were presented in the context of an
implausible-related sentence were less often seen as
pseudo-words (20 %) than when occurring in the
implausible controls with unrelated words (35 %). In
other words, the semantic illusion effect in terms of a
reduction in percentage of errors during lexical decision
turned out to be approximately equally large in LH and
RH.
The field/sentence type analysis did not produce
significant interactions of field and sentence type (both
Fs <1). There was a main effect of field (F1(1,47)=43.9;
p<.001; F2(1,111)=36.4; p<.001) reflecting more errors
for LVF (27 %) than for RVF(16 %), and there was also
a significant main effect of sentence type (F1(1,47)=9.3;
p<.005; F2(1,111)=36.4; p<.001) showing most errors
for the implausible control sentences (35 %),
considerably less errors for the semantic illusion
sentences (20 %), and fewest errors for the plausible
sentences (9 %).

Discussion
This experiment yielded two important results. First, in
both reaction times and error percentages evidence was
found for the semantic illusion effect: decision times
were shorter and error percentages were smaller for the
implausible-related sentences than for the implausible
controls. Secondly, contrary to our hypothesis, the
semantic illusion effect did not appear to be an
exclusive RH phenomenon at all, as it was found in both
hemispheres in terms of error percentages, and only in
the LH when reaction times were concerned.
Looking only at the error data we might conclude that
there is not much difference in processing between the

566 http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version

two hemispheres, as both show a large semantic illusion
effect. However, if we consider the reaction time data,
the strict lateralization of the semantic illusion effect
suggests that the hemispheres do process language
differently, and that it is the LH that is most sensitive to
semantic information, not the RH.
This dissociation between the two dependent
measures certainly suggests that each of these measures
must reflect a different aspect of processing. It is
possible that reaction time is a more on-line measure of
sentence processing, while the errors might reflect some
later stage, e.g., the process of decision making or error
monitoring, which is also a very important aspect of the
lexical decision task that was used (cf. Kaplan & Zaidel,
2001). To determine the extent to which our present
pattern of results is specific to the particular task that
was used in the experiment, we decided to try and
replicate the present findings with a different, and
probably less complicated task: plausibility judgment.

Experiment 2
This experiment used plausibility judgment time and
judgment errors as its dependent measures. The logic
behind the experiment is simple: the semantic illusion
effect will tempt readers to say that implausible
sentences with related words are actually plausible,
which should lead to longer judgment times and to
more errors than for the control sentences which are
equally implausible (e.g., sentence 3). Furthermore, if
the semantic illusion is the consequence of an
integrative mechanism in the RH, and the results from
the previous experiment are highly task-dependent, this
pattern of longer reaction times and more errors is
expected to obtain when the stimulus is presented in the
LVF/RH, but not, or substantially less, when presented
in the RVF/LH.

Method
Participants Forty native speakers of Dutch were paid
for participating in this experiment (32 female; mean
age 21 years, age range 18-26); all were currently
receiving a university education. Participants were
righthanded, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision
and did not report having (had) neurological problems.
Materials, Design, & Procedure Materials and design
were the same as in Experiment 1, now without the
pseudowords. Procedure, and other experimental details
were also the same as in Experiment 1, except that
participants had to decide whether the sentence was
plausible or not.

Results
Analysis After screening for outliers (see Experiment
1), mean RTs and mean error percentages in each
condition were calculated for both participants and
items (see Figure 3). Both the field (2) x relatedness (2)
and the field (2) x sentence type (3) ANOVA were
performed (see Experiment 1)
Reaction Times The field/relatedness analysis on
reaction times did not produce the predicted interaction

of field and semantic relatedness (Fs < 1). Although
there was no main effect of relatedness, the main effect
of field was highly significant, as RTs were much
longer when target words were presented to the LVF
(1238 ms) than to the RVF (1139 ms) (F1(1,39)=22.1;
p<.001; F2(1,111)=26.1; p<.001).
1300
1200
P-R

1100
RT

I-R
1000

I-U

900
800
LVF

RVF

45
40
35
30
25
ER
20
15
10
5
0

P-R
I-R
I-U

LVF

RVF

Figure 3. Reaction times (upper panel) and Error
percentages (lower panel) for Experiment 2.
P-R=plausible-related; I-R=implausible-related; IU=implausible-unrelated. LVF=left visual field;
RVF=right visual field.
No interaction was found in the field/sentence type
analysis either (Fs < 1). There were main effects of field
(F1(1,39)=33.8; p<.001; F2(1,111)=41.2; p<.001) and
of
sentence
type
(F1(1,39)=55.7;
p<.001;
F2(1,111)=142.9; p<.001). The first main effect
reflected the slower processing of LVF stimuli (LVF:
1164 ms; RVF: 1066 ms), the second one represented
the much faster times for the plausible sentences
(implausible-related: 1199 ms; implausible-unrelated:
1178 ms; plausible-related: 968 ms).
Error Percentages The field/relatedness analysis did
reveal significant interactions between field and
relatedness in the error data (F1(1,39)=4.3; p<.05;
F2(1,111)=3.9; p=.05). The semantic illusion effect
turned out to be present in the LH, but totally absent in
the RH: when target words were presented to the RVF,
the amount of errors rose from 5 % (implausibleunrelated) to 9 % (implausible-related), as opposed to a
null-result for targets presented to the LVF (both
conditions 8 % errors). There were no main effects of
field and relatedness (all p's > .20).
The field/sentence type analysis produced a
marginally significant interaction of field and sentence
type (F1(1,39)=3.7; p=.06; F2(1,111)=3.7; p=.06),
essentially reflecting a trend toward a null effect of
sentence type in the RH (stimuli presented to LVF: all

567 http://www.fineprint.com
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version

sentence types showed 8 % errors) and a semantic
illusion effect in the LH (stimuli presented to RVF:
implausible-related 9 %, both other sentences 5 %). The
main effect of field was significant in the analysis by
items, but only marginally significant in the participants
analysis (F1(1,39)=3.5; p=.07; F2(1,111)=4.0; p<.05)
suggesting a trend of more errors when targets were
presented in LVF (8 %) as compared to RVF (6 %). No
main effect of sentence type was observed (all p's >
.20).

General Discussion
The two behavioral experiments using the divided
visual field paradigm have yielded two important
findings. First, they provided convincing evidence for
the existence of 'semantic illusions' during sentence
processing. The experiments presented here replicated
the original observation made by Hoeks et al. (2003),
that sometimes semantic relationships between words in
a sentence can be so strong, that they temporarily
'overrule' the semantic interpretation prescribed by the
syntactic structure of that sentence. Experiment 1 using
lexical decision showed that target words of
implausible-related
sentences
were
processed
significantly faster and with fewer errors than the target
words of implausible control-sentences. In addition,
Experiment 2 showed that the semantic illusion effect
tempts readers to classify the implausible-related
sentences as plausible, causing significantly more errors
there than in the implausible controls.
The second important finding is that although the
results showed that semantic illusion does occur during
sentence processing, there was only very little evidence
for the presumed lateralization of the effect. Actually,
the results of the two experiments taken together seem
to implicate the LH as the most important site for the
hypothesized coarse-grained semantic representation,
and not the RH. For instance, in the plausibility
judgment experiment only the LH was sensitive to the
semantic illusion with regard to the analyses of the error
percentages. The RH did not show any such effect. In
the lexical decision experiment the evidence was a bit
mixed, as the semantic illusion effect was found
bilaterally in the error data. Nevertheless, the analyses
on reaction times again showed an RVF/LH focus for
the semantic illusion, against a null-effect in LVF/RH.
On the basis of these data it seems clear that we have
to reject any model of sentence interpretation in which
the LH is only focused on following the instructions of
syntax in order to arrive at the interpretation of a
sentence. Likewise, the results do not support a model
in which the RH is continuously building up a coarse
semantic representation into which all words fit that
have a certain semantic relationship to the preceding
words in the sentence. But what kind of model can
account for these results?
One possible way towards a solution might be to
leave the 'static' models (e.g,. LH is responsible for one
thing and the RH is responsible for something else) and
to look for a more dynamic model, in which the brain
finds an optimal division of labour between the two
hemispheres for each and every task it sees itself
confronted with, even when all of these tasks belong to
one and the same domain, such as, for instance,

language. If we also add the conjecture that the two
dependent measures (i.e., RTs and errors) that were
used in the present experiments actually reflect different
aspects of task performance, we arrive at a very
different picture of what is going on. For instance, the
lexical decision task might have demanded more
resources to handle the task: where perhaps normally
the LH would have had enough capacity processing, in
this case the RH was mobilized too to help with
decision making and error monitoring. The plausibility
task, then, might have been less demanding, burdening
only the LH, and only slightly.
Obviously, more research is needed to begin to
answer these questions, despite the large number of
studies that have already been done. But especially
research in which divided visual field studies are
combined with neuroimaging methods, such as ERPs
and also fMRI (function magnetic resonance imaging)
are expected to be very fruitful.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to Eran Zaidel and Berry Wijers
for helpful comments on, and discussions of this work.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction
with context during human sentence processing.
Cognition, 30, 191-238.
Beeman, M., Friedman, R.B., Grafman, J., Perez, E.,
Diamond, S., & Lindsay, M.B. (1994). Summation
priming and coarse semantic coding in the right
hemisphere. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(1),
26-45.
Duffy, S.A., Henderson, J.M., & Morris, R.K. (1989).
Semantic facilitation of lexical access during sentence
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 791-801.
Hagoort, P., Brown, C.M., & Groothusen, J. (1993).
The Syntactic Positive Shift (SPS) as an ERP
measure of syntactic processing. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 8, 439-483.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Stowe, L.A., & Doedens, G. (2003).
Word processing in sentential context: evidence for
both lexical and message-level priming. Manuscript
submitted for publication, University of Groningen.
Kaplan, J. & Zaidel, E. (2001). Error monitoring in the
hemispheres: The effect of feedback on lateralized
lexical decision. Cognition, 82, 157-178.
Kolk, H.H.J., Chwilla, D.J., van Herten, M., & Oor,
P.J.W. (in press). Structure and limited capacity in
verbal working memory: a study with Event Related
Potentials. To appear in Brain and Language.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1984). Brain potentials
during reading reflect word expectancy and semantic
association. Nature, 161-163.
Morris, R.K. (1994). Lexical and message-level
sentence context effects on fixation times in reading.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 92-103.
O'Seaghdha, P. G. (1997). Conjoint and dissociable
effects of syntactic and semantic context. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 807-828.

568
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version
http://www.fineprint.com

