UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sex and Seniority: The Effects of Linguistic Categories on Conceptual Judgments and
Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2q6426ng

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Anggoro, Florencia
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sex and Seniority:
The Effects of Linguistic Categories on Conceptual Judgments and Memory
Florencia Anggoro (f-anggoro@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
The current study explored the effects of different semantic
categories in kinship terms on similarity judgments, word
extensions, and recognition memory. We compared
Indonesian – in which sibling terms are based on relative age
– with English – in which sibling terms are based on gender.
In Experiment 1, participants saw triads of pictures of scenes
involving kinship relations and were asked to make similarity
judgments and to extend novel labels from the standards to
the variants. The variants each resembled the standard along
one dimension and differed along the other. In Experiment 2,
other participants were asked to remember the standard
pictures and were later tested on their recognition memory
using the variants. Results from both experiments converged
to suggest that participants’ judgments, word extensions, and
memory were influenced by their semantic categories.

Introduction
The Whorfian Question
The question of whether language influences nonlinguistic
cognition has enjoyed a recent resurgence of interest. This
idea was widely accepted in the 1950’s and 1960’s. Then it
fell into disregard, due in part to Rosch’s failure to find
differences in performance on cognitive tasks between the
Dani people and English speakers, despite striking
differences in the linguistic categories of color terms
([Rosch] Heider, 1972). In recent years, however, interest in
the question of language and thought has been revived
(Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, in press; Gumperz &
Levinson, 1996). This renewed interest was marked by a
shift from the domain of color to relationally richer domains
such as space, fueled in part by linguistic findings of major
semantic differences in domains such as space and motion
(e.g., Talmy, 1975; Bowerman, 1980), tense (Boroditsky,
Ham, & Ramscar, 2002), and social categories (Romney &
D’Andrade, 1964). For example, Choi and Bowerman
(1991) found that in contrast to English, which divides
spatial configurations into support vs. containment relations,
Korean divides this arena into tight-fitting vs. loose-fitting
arrangements (Choi & Bowerman, 1991).
There is recent evidence that such linguistic distinctions
may influence non-linguistic similarity and memory for
scenes (Bowerman & Choi, in press; Sera et al., 2002; Choi,

91

McDonough, Bowerman, & Mandler, 1999; Levinson,
1998), as well as counterevidence (Munnich, Landau, &
Anne Dosher, 2001; Li & Gleitman, 2002).
So far the bulk of the new wave of cross-linguistic
investigations on language and thought has centered on
space and motion (e.g., Levinson, 1998). However, it is
clear from the classic studies in anthropological linguistics
that there are also substantial differences in semantic
categories in social arenas such as kinship (Romney &
D’Andrade, 1964; Danziger, 2001; Foley, 1997).
One kind of linguistic category that touches on the social
arena is linguistic gender. Although gender has often been
seen as purely formal, some recent research suggests that it
may retain some semantic content (e.g., Sera, et al., 2002).
For example, Boroditsky and Schmidt (2000) conducted a
study where they taught bilingual Spanish-English and
German-English speakers gender-specific proper names for
objects in English (e.g., Betty for a table). For both groups
of participants, half the names were consistent with the
grammatical gender of the objects’ labels in their first
language; the other half were inconsistent. The objects were
chosen to have opposite genders in Spanish and German.
Boroditsky and Schmidt found that participants remembered
gender-consistent pairings better than gender-inconsistent
pairings. In addition, because the objects had been chosen
to have opposite genders in both languages, the results
showed opposite memory patterns: for objects where
Spanish speakers remembered more female names, German
speakers remembered more male names, and vice versa
(Boroditsky & Schmidt, 2000).
Our research investigates another arena of social
categories, namely kinship terms. Some common
distinctions occur across languages, such as the gender of
the person named, the age and/or generation relative to ego,
and the gender of the linking relative, leading some theorists
to emphasize universal aspects of kinship systems (e.g.,
Malinowski, 1930). Nevertheless, kinship systems vary
considerably in how these distinctions play out. We focus
here on one pair of contrasting languages – English and
Indonesian – which vary in the way they name sibling
relations.
Before describing the current study, we describe the
relevant semantic patterns for Indonesian and English.

Indonesian makes more distinctions than English in many
aspects of social and kinship terms. The most relevant to
our study is that Indonesian makes a lexical distinction for
whether a sibling is older or younger. The word kakak refers
to older sibling while the word adik refers to younger
sibling. For example,
(1)
Saya
mempunyai
seorang
kakak.
1st pers. sing.
have
one (person)
older sib
‘I have an older sibling’
Crucially, the words kakak and adik are gender-neutral.
When English speakers need to be specific, they could ask
“Is your brother older or younger?” Similarly, if Indonesian
speakers need to be specific, the following is one way they
could go about it:
(2)
Adikmu
laki-laki
atau
perempuan?
younger sib.-your
male
or
female
‘Is your younger sibling a boy or a girl?’
In other words, when an Indonesian child refers to her
siblings, she speaks not in terms of sister and brother but
rather of older and younger. That is, the Indonesian
semantic system focuses on the relational seniority of
siblings, in contrast to the English focus on gender. Does
this linguistic difference matter to the way people think
about family relations? Might it even affect the way people
construe scenes involving families? Our study investigates
this possibility.

The Current Study
In this research, we explored the effects of language on how
people encode and remember scenes. Specifically, we
compared Indonesian and English to ask whether
differences in habitual kinship language can influence
similarity judgments and recognition memory. Indonesian
and English are interesting to compare, because in some
arenas – e.g., spatial prepositions – the Indonesian language
makes fewer distinctions than English, while in other arenas
– e.g., many social domains – the reverse is true. In the
present case – terms for siblings – each language makes a
distinction that the other does not. Our interest is in
exploring whether relative age of siblings matters more for
Indonesian speakers than for English speakers.

Experiment 1
In this study, we contrasted the two languages using a
similarity task and a word extension task. In both tasks,
Indonesian and English speakers were shown triads of
pictures depicting family interactions, containing a standard
and two variants. In the similarity judgment task,
participants were simply asked “which of these two pictures
(showing the variants) is more like this one (pointing to the
standard)?” (In Indonesian: “Dari dua ini menurut kamu
mana yang lebih seperti yang ini?”). In both cases, one
variant (the Gender Variant) preserved the gender relation

92

but altered the seniority relation; the other (the Seniority
Variant) preserved the seniority relation but altered the
gender relation. We chose the word extension task in
addition to the standard similarity task to provide a more
natural, implicit measure of similarity than a direct
judgment. We know from studies with American subjects
that the term similarity in English is ambiguous (Gentner,
Rattermann and Forbus, 1993; Goldstone, 1995). It can be
taken to mean 'purely perceptual similarity' or 'deep
relational similarity' or a combination. Because extending a
new word to further situations is natural across both
languages, this task should be less susceptible to
misinterpretation across languages than instructions to
'judge similarity' (Gentner & Brem, 1999).
In the word-extension task, the event depicted in the
standard picture was labeled, and participants were asked
which of the two variants could also be described as the
label. In designing the novel word task, we avoided naming
the sibling relation itself, for this might have invited a kind
of internal translation – participants might have translated
the novel word into their languages’ normal kinship system.
Instead, the novel word always described an event in which
the siblings were participating. We reasoned that kinship
relations might be particularly salient for ritual or
ceremonial events (in both languages). Therefore, in
designing the family triads, we included two sets depicting
ceremonies as well as one rather mundane kitchen scene.
If the language’s patterns of kinship naming become
integrated into their habitual conceptualization of kinship
relations, then (1) they should influence the perceived
similarity to other parallel events involving kin pairs, and
(2) they should influence people’s sense of how the new
word should be extended. For example, if an English
speaker sees a new event between a brother and sister who
differ in age, s/he might be more likely to generalize that
event to a future brother-and-sister pair than to a future
older-and-younger pair. In contrast, an Indonesian speaker
would be more likely to weigh the relative age of the two
participants more than the gender difference.
The question is whether these habitual patterns will
influence people’s extension of a new word, and perhaps
even their sense of similarity. If so, then the English
participants in both the word-extension and the similarity
tasks should choose the alternative where gender relations
are preserved. The predicted Indonesian pattern is to choose
the alternative where seniority relations are preserved.

Method
Participants The participants include 15 Indonesian
monolinguals and 19 English monolinguals, ranging in age
from approximately 17 to 19 years old. Participants were
either given credit or a small monetary compensation. Data
from Indonesian speakers were collected in Jakarta,
Indonesia. Data from English speakers were collected at
Northwestern University and other areas near Chicago.

Materials The stimuli were three sets of pictures. One set
(the Kitchen set) involved scenes of siblings performing a
simple activity in the kitchen. The other two sets (the Ritual
sets) involved ceremonies. The Kitchen set was used in the
similarity task and the Ritual sets were used in the word
extension task. In all cases, family pictures were used to
introduce the ‘characters’ and make clear the sibling
relations.

Family Picture for
Kitchen Set

Family Picture for
Ritual 1 Set

Figure 1: Family pictures used in the Kitchen and Ritual 1
sets. These were shown before the standards and remained
in view throughout the task.

Standard

Gender Variant
younger sister gives bowl
to older sister

Seniority Variant
younger brother gives crown
to older brother

Procedure Participants were run individually in a quiet
room. Instructions were given in Indonesian for the
Indonesian speakers and English for the English speakers.
For each set of stimuli, participants were first shown a
family picture to insure that they understood that the triad
that followed only involved the children. For the wordextension task (Ritual sets), the experimenter explained that
the family lives on some island and they held a ritual each
year. Then the experimenter labeled the ritual (with a novel
word) and asked participants to choose which of the two
variants is also called that name.
Specifically, for the similarity judgment task (Kitchen
set), the experimenter said, “This is a picture of a family
(showing Kitchen set family picture). Two parents, four
children. Now I am going to show you pictures of just the
children.” Then the experimenter said, “Pay attention to this
one (showing standard). Which of these two (showing
variants) do you think is more like the standard?” For the
word-extension task (Ritual sets, e.g., Ritual 1), the
experimenter said: “On the island of Kokapu, there lives this
family (showing Ritual 1 family picture). Two parents, four
children. Once a year they always attend a ritual that is
being held at night, when there is a full-moon. Now I am
going to show you pictures of just the children.” Then the
experimenter said “Now this (showing standard) is called
saluming. Which one of these two (showing variants) do
you think is also saluming?” After participants had made a
choice, the experimenter asked them to explain their choice.

older sister gives bowl to younger sister

Seniority Variant

Gender Variant
older sister gives crown
to younger brother

Figure 3: Ritual 1 set. In the Gender Variant, the genders of
both actors are the same as in the standard, but the crown
now goes from the older to the younger sibling. In the
Seniority Variant, the bowl still goes from the younger to
the older sibling, but the gender of the older sibling is
altered.

The triad pictures consisted of one standard picture and two
variants: the Seniority Variant, which preserved the
seniority relation but altered the gender relation, and the
Gender Variant, which preserved the gender relation but
altered the seniority relation.

older sister gives bowl
to younger brother

Standard
younger brother gives crown
to older sister

Figure 2: The Kitchen set. In the Seniority Variant, the
bowl still goes from the older to the younger sibling, but the
gender of the younger sibling is altered. In the Gender
Variant, the gender of both actors is the same as in the
standard, but the bowl now goes from the younger to the
older sibling.

93

Predictions
We predicted that Indonesian monolinguals would be
relatively more sensitive to changes in relative age, as
opposed to changes in gender, than would English
monolinguals. Specifically, if the similarity judgments and
word extensions reflect the semantic categories in the two
languages, then Indonesian speakers should be likely to
choose or extend the novel labels to the variant that
preserved the seniority relation (Seniority Variant). English
speakers should be less likely to attend to relative age and
more likely to attend to the variant that preserves the gender
relation (Gender Variant).

Results
The results from the similarity judgment task (Kitchen set)
are depicted in Figure 4. As predicted, Indonesian speakers
were much more likely to choose the Seniority Variant (M
= .93, SD = .26) than the English speakers (M = .63, SD =
.5), t(32) = 2.14, p =.04.

samples t-test over the three sets of items showed a
significant difference between the two language groups, t(2)
= 5.74, p = .03.

Discussion
The results from Experiment 1 showed that, as predicted,
Indonesian speakers were highly attentive to seniority in
judging the similarity of events and in extending a new
word meaning. In this study, we did not find a
correspondingly strong weighting for gender relations
among English speakers; rather, English speakers seemed to
attend to both kinds of relations. (However, the next study
shows a somewhat different pattern.) In any case, the
important thing is the difference between the two language
groups. Indonesian speakers attend more to seniority than
do English speakers. This pattern fits with our prediction of
greater relative sensitivity to the dimension required in
naming siblings.

Experiment 2
In this study we used a recognition task as a more subtle
way to discover whether the two languages induce different
encodings. Indonesian and English speakers were shown a
series of pictures: the three kinship standards and their three
corresponding family pictures from Experiment 1, along
with 21 other pictures. Participants were asked to remember
the scenes for a later memory task. Recognition memory for
the scenes was later tested using the Gender and Seniority
Variants that were used in Experiment 1.

% Seniority Variant Choices

Similarity Judgment
Task
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Indonesian

English

Method

Language Group

Figure 4: Results from the similarity judgment task.
The results from the word-extension task (Ritual sets) are
depicted in Figure 5. Again, as predicted, Indonesian
speakers (M = .97, SD = .13) were more likely to extend the
new word to the Seniority Variant than were English
speakers (M = .55, SD = .37), t(32) = 4.14, p < .001.

Materials There were 27 study pictures (the three standard
pictures from Experiment 1, their three corresponding
family pictures, and 21 filler pictures). There were 50 test
pictures. The recognition test included the three standards
and all six of their variants, plus 41 fillers, as described
below.

Word Extension
Task

% Seniority Variant Extensions

Participants Participants were 15 Indonesian monolinguals
and 15 English monolinguals, ranging in age from
approximately 17 to 19 years old. They were either given
credit or a small monetary compensation. Data from
Indonesian speakers were collected in Jakarta, Indonesia.
Data from English speakers were collected at Northwestern
University and other areas near Chicago.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30

Procedure As in Experiment 1, before each standard
picture, participants were shown a family picture to ensure
that they understood that the picture that followed involved
only the children. (For the Ritual sets, the experimenter
explained that the family lives on some island and they held
a ritual each year. Then the standard was shown without
further description.) After participants had seen all of the
standards, they were given a short break (approximately 10
minutes) during which they were asked to solve a few

20
10
0

Indonesian

English

Language Group

Figure 5: Results from the word extension task.
Although the two measures are somewhat different, we
then combined them to permit an items analysis. A paired-

94

simple puzzles. Then they were given a yes-no recognition
task. The two variants for each standard were intermixed in
semi-random order among the fillers. The three standards
were given at the end of the test.

Results
The key dependent measure is the mean proportion of
times a participant responded ‘yes’ to each variant; i.e., the
false alarm rates on the Gender Variants vs. the Seniority
Variants. Qualitatively, Indonesian speakers were more
likely to false alarm on the Seniority Variants (M = .49, SD
= .25) than on the Gender Variants (M = .38, SD = .25),
while English speakers were more likely to false alarm on
the Gender Variants (M = .56, SD = .30) than on the
Seniority Variants (M = .44, SD = .30). An ANOVA over
language and variant type showed a marginally significant
interaction between the two factors (p = .06).

% False Alarms

Memory

60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Indo nesian
English

Seniority
Variant

Gender
Variant

Figure 7: Results from Experiment 2. The Seniority Variant
preserved the seniority but altered the gender, and the
Gender Variant did the reverse.

Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 suggest an influence of
language on encoding and recognition. Indonesian speakers
showed greater relative sensitivity to changes in seniority
than to changes in gender in recognition memory, whereas
English speakers showed the reverse pattern, as evidenced
by the marginally significant interaction between language
and variant type. As in Experiment 1, this pattern suggests
greater sensitivity to the dimension that is required in
naming siblings in each language.

General Discussion
Our major prediction was that Indonesian speakers would
focus on seniority and English speakers on gender. This
prediction was borne out in all three tasks. Our results
suggest that the difference in the semantic patterns of the
two languages may lead to differences in the way speakers
encode situations – even nonlinguistic perceptual scenes.
Habitually speaking a different language appears to have led
participants to have different ‘takes’ on the same pictures.

95

Our three measures converge quite well. Across our
studies we found that Indonesian speakers attended more to
seniority than did English speakers in judging similarity and
in extending a new word meaning. However, because these
two tasks might have a somewhat deliberative component,
we added a memory task as a more subtle test of whether
semantic patterns influence encoding. Indeed, the results of
the recognition task showed the predicted interaction:
Indonesian speakers show greater sensitivity to seniority and
English speakers to gender. Interestingly, in the memory
task the language effects appeared greatest on the gender
dimension, in contrast to the first two tasks in which the
effects were most prominent for seniority.
In our studies, we did not ask participants to describe the
pictures verbally. It is possible that the differences would
have been even stronger had we done so. As Slobin (1987)
suggested in his thinking for speaking hypothesis, “[when]
constructing utterances in discourse, one fits one’s thoughts
into available linguistic forms.” To test whether giving
verbal descriptions will heighten the language effects, we
are currently running another version of the memory study
in which participants are initially asked to describe the
pictures.
The two tasks used in Experiment 1 – similarity
judgment and word-extension – are somewhat related. In a
sense, the word-extension task could be viewed as a highly
selective form of similarity judgment. When one variant is
judged to have the same label as the standard, it is
presumably seen as sharing the commonalities relevant to
the inferred word meaning. However, given the abundant
evidence that naming patterns differ from general similarity
judgments (Gentner & Brem, 1999; Imai, Gentner &
Uchida, 1994; Markman, 1989), the fact that the predicted
pattern emerges in both tasks is evidence for the role of the
language of kinship in the conceptualization of kinship.
A question we raised in Experiment 1 was whether there
would be stronger language effects on the Ritual sets than
on the Kitchen set; that is, would family relations become
especially salient in ceremonial settings? The results are
indeterminate at this point. The Indonesian speakers were
essentially at ceiling on the seniority choices (i.e., they
almost never showed gender-based responses), so this
prediction could not be tested. English speakers showed a
hint of such a tendency in that they showed their strongest
gender-based responding (57.9% gender-based) on the
Ritual 1 set (shown in Figure 3). However, their
performance on the Ritual 2 set (31.58% gender-based) was
not markedly different from their performance on the
Kitchen set (36.84% gender-based).
We have interpreted our findings in terms of effects of
semantic patterns on habitual encoding patterns. However,
another possible explanation for our findings is cultural
differences in the salience of status differences in seniority.
It is indeed possible that seniority is more salient in
Indonesia than in the U.S. On the other hand, it is difficult
to argue that gender is less salient in the Indonesian culture
than in American culture (if anything, Indonesia employs
more traditional gender roles than does the U.S. in everyday
life). Although further research should be done to sort out
the roles of culture and language, our overall results are

most consistent with effects of semantic patterns on habitual
encoding patterns.
In conclusion, our results suggest that linguistic
differences in kinship terms (specifically, sibling terms)
influence the way people encode and remember scenes and
perceive similarities among them. This finding is important
because it suggests that language can influence encoding not
only in spatial domains but also in the social arena. Further
research may reveal that social categories are a rich source
of information on the effects of language on habitual
thought.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NSF-ROLE award
21002/REC-0087516 and the Culture, Language, and
Cognition group at Northwestern University. We would like
to thank Jeanne Arijanti, SMU PSKD in Jakarta, Kathleen
Braun, and Ronnie Rios for their assistance with data
collection and other stages of this project. Special thanks to
Felicia Anggoro for creating the materials.

References
Boroditsky, L., Ham, W., & Ramscar, M. (2002). What is
universal in event perception? Comparing English and
Indonesian speakers. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Boroditsky, L. & Schmidt, L. (2000). Sex, Syntax, and
Semantics. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Philadelphia, PA.
Bowerman, M. (1980). The structure and origin of semantic
categories in the language-learning child. In M. L. Foster
& S. Brande (Eds.), Symbol as sense. New York:
Academic Press.
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (in press). Space under
construction: Language specific spatial categorization in
first language acquisition. To appear in D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadow, Eds. Language in mind: Advances in the
study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Choi, S., & Bowerman, M. (1991). Learning to express
motion events in English and Korean: The influence of
language-specific lexicalization patterns. Cognition, 41,
83-121.
Choi, S., McDonough, L., Bowerman, M., and Mandler,
J.M (1999). Early sensitivity to language-specific spatial
categories in English and Korean. Cognitive
Development, 14, 241-268.
Danziger, E. (2001). Relatively speaking: Language,
thought and kinship in Mopan Maya. Oxford Studies in
Anthropological Linguistics. Oxford University Press.
Foley, W. (1997). Anthropological Linguistics: An
Introduction. Blackwell Publishers.
Gentner, D., & Brem, S. (1999, August). Is snow really like
a shovel? Distinguishing similarity from thematic
relatedness. Paper presented at the Twenty-first Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver,
B.C.

96

Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (Eds.). (in press).
Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Goldstone, R. L. (1995). Mainstream and avant-garde
similarity. Psychologica Belgica, 35, 145-165.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (Eds.). (1996). Rethinking
linguistic relativity.
Cambridge, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93, 10-20.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children's
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9, 45-75.
Levinson, S. C. (1998). Studying spatial conceptualization
across cultures: Anthropology and cognitive science.
Ethos, 26, 7-24.
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265-294.
Malinowski, B. (1930). Kinship. Man, 30, 19-29.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Munnich, E., Landau, B., & Anne Dosher, B. (2001).
Cognition, 81, 171-207.
Romney, A. K., & D’Andrade, R. G. (1964). Cognitive
aspects of English kinship terms. American
Anthropologist, 66, 146-270.
Sera, M. D., Elieff, C., Burch, M. C., Forbes, J., &
Rodríguez, W. (2002). When language affects cognition
and when it does not: An analysis of grammatical gender
and classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 377-397.
Slobin, D. I. (1987). Thinking for speaking. Proceedings of
the Berkeley Linguistic Society, 13, 435-444.
Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J.
Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and semantics. New York:
Academic Press.

