UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Processing for Syntax Acquisition: A simulation study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84v9c195

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Blanc, Jean-Marc
Dodane, Christelle
Dominey, Peter Ford

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Processing for Syntax Acquisition: A simulation study
Jean-Marc Blanc (blanc@isc.cnrs.fr)
Christelle Dodane (dodane@isc.cnrs.fr)
Peter Ford Dominey (dominey@isc.cnrs.fr)
Institut des Sciences Cognitives
UMR 5015 CNRS-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1
67, boulevard Pinel 69675 BRON cedex

Abstract

Prosodic Foundations for Syntax
Early perceptual processing capabilities are likely to
contribute to the categorization of lexical vs.
grammatical words by newborns. This lexical
categorization could be performed by detecting
differences in the prosodic structure of these word
categories. Here we demonstrate that a Temporal
Recurrent Network (TRN) that allows realistic treatment
of the dynamic temporal aspect of prosody performs this
lexical categorization task on French and English. We
then examine the functional relation between this
capability, and non-linguistic temporal discrimination.
We reduce sensitivity to temporal structure in the TRN
by increasing the network time constants. This yields (1)
a reduction in performance in the lexical categorization
task, and (2) a deficit in the processing of brief auditory
events similar to that observed for children with SLI.
While our principle result is that the TRN can perform
lexical categorization based on prosodic structure, it is of
interest that the impaired TRN suggests a functional link
between impaired temporal processing, and impaired
lexical categorization in SLI.

Jusczyk et al. (1996) proposed that infants are able to
make immediate use of their sensitivity to prosodic
markers as a means for organizing the input. We will
now examine several investigations that have been
realized to confirm this hypothesis.

Sensitivy to prosodic structure

Introduction
One of the most challenging questions in child language
acquisition is how children learn syntax. Acquiring
language involves classifying lexical items into
syntactic categories. Four main sources of information
in linguistic input have been proposed as potentially
useful in this categorization: Distributional Information
(Redington, Chater & Finch 1998), Semantic
Bootstrapping, Phonological Constraints (Kelly 1995)
and prosodic information (Shi, Werker & Morgan
1998). With respect to prosodic information coded in
the fundamental frequency (F0), and lexical
categorization, we note that in French, content words
within a prosodic group (i.e. not at a group boundary)
are marked with F0 peaks, and the F0 of content words
in English are marked with a principal accent (Hirst &
Di Cristo 1998).
The current research tests the hypothesis that these
aspects of the temporal structure of prosody can be
processed by a temporal recurrent network (TRN), thus
providing insight into lexical categorization and
language acquisition.

145

Adults: Bagou et al. (2002) evaluated the relative
contribution of two prosodic cues, lengthening and F0
contour, in the processes of speech segmentation and
storage of new words. Their results showed that
prosodic information facilitates the acquisition of a new
mini-language. Kelly (1995) demonstrated that
American subjects were able to exploit phonological
cues to identify unknown words as verbs or nouns.
Children: Though children frequently fail to
produce function morphemes in their earliest utterances,
Gerken and McIntosh (1993) have suggested that
children by the age of 2 years have a representation of
some specific function morphemes, and the context in
which they appear. We will now consider the ability of
newborns to exploit prosodic cues for the early basis of
syntax.
Newborns: French newborns can discriminate
between English and Japanese sentences (different
rhythm classes), but not between Dutch and English
sentences (same rhythm class). This discrimination was
possible despite the speech being low-pass filtered (at
400 Hz), highlighting the role of prosody (Nazzi,
Bertoncini & Mehler, 1998). Moreover, newborn
infants are able to use probabilistic combinations of
acoustic and phonological information to perceptually
separate English word tokens into function/content
categories (Shi et al. 1999). At a later stage, such an
ability could potentially help bootstrap infants into
acquisition of grammar by allowing them to detect and
represent classes of words on the basis of perceptible
surface cues. However, the specific cues used by
newborns to make this distinction have not been
precisely determined.
Simulation Shi et al. (1998) investigated if various
“presyntactic cues” (such as number of syllables,

presence of a complex syllable nucleus, presence of
syllable coda, and syllable duration, to name only a few
phonologically relevant cues) are sufficient to guide the
assignment of words to rudimentary grammatical
categories. Their investigation of English, Mandarin
Chinese and Turkish shows that “sets of distributional,
phonological, and acoustic cues distinguishing lexical
and functional items are available in infant-directed
speech across such typologically distinct languages as
Mandarin and Turkish” (Shi et al. 1998). Thus
grammatical words tended to be acoustically and/or
phonologically minimized in comparison to lexical
words.
Durieux and Gillis (2000) proposed an artificial
learning system for lexical categorisation with English,
based on phonological and prosodic information.
However in these two simulation studies, a number of
specific cues were extracted from the speech by a
human expert. Here, we investigate whether a neurorealistic system can automatically extract cues from the
contour of the fundamental frequency itself.

are organized in three layers: the Input, consisting of
sixty units, that transmits prosodic information to the
State layer, which projects to the StateD layer (See
Figure 1). Recurrently connected State and StateD
layers are each made up of 25 units, and StateD neurons
include several different time constants to allow
sensitivity to different time scales.
Principles: The connections between the different
layers are randomly initialized (-0.5; +0.5) at the outset
and remain fixed. Weights are then selected from a
population of networks based on performance. Learning
consists of evaluating the representation of input
sequences in the activities of State and StateD after a
sequence has been presented.
Treatment of prosody: The dynamic system that
results from this recurrent network has been
demonstrated to be sensitive to the temporal and serial
order of input sequences, and was shown to
discriminate between languages of different rhythm
classes based on their prosodic structure (Dominey &
Ramus 2000).

Material & Methods

Figure 1: Temporal Recurrent Network Architecture

Corpora
LSCP: This corpus contains 54 French sentences read
by a single native speaker. The segmentation provided
groups of adjacent content and function words (~ 200
for each category; Ramus et al. 1999). The corpus
served in part for Experiments 1 and 3.
MULTEXT Experiment 2 used French and English
speech from the MULTEXT multilingual corpus
developed for the study of prosody (Campione &
Veronis, 1998). Stories were read by 20 different
speakers (5 males and 5 females per language) which
lead to a total of 8236 words for English, and 6945
words for French.

Fundamental Frequency (F0)
Extraction Fundamental frequency (Raw data) was
obtained from the speech signal autocorrelation
(PRAAT software; Boersma 1993). This description of
F0 was provided as input to the TRN.
Processing To obtain an acceptable perceptual
representation of intonation based on raw values of F0,
we apply the MOMEL quadratic spline smoothing
algorithm (Hirst & Espesser (1993), yielding a smooth
continuous curve reflecting the intonation contour with
which the utterance is spoken.

Temporal Recurrent Network (TRN)
Architecture: The TRN is based on the dynamic
coding properties of recurrently connected leaky
integrator neurons with sigmoid output functions that

146

F0

StateD

Input

State

Representation of inputs F0 was coded in Hz at 5ms
sampling intervals as a population of activity with a
Gaussian distribution, where the unit with the highest
activation encodes the mean frequency.

Exp. 1: Development of Lexical
Identification
The purpose of Experiment 1 was the identification,
based on peaks in F0, of two lexical categories:
Content words that have a meaning-related component
such as nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs, and
Function words that are primarily structural, such as
articles, prepositions, and auxiliaries.

Exp 1a: Linguistics Investigations
The location of F0 peaks is based on the detection of a
change in the sign of the difference between two
adjacent values of F0. Thus local minima and maxima
(F0 peaks) are detected. To eliminate irrelevant peaks
due to deviations in the raw F0 data, the MOMEL

smoothing algorithm was applied. We observed that
92% of F0 peaks and 61% of F0 valleys occurred in
content words, with the opposite distribution for
function words. Applying the rule that the presence of a
F0 peak indicates that a word belongs to Content
category, whereas the absence of this cue revealed a
Function word yields the results in Table 1, where
chance is 50,6%.
Table 1: French lexical categorization with LSCP
Corpus

LSCP
French

Method
Random
F0 peaks
F0 peaks
TRN
TRN+SOM

F0
Raw data
MOMEL
Raw data
Raw data

% correct
50,6
62,1
82,8
83,6
84,1

English
We subsequently tested whether F0 peaks were also
characteristic of content words in English. Table 2
indicates that this intonation contour could be used to
obtain the same lexical identification in English. We
conclude that, the TRN can perform lexical
categorization at a level comparable to human infants
(Shi et al. 1999). However, as pointed out by Shi et al.
1998, the contribution of a given cue to lexical
categorization may vary across languages. Thus the
presence of an F0 peak may have less impact in
English than in French.
Table 2: Lexical categorization with MULTEXT
Language

Exp 1b: Temporal Neuro-inspired Simulations

French

The TRN was trained on half of the function (F) and
content (C) words at group boundaries. After
presentation of a F or C word, the vector of activity in
State/StateD was sampled, and averaged into a
Prototype vector, yielding prototype vectors for F and C
respectively. Validation consisted of presenting the
second half of the corpus, and identifying words based
on their distance from the prototypes. We also
conducted experiment with a Self-Organized Map to
classify these vectors in a unsupervised way. Table 1
presents performance for the best of a population of 50
networks on the validation, for supervised (TRN) and
unsupervised learning (TRN+SOM).

Exp 2: Application to larger Corpora
Experiment 2 applies the Peak and TRN methods of
identification to a larger corpus (MULTEXT) with ten
different speakers. The speech signal is divided into
words rather than groups of words belonging to the
same lexical category and the speech is closer to
unconstrained speech than that in the LSCP corpus.

French
Table 2 demonstrates that the TRN performs the
Content/Function distinction within the same range as
the explicit detection of F0 peaks, superior to chance.
The LSCP and MULTEXT French corpora yielded
different performance, and their syntactic content
differs notably. The LSCP corpus contains only
sentences between 15 and 21 syllables, whereas the
MULTEXT corpus is based on short passages including
syntactic structure specific to spontaneous speech.
Nonetheless, despite these differences, lexical
categorization remains possible.

147

English

Method
Random
Peaks
TRN
Random
Peaks
TRN

F0
MOMEL
Raw data
MOMEL
Raw data

% correct
52
73,1
70,3
54
64,5
62,8

Impaired Prosodic Foundations for Syntax
In contrast to normally developing children, there exists
a subgroup of children characterized by a significant
limitation in reading and/or language development and
ability without the presence of an overt underlying
condition such as low overall IQ or impaired hearing.
This condition is often referred to as Specific Language
Impairment (SLI). Several investigators have proposed
that individuals with SLI have special problems with
the acquisition of functional categories (Eyer &
Leonard, 1995; Leonard 1995; Bishop 1979). Van der
Lely (1996) suggested that children with SLI had
greater difficulty assigning roles such as agent and
theme or theme and goal on the basis of syntactic
structure alone.
The origin of the processing deficits in language
impaired populations is still a question of debate. To
summarize, it could be due to basic sensory processing
deficits (Tallal et al. 1993) or to higher-level cognitive
processes. The first hypothesis postulated that
abnormalities in the neurophysiological encoding of
acoustic differences in speech are responsible for this
deficit. This impairment of auditory temporal
processing was tested in several auditory experiments
employing non-verbal stimuli. When stimuli are either
brief or rapid, children with SLI have difficulty in
discriminating them, although they have no difficulty in
differentiating the same stimuli when they are
lengthened or presented at slower rate. At least a
subgroup of children with SLI exhibits a deficit for
processing rapid auditory events at the same time that

they have trouble with the manipulation of function
words and phonemes (Tallal 1998).
These observations lead us to three important
experimental considerations: Exp 1a: Prosodic cues can
allow the distinction of function versus content words;
Exp 1b and Exp 2: This prosodic structure can be
processed by a temporal neural network model to
perform this identification; Exp 3: A deficit in temporal
prosodic processing could produce impairments both in
lexical categorization and in auditory temporal
discrimination tasks based on pure tones.

Exp. 3: Simulation of a Temporal Deficit
In Exps 1 and 2, the processing of temporal context
likely plays an important role, as F0 peaks are defined
within a progressive rising and falling context, implying
a required sensitivity to peaks and the surrounding
temporal context. In this context, the TRN is sensitive
to serial and temporal structure. Thus, the objective of
this experiment is to determine if perturbation of the
temporal sensitivity of the network will yield the same
impairments as observed in children with SLI for the
manipulation of syntax (i.e. lexical categorization), and
also for auditory processing of rapid events.

Impaired Lexical Categorization
A population of 50 control networks was able to
perform lexical categorization with a mean of 75%
correct on the LSCP corpus. To reduce sensitivity to
temporal structure in the TRN we increased the network
time constants to produce 50 distorted networks. None
of the distorted networks were able to perform the
categorization task (mean of 50%, and maximum for
53%), whereas these models could perform a sequence
identification task based on 3-element sequences with
elements of long duration (800 ms).

Auditory Repetition Task
The Rapid Perception Test was elaborated to test the
ability of children with SLI to handle rapid auditory
events. Tallal and Piercy (1973) demonstrated that
normal children were able to identify the order of two
75ms tones separated by an inter-stimulus interval (ISI)
as short as 8ms, while individuals with SLI required an
ISI exceeding 300ms (Fig 2).
These experiments were replicated on the two
populations of TRN (control and distorted), based on
comparing the State/StateD vectors in a discrimination
measure. Figure 2 reveals that the same disorder was
observed for the distorted network which failed in the
case of short ISIs. As observed in children with SLI,
performance improves rapidly for longer ISI durations
for the distorted networks.

148

Backward Masking
Wright et al. (1997) tested the hypothesis that the
auditory temporal processing deficits observed in SLI
children could be related to impairments in the
detection of temporally interacting stimuli as in tasks of
forward and backward masking. They reported that
control children showed a significantly lower tone
thresholds than SLI children for detecting a tone in the
backward masked condition, in which the target tone
immediately follows a white noise mask.
The model performs this backward masking task in
which the presence or absence of a 20 ms tone (coded
by activation of specific F0 units) should be detected
after a 300 ms noise mask (coded by uniform activation
of F0 units) (Fig 3). Wright et al. (1997) demonstrated
that children with SLI required significantly higher
intensity levels for the tone than normal children to
perform this task. This experiment reveals the same
distinction between the normal and distorted networks,
as between normal and SLI children, as illustrated in
Figure 3.

Discussion
Implication for a Simulated Acquisition of
Language
The first two experiments demonstrated that the
intonation contour could serve as basis for an
identification of Function vs. Content words, that could
bootstrap the acquisition of syntax. Furthermore we
demonstrated that a biologically plausible recurrent
network system could extract reliable information from
the fundamental frequency, without human labeling of
speech samples (as was required in Durieux & Gillis
2000; Shi et al. 1998). This observation has been
demonstrated on two languages, English and French.
In this context it would of interest to study Child
Directed Speech (CDS), that is known to including
more salient information. Indeed CDS displays an
exaggeration of prosody, in particular in the contour of
F0. In addition to previous work, supplementary
information (like a representation of spectrum) could be
provided to the network to increase the performance of
the lexical categorization.

Neurophysiological Implication
The TRN is a an extension of a model originally
developed
to
simulate
primate
behavioral
electrophysiology experiments (Dominey et al. 1995).
In the current context it demonstrated how temporal
processing can contribute a rudimentary basis for
syntax in the form of lexical categorization. This
confirmed the TRN’s utility in processing prosodic and
distributional regularities (Dominey & Ramus 2000).

TRN Simulation

110

110

100

100
Peformance (%)

Performance (%)

C h ild r e n

90
80
70

90
80
70
60

60

50

50
8

30

150

428

1466

8

3023

C o n trol

30

150

428

1466

3023

ISI (ms)
Control 0,01
Distorted 0.5

IS I (m s )
C h ild r e n w i t h S L I

Figure 2: Comparison of children performance versus TRN on the Auditory Repetition Task (Tallal & Piercy 1973)
T R N S im u l a t i o n

Threshold (dB)

Children
100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0
long-tone
Control

0

backward

long-tone

Children withSLI

C o n trol 0.01

backward

D is t o r t e d 0 . 5

Figure 3: Tone threshold for TRN and children for the first two conditions of the task in Wright et al. 1997.

All these experiments lead to the conclusion that a
fine-grained treatment of temporal structure in speech is
of primary importance for initiating syntax acquisition.

Deficits in Prosodic Processing, and SLI

thresholds approached the normal tens-of-ms range.
These results pose interesting simulation goals, and we
are currently investigating the effects of training and
discrimination threshold modifications for improving
task performance in our SLI simulations.

Conclusion

Several studies have reported the difficulties faced by
children with SLI with manipulation of function words,
together with a deficit in treatment of rapid auditory
events. The time window implied in this deficient
processing has been proposed to be roughly the
duration of a syllable (Tallal & Piercy, 1973). In this
case it will be difficult to localize F0 peaks within the
word structures of sentences. In this context the TRN
failed to identify Content and Function words, when its
sensibility to fine temporal structure was altered. Tallal
and al. (1998) indicated that this auditory deficit was
reversible, indeed after training on the ART task,

149

Three objectives were achieved with these experiments.
First, two basic categories (Function and Content
Words) could be identified from the prosodic structure
of speech. Second, this distinction could be performed
by a Temporal Recurrent Network, that was developed
in a functional neurophysiology framework (Dominey
et al. 1995). Third, the TRN could be perturbed to
simulate the behavior of children with SLI for detection
of rapid auditory events, while at the same time its
lexical categorization based on prosody is severely
attenuated. This provides the basis for future studies of

the contribution of temporal structure of speech to
normal and impaired language acquisition.

Acknowledgments
JMB is supported by a Doctoral fellowship from the
Région Rhone-Alpes, CD by a Post-Doctoral fellowship
from the HFSP Organization, and PFD by the ACI
Integrative and Computational Neuroscience, the
OHLL and the Eurocores OMLL Projects. We thank F.
Ramus, A. Christophe and E. Dupoux for insightful
discussion and access to the LSCP corpus.

References
Bagou, O., Fougeron, C., & Frauenfelder, U.H. (2002).
Contribution of Prosody to the Segmentation and
Storage of "Words" in the Acquisition of a New
Mini-Language, Prosody 2002, 11-13 April 2002,
159-162.
Bishop,
D.V.M.
(1979).
Comprehension
in
developmental language disorder. Developmental
Medicine and Child neurology, 21, (pp. 225-238).
Boesrma, P., Accurate short-term analysis of the
fundamental frequency and the harmonics-to-noise
ratio of a sampled sound. Proceedings of the Institute
of Phonetic Sciences 17, pp. 97-110.
Campione, E., & Véronis, J., (1998). A multilingual
prosodic database, Proc. of ICSLP'98, Sidney.
Dominey, P.F., Arbib M.A., & Joseph J.P. (1995). A
Model of Cortico-Striatal Plasticity for Learning
Oculomotor Associations and Sequences, Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 7:3, 311-33.
Dominey P.F., & Ramus F. (2000). Neural network
processing of natural language: I. Sensitivity to serial,
temporal and abstract structure of language in the
infant. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15(1)
87-127.
Durieux, G., & Gillis, S. (2000). Predicting
grammatical classes from phonological cues: An
empirical test. In Approaches to bootstrapping:
phonological, syntactic and neurophysiological
aspects of early language acquisition, ed. B. Höhle,
J. Weissenborn, pp. 189-232. Amsterdam: Benjamins
Eyer J., Leonard L., (1995). Functional categories and
specific language impairment: A case study.
Language Acquisition, 4, 177-203.
Gerken, L. A., & McIntosh, B. J. (1993). The interplay
of function morphemes and prosody in early
language. Developmental Psychology, 29, 448-457
Hirst D., & Di Cristo A., (1998). A survey of intonation
systems. in Hirst & Di Cristo (eds). Intonation
Systems : A Survey of Twenty Languages.,1-44.
Hirst, D. & Espesser, R.(1993). Automatic modelling of
fundamental frequency using a quadratic spline
function. Travaux de l'Institut de Phonétique d'Aix
15, 71-85.
Jusczyk, P.W., Kelmer Nelson, D.G. (1996). Syntactic
units, prosody, and psychological reality during

150

infancy, In JL Morgan, K Demuth (Eds) Signal to
Syntax: Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in
early acquisition, Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah NJ.
Kelly, M.H. (1995). The role of phonology in
grammatical category assignments. In J.L. Morgan
and K. Demuth (Eds.), Signal to syntax:
Bootstrapping from speech to grammar in early
acquisition (pp. 249-262). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Van der Lely, H. K. J. (1996). Specifically language
impaired and normally developing children: Verbal
passive vs. adjectival passive sentence interpretation,
Lingua 98-4, 243-272.
Leonard, L. (1995). Functional categories in the
grammars of children with specific language
impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research,
38, 1270-1283. Leonard L. (1998). Children with
specific language impairment. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Nazzi, T., Bertoncini, J., & Mehler, J. (1998). Language
discrimination
by
newborns:
towards
an
understanding of the role of rhythm. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Ramus, F., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (1999). Correlates
of linguistic rhythm in the speech signal. Cognition,
73(3), 265-292.
Redington, M., Chater, N. & Finch, S. (1998).
Distributional information: A powerful cue for
acquiring syntactic categories. Cognitive Science, 22,
425-469.
Shi R., Morgan J.L., & Allopenna P. (1998).
Phonological and acoustic bases for earliest
grammatical category asssignment : a cross linguistic
perspective. Journal of child language 25 (1998),
169-201.
Shi R., Werker J.F., & Morgan J.L. (1999). Newborn
infants' sensitivity to perceptual cues to lexical and
grammatical words, Cognition, Volume 72, Issue 2,
B11-B21.
Tallal P., & Piercy, M. (1973). Defects of non-verbal
auditory perception in children with developmental
aphasia. Nature. Feb 16;241(5390):468-9
Tallal, P. (1998). Children with language impairment
can be accurately identified using temporal
processing measures: A response to Zhang and
Tomblin, Brain and Language, 65, 395-403 Brain
Lang. 1999 Sep;69(2):222-9.
Tallal, P., Merzenich, M., Miller, S., & Jenkins, W.
(1998). Language Learning Impairments: Integrating
Basic Science, Technology and Remediation,
Experimental Brain Research, v. 123, p 210-219.
Wright, B.A., Lombardino, L.J., King, W..M, Puranik,
C.S., Leonard, C.M., & Merzenich, M.M. (1997).
Deficits in auditory temporal and spectral resolution
in language-impaired children. Nature. May 8;
387(6629):176-8.

