UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Fallacy of Single-Source Explanations: The Multiple Difficulties of the Nine-Dot Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hz3k0b8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Kershaw, Trina C.
Ohlsson, Stellan
Coyne, Colleen

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Fallacy of Single-Source Explanations:
The Multiple Difficulties of the Nine-Dot Problem
Trina C. Kershaw (tkersh1@uic.edu), Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu), and Colleen Coyne
Department of Psychology
University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 W. Harrison St., Chicago, IL, 60607

The analysis of the difficulty of a problem is often
based on the results of providing solvers with hints or
training. Or, on the basis of limited evidence, a
particular explanation is sometimes passed down from
author to author. A striking feature of the majority of
explanations offered for the difficulty of insight
problems is that they attribute the difficulty to a single
source.
The difficulty of the six matches problem (use 6
matches to form four equilateral triangles with each
side being the length of a match) has often been
explained by solvers’ belief that the solution is twodimensional (Scheerer, 1963; Weisberg & Alba, 1981).
More recently, Ormerod, MacGregor, and Chronicle
(2002) attributed this same failure to the eight-coin
problem. Failure to solve in both Maier’s (1931) twostring problem and Duncker’s (1945) candle problem
has been attributed to functional fixedness
(Dominowski & Dallob, 1995). Kaplan and Simon
(1990) allocate the difficulty of the Mutilated
Checkerboard problem to the incompleteness of the
initial problem representation. Isaak and Just (1995)
list 20 insight problems and give only a singular
explanation of the difficulty for each. The nine-dot
problem (Maier, 1930) provides a multi-decade
example of single-source explanation.

Abstract
Single-source explanations of problem difficulty are
common throughout the insight literature (cf.
Dominowski & Dallob, 1995; Isaak & Just, 1995;
Weisberg & Alba, 1981). However, many insight
problems contain multiple difficulties. We propose
that the nine-dot problem (Maier, 1930) is difficult
because of the interaction between perceptual,
knowledge, and process factors. Two experiments
show how different types of training can have a
statistically significant effect on the overall solution
rate, yet produce a small effect size. A third
experiment shows how the multiple difficulties of the
nine-dot problem can be simultaneously addressed.

Sources of Difficulty in Insight
A main focus of the problem solving literature is
determining what features of a problem lead to
difficulty in achieving the solution. Insight problems,
such as the nine-dot problem (Maier, 1930) and
Duncker’s (1945) candle problem, are defined by the
constraints the problem solver attaches to the problem.
As the solver encodes the insight problem, prior
knowledge is activated that does not necessarily help
the solver (Ohlsson, 1992; Wiley, 1998). This prior
knowledge constrains the solver’s representation of the
problem, therefore leading to an impasse that may not
be resolved. If the solver is able to relax these
constraints, he or she exits the impasse and solves the
problem (Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, & Rhenius,
1999).
In studying insight, researchers are often interested
in how solvers are able to overcome an impasse.
Knoblich et al. (1999) propose that constraint
relaxation, and therefore impasse resolution, occurs as a
result of spreading activation. However, other
researchers believe that a conscious restructuring of the
problem is needed to achieve solution. Sometimes
researchers give hints to help solvers break out of an
impasse, or, alternatively, train the solvers on helpful
elements of the problem to prevent impasse (cf.
Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2001). Within this general
explanatory scheme, the difficulty of each insight
problem is explained by identifying the particular
difficulty that is operating in each.

Single-Source Difficulties in the
Nine-Dot Problem
Maier (1930) is the earliest source for the nine-dot
problem (connect a 3 x 3 square of dots by using only
four straight lines without lifting your pen from the
page, see Figure 1) and gives the most popular reason
for the problem’s difficulty: People do not want to draw
lines outside of the box which is set up by the dots (cf
Chronicle, Ormerod, & MacGregor, 2001; Scheerer,
1963). Maier’s claim has been tested by a series of
experiments that proposed other, single-source
explanations for the nine-dot problem’s difficulty.
Burnham and Davis (1969) believed that the
problem was difficult because people were unable to
understand its abstract definition. Weisberg and Alba
(1981) contended that the difficulty of the problem was
due to lack of applicable prior experience. Lung and

664

Dominowski (1985) found that solvers were unwilling
to begin and end lines where there was not a dot. More
recently, MacGregor, Ormerod, and Chronicle (2001)
proposed that level of mental lookahead (the number of
lines that can be held in memory at any one time)
predicts performance on the nine-dot problem.
Chronicle, Ormerod, and MacGregor (2001) studied the
influence of perceptual manipulations on performance.

of just one source of difficulty leaves the other sources
in place. Consequently, it should be possible to get
significant but small effects with a wide variety of
training and hint types that may or may not have any
conceptual relations to each other, depending on the
configuration of difficulties that the solver faces. In two
studies, we demonstrate precisely this pattern in the
case of the nine-dot problem. In a third study, we show
how applying training that accounts for multiple
difficulties leads to an increased solution rate and an
increased effect size.

Experiment I
In addition to non-dot turns, the nine-dot problem is
difficult because of perceptual factors. The square set
up by the dots creates a gestalt that solvers are
unwilling to breach. Chronicle et al. (2001) attempted
to increase solution through perceptual manipulations
such as adding two additional unfilled circles next to
the upper right and lower left filled dots. In this
experiment, we attempted to increase non-dot turns
through the use of training problems made of black dots
presented on a grid of unfilled circles (see Figure 2).

Figure 1: The Nine-Dot Problem and its Solution
In our own work, low solution rates have been
attributed to the non-dot turns hypothesis (Kershaw &
Ohlsson, 2001). Simply, people do not want to turn on
a non-dot point, i.e., a space between two dots.
Training participants to make non-dot turns led to
increased performance relative to control (19/30 vs.
11/30) on a variant of the nine-dot problem. However,
we have had mixed results applying the non-dot turns
training to the nine-dot problem itself.

Problems with Single-Source Explanations
Relying upon a singular explanation of difficulty for an
insight problem is not useful when the explanation does
not fully account for the experience of solvers who
attempt the problem. None of the explanations of the
nine-dot problem’s difficulty have fully accounted for
the poor performance of subjects on the nine-dot
problem (typical unaided solution rate = 0%,
MacGregor et al., 2001). After reviewing the available
research and watching people struggle while solving
the nine-dot problem, we decided to work from the idea
that the problem is composed of multiple difficulties.
We propose that the multiple difficulties of the nine-dot
problem contain perceptual, knowledge, and process
factors. Perceptual factors include figural integrity and
figure/ground relationships, knowledge factors include
past experience with other dot problems, and process
factors include the size of the problem space, the illdefined goal, and mental lookahead.
If there are multiple sources of difficulty in the ninedot problem, we should expect the following pattern:
Each type of training or hint should (a) have a
statistically significant effect on the solution rate, but
(b) the effect size should be small, because taking care

Figure 2: Facilitating Training Exercise with Solution
NB: Grid covers entire page in real training
In a 2 x 2 design, 160 subjects were assigned to one of
four groups: facilitating grid, hindering grid, facilitating
no grid, and hindering no grid. Participants in the
facilitating groups received training problems that
required non-dot turns, while participants in the
hindering groups received training problems in which
they always turned on a dot (for more examples of
training problems, see Kersahw & Ohlsson, 2001). The
training problems did not look like the nine-dot
problem and required one, two, or three turns (see
Figure 2). All participants completed 12 training
problems, and had the nine-dot problem as their target
problem.
There was a main effect of training, in that subjects
in the facilitating training groups had a higher solution
rate (12/80) than subjects in the hindering training
groups (1/80), F2 (1, N=160) = 10.13, p < .05, lambda =
.12. However, only 13 subjects out of 160 solved, or

665

8%, and the effect size was small . There was no effect
for the grid, the perceptual factor.
The significant effect of the non-dot turns training
provides support for the knowledge factor. The
increased performance by the facilitating groups on the
nine-dot problem mirrors Kershaw and Ohlsson’s
(2001) finding of increased performance on variants of
the nine-dot problem following training on non-dot
turns. However, perceptual factors did not significantly
impact subjects’ performance.

the expected 0%. We also infer that there are other
sources of difficulty, otherwise the increase would have
been larger.

Experiment II
Burnham and Davis (1969) believed that a consequence
of the abstract definition of the nine-dot problem was
that the sequence of lines needed to solve it was nonobvious. The nine-dot problem is ill-structured because
solvers do not know what the shape of the solution will
be. We devised two types of training that would
familiarize participants with the solution shape of the
nine-dot problem and explore the process factors of the
nine-dot problem. One type of training used a motor
manipulation to teach participants the order to connect
the dots in, and the other type of training sought to
teach participants how to perceptually distinguish the
shape of the nine-dot solution from other shapes.
In a 2 x 2 design, 120 participants were assigned to
one of four groups: motor relevant, motor irrelevant,
perceptual relevant, and perceptual irrelevant.
Participants in the relevant shape conditions learned the
shape of the nine-dot solution, while participants in the
irrelevant shape conditions learned a shape that did not
correspond to the nine-dot solution. The motor training
consisted of figures composed of numbered dots.
Participants were instructed to connect the dots in
number order, much like a child’s connect-the-dots
puzzle (see Figure 3).
In the perceptual training conditions, participants
were shown a shape, and then rated a sequence of
target and distractor shapes as being either the same as
or different than the shape they were shown (see Figure
4). Participants in the perceptual training groups also
rated how confident they were of their judgments on a
scale of 1-5, 1 = not at all confident and 5 = completely
confident. All participants attempted the nine-dot
problem as their target problem.
There was a main effect of training shape, in that
subjects in the shape-relevant groups had a higher
solution rate (7/60) on the nine-dot problem than
subjects in the shape-irrelevant groups (1/60), F2 (1,
120) = 4.72, p < .05, lambda = .03. However, only 8
out of 120 participants solved, or 7%, and the effect
size was small. There was no effect for training type.
We infer that knowing the shape of the nine-dot
solution is an important process factor, otherwise there
would have been no increase in the solution rate above

3

4

5

11

2

7

10

8

1

6

9
Figure 3: Motor Relevant Training Exercise

Figure 4: Target and Distractor Shapes for the
Perceptual Relevant Condition

Experiment III
In both Experiments I and II, we attempted to address
one of the multiple difficulties of the nine-dot problem.
In Experiment I, we found evidence for knowledge
factors via the non-dot turns (facilitating) training. In
Experiment II, we explored process factors, via
learning how to distinguish the correct shape in the
perceptual condition, and how to draw the correct
shape in the motor condition. However, applying each
of the multiple difficulties of a problem individually
does not serve to increase the solution rate for the
problem by a large amount. Training on any one of the
individual difficulties can lead to a partial insight
(Ohlsson, 1992), but will not be enough to allow an
individual to solve the whole problem. For example, if
a participant learns to make non-dot turns, he or she
still does not know which dot to begin at, what order to
draw the lines in, or when and where to draw lines that
extend outside of the dots. If a problem has multiple
difficulties, then these difficulties need to be attacked in
a combinatorial fashion.
The obvious remedy here is to look for multiple
sources of difficulty, and to test such hypotheses with
experiments that aim to alleviate all of them.
Experiments I and II identified several difficulties of
the nine-dot problem. Experiment III combined all of

666

the elements that have been shown to increase the
solution rate for the nine-dot problem, both from
Experiments I and II, and from the nine-dot literature.
The training used in Experiment III featured problems
made of black, filled dots presented on a grid of other
unfilled dots as well as problems made of black dots
that were alone on the page (see Experiment I, and
Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2001). The training also had a
perceptual component in which participants learned to
distinguish the shape of the nine-dot problem solution
from other shapes (see Experiment II: perceptual
relevant condition). In addition, the training contained
a dialogue component in that participants were
informed of the purposes of each training task.
Specifically, participants were told that the shape they
learned during the perceptual training was the shape
that would be required to solve the target problem, and
that it was necessary to draw lines outside the dots and
turn in the empty space between dots. Finally,
Experiment III contained a feedback component, in that
participants were shown the correct answer for judging
a shape or connecting dots for each judgment or
problem that was completed.
In addition to combining elements from the
previous experiments and the literature on the nine-dot
problem, Experiment III compared several new variants
of the nine-dot problem to the original as a further test
of the non-dot turns hypothesis. Much of the nine-dot
literature has shown that variants of the nine-dot
problem (such as problems with additional dots) are
easier to solve than the traditional problem (cf.
Burnham & Davis, 1969; MacGregor et al., 2001);
Weisberg & Alba, 1981), but none of this research has
specified a testable theory as to why these variants are
easier than the nine-dot problem. The non-dot turns
hypothesis (Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2001) predicts that
the more non-dot turns a problem requires, the more
difficult the problem is. By counting the number of
non-dot turns required, the relative difficulty of the
variants of the nine-dot problem can be predicted.
The new variants of the nine-dot problem have the
same solution shape, but require differing numbers of
non-dot turns. The variants either contain more dots or
have a dot moved to a place outside of the traditional
nine-dot square to create a new figure. One variant is
the 10-dot problem (see Figure 5), which has an
additional dot at the lower left-hand corner, thereby
requiring one turn on a non-dot point. Another variant
is the displaced nine-dot problem (see Figure 5), in
which the top line of dots in the nine-dot problem is
shifted to the right by one dot. This version requires
two non-dot turns. The third variant moves the dot in
the upper left hand corner to the bottom right hand
corner, as an extension to the right of the figure (see
Figure 5). This variant requires three turns on a non-

dot point, and is therefore called the three-turn
problem.
Different solution rates are expected for the different
problem versions, based on the number of non-dot
turns required. In general, the more non-dot turns
required, the greater the difficulty, or the lower the
solution rate, of the problem. However, the nine-dot
problem should have the lowest solution rate because in
addition to the difficulty of turning on a non-dot point,
the traditional nine-dot problem forms a figure that
discourages participants from extending lines beyond
the boundaries of the figure.

Figure 5: 11-Dot, 10-Dot, Displaced Nine-Dot, and
Three-Turn Problems
The variant requiring the three non-dot turns should
have a solution rate equal to or possibly lower than the
nine-dot problem. However, due to the very low
solution rate of the nine-dot problem, it is not expected
that the variant requiring three non-dot turns will have a
significantly lower solution rate than the nine-dot
problem.
Based on studies that include an 11-dot variant (cf.
Burnham & Davis, 1969; MacGregor et al., 2001; see
Figure 5), the 10-dot problem is predicted to have the
best solution rate of the three new problems, but the 11dot problem should have the best solution rate overall
because it requires no non-dot turns. The solution rate
for the displaced nine-dot should be somewhere
between the solution rates for the 10-dot and the
traditional nine-dot. The reason the displaced nine-dot
should have a higher solution rate than the traditional
nine-dot is that the displaced nine-dot breaks up the
gestalt of the traditional nine-dot. We believe that
participants will be more likely to extend lines beyond
the figure in the displaced nine-dot version.
There was a main effect of training, in that
participants who received the training were more likely

667

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

of participants drew lines outside of the dots even when
they did not solve the problem. But when participants
received the nine-dot problem, they were less likely to
draw lines outside the dots, nine-dot problem vs.
displaced nine-dot, Ȥ2 (1, N = 60) = 9.31, p < .05,
lambda = .23. The problems have the same number of
non-dot turns and require the same solution, but the
displaced nine-dot breaks up the Gestalt formed by the
dots. Although the solution rate for these two problems
was not significantly different, the displaced nine-dot
problem led to a greater incidence of drawing lines
outside the dots than the traditional nine-dot problem.
Table 1: Experiment III: Number of Lines Drawn
Outside for Each Group and Problem Type
Experimental
Control
Outside Inside
Problem Type Outside Inside
____________________________________________
10-dot
5
25
26
4
dis. nine-dot
10
20
28
2
nine-dot
5
25
18
12
three-turn
11
19
27
3
____________________________________________
Note. The number of lines drawn outside was not
counted for the 11-dot problem because the problem
does not require any non-dot turns.

experimental

General Discussion
The nine-dot problem, like many insight problems,
presents the problem solver with a small and artificially
restricted problem solving environment, and the
solution is short and undemanding. It is therefore
tempting to think of the solution as encapsulated in a
single, unitary idea or thought. This way of thinking
naturally leads one to think of the difficulty of the
problem in terms of a single, unitary blockage. The
focus of research then becomes to identify that
blockage, and the history of research on the topic
becomes a history of one hypothesized source of
difficulty being replaced by another when it is shown
that removal of the first one does not boost the solution
rate very much.
However, closer inspection and reflection reveals
that even simple problems with short solutions can
contain multiple sources of difficulty. The nine-dot
problem provides a good example. The Gestalt
psychologists focussed on the perceptual factors
operating in this problem. The square shape of the nine
dots forms a natural perceptual configuration that
interferes with the invention of the solution, which
breaks with that shape in several ways.
Other
researchers (cf. Chronicle et al., 2001) have confirmed
that such perceptual factors are indeed operating in the

three-turn

nine-dot

displaced nine-dot

10-dot

control

11-dot

Percent Solved

to solve their target problem (89/150), than participants
in the control group (24/150), F2 (1, N=300) = 59.98, p
< .05, lambda = .25. In the control group, there was a
significant difference between solution rates for the
problem types, F2 (4, N=150) = 39.39, p < .05, lambda
= .08. About half of the participants in the 11-dot
group solved their target problem, compared to the low
solution rates for each of the other problem types in the
control group (see Figure 6). In the trained group, there
was a significant difference between solution rates for
the problem types, F2 (4, N=150) = 39.07, p < .05,
lambda = .30.
The combination of multiple difficulties into one set
of training led to the highest solution rate for the target
problem, 59% (solution rate for nine-dot problem in
experimental condition = 40%). There was a moderate
effect size for both the effect of the training and the
effect of problem type in the trained group.
Additionally, the pattern of results in the trained group
supports the non-dot turns hypothesis. As the number
of non-dot turns increased, the solution rate decreased
(see Figure 6).

Problem Type

Figure 6: Experiment III: Solution Rate for
Each Target Problem
The results also showed a distinction between Lung
and Dominowski’s (1985) conception of the main
difficulty of the nine-dot problem as drawing lines that
begin or end on a non-dot point, and Kershaw and
Ohlsson’s (2001) conception of non-dot turns as the
key difficulty. We counted the number of participants,
for each problem type that required non-dot turns and
within each condition, who drew lines outside the box
set up by the dots (see Table 1). The differences
between the problem types within the control group
were not significant, Ȥ2 (3, N = 120) = 5.35, p > .05,
lambda = .05. In the experimental group, the majority

668

nine-dot problem, but their removal only increases
solution rates with a minor amount.
Other factors are operating as well. The shape
formed by the solution is not in any way familiar or
natural or previously known. Thus, familiarizing the
solvers with that shape also has an effect, again small in
magnitude. Likewise, prior experience with dot
problems does not apply to the nine-dot problem
(Weisberg & Alba, 1981).
It is the combination of these perceptual,
knowledge, and process factors that can lead to success
on the nine-dot problem and its variants. However, the
difficulty of turning on a non-dot point is still present,
as seen in the results of Experiment III.
The implicit assumption of single-source difficulty
that has characterized much research on insight
problems leads to a non-cumulative research process.
Each hypothesized difficulty is 'confirmed' in the eyes
of its advocates, because it generates a statistically
significant rise in the solution rate. However, each is
also 'falsified' in the eyes of its detractors, because its
removal does not lead to anywhere near 100% solution
rate. So the history of the topic takes the form of a
sequence of single-source hypotheses, none of which
explain more than a small proportion of the difficulty.
The nine-dot problem provides an example of a chain
of non-building research. Instead of utilizing and
extending previous explanations, researchers dismissed
earlier claims in favor of establishing new explanations
of the difficulty of the nine-dot problem. We hope to
change the direction of research on the nine-dot
problem, and on insight problem solving in general, by
moving towards difficulty as a synthesis of factors,
rather than a single element. In addition, it would be
interesting to evaluate if multiple difficulties are
operating in other creative tasks.

Isaak, M.I., & Just, M.A. (1995). Constraints on
thinking in insight and invention. In R.J. Sternberg
and J.E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp.
281-325), Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kaplan, C.A., & Simon, H.A. (1990). In search of
insight. Cognitive Psychology, 22(3), 374-419.
Kershaw, T.C., & Ohlsson, S. (2001). Training for
insight: The case of the nine-dot problem. In J.D.
Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 489-493). Mahwah, NJ: Lance
Erlbaum Associates.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999).Constraint
relaxation
and
chunk
decomposition in insight problem solving. JEP:
LMC, 25, 1534-1555.
Lung, C.T., & Dominowski, R.L. (1985). Effects of
strategy instructions and practice on nine-dot
problem solving. JEP:LMC, 11(4), 804-811.
MacGregor, J.N., Ormerod, T.C., & Chronicle, E.P.
(2001). Information-processing and insight: A
process model of performance on the nine-dot and
related problems. JEP:LMC, 27(1), 176-201.
Maier, N.R.F. (1930). Reasoning in humans: I. On
direction. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 10,
115-143.
Ohlsson, S.(1992). Information processing explanations
of insight and related phenomena. In M. Keane and
K. Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the Psychology of
Thinking (Vol.1, pp. 1-44). London: HarvesterWheatsheaf.
Ormerod, T.C, MacGregor, J.N., & Chronicle, E.P.
(2002). Dynamics and constraints in insight problem
solving. JEP:LMC, 28(4), 791-799.
Scheerer, M. (1963) Problem solving. Scientific
American, 208(4), 118-128.
Weisberg, R.W., & Alba, J.W. (1981). An examination
of the alleged role of “fixation” in the solution of
several “insight” problems. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 110(2), 169-192.
Wiley, J. (1998). Expertise as mental set: The effects
of domain knowledge on creative problem solving.
Memory & Cognition, 26(4), 716-730.

References
Burnham, C.A., & Davis, K.G. (1969). The nine-dot
problem:
Beyond
perceptual
organization.
Psychonomic Science, 17(6), 321-323.
Chronicle, E.P., Ormerod, T.C., & MacGregor, J.N.
(2001). When insight just won’t come: The failure
of visual cues in the nine-dot problem. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54A(3), 903919.
Dominowski, R.L, & Dallob, P. (1995). Insight and
Problem solving. In R.J. Sternberg and J.E.
Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight (pp. 33-62),
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving.
Psychological Monographs, 58, whole no. 270.

669

