UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Misattribution of Relations in Similarity Judgments of Person Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zd2c4f9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Estes, Zachary
Alix-Gaudreau, Roger

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Misattribution of Relations in Similarity Judgments of Person Concepts
Zachary Estes (estes@uga.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602 USA

Roger Alix-Gaudreau (rodge@uga.edu)
Artificial Intelligence Program, University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602 USA

Abstract
We demonstrate an effect of the valence of a relation between
person concepts on subsequent similarity judgments. In
Experiment 1, the assertion of a positive relation between
person concepts (e.g., The plumber protected the housewife.)
increased their perceived similarity, whereas the assertion of a
negative relation (e.g., The plumber alienated the housewife.)
decreased their perceived similarity. In Experiment 2, positive
relations (e.g., The plumber protected the housewife.)
increased the perceived similarity of two unrelated person
concepts (e.g., editors and taxi drivers), and negative relations
decreased the similarity of unrelated persons. Experiment 3
ruled out a task demand explanation by showing that the
effect is specific to similarity judgments. Results suggest that
relations between person concepts are misattributed to the
similarity of any two subsequently judged persons.

Introduction
Similarity is a central explanatory construct of the cognitive
sciences. Many cognitive processes, such as analogy
(Gentner, 1983), categorization (Rosch, 1975), conceptual
combination (Wisniewski, 1996), induction (Sloman, 1996),
memory retrieval (Tulving & Thompson, 1973), etc. are at
least partially explained by similarity. Although similarity
seems intuitively to result from a comparison process
(Gentner & Markman, 1997; Tversky, 1977), recent
research indicates that the relations between concepts also
influence their perceived similarity (Bassok & Medin, 1997;
Estes, in press; Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999). The purpose
of the present investigation was to demonstrate that relations
affect person perception as well, specifically in terms of the
perceived similarity of person concepts.
Models of similarity are based almost exclusively upon
research that has focused on object concepts (see e.g.,
Gentner & Markman, 1997). This research on object
concepts has interesting and counterintuitive implications
for the similarity of person concepts. We begin by briefly
describing current research on similarity and relations
before considering the implications of this research for
person concepts.

Similarity and Relations
Intuitively, similarity computations seem to entail (1)
comparison of concepts, and (2) an evaluation of their
degree of commonality relative to their degree of
distinctiveness (Tversky, 1977). Much evidence indicates

372

that the comparison process is accomplished via structural
alignment (see Gentner & Markman, 1997). That is, the
representational structures of the two concepts are aligned,
or placed into correspondence, and their commonalities and
differences are then determined. For instance, in comparing
apples to oranges, the shape of apples is aligned with the
shape of oranges, resulting in the detection of a
commonality; both concepts have roughly similar shapes.
The color of apples is also aligned with the color of oranges,
revealing a difference; apples and oranges are different
colors. Once the concepts have been compared in this way
(i.e., Gentner & Markman, 1997), their commonalities are
evaluated relative to their differences (cf. Tversky, 1977),
yielding a perception of similarity or dissimilarity.
It has recently been shown, however, that relations
between concepts also affect the perceived similarity of
those concepts. Wisniewski and Bassok (1999), for
example, showed that related concepts (e.g., milk and
coffee) tend to be judged more similar than unrelated
concepts (milk and lemonade; see description below). Thus,
perceptions of similarity appear to result from both a
comparison process and an integration process.

Comparison and Integration
Ample evidence indicates that comparison and integration
are distinct processes, with independent contributions to
similarity. Wisniewski and Bassok (1999) had participants
rate the similarity of concepts that were either alignable and
related (e.g., milk – coffee), alignable and unrelated (e.g.,
milk – lemonade), nonalignable and related (e.g., milk –
cow), or nonalignable and unrelated (e.g., milk – horse).
They found a main effect of alignability, such that alignable
concepts were judged more similar than nonalignable
concepts. That is, milk was judged more similar to coffee
and lemonade than to cow and horse. They also found a
main effect of relatedness, with related concepts judged
more similar than unrelated concepts. Milk was judged more
similar to coffee and cow than to lemonade and horse. Thus,
Wisniewski and Bassok demonstrated that comparison (i.e.,
alignability) and integration (i.e., relatedness) provide
independent contributions to perceived similarity (see also
Bassok & Medin, 1997).
Perhaps even more convincing of the distinction between
comparison and integration is a recent study by Gentner and
Gunn (2001). For each of a series of concept pairs, Gentner
and Gunn had participants either list a commonality of (i.e.,

comparison) or list a relation between (i.e., integration) the
concepts. Then, under time pressure, participants were
instructed to list one difference for as many concept pairs as
they could. Critically, half of the concept pairs were from
the first phase of the experiment (i.e., “old” pairs), and half
had not been seen previously (i.e., “new” pairs). Participants
in the comparison condition were more likely to list
differences for old pairs than for new pairs. But participants
in the integration condition exhibited the opposite pattern of
results: they were more likely to list differences for new
pairs than for old pairs. That is, prior comparison facilitated
the detection of differences, whereas prior integration
inhibited the detection of differences.
Consistent with Gentner and Gunn’s finding, Estes (in
press) showed that comparison decreased similarity,
whereas integration increased similarity. Participants judged
the similarity of concept pairs that could be interpreted
either by comparison (e.g., umbrella tree) or by integration
(e.g., pancake spatula). An experimental group of
participants was instructed to combine the concepts (via
comparison or integration) before judging their similarity,
while a control group judged the similarity of the concepts
without combining them. Relative to control, concepts were
judged more similar after integration, and less similar after
comparison. That is, interpreting umbrella tree as a
compound decreased the perceived similarity of umbrellas
and trees, presumably as a result of the comparison process.
But interpreting pancake spatula as a compound increased
the perceived similarity of those concepts, presumably
because of the integration process.
Collectively, these studies demonstrate that comparison
and integration exert distinct influences on similarity
judgments (Bassok & Medin, 1997; Wisniewski & Bassok,
1999). Specifically, comparison facilitates the detection of
differences (Gentner & Gunn, 2001) and therefore decreases
perceived similarity (Estes, in press), whereas integration
inhibits the detection of differences (Gentner & Gunn, 2001)
and hence increases perceived similarity (Estes, in press).

Relational Misattributions to Similarity
Because comparison and integration occur via distinct
processes, Gentner and colleagues argue that the term
“similarity” should properly be reserved for that which
results from comparison. That which results from
integration, on the other hand, is “relatedness” or
“association” (Gentner & Brem, 1999; Gentner & Gunn,
2001). They argue that relatedness merely intrudes on, or is
confused as, true (comparison) similarity. That is,
essentially, relations are misattributed as similarity. So it’s
not that milk is more similar to coffee than to lemonade
(Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999). Rather, the relation between
milk and coffee (i.e., one pours milk into coffee) is
misattributed as similarity between those concepts.
This presumed misattribution of relations as similarity has
interesting implications for social cognition. Many social
judgments, like their cognitive counterparts, are based on
similarity. For instance, people are grouped into classes on
the basis of their similarity to other group members, and
traits are inferred on the basis of the individual’s similarity
to a given social category (see Wittenbrink, Hilton, & Gist,

373

1998). If relations between object concepts are misattributed
as similarity between those objects, it would seem to follow
that relations between person concepts will also be
misattributed as similarity between those persons. But
consider the implications of this: If a professor smiles at a
bus driver, is one warranted to infer that professors and bus
drivers are now more similar than they would otherwise be?
Moreover, does a florist thanking a bartender cause an
inference that teachers and violinists are similar? These
questions, which follow directly from the research on object
concepts, were investigated below.

Experiment 1
If relations are misattributed as similarity, then relations
between person concepts should also affect the perceived
similarity of those people (just like with object concepts). In
particular, the research on object concepts (i.e., Estes, in
press; Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999) indicates that relations
should increase perceived similarity. However, the relations
in those studies were largely devoid of the positive and
negative intentions inherent in the relations of person
concepts. Thus, we introduced relation valence (i.e.,
positive, negative) as an independent variable in the present
experiment. Half of the relations were positive (e.g.,
protected) and half were negative (e.g., alienated). After
reading a sentence conveying either a positive or a negative
relation between two person concepts, participants judged
the similarity of those concepts. The null hypothesis was
that positive and negative relations would affect perceived
similarity equally. The alternative hypothesis was that
positive relations would increase similarity, whereas
negative relations should decrease similarity.

Method
Seventy-five University of Georgia undergraduates
participated for partial course credit. None participated in
more than one experiment reported herein, and all were
native English speakers.
Materials consisted of 80 common person concepts, 20
positive relations and 20 negative relations. Concepts were
randomly paired, with the constraint that no two extremely
similar or dissimilar concepts were paired, so as to minimize
ceiling and floor effects. Relations were randomly assigned
to concept pairs. Independent evaluation of the materials by
the experimenters resulted in greater than 90% agreement
that (1) the concept pairs were neither extremely similar nor
extremely dissimilar, (2) the relations in the positive
condition were in fact positively valenced, and (3) those in
the negative condition were in fact negatively valenced. See
the Appendix for a complete list of the concept pairs and
their positive and negative relations.
Each trial began with a declarative sentence describing
either a positive or a negative relation between two common
person concepts. For example, one positive stimulus was
“The singer thanked the engineer,” and the corresponding
matched negative stimulus was “The singer yelled at the
engineer.” Each sentence was presented in 16-point bold
type, in order to increase the likelihood that participants
would read the sentences carefully. Immediately below each

sentence was a judgment question (i.e. “In general, how
similar are singers and engineers?”), presented in 12-point
normal type. Below that was a response scale ranging from
1 (“not at all similar”) to 7 (“extremely similar”).
Participants were instructed to read each stimulus
sentence before judging the similarity of its constituent
concepts. They were instructed to circle a number on the
scale corresponding to their similarity judgment.
The valence of the relation (i.e., positive, negative) was
manipulated within-participants; each participant received
20 sentences containing a positive relation and 20
containing a negative relation. Sentences were presented in
random, intermixed order. The order of concepts within a
sentence, and the valence of the relation between them, were
counterbalanced between-participants, resulting in four
experimental lists. For example, where one group saw “The
singer thanked the engineer,” another saw “The engineer
thanked the singer,” a third saw “The singer yelled at the
engineer,” and a fourth saw “The engineer yelled at the
singer.” Participants were randomly assigned to
experimental lists, with each list completed by an
approximately equal number of participants. Fifty
undergraduates participated in the experimental condition.
For purposes of comparison, 25 undergraduates
participated in a control condition, in which the 40
similarity judgments occurred without their preceding
stimulus sentences. Similarity questions were presented in
the same order as in the experimental condition, and the
order of concepts within each question was again
counterbalanced between-participants.

Results and Discussion
Results were analyzed separately with participants (t p ) and
items (t i ) as random factors. Common person concepts were
judged significantly more similar following positive (M =
2.44, S.E = .11) than negative (M = 2.27, S.E. = .11)
relations, tp (49) = 3.69, p < .001 and ti (39) = 2.89, p < .01.
This result is shown in Figure 1. Error bars (in all figures)
represent one standard error of the mean.

Mean Similarity Rating

2.6
2.5

conditions. However, neither experimental condition
differed reliably and consistently from the control condition.
The positive condition did not differ from control in either
analysis, both p > .10. The negative condition differed from
control in the item analysis, ti (39) = 2.54, p < .02, but not in
the participant analysis (p > .60).
These data demonstrate that a positive relation between
two person concepts increases participants’ judgments of
their similarity, while a negative relation decreases that
similarity. The size of the effect is small – which may
account for the lack of a significant difference between
either experimental condition and the control condition –
but this is not surprising, given that the concepts being
judged were exactly the same in both conditions. We
suggest instead that the mere existence of an effect is
noteworthy, as it supports the hypothesis that the presence
of a relation involving two persons affects their perceived
similarity. The results go beyond previous investigations
using object concepts, which indicated that relations
increase perceived similarity. The present results indicate
further that, with person concepts, some relations (i.e.,
negative ones) decrease similarity instead.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 demonstrated that positive relations increase
the similarity of two person concepts, while negative
relations decrease the similarity of those person concepts.
Apparently, the positive and negative relations are
misattributed to the subsequent similarity evaluation. If this
effect is in fact due to misattribution (Gentner & Brem,
1999; Gentner & Gunn, 2001), then a relation between two
person concepts should also be misattributed to the
similarity of other, entirely unrelated person concepts. That
is, if participants are unaware that the relations between
concepts are influencing their similarity judgments, then this
effect should transfer to any subsequent similarity judgment.
Thus, a positive relation between two person concepts (e.g.,
The plumber protected the housewife.) should increase the
similarity of two unrelated target concepts (e.g., How
similar are editors and taxi drivers?). And likewise, a
negative relation (e.g., The plumber alienated the
housewife.) should decrease the similarity of those unrelated
concepts. Experiment 2 tested this hypothesis.

2.4

Method

2.3

Eighty undergraduates at the University of Georgia
participated for partial course credit. Materials from
Experiment 1 were modified for the present purposes. Each
list of 40 stimuli was split into two lists of 20 stimuli, such
that each list contained ten sentences with a positive relation
and ten with a negative relation. The judgment questions
from the first list were interchanged with those from the
second list, so that in every case, the concepts in the
stimulus sentence differed from those being judged (e.g.
“The singer thanked the engineer. In general, how similar
are soldiers and chefs?”). In a given list, no concept that
appeared in a stimulus sentence also appeared in a judgment
question, or vice versa. Thus, each list consisted of 20 trials,
10 of which contained a positive relation and 10 of which

2.2

2.44

2.1

2.27

2
1.9
Positive

Negative

Figure 1: Mean similarity ratings, Experiment 1.
Similarity ratings in the control condition (M = 2.36, S.E.
= 0.15) fell between those of the two experimental

374

contained a negative relation. As before, stimulus sentences
were presented in 16-point bold type. Participants were told
that the sentences had been generated by a previous group
of participants, and that they should read these sentences
prior to judging the similarity of the subsequent concepts.
Participants rated the similarity of the concepts on the same
7-point scale. The order of concepts within a sentence, as
well as the valence of the relation between them, was again
counterbalanced across participants.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that the mean of the control
condition was approximately midway between the means of
the positive and negative relation conditions. However,
given the small effect size, the number of participants
necessary to bear out a significant difference from the
control condition was prohibitive. Thus, Experiment 2 did
not attempt to replicate the control condition of Experiment
1. Experiment 2 consisted solely of the positive and
negative relation conditions.

Results and Discussion
Results were analyzed separately with participants (t p ) and
items (t i ) as random factors. Both analyses used paired
samples t-tests. As in Experiment 1, similarity ratings
following positive relations (M = 2.43, S.E = .09) were
significantly higher than those following negative relations
(M = 2.30, S.E. = .09), tp (79) = 2.41, p < .02 and ti (39) =
1.93, p = .06. This result is illustrated in Figure 2.

Mean Similarity Rating

2.6
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.2

2.43

Experiment 3
Results of Experiments 1 and 2 could be attributed to a task
demand. Participants may have noticed that some relations
were positive and some were negative, and they may have
reasoned that the experimenters were anticipating an effect
of this manipulation. Hence, they may have complied by
intentionally increasing their ratings after positive relations
and decreasing their ratings after negative relations.
If this were the case, then the valence (positive or
negative) of the relation should predict subsequent ratings,
regardless of the judgment elicited. That is, for instance,
ratings should increase following positive relations, and
should decrease following negative relations, even if we ask
the opposite question. Thus, to test this hypothesis,
Experiment 3 was an exact replication of Experiment 2,
except that participants rated the difference between two
person concepts, rather than their similarity. If, alternatively,
the effect observed in Experiments 1 and 2 is specific to
similarity judgments, then it should not replicate here in the
difference judgments of Experiment 3.

Method
Eighty undergraduates at the University of Georgia
participated for partial course credit. Materials were
identical to those of Experiment 2, with a single
modification: every instance of the words “similar” and
“similarity” were replaced with the words “different” and
“difference,” respectively. Participants were instructed to
read the context sentence, which they were told had been
generated by previous participants, and then to rate the
difference of the two subsequent concepts (e.g. “The singer
thanked the engineer. In general, how different are soldiers
and chefs?”). The scale ranged from 1 (“not at all different”)
to 7 (“extremely different”). The experiment was otherwise
identical to Experiment 2.

2.30

2.1

Results and Discussion

2
1.9
Positive

Negative

Figure 2: Mean similarity ratings, Experiment 2.
These data show that a positive relation between two person
concepts reliably increased participants’ judgments of the
similarity of two entirely different, unrelated person
concepts, while a negative relation reliably decreased that
judgment. The consonance of the present results with those
of Experiment 1 is striking; the two experiments produced
virtually identical results. Whereas positive and negative
condition means were 2.44 and 2.27 respectively in
Experiment 1, they were 2.43 and 2.30 in Experiment 2.
This serves both as corroboration of Experiment 1 and as
support for the hypothesis of Experiment 2. It seems that
both experiments demonstrate the same phenomenon: the
presence of a relation between two person concepts is
misattributed as similarity in the subsequent judgment.
Moreover, the persons being judged need not be those to
whom the relation pertains.

375

Results were again analyzed separately with participants (t p )
and items (t i ) as random factors. Both analyses used paired
samples t-tests. Difference ratings following positive
relations (M = 5.09, S.E = .08) were nearly identical to
those following negative relations (M = 5.12, S.E. = .09).
This result, which is shown in Figure 3, did not approach
significance, tp (79) = .40, p = .69 and ti (39) = .02, p = .98.
Results of Experiment 3, which elicited difference
judgments, did not replicate the pattern of results obtained
in Experiments 1 and 2, which elicited similarity judgments.
If the results of the previous experiments were simply due
to a task demand in which participants deduced that they
should increase their rating following a positive relation and
decrease it following a negative one, then similar results
should have obtained in this third experiment. The lack of
such a result suggests that participants were not simply
following a rule that produced an artifactual effect in the
previous experiments.
The present lack of a reliable difference was not due to
insufficient statistical power. First, the relatively large
sample size of 80 was exactly the same as that of
Experiment 2, which did achieve statistical significance.

And second, variance was approximately equal across
experiments, ruling out the possibility that greater variance
in Experiment 3 led to a decrease in the ability to detect a
difference. There simply was no real difference between the
means presented in Figure 3; they differed by a mere three
one-hundredths of a point, on a 7-point scale.

Mean Difference Rating

5.3
5.2
5.1
5

endpoint of the scale in Experiment 3. But this was not the
case: mean difference ratings (collapsed across conditions)
were 1.89 units from the higher endpoint (i.e., 7 – 5.11). An
independent t-test verified that this difference between 1.37
and 1.89 was highly significant, t (158) = 4.66, p < .001.
Thus, similarity and difference judgments were not
complementary in the present experiments (cf. Medin et al.,
1990), thereby explaining the lack of a significant result in
Experiment 3. Therefore, we conclude that the effect
observed in Experiments 1 and 2 is specific to judgments of
similarity, and does not extend to judgments of difference.

General Discussion

4.9
5.09

5.12

Positive

Negative

4.8
4.7
4.6

Figure 3: Mean difference ratings, Experiment 3.
Note also that the means of the difference judgments were
much higher than the means of the similarity judgments
observed in Experiments 1 and 2. This was due to the fact
that a rating of “not at all similar” was located on the lower
end of the scale in Experiments 1 and 2, whereas the
complementary
rating
of
“extremely
different”
corresponded to the higher end of the scale in Experiment 3.
One might have expected the difference ratings of
Experiment 3 to produce a reliable effect opposite to that of
Experiments 1 and 2. That is, intuitively, just as positive
relations increased similarity ratings, they should have
decreased difference ratings. And likewise, just as negative
relations decreased similarity ratings, they should have
increased difference ratings. However, this intuition
assumes that similarity and difference are inverses of one
another, an assumption that has been convincingly refuted.
It has been shown, for example, that participants tend to
judge AA as both more similar to and more different from
BB than AC (Medin, Goldstone & Gentner, 1990). This
finding that the same alternative is both more similar to and
more different from the standard necessarily implies that
similarity and difference are not inverses. For, if they were
inverses, then one alternative stimulus should be chosen as
more similar to the standard, and the other alternative
stimulus should be chosen as more different from the
standard. Hence, the failure of Experiment 3 to reverse the
effect of Experiments 1 and 2 may be attributed to the noncomplementary nature of similarity and difference
judgments.
This explanation is corroborated by the fact that similarity
ratings of Experiment 2 and difference ratings of
Experiment 3 were not complementary. Calculating the
distance of the mean ratings from their respective endpoints
of the scale, we see that mean similarity ratings (collapsed
across conditions) of Experiment 2 were 1.37 units from the
lower endpoint (i.e., 2.37 – 1). If similarity and difference
ratings are complementary, then mean difference ratings
should be approximately 1.37 units from the higher

376

In Experiment 1, the perceived similarity of common person
concepts was increased by the assertion of a positive
relation between those concepts. So for instance, plumbers
and housewives were judged more similar by participants
who were informed that the plumber protected the
housewife. And conversely, the perceived similarity of those
same person concepts was decreased by the assertion of a
negative relation between them. Plumbers and housewives
were judged less similar by participants who read that the
plumber alienated the housewife. This result demonstrated
the influence of relations on similarity judgments of person
concepts, and suggested that relations are misattributed as
similarity (Gentner & Brem, 1999; Gentner & Gunn, 2001).
Experiment 2 further showed that positive and negative
relations may even be misattributed to the similarity of
another pair of entirely unrelated concepts. In this
experiment, for example, a positive relation between a
plumber and a housewife increased the similarity of editors
and taxi drivers. And a negative relation between the
plumb er and the housewife conversely decreased the
similarity of editors and taxi drivers. Experiment 3
suggested that this effect may be specific to similarity
judgments, as the result was not replicated with difference
judgments. Thus, the results of Experiments 1 and 2 do not
appear to be due to a general strategy of increasing ratings
after a positive relation and decreasing ratings after a
negative relation.
In the Introduction we stated that the effect of relations on
the perception of similarity may be considered a
misattribution (Gentner & Brem, 1999; Gentner & Gunn,
2001). That is, the presence of a relation between two
concepts is confused as, or intrudes on, perceived similarity.
By this account, similarity is the result of a comparison
process, whereas relatedness is the result of an integration
process. Importantly, similarity is pure comparison;
relatedness is a different phenomenon resulting from a
distinct process.
Alternatively, Bassok and colleagues (Bassok & Medin,
1997; Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999) reject this “pure”
similarity model in favor of a dual process model of
similarity. According to the dual process model, comparison
and integration are indeed distinct processes, but they both
contribute to the perception of similarity. In other words,
given the evidence that relations affect similarity, it is
apparent that similarity is derived from both comparison and
integration. Indeed, Wisniewski and Bassok (1999,
Experiment 2) found that the influence of relatedness was

pervasive even in a task that explicitly required comparison
instead of integration. Thus, to exclude relatedness from
similarity is to render the definition of “similarity” arbitrary.
Distinguishing between the “pure” similarity model
(Gentner & Brem, 1999; Gentner & Gunn, 2001) and the
dual process model of similarity (Bassok & Medin, 1997;
Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999) appears, to a certain extent, to
be a matter of theoretical preference. However, our results
do appear to lend some, admittedly tentative, support to the
pure similarity model. The finding that a relation between
person concepts affects the similarity of other, unrelated
person concepts is counterintuitive. There seems little
reason that participants would consciously and intentionally
adjust their similarity ratings of one pair of concepts in
accordance with a relation between an unrelated pair of
concepts. More plausible is the hypothesis that participants
were simply unaware that prior relations were affecting their
subsequent similarity judgments. That is, participants were
likely misattributing relations as similarity. So to the extent
that participants are unaware that relations are affecting
their similarity judgments, relations may be considered a
misattribution to similarity.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cassie Barnard, Chris Butler, Lisa Hatfield,
Cristina Jover, Robby Pelfrey, Jack Tomlinson and Matt
Voss for assistance with data collection. This research was
funded in part by a Faculty Research Grant to the first
author from the University of Georgia Research Foundation.

References
Bassok, M. & Medin, D. L. (1997). Birds of a feather flock
together: Similarity judgments with semantically rich
stimuli. Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 311-336.
Estes, Z. (in press). A tale of two similarities: Comparison
and integration in conceptual combination. Cognitive
Science.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. & Brem, S. (1999). Is snow really like a shovel?
Distinguishing similarity from thematic relatedness.
Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 179-184). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 565-577.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L. & Gentner, D. (1990).
Similarity involving attributes and relations: Judgments of
similarity and difference are not inverses. Psychological
Science, 1, 64-69.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
104, 192-233.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.

377

Tulving, E. & Thompson, D. M. (1973). Encoding
specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.
Wisniewski, E. J. & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man
similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with comparison
and integration. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208-238.
Wittenbrink, B., Hilton, J. L. & Gist, P. L. (1998). In search
of similarity: Stereotypes as naïve theories in social
categorization. Social Cognition, 16, 31-55.

Appendix: Concepts and Relations.
Concept Pair
Positive/Negative Relation
actress/construction worker appreciated/pushed
athlete/gas station attendant had fun with/bothered
baker/movie producer
danced with/complained about
bus driver/lawyer
cared for/fought with
butcher/maid
visited/accused
carpenter/professor
admired/upset
coroner/economist
respected/ignored
dancer/shopkeeper
welcomed/yelled at
dentist/interpreter
chatted with/rejected
drummer/novelist
entertained/insulted
electrician/sailor
complimented/bothered
farmer/astronomer
trusted/complained about
fisherman/nurse
cared for/tricked
guitarist/bartender
chatted with/stole from
hypnotist/bicycle messenger entertained/fought with
janitor/architect
helped/tripped
librarian/astronaut
visited/accused
painter/restaurant manager supported/ignored
pharmacist/tailor
danced with/upset
philosopher/composer
helped/lied to
photographer/programmer
complimented/pushed
pianist/reporter
shook hands with/abused
plumber/housewife
protected/alienated
poet/florist
joked around with/angered
police officer/landscaper
encouraged/angered
politician/waiter
admired/rejected
postal worker/banker
thanked/tripped
priest/stunt man
trusted/hurt
receptionist/barber
joked around with/tricked
sales clerk/factory worker
appreciated/alienated
scientist/prison guard
encouraged/threatened
sculptor/flight attendant
smiled at/insulted
singer/engineer
thanked/yelled at
soldier/chef
supported/opposed
student/airplane pilot
protected/stole from
taxi driver/editor
respected/opposed
teacher/fireman
welcomed/threatened
therapist/rancher
smiled at/abused
violinist/doctor
shook hands with/hurt
welder/travel agent
had fun with/lied to

