UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of cultural differences in fear of isolation on dialectical reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1189x92j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Kim, Kyungil
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of cultural differences in fear of isolation on dialectical reasoning
Kyungil Kim (kyungil@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin
1 University Station A8000, Austin TX 78712-0187 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin
1 University Station A8000, Austin TX 78712-0187 USA

Abstract
Previous research suggests that members of East Asian
cultures show a greater preference for dialectical (vs.
nondialectical) thinking than do members of Western
Cultures. We suggest this difference is rooted in a
greater chronic fear of isolation (FOI) in East Asians
than in Westerners. To explain this hypothesis, we
manipulated fear of isolation in a group of Western
college students and assessed their preference for
dialectical and nondialectical proverbs. Consistent with
our proposal, High FOI students showed a greater
relative preference for dialectical proverbs than did
Low FOI students.

Introduction
There has been a sustained interest in research on
cultural differences in reasoning and decision making,
because of observations that members of different
cultures may exhibit radically different behaviors in a
number of tasks (Hsee & Weber, 1999; Nisbett, Peng,
Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001; Peng & Nisbett, 1999).
Clearly the study of cultural differences has practical
implications for international commerce and theoretical
implications for claims about the universality of
cognitive processing. Nonetheless, a critical question is
whether cultural and individual differences can be
captured in terms of variations in the parameters of a
single model or whether different theories are required
to describe decision makers from different cultures.
For example, Briley and Wyer (2002) found that calling
Asian and Western participants’ attention to their
cultural identity induced feelings of being part of a
group that had the same effect on decisions in both
groups.
As this work suggests, research must focus on the
underlying processes that explain cultural differences
rather than merely describing group differences in overt
behavior (Weber & Hsee, 2000). As one example of
research in this spirit, Nisbett, Peng, Choi, and
Norenzayan (2001) showed that East Asian and
Western thought differ in style with East Asians having
a more holistic style and Westerners having a more

670

analytic style. They suggested that members of East
Asian culture are more dialectical, i.e., they retain basic
elements of opposing perspectives by seeking a “middle
way”, and focus on relations. In contrast, Westerners
are more comfortable with formal logic and focused on
individuals. Generally speaking, East Asians tend to
seek a compromise solution when reconcile conflicts
and contradictions.
As another example, Briley, Morris, and Simonson
(2000) examined the compromise effect in East Asians
and European Americans. The compromise effect is
phenomenon in which people are more likely to select
an option when it is the intermediate option in a choice
set than when it is an extreme option (Simonson &
Tversky, 1992). Briley et al. found that asking for
justifications for choices increased compromise choices
for East Asians but decreased them for European
Americans. These examples suggest that cultural
differences strongly influence patterns of judgment,
decision making and thought. Thus, what we have
considered to be cognitive universals in decision
making may sometimes be specific to members of
particular cultures.
Holistic reasoning is guided by the assumption that
everything in the universe is related to everything else
in some way, resulting in the belief that the slightest
change in any element of the whole leads to substantial
alterations in others (Choi & Nisbett, 2000). This
assumption makes theories of the world based on a
small number of facts seem inadequate, because such
theories cannot simultaneously consider a multitude of
interconnected factors and their complex interactions.
In support of this view, there is some evidence that East
Asians hold a more complex interactionist theory about
behavior than do Americans. For example, Koreans
made more situational inferences than did Americans in
a behavioral prediction task as long as situational
information was salient.1 They were also more likely to

1

A situational inference is one in which someone infers that
people’s behavior was caused by the interaction between a
person and a situation rather that due to a characteristic trait
of the actor.

endorse a situationist theory of behavior than were
Americans (Norenzayan, Choi, & Nisbett, 2002).
In line with this explanation, Peng and Nisbett
(1999) suggested that East Asians’ relatively more
dialectical thinking and Western Americans’
nondialectical thinking is one of bases for these cultural
differences. They argued that the dialectical approach
has its roots in Eastern philosophy that is opposed to the
formal logic tradition. Consistent with this proposal,
Western reliance on dialectical principles is weaker
than that of Easterners, and Western reliance on the
foundational principles of formal logic, especially the
principle of noncontradiction, is stronger (Nisbett et al.,
2001; Peng & Nisbett, 1999).
These aspects can be treated as causal factors for
observed cultural differences to date. We suggest,
however, fear of isolation, which is a more basic factor
that differs between cultures, better explains culturespecific patterns of behaviors and thinking.
To
motivate this idea, we first define fear of isolation (FOI),
and discuss how it should influence reasoning. Then,
we present a study in which experimentally induced
differences in FOI lead to differences in the degree of
dialectical reasoning.

Fear of isolation
The notion of “fear of isolation (FOI)” can be
defined in two ways. First, social psychologically,
“isolation” is defined as negative and unwanted
collective experiences including loneliness, a lack of
community, solitary, confinement, or a quarantine
(Gilbert, Fiske, & Lindzey, 1998).
FOI is a basic
emotional response to the described isolation that
includes a strong need/goal to avoid those negative
experiences. Second, communication theories define
FOI as a centrifugal force, i.e., a pressure from society,
that accelerates the spiral of silence (Noelle-Neumann,
1984). That is, people feel increasing pressure to
conceal their views when they believe they are in a
minority. This pressure is assumed to be related to their
fears of being negatively evaluated by others. The
theory maintains that mass media work simultaneously
with majority public opinion to silence minority beliefs
on cultural issues. Therefore, FOI prompts those with
minority views to examine the beliefs of others.
Individuals who fear being socially isolated are prone to
conform to what they perceive to be a majority view.
In sum, FOI seems to be a basic motivational factor
that can direct people’s actions toward desired states of
the world by moving people’s viewpoints and interests
to social situations and others around them from inside
of them.

671

Different sensitivities to FOI between East
Asian and Western culture
Before discussing how a difference in degree of
FOI can influence judgment and decision making, we
must first show that members of different cultures are
likely to differ in their chronic level of FOI. This
possibility is consistent with observed collectivism in
East Asian culture and individualism among Western
populations (Nisbett et al., 2001). Similarly, Hsee and
Weber (1999) presented a cushion hypothesis in which
they suggested that members of socially collectivist
cultures, such as the Chinese culture can afford to take
greater financial risks because their social networks
protect them against catastrophic outcomes. The social
network serves as a “cushion” that protects people if
they take risks and fail. Assuming that the notion of
FOI, at least in this study, reflects interactions with the
social environment and with others, it would be
reasonable to say that members of a collectivist culture
would show more FOI than would those in individualist
cultures.
Our research focuses on the relationship between
different degrees of FOI and their effect on judgment
and decision making. We think that members of East
Asian culture have a higher chronic FOI than do
members of Western culture. If so, then experimental
manipulation of this factor even within a single culture
should induce similar reasoning differences observed so
far between Western and East Asian cultures. To test
this hypothesis, we developed a manipulation of FOI
and explored whether Western students with a high
level of FOI would be more like Eastern Asians than
would Western students with a low level of FOI.
Following Peng and Nisbett (1999), we examined
people’s preferences for dialectical and nondialectical
proverbs.
In their research, Chinese participants
showed a greater relative preference for dialectical
proverbs over nondialectical proverbs than did
American undergraduates.
If a high level of FOI indeed makes people attend
to interpersonal relationships, then inducing a high level
of FOI should make Americans less likely to think by
formal logic, which in turn should increase their
preferences for dialectical vs. nondialectical proverbs.
In sum, a high level of FOI should result in a relatively
greater preference for dialectical reasoning than should
a low level of FOI.

Manipulation and measurement of FOI
In our study, FOI was manipulated as an
independent variable. Participants were asked to
describe their previous experiences relative to one of
the following two situations: a) experiences of being
socially isolated from others (High FOI group), e.g.,
“you might have been anxious once when your friends

were not talking to you at all, or when you went to a
new place where you didn'
t know anyone and had
difficulty meeting new people.”, or b) experiences of
socially isolating others from them or other people
(Low FOI group), e.g., “you might have been at a party
and you didn'
t talk to one of your friends who did not
know many people at the party and you felt bad about it
later.” Many clinical techniques such as prolonged
exposure treatment which is aimed at treating posttraumatic stress disorder are based on the premise that
asking a patient to recall and describe their previous
experiences of certain events and associated emotions
can activate and retrieve relevant feelings and
memories, and put the person into that state again (Foa,
Cashman, Jaycox, & Perry, 1997).
To measure a person’s FOI, we adopted the Fear of
Negative Evaluation (FNE) scale (Watson & Friend,
1969). This 30-item instrument was designed to
measure one aspect of social anxiety, the fear of
receiving negative evaluations from others. Scores on
this scale essentially reflect a fear of the loss of social
approval. Items on the measure include signs of
anxiety and ineffective social behaviors that would lead
to disapproval by others.
We adopted this scale, because we had to measure
the degree to which participants were concerned with
social and relational matters, e.g., their tendency to seek
approval and to avoid disapproval from others. There
are other scales that have been used to measure FOI,
but these scales also ask questions about physical
isolation which is not of interest in this study. A large
part of FOI may be likely to arise from a fear of
negative evaluation.
In sum, the goal of this study is to determine
whether FOI is a candidate to be a causal factor
underlying cultural difference in judgment and decision
making. As a first step in this project, we adopted one
elementary task studied by previous researchers, i.e.,
preferences for different types of proverbs.

Experiment
Our experiment was based on a study (Peng &
Nisbett, 1999) that examined East Asians’ and
Westerners’ dialectical reasoning. In their study,
Chinese populations who are supposed to maintain the
tradition of dialecticism preferred dialectical proverbs
that accept rather than deny a contradiction (e.g.,
“Sorrow is born of excessive joy”) to nondialectical
proverbs that reflect the rule of non-contradiction (e.g.,
“Half a loaf is better than none”). Analyses of national
proverbs provide some insight into the sources of crosscultural differences, because proverbs can be construed
as embodiments of folk wisdom. Proverbs are defined
as short expressions of cultural wisdom, truth, morals
and norms in a “metaphorical, fixed and memorable
form” which are “handed down from generation to

672

generation” (Mieder, 1993). Many researchers have
analyzed national proverbs to study cross-cultural
differences.
For example, Weber, Hsee, and
Sokolowska (1998) supported their cushion hypothesis
by showing that Chinese raters perceived the same
proverbs as providing significantly more risk-seeking
advice in the context of financial risk than social risk,
whereas American raters did not show this sensitivity to
the decision domain.
As discussed above, we manipulated participants’
level of FOI. After this priming task, participants were
given “Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale (FNE)”
(Watson & Friend, 1969) as a manipulation check.
Then we explored whether a person’s preference for
dialectical proverbs would be influenced by those levels
of FOI. We expected that the High FOI group would
show a greater relative preference for dialectical
proverbs than would the Low FOI group. In order to
ensure that these results are not due to a particular style
of proverb, we selected dialectical and nondialectical
proverbs from three cultures; American, Chinese, and
Yiddish. This followed the work by Peng and Nisbett
(1999).

Method
Design
The study used a 2 (FOI: High vs. Low) × 2
(proverb type: Dialectical vs. Nondialectical) × 3
(proverb nationality: American, Chinese, and Yiddish)
design.
FOI was manipulated between subjects.
Proverb type and proverb nationality were within
subjects.
Subjects
One hundred American undergraduate students of
the University of Texas participated in the study. Half
of participants were randomly assigned to the High FOI
condition and the other half were to the Low FOI
condition.
Materials
Two types of proverbs from three nationalities
were randomly presented to participants; dialectical
proverbs (eight American, eight Chinese, and eight
Yiddish) and nondialectical proverbs (five American,
five Chinese, and eight Yiddish). All of these proverbs
were used in Peng and Nisbett’s (1999) study.
Procedure
Participants were asked to describe their previous
experiences relating to an anxiety producing situation.
In the High FOI condition, participants wrote about
being socially isolated from others. In the Low FOI
condition, participants wrote about socially isolating
someone else from them or other people. After
completing this self-descriptive priming task,
participants in both conditions responded to the Fear of
Negative Evaluation scale as a manipulation check.
Then the 42 proverbs were presented randomly to

673

logic, the effect of the Fear of Negative Evaluation
scale score was significant, F (1, 97) = 4.51, p < .05,
and the effect of FOI was reduced to marginal
significance, F (1, 97) = 3.16, p = .08. These results
indicate that levels of FOI are positively related to the
degree of dialectical thinking.

0.80

0.40

dd
is
h
Yi

-0.40

Am
er
ic
an

0.00

C
hi
ne
se

Relative preference for dialectical proverbs

participants and they answered four questions per
proverb: (a) How familiar is this proverb to you in exact
words? (b) How well do you think you understand this
proverb? (c) How much do you like this proverb? (d)
How often do you use this proverb? Participants rated
their responses on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (not at
all) to 7 (very much).
Results
First, we checked the effectiveness of our FOI
manipulation. Average values on the Fear of Negative
Evaluation scale were significantly higher in the High
FOI condition (M = 15.82) than in the Low FOI
condition (M = 12.40), t = 6.17, p < .05.
To explore preferences for proverbs, we followed
the method used by Peng and Nisbett (1999), an
intermediate index of preference by taking the mean of
the four judgments participant made for each proverb.
A reliability analysis indicated that the four judgments
were consistent enough to be summed into one index
(Cronbach’s alpha = .78). For each participant we
subtracted his or her average rating for the
nondialectical proverbs from his or her ratings of the
dialectical proverbs for each nationality of proverb.
This difference score provides a measure of the
participant’s relative preference for dialectical proverbs
in which positive values reflect a greater overall
preference for dialectical proverbs and negative values
reflect a greater overall preference for nondialectical
proverbs. A two-way ANOVA of FOI (High FOI
condition vs. Low FOI condition) × proverb nationality
(American, Chinese, and Yiddish) produced a
significant main effect of FOI in participants’ relative
preferences for dialectical proverbs (see Figure 1).
There was a significant main effect of proverb
nationality, F (1, 98) = 18.34, p < .01, that reflects
relatively stronger preference for dialectical proverbs
for the American proverbs than for the Chinese or
Yiddish proverbs. This effect is not germane to the aim
of this study, so we will not discuss it further.
Participants in the High FOI condition showed a
relatively higher preference for dialectical proverbs (M
= - 0.49) than did those in the Low FOI condition (M =
- 1.04), F (1, 98) = 5.41, p < .05. Interestingly, all
participants showed a relatively greater preference on
average for nondialectical proverbs (i.e., the average
mean scores are negative), which is consistent with
other studies showing that members of Western cultures
prefer nondialectical thinking. Our main interest was
that a manipulation of FOI influences this chronic
difference.
To further examine the effect of FOI, we did an
ANCOVA that included the Fear of Negative
Evaluation scale value as a covariate. If level of FOI
influenced participants’ ratings, then the differences
among FOI groups should decrease when the scale
values are added as a covariate. Consistent with this

-0.80

High FOI
Low FOI

-1.20

-1.60

Proverb nationality

Figure 1. Participants’ relative preferences for
dialectical proverbs by nationality

Discussion
We suggested that East Asians and Western
populations differ in their chronic levels of FOI and that
this factor influences the degree of dialectical and
nondialectical thinking in members of these cultures.
The results of our experiment support this
hypothesis.
Participants in the High FOI group
exhibited a relatively greater preference for dialectical
proverbs than did those in the Low FOI group.
Furthermore when Fear of Negative Evaluation scale
values were involved into the analysis as a covariate
they were significantly related to the relative preference
for dialectical proverbs and the effect of the FOI
manipulation decreased.
Given these findings, we should consider whether
FOI is a real causal factor in dialectical thinking and
cultural differences in judgment between East Asian
and Western culture. We cannot deny the possibility
that FOI is an intermediate rather than a basic factor.
FOI may be one of many intermediate factors between
observed differences in overt behaviors such as
dialectical reasoning and in culturally accessible
concepts such as collectivism and individualism.
Alternatively FOI might be a result from either

collectivism-individualism or from other culturespecific factors.
This issue has been much discussed in
communication theories, which have yielded no clear
consensus on whether FOI is an antecedent or an
intervening variable. For example, Shoemaker, Breen,
and Stamper (2000) tested whether FOI is antecedent to
opinion formation or an intervening variable between
opinion formation and willingness to voice the opinion.
Their path analysis suggested that FOI is an antecedent
variable, but they could not exclude possibility that it is
an intervening variable.
Nonetheless, the results of this study indicate that
FOI is causal even if there are other factors that differ
between cultures that cause FOI. We manipulated a
candidate causal variable, i.e., FOI, and observed how it
influenced people’s thinking and reasoning. This is a
reasonable method for exploring causal mechanisms in
a domain of interest, but only a few studies in crosscultural research have manipulated causal variables in
studies (e.g., Briley & Wyer, 2002). Thus, the results
from this study strengthen the argument that FOI is an
important factor in the causal chain for culture-specific
behaviors because a difference in FOI produced a
difference in the relative degree of dialectical reasoning.
Clearly, much more research remains to be done to
examine the range of reasoning tasks that are influenced
by level of FOI.
As discussed in the introduction, there are likely to
be several common modes of thinking that cause
cultural differences in reasoning. We suggest that more
studies should explore manipulations that will allow us
to further understand the causal mechanisms underlying
culture-specific thinking and behaviors.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Lisa Grimm, Hunt Stilwell,
Thi Tran, and Randy Jupio for helpful discussion about
and/or aid in conducting experiments.
This research was supported by NIDA grant NIH
#1 R21 DA015211-01A1.

References
Briley, D. A., Morris, M. W., & Simonson, I. (2000).
Reasons as carriers of culture: Dynamic versus
dispositional models of cultural influence on decision
making. Journal of Consumer Research, 27(2), 157178.
Briley, D. A., & Wyer, R. S. (2002). The effect of
group membership salience on the avoidance of
negative outcomes: Implications for social and
consumer decisions. Journal of Consumer Research,
29(3), 400-415.
Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (2000). Cultural psychology
of surprise: Holistic theories and recognition of

674

contradiction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79(6), 890-905.
Foa, E. B., Cashman, L., Jaycox, L., & Perry, K. (1997).
The validation of a self-report measure of
posttraumatic stress disorder: The Posttraumatic
Diagnostic Scale. Psychological Assessment, 9(4),
445-451.
Gilbert, D., Fiske, S. T., & Lindzey, G. (1998). The
handbook of social psychology (4th ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Hsee, C. K., & Weber, E. U. (1999). Cross-national
differences in risk preference and lay predictions.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12(2), 165179.
Mieder, W. (1993). Proverbs are never out of season :
popular wisdom in the modern age. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K. P., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A.
(2001). Culture and systems of thought: Holistic
versus analytic cognition. Psychological Review,
108(2), 291-310.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The spiral of silence :
public opinion, our social skin. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Norenzayan, A., Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (2002).
Cultural similarities and differences in social
inference: Evidence from behavioral predictions and
lay theories of behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28(1), 109-120.
Peng, K. P., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics,
and reasoning about contradiction. American
Psychologist, 54(9), 741-754.
Shoemaker, P. J., Breen, M., & Stamper, M. (2000).
Fear of social isolation: testing an assumption from
the spiral of silence. IRISH communication review, 8,
65-78.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in Context
- Tradeoff Contrast and Extremeness Aversion.
Journal of Marketing Research, 29(3), 281-295.
Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of
social-evaluative anxiety. Journal of consulting and
clinical psychology, 33(4), 448-457.
Weber, E. U., & Hsee, C. K. (2000). Culture and
individual judgment and decision making. Applied
Psychology-an International Review-Psychologie
Appliquee-Revue Internationale, 49(1), 32-61.
Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Sokolowska, J. (1998).
What Folklore Tells Us about Risk and Risk Taking:
Cross-Cultural Comparisons of American, German,
and Chinese Proverbs, , ,. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 75(2), 170-186.

