UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Knowledge Support in Creating Noun-Noun Compounds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/876664xv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Lynott, Dermot
Keane, Mark

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Knowledge Support in Creating Noun-Noun Compounds
Dermot Lynott (dermot.lynott@ucd.ie)
Mark Keane (mark.keane@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract
Conceptual combination research has largely concerned
itself with the comprehension of novel nominal
compounds, while the production of novel compounds
has long been neglected in both the empirical and
computational literature. In this paper, we advance a
new paradigm for examining the creation of novel nounnoun compounds. Two experiments are reported,
showing that the level of knowledge support (i.e. the
familiarity) of the object descriptions affect compound
production in two ways. First, people exhibit greater
agreement on what compounds to produce when the
object description has high knowledge support. Second,
people also have increased confidence in the goodness of
their compounds with high knowledge support. To
conclude, we discuss some of the issues that arise out of
this new work and outline a model of the compound
creation process.

Introduction
Holiday drug mule, soccer mom, laptop computer, trash
cookies and many more nominal compounds illustrate
the creativity and pervasiveness of nominal compounds
in everyday language use. These compounds are a
microcosm of the generative nature of natural language,
in which we see new meanings being created from the
re-combination of words in syntactically well-formed
phrases. It is the need to understand this generativity of
language that has motivated several decades of research
into nominal compounds (e.g., Clark & Hecht, 1983;
Costello & Keane, 2000; Gagné & Shoben, 1997;
Gerrig & Murphy, 1992; Hampton, 1987; Levi; 1978;
Wisniewski, 1996). However, this research effort has
been somewhat unbalanced in that it has mainly
concentrated on the comprehension of novel
compounds, rather than on their production. This
oversight, focusing on how people understand
compounds rather than on how they coin new ones,
applies to both the empirical testing and actual
modelling of nominal compound use.
There is a large empirical literature on the
comprehension of lexicalised (e.g., Levi, 1978; Marsh,
1984; Quirk, Greenbaum & Svartik, 1985) and novel
nominal
compounds
(so-called
conceptual
combination; see e.g., Coolen, Van Jaarsveld &
Schreuder, 1991; Costello & Keane, 2000, 2001;
Gagne, 2000, 2001, 2002; Gerrig & Bortfeld, 1999;

746

Lynott & Keane, 2002; Murphy, 1990; Smith,
Osherson, Rips & Keane, 1988, Wisniewski, 1997). In
contrast, work examining the production of nominal
compounds has been quite patchy and disjointed (Clark,
Hecht & Mulford, 1986; Levi, 1978, Downing, 1977,
Windsor, 1993). This may be because the production
literature to date tends to be mainly concerned with
issues other than compound creation per se. For
example, Clark et al. and Windsor were primarily
concerned with compound production as an aspect of
language development, while Downing and Levi
focused on debating the existence of a taxonomy of
relations within noun-noun compounds. It is also very
hard to generalise over these studies because of their
widely differing methodologies, from context-free
production to picture naming to linguistic analysis.
The ample modelling literature on conceptual
combination has also tended to focus on comprehension
rather than on production. Three models deserve
mention. CARIN (Gagné & Shoben, 1997) proposes
that the distribution of relations usually found with the
compound’s constituents can determine the correct
relation / interpretation. The Dual-Process model
(Wisniewski, 1996) proposes that the level of similarity
between the constituent nouns activates one of two
possible processes of comprehension: scenario creation
(which produces relation-based interpretations by slot
filling) and alignment (which produces property-based
interpretations by a type of analogical mapping).
Finally, Costello and Keane’s (1997, 2000) C3 model
proposes that, at a computational level, there is a space
of possible meanings for a novel compound from which
one meaning is selected during comprehension by the
application of three constraints (informativeness,
plausibility and diagnosticity).
Although these three models offer a rich diversity of
mechanisms to model the creation of novel nominal
compounds, no one model seems to be directly
applicable. At its simplest, one might argue that the
production process is the reverse of comprehension,
taking an interpretation as input and outputting possible
nominal compounds. However, this proposal does not
stand up to close scrutiny. Intuitively, production
seems more complex than this reversion, as one has to
select a set of terms that best convey the intended
meaning in many future contexts, rather than simply
extracting a possible meaning from two terms presented

in a single, current context. One would expect there to
be
common
component
processes
between
comprehension and production, but exactly what these
might be is unclear.
Of course, the paucity of the empirical literature
means that any model is mere speculation until there is
some hard evidence to model. To fill this important gap,
we propose a new paradigm for the empirical
investigation of novel compound creation. Towards the
end of the paper, we will return with this evidence to
the issue of computational modelling.

A Paradigm for Compound Production
Vendler (1967) describes the process of nominalization
as “packing a sentence into a bundle that fits into other
sentences”. We have developed a novel experimental
paradigm for studying compound production that
mimics just such a process. In this paradigm, we give
people a sentence describing an object, and ask them to
produce a compound to convey the information in this
description. Computationally, one can cast this problem
as finding the minimal subset of terms whose meaning
will accurately and unambiguously convey the given
description. Consider a number of cases to illustrate this
proposal. If the object description is the sentence:
1a. A wine that is made from grapes and contains alcohol.

then the minimal set of terms to capture it is likely to be
just one word “wine”. Prior knowledge tells us that
wine is typically made from grapes and is alcoholic. So,
“wine” will accurately and unambiguously convey the
description. However, if the description were changed
to 1b, a single term will no longer suffice.
1b. A wine that is made from apricots and contains alcohol.
Using “wine” alone will not convey the meaning
accurately. Indeed, the minimal set of terms is probably
now two; namely, “apricot wine”. “Apricot” is needed
to overwrite the default shared knowledge that wine is
made from grapes and replace it with the knowledge
that this wine is made from apricots. However, even
“apricot wine” will only work if people readily
understand the structure an “X wine” to be “a wine
made from X” rather than “a wine in X shaped bottles”
or “a dessert wine served with Xs”. So, it is not just the
case that a term can be ignored if prior knowledge is
available. It must also be the case that other competing
interpretations from prior knowledge should not be
suggested by the chosen terms.
Knowledge or Word Order or Both?
The above analysis indicates what needs to be
computed when creating nominal compounds but it says

747

less about what allows this computation to be achieved.
At least three factors are likely to play role:
 pragmatic knowledge about effective communication
 available world knowledge about the described
objects
 syntactic knowledge, or word order in the object
description
From the pragmatic perspective, when people produce a
novel nominal compound, either in speech or in writing,
they are forced to make decisions regarding their choice
of words, knowing that the resulting compound must be
comprehensible to the listener or reader1. The
pragmatics literature suggests that shared world
knowledge is likely to have a crucial impact on this
choice of words (see Grice, 1975; Sperber & Wilson,
1986). Indeed, in their C3 model of comprehension,
Costello and Keane (2000) employ such pragmatic
principles (e.g. informativeness) to show how
supporting world knowledge is central to arriving at a
plausible meaning for a novel compound. In the studies
reported here, we attempt to manipulate the shared (or
available) knowledge given in the sentence description
to look at its effect on the compounds produced.
Intuitively, if there is supporting knowledge then people
may be more confident that the compound they produce
will convey its intended meaning (see Experiments 1
and 2).
Although it is difficult to quantify levels of
knowledge support, the support for a particular object
description certainly relies on our prior knowledge and
experience of the object. In other words, knowledge
support is about how normal a description seems with
respect to what we know about the world.
Furthermore, when supporting world knowledge is
available, it is possible that it will reduce variability in
the compounds people produce – i.e. people may
produce fewer unique compounds for an object
description that is supported by world knowledge (see
Experiments 1 and 2).
From a syntactic perspective, it also seems feasible
that the selection of appropriate words from the
sentence may be informed by its syntactic structure.
Consider the following:
2a A note left for a milkman on a pole.
2b A note left on a pole for a milkman.
If people were being solely directed by the syntactic
position of the words in the sentence then we would
expect different choices of compound (milkman note for
2a and pole note for 2b). However, if the primary
1

This is not to suggest that these decisions are conscious,
merely that the compound producer is implicitly aware of the
need to provide an informative compound.

influence is from the world knowledge brought to bear,
and not from the word order in the description, then
alternative syntactic forms should have little effect (see
mainly Experiment 2).

2.

Outline of Experiments
In our first experiment, we used different object
descriptions to manipulate the amount of supporting
world knowledge available and asked people to produce
labels for the objects being described. Experiment 1 is
mainly focused on the world knowledge issues, while
Experiment 2 looks at whether altering the word order
of the object descriptions affects peoples’ production of
novel compounds.
3.

Pre-Test
A pre-test was required before the main experiment in
order to confirm a reliable difference in levels of
knowledge support between High Support and Low
Support items.
21 native English speakers were given booklets
containing 44 object descriptions. Participants were
asked to rate how normal each of the descriptions were
(1 being not normal at all and 7 being completely
normal), and they were free to decide what normal
meant to them.
From participant responses, 44 pairs of object
descriptions were selected with one description being of
High Support and one being of Low Support. The mean
rating for High Support items was 5.451, while the
mean for Low Support items was 3.563. This difference
was reliable both by subjects (F1(1, 20) = 312.640,
MSe = 809.994, p < 0.0001) and by items (F2(1, 43) =
126.4, MSe = 791.217, p < 0.0001).

Experiment 1
Having confirmed differing levels of knowledge
support, we then used this set of object descriptions to
examine the effects of knowledge support on how
people produce novel noun-noun compounds. Two
main types of object descriptions were used: High
Support (HS) and Low Support (LS):
3a A disease in a swamp caused by flies (HS)
3b A disease in a school caused by flies (LS)
World knowledge suggests that swamps are more
associated with flies and disease than schools are and so
3a is categorised as being a High Support item while 3b
is categorised as Low Support.
In this experiment, we looked at three measures that
might be influenced by this variable:
1. Variability of compound production – This refers
to the number of unique compounds produced for a
given object description. We expected increased
knowledge support to reduce the variability of

748

compounds produced – i.e., increased knowledge
support would give rise to greater agreement
between participants.
Frequency of compound production – This refers to
the number of times a compound is produced for a
given description. We might expect to see a more
unbalanced distribution of frequencies for High
Support descriptions, with particular compounds
being produced with great frequency and the
remainder with only very low frequencies. Low
Support descriptions, on the other hand, might
provide a more even distribution, with several
compounds being produced with relatively high
frequency.
Confidence ratings – This refers to how well
participants feel their compounds adequately
convey the information contained in the sentence
description. We expected High Support items to
lead people to give higher confidence ratings. If
people produce compounds to describe something
that closely matches what they know of the world,
then this should make them more confident about
the goodness of their compound.

Method
Materials Eighty-eight sentences were used in the
experiment: 44 of which were High Support and 44
Low Support versions of the sentence. Each sentence
had a subject and two objects that were linked by
various relations e.g. Subject made of Object 1 located
in Object 2 (e.g., see sentences 2a, 2b, 3a, and 3b). The
High Support and Low Support versions of a sentence
were differentiated by the change of one word (either
Object 1 or Object 2).
A set of 15 pairs of filler items was also created.
Filler sentences had the same syntactic form but were
tautological in nature; for example, A wine that is made
from grapes and contains alcohol. The filler items
could be adequately described using only one word
(e.g., wine) whereas test items would require two or
more words.
Procedure Participants were 24 Computer Science
undergraduates from University College Dublin. All
were volunteers and were native speakers of English.
Two participants were removed prior to analysis for not
completing the task. Participants were given booklets of
sentence descriptions and were asked to produce a
description of one or two words that would best
describe the object given in each description. They were
also asked to rate, on a seven-point scale, how well
their new phrase conveyed same information as the
sentence description (1 being very good and 7 being
very poor). Participants were not asked explicitly to
produce noun-noun compounds, only to produce
responses of one or two words. However, the examples

that were given in the instructions were all noun-noun
responses.
Two sets of booklets were prepared with a random
selection of object descriptions but with equal numbers
of high- and low-support items. The order of
descriptions was randomised for each participant.
Support was a within-subject factor with no participant
seeing both the high support and low support versions
of the same sentence.
Results & Discussion Approximately 75% of all
responses were noun-noun compounds and the results
relate to these compounds.
Using a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test we observed a
main effect of knowledge support on compound
variability, with High-Support descriptions giving rise
to fewer unique compounds than Low-Support
descriptions; U = 610.5, n1 = 44, n2 = 44, p < 0.001.
The mean number of unique compounds produced for
High Support descriptions was 3.48 while the mean for
Low Support descriptions was 4.34.
People were reliably more confident about
compounds produced for highly supported object
descriptions than those produced for low-supported
descriptions. This finding was reliable both byparticipants; F1(1, 21) = 37.788, p < 0.001, MSe =
82.039, and by-items; F2(1, 43) = 30.421, p < 0.001,
MSe = 80.620. On the 7-point scale, the mean rating for
high-support items was 2.945, while the mean for lowsupport items was 3.598. There was also a reliable
correlation between the frequency of production of a
compound and the confidence ratings it received (p <
0.005, r = 0.163, N = 350). In other words, compounds
that were produced the most often tended to have the
highest confidence ratings. Finally, we found no
difference between the frequency of compound
production for High Support descriptions and Low
Support descriptions (p > 0.1).

Experiment 2
There is the possibility that the results of Experiment 1
were in some way confounded by the word order of the
object descriptions i.e. the order in which the concepts
appeared in the description. Thus, the purpose of
Experiment 2 is twofold. First, we can investigate
whether the findings from Experiment 1 were being
driven by the word order of the object descriptions or
by the knowledge of the concepts themselves. Second,
it provides a replication of Experiment 1 as it follows
the same structure and task demands.
The question of whether nominal compounding is
knowledge-driven or syntax-driven is an important one.
If it is the case that the process is knowledge-driven,
then we can make predictions regarding the production
of novel compounds by focussing only on the concepts
involved and not on how they have been described
syntactically. On the other hand, if syntax or word order

749

is the driving force behind compound production then it
is factors such as sentential structure and word order
that would need to be attended to first and foremost.
Experiment 2 uses the same base set of materials as
Experiment 1, except that the word order of the
descriptions has been altered. This allowed us to
compare the response from both experiments to
ascertain the effect of changing the word order on the
production process. To construct this new set of
materials Experiment 1 descriptions were changed by
switching the positions of the first and second objects.
The subject remained at the start of the description. If
an object description in Experiment 1 were of the form
4a then it was re-written in the form 4b for
Experiment 2 (see also examples 2a and 2b).
4a An X caused by a Y in a Z
4b An X in a Z caused by a Y
So although the constituents of the description remain
the same, the word order has changed. In altering the
word order in this way, six of the object descriptions
became ambiguous or nonsensical. These descriptions
were excluded from analyses.

Method
Materials 38 of our 44 original object description pairs
were used along with 15 filler items. As with
Experiment 1, the object descriptions were categorised
as either High Support or Low Support. Two sets of
booklets were prepared with a random selection of
descriptions, with Support as a within-subject factor
with no participant seeing both the High Support and
Low Support versions of the same sentence.
Procedure Participants were 20 undergraduate students
in computer science at University College Dublin. All
were volunteers and were native speakers of English.
Participants received booklets of descriptions whose
order was randomised for each person. As with
Experiment 1, participants were asked to rate on a scale
of 1-7 how good their compound was in conveying the
same information as the object description (1 being
very good and 7 being very poor).
Results As with Experiment 1, approximately 75% of
responses were noun-noun compounds and these were
used in the analyses that follow. We found a replication
of all of the main findings reported in Experiment 1.
The level of knowledge support had a reliable effect
on the variability of compounds produced (U = 557.5,
n1 = 38, n2 = 38, p < 0.05), with High Support
descriptions giving rise to 2.947 compounds on
average, compared to 3.421 for Low Support
descriptions.
Again we found that the level of knowledge support
affected participants’ confidence ratings, with
compounds produced for High Support descriptions

receiving better scores. This was reliable both by
participants (F1(1, 19) = 4.67, p < 0.05) and by items
(F2(1, 37) = 5.151, p < 0.05). The frequency of
compound production was not affected by the level of
knowledge support (p > 0.1).
In order to compare participants’ responses from both
experiments we extracted the overlap of compounds
that were produced in both experiments. We then
examined correlations (Pearson’s r) between the two
sets for compound variability, frequency of compound
production and mean confidence ratings for each
compound. If word order in the object descriptions were
driving the compound creation process, then we would
expect non-significant correlations between the results
of Experiments 1 and 2. However, this was not the case.
The results obtained are more in line with a knowledgebased account of the production process. Significant
correlations were obtained for compound variability (p
< 0.001, r = 0.375, N = 117), confidence ratings (p <
0.02, r = 0.19, N = 117) and compounds’ frequencies of
production (p < 0.001, r = 0.624, N = 117).

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 examined the effects of knowledge
support and word order on the process of novel nounnoun compound production. We found that differing
levels of knowledge support impact on the level of
variability between participants’ novel compounds and
also on people’s ratings of how well a novel compound
adequately conveys information. However, the level of
world knowledge support does not affect the frequency
of production of specific compounds. Significant
correlations between the responses of Experiments 1
and 2 suggest that it is the available knowledge
associated with the concepts of an object description
that drive the compound production process, and not the
order in which the concepts occur in the description.
The implication of these results is that the word order of
object descriptions does not play a primary role when
people create novel compounds. This has important
ramifications when we come to consider how we might
model the production process.
So why does increased knowledge support increase
people’s confidence in the compounds they generate
and reduce the variability of compounds produced?
If we take a High Support object description “A
uniform worn by a guard in a prison” we can see that
there are strong associations between the words
uniform, guard and prison and also that the notion of a
guard in a prison wearing a uniform is not unfamiliar to
us. In contrast, the Low Support description “A uniform
worn by a guard in a school” does not have the same
strength of association between all its constituents and
nor is the notion of a guard at a school as familiar to
most people as a guard at a prison. It appears that it is
this incompatibility between Low Support descriptions

750

and participants’ prior knowledge that leads people to
be less confident about the compounds they produce.
What’s more, this increased familiarity for High
Support descriptions also allows participants to
converge on particular compounds - as evidenced by
the lower number of unique compounds for High
Support Descriptions in both Experiments 1 and 2. This
suggests that increased knowledge support makes it
easier for people to encapsulate information, so leading
to less variation in the compounds produced.

Towards a Model of Compound Production
Experiments 1 and 2 give us but a small part of the
picture of novel compound production, but it is
important for us to consider how these processes might
actually be carried out. What stages are involved in the
production process and how might a model reflect the
findings reported here?
Below we outline the steps involved in producing a
novel compound for a given description, incorporating
both local and world knowledge to arrive at a suitable
compound. We refer to descriptions 1a (A wine that is
made from grapes and contains alcohol) and 1b (A wine that
is made from apricots and contains alcohol) in order to
highlight how minor differences in object descriptions
will impact on the on the production process and on the
resultant compounds. The steps are:
1. Input the object description.
2. Isolate subject of the object description e.g. wine
3. Compare the knowledge about this term to the
meaning of the object description. If the
information matches (e.g., wine is made-fromgrapes and contains-alcohol) then we have found
an adequate label (as in 1a) and the production
process stops. However, if the meanings do not
match (as in 1b) then further processing is required.
4. We retrieve another object from the description
(e.g. apricot) and ascertain if this object could fill
some role in the subject term (wine) to bring it
closer to the meaning of the description. In this
example, knowledge about wine contains the
information that it is made-from-grapes. Since
apricot can be substituted for grapes in this role
(i.e. becomes made-from-apricots), we now have a
new candidate, apricot wine, to consider.
5. Compare the meaning of the new candidate
compound (e.g. apricot wine) to the meaning of the
object description. If the information matches, then
we have a compound that adequately summarises
the object description and the production process
can stop. If the information does not match, we
must return to step 3.
With this process, we can cycle through different
possible compounds until one is found that
satisfactorily reflects the information contained in the
description.

This account of the various stages involved in the
production process at a computational level may be
preliminary in nature, but it incorporates the basic
elements required to produce novel compounds. We
hope that together with the findings reported here and
future empirical work, it will form the basis for a
complete, cognitively-motivated model of novel
compound production.
Such a model should
incorporate not only commonsense knowledge
regarding objects and relations, and syntactic
information of sentence and object descriptions, but
should also have the capacity to address pragmatic
considerations such as the informativeness of novel
compounds and the extent to which knowledge might
be shared between speakers. We intend the
experimental paradigm we have outlined here, and the
evidence shown for the primacy of knowledge support,
to provide an important signpost for the direction of
future work in this area.

Acknowledgments
This research was partly funded by a grant from the
Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and
Technology.

References
Clark, E. V., Hecht, B. F., & Mulford, R. C. (1986).
Coining complex compounds in English: affixes and
word order in acquisition. Linguistics, 24, 7-29.
Coolen, R., Van Jaarsveld, H. J. V. & Schreuder, R.
(1991). The interpretation of isolated novel nominal
compounds. Memory and Cognition, 19, 341-352.
Costello & Keane, (1997). Polysemy in conceptual
combination: Testing the Constraint Theory of
Combination. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, M. G.
Shafto, P Langley (Eds.). Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. pp
137-142.
Costello, F. J. & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient
creativity: Constraints on conceptual combination.
Cognitive Science, 24, 2, 299-349.
Costello, F. J. & Keane, M. T. (2001). Testing two
theories of conceptual combination: Alignment
versus diagnosticity in the comprehension and
production of combined concepts. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 27(1): 255-271.
Downing, P. (1977). On the creation and use of English
Compounds. Language, 53 (4), 810-842.
Gagné, C. L., (2000). Relation-based versus property
based combinations: A test of the CARIN theory and
dual-process theory of conceptual combination.
Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 365-389.
Gagné, C. L., (2001). Relation and lexical priming
during the interpretation of noun-noun combinations.

751

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 236-254.
Gagné, C. L., (in sub). Conceptual combination and
discourse context: Effect of discourse context and
modifier relation frequency on conceptual
combination.
Gagné, C. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of
thematic relations on the comprehension of modifiernoun combinations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23,
71-87.
Gerrig, R. J. & Bortfeld, H. (1999). Sense creation in
and out of discourse contexts. Journal of memory and
Language, 41, 457-468.
Gerrig, R. J. & Murphy, G. L., (1992). Contextual
influences on the comprehension of complex
concepts. Language and Cognitive Processes, 7, 205230.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole
and J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics (vol.
3): Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press.
Hampton, J. A. (1987). Inheritance of attributes in
natural concept conjunctions. Memory and Cognition,
15(1), 55-71
Levi, J. N. (1978). The Syntax and Semantics of
Complex Nominals. New York: Academic Press.
Lynott, D. & Keane, M. T. (2002) The comprehension
of novel noun-noun compounds: the influence of outof-context
interpretations
on
in-context
understanding. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(p. 1020). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marsh, E. (1984). A Computational analysis of complex
noun phrases in navy messages. In Proceedings of
10th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, New York. NY.
Murphy, G. L., (1990). Noun phrase interpretation and
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 259-288.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. & Svartik, J.
(1985). Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Longman.
Smith, E. E. & Osherson, D. N., Rips, L. J. & Keane,
M., (1988). Combining prototypes: A selective
modification model. Cognitive Science, 12, 485-527.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in Philosophy. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Windsor, J. (1993). The functions of novel word
compounds. Journal of Child Language, 20, 119-138.
Wisniewski, E. J., (1996). Construal and Similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 35, 434-453.
Wisniewski, E. J., (1997). When concepts combine.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 4, 167-183.

