UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Flexible Use of Deontic Mental Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4g54r4m9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Author
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Flexible Use of Deontic Mental Models
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
Deontic mental model theory proposes that social norms
are the basic concept underlying deontic inferences.
Norms impose constraints on individual actions under
certain conditions. Two assumptions are made: First, people’s representations of norms follow a closed world principle. Second, they interpret the relation between a
behavioral constraint and its conditions as equivalence.
Both principles allow them to draw definite deontic inferences very flexibly. An experiment provides first empirical evidence that the assumptions are justified.

Introduction
Deontic reasoning refers to thinking about which
actions people may or must perform with respect to
social norms. According to Deontic Mental Model theory (DMM; Beller, 2001), people build normative mental models that represent social restrictions on actions,
and they use these models flexibly to determine their
implications for the behavior of individuals. Two principles, illustrated by the following examples, are at the
heart of the DMM representation of norms.
Imagine a person whose job is to control entry into a
pop concert. The promoter pointed out two conditions
for admitting somebody into the concert:
(a) The person has a ticket.
(b) The person has no weapons.
Suppose Peter is waiting at the entrance with a ticket.
May he enter? The answer is: “It depends.” If Peter has
not yet been checked for weapons, it cannot be decided
whether he may enter or must stay outside. If Peter does
not have a weapon he may enter. Giving these answers
requires integrating the admission conditions: both are
necessary, and together they are exhaustive. DMM theory assumes that people’s representations of norms follow such a closed world principle. Let us consider
another case. Suppose that Tom may enter. Does he have
a ticket? DMM theory claims that people treat the relation between the permission to enter and its preconditions as equivalence. They would thus conclude that
Tom fulfills the conditions: he has a ticket and no weapons. Together, both principles enable people to draw
definite inferences and to do this flexibly in both directions, from facts to deontic statements and vice versa.
What evidence is there to support the claims of DMM
theory? Until now, DMM theory has only been applied
to various deontic versions of Wason’s (1966) selection

127

task. Deontic selection tasks (for an overview see, e.g.,
Newstead & Evans, 1995) ask participants to identify
people violating a deontic conditional such as “If a person is drinking beer, then he or she must be over 19.” All
central findings from such tasks were able to be successfully traced back to deontic mental models or to particular features of the domain (Beller, 2001): the high
proportion of correct violation detections compared
with the classical abstract task (for an overview see
Dominowski, 1995), as well as the effects of instructional modifications (e.g., Noveck & O’Brien, 1996), of
syntactical changes of the rule (e.g., Cosmides, 1989),
and of the way in which negation is expressed (e.g.,
Jackson & Griggs, 1990). This indicates that DMM theory provides an adequate account for the understanding
of deontic conditionals and rule violations – but its core
assumptions are supported only indirectly. By using a
combination of different tasks, this paper aims to prove
the assumptions more directly and to demonstrate people’s competence and flexibility in reasoning about
social rules.

Deontic Mental Models
DMM theory (Beller, 2001) distinguishes two types of
models: normative and factual. Factual models describe
whether or not an action is performed (symbolized as
Action vs. ¬Action) or whether or not a precondition
is fulfilled (C vs. ¬C). Normative models represent
restrictions on actions imposed by social rules, that is,
they describe the conditions under which an action is
forbidden or obligatory. Bans are used as a basic representational concept and are represented as forbidden(Action). Obligations can be derived from bans
since they prohibit the omission of an action.
As explained in the introductory section, DMM theory makes two assumptions with regard to the relation
between a ban and the conditions under which it comes
into force: People represent each relevant ban together
with all its conditions (closed world), and they treat the
relation between a banned action and the conditions as
an equivalence: The action is forbidden if the conditions
are met; otherwise it is allowed. Accordingly, the basic
schema of a norm takes the following form:
(1) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Conditions

[¬forbidden(Action)]

¬Conditions
...

Each line denotes a separate model. Since, according
to the closed world principle, all conditions concerning
the ban are subsumed under the condition side, the
action side is represented exhaustively (indicated by the
square brackets). The condition side is not necessarily
exhaustive because there may be other bans under the
same conditions (indicated by the three dots). A weak
definition of permission can be associated with this representation – all actions not explicitly forbidden are
allowed – so that models of the second type need not be
represented explicitly and are omitted below.
Often, conditions have to be combined. Conditions
that are additionally necessary are integrated conjunctively, while alternative conditions cause a disjunction
of models. In the introductory example, people without
a ticket or with weapons are not admitted to the concert.
The models thus represent two disjunctive conditions:
(2) Normative
[weapon]

[forbidden(entering)]

[¬ticket]

[forbidden(entering)]

[¬ticket] [¬weapon]

[forbidden(entering)]

[ticket]

[weapon]

Leaving aside the condition of checking persons for
weapons, let us consider musicians who are allowed to
enter the concert hall without a ticket. In this case, entry
is forbidden if somebody has no ticket and is not a musician. Thus, two conditions are combined conjunctively:
(3) Normative
[forbidden(entering)] [¬ticket] [¬musician]

What inferences are implied by a given set of normative models? Modal inferences about what must or may
be the case can be derived by connecting norms with
facts about actions or conditions. If the conditions Cs of
a ban apply to a person, then two statements can be
asserted: the action must not be taken and, according to
the axiom of definitional equivalence in modal logic
(e.g., Chellas, 1980), the action must be omitted:
(4) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
Cs

P2:
P3:
P4:

Taking a forbidden action implies that the conditions
Cs must not apply; otherwise the norm would be violated. Equivalently, it must be the case that the conditions do not apply:
(5) Normative
[forbidden(Action)]

Factual
[Cs]

P1:

[Cs]
∴ must-not Action
∴ must ¬Action

...

from obligation? In the deontic square of opposition
(e.g., Anderson, 1956), ban and permission, and obligation and release are pairs of contradictories. Only one of
each pair is true. Thus, one can infer that something may
be the case if it is not forbidden, and it need not be the
case if it is not obligatory.
The inferences considered so far are derived by combining a factual model with a normative model. DMM
theory predicts that people can flexibly switch between
the modals must and must-not, as well as between may
and need-not. In addition to this, people’s reasoning
should be even more flexible, making use of the inference schemas in reversed direction. By relating deontic
statements and norms, inferences about facts can be
derived. Given a normative model (4) and the deontic
statement “Paul must not take the action”, for example,
one can infer that the conditions of the ban apply. The
conditions do not apply when a banned action may be
taken. Analogous inferences can be drawn from deontic
statements with the modals must and need-not.
DMM theory integrates and expands on former psychological contributions to human deontic reasoning
(for a detailed discussion see Beller, 2001). JohnsonLaird (1978) proposed that the modal terms gain their
deontic meaning by referring to deontic norms. Such
norms should, in turn, represent permissible and impermissible situations (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1992).
DMM theory goes beyond these ideas by providing an
elaborated approach to norms and deontic inferences.
The idea of a domain-specific representation is adopted
from the theory of pragmatic reasoning schemas (PRS,
Cheng & Holyoak, 1985) while its conceptual weaknesses are avoided (Beller, 2001; cf. Manktelow & Over,
1995). In addition, DMM theory covers a broader range
of deontic decisions than PRS theory, which postulated
two schemas only, one for permission and one for obligation. The permission schema, for example, is defined
by the following rules:

[Action]
∴ must-not Cs
∴ must ¬Cs

The modal terms must not and must directly correspond to the notion of ban and obligation. What about
the complementary concepts of permission and release

128

If the action is to be taken,
then the precondition must be satisfied.
If the action is not to be taken,
then the precondition need not be satisfied.
If the precondition is satisfied,
then the action may be taken.
If the precondition is not satisfied,
then the action must not be taken.

A rule is applicable when the schema is activated by
appropriate content and the antecedent of the rule is fulfilled. Consider the statement: “If a person has no ticket,
then this person must not enter.” Since it matches rule
P4, the permission schema is activated with “having a
ticket” as the only admission condition. The fact “Carla
has a ticket” matches the antecedent of rule P3 supporting the inference “Carla may enter.” But does anything
follow from the fact that a person may enter? The closed
world principle and the equivalence principle justify the
conclusion that the precondition is satisfied. The person
has a ticket since he or she would not have been allowed

to enter without one. However, this inference is not covered by the current PRS schemas. Suppose Lisa has no
ticket. This fact matches the antecedent of rule P4, so
we can assert that “Lisa must not enter”. But what if we
were to ask, “must Lisa stay out?” According to the relations between the deontic operators (cf. model 4) Lisa
must stay out. Again there is no inference rule within the
permission schema supporting this conclusion.
In addition to the basic representational assumptions,
it is this broader range of deontic inferences that is scrutinized in the following experiment.

Experiment
The experiment used a modified version of Ruth Byrne’s
(1989) suppression paradigm. Participants received one
of three deontic scenarios similar to that in the introductory example. All scenarios mentioned the same primary
condition p (“having a ticket”), which has to be fulfilled
for admission to an event. In one scenario, p was the
only relevant condition (ponly). In the other two scenarios a second condition was introduced, either “being a
musician” or “no weapons”. The first of these two scenarios supplements an alternative admission condition
(+palt), the second an additional one (+padd). Participants were expected to consider the conditions as
exhaustive and integrate them into the respective normative model (cf. model 2 and 3) according to the closed
world and the equivalence principle. The effects of the
experimental manipulation were checked with three
types of tasks. An evaluation task asked for the necessity
and sufficiency of the primary condition, inference tasks
were used to assess people’s inferential flexibility, and a
reformulation task required to rephrase the complete
norm. Each type of task allows conclusions to be made
about both representational principles.

Method
Design: Participants were randomly assigned to one
of three groups (n = 11), which were defined by the scenarios described above (ponly , +palt vs. +padd). Participants in all of the groups were required to work on 14
tasks. 12 inference tasks were given in one block to
ensure that participants make their inferences on the
basis of their spontaneous interpretation of the norm.
These tasks were arranged in a new random sequence
for each participant. The inference block was followed
by the evaluation task and the reformulation task.
Materials: All scenarios started with a description of
the basic situation:

This was the only prerequisite in the ponly scenario. A
second one was added in the other two scenarios introducing either an alternative or an additional condition:
The person is one of the musicians. (+palt)
The person has no weapons. (+padd)
Inference tasks: The basic situation was followed by
12 inference tasks. Each task repeated the deontic context (Condition/s to admit somebody into the concert:
...) and the condition(s). Information about a person was
then given together with a specific question. Three
answers were proposed: yes, no, and cannot be decided.
The tasks are listed in Table 1. They are divided into
two groups. In both groups, tasks (1) and (2) required
participants to draw a deontic inference about the action
from information about the condition (i.e., whether or
not the person has a ticket). Tasks (3) and (4) called for a
reversed inference. This time, a deontic statement about
the action is given (e.g., that the person may enter) and
participants were asked to decide whether or not the
condition is fulfilled. Finally, task (5) and task (6)
demanded a deontic inference about the condition.
The tasks of the first group are related to PRS theory
(at least in parts). Note that the basic situation mentions
preconditions that have to be fulfilled in order to be
allowed to perform an action in correspondence with
PRS rule P3 “If the precondition is fulfilled then the
action may be taken.” If people’s deontic knowledge is
organized according to the two postulated PRS schemas,
then the permission schema should be activated but not
the obligation schema. Four tasks of the first group can
be solved by applying the permission schema. The
“deontic-to-fact” inferences (tasks 3 and 4) are not covered since its inference rules are not conceived to be
used in both directions. Each task of the second group
Table 1: Inference tasks and applicable PRS rules.
Given
A.1 X has a ticket

P3

2 X has no ticket

May X enter?

P4

3 X may enter

Does X have a ticket?

–

4 X may not enter

Does X have a ticket?

–

5 X enters

Must X have a ticket?

P1

6 X stays out

Must X have a ticket?

P2

Must X stay out?

–

Must X stay out?

–

2 X has no ticket

The primary condition p for the admission was simply:
The person has a ticket.

129

PRS

May X enter?

B.1 X has a ticket

Imagine you are on the staff of an open-air concert.
Your job is to control the admission at the entrance.
The promoter has given you the following condition[s] as the only one[s] you have to pay attention
to in order to admit somebody into the concert:

Question

3 X need not stay out Does X have a ticket?

–

4 X must stay out

Does X have a ticket?

–

5 X enters

May X have no ticket?

–

6 X stays out

May X have no ticket?

–

corresponds to a respective task in the first group but
uses the complementary deontic operator according to
the logical relations between must and may. These relations are not considered in PRS theory. According to
DMM theory, people should be able to switch flexibly
between both modal versions and to reason backwards
(“deontic-to-fact”) equally well.
Evaluation task: Following the inference tasks, participants were required to work on an evaluation task.
This first repeated the basic situation and the condition(s) and then required participants to evaluate the
necessity and sufficiency of the primary condition (“having a ticket”), either alone (ponly) or in the context of the
second condition (+palt or +padd). Two questions were
posed (each to be answered with Yes or No):
Is having a ticket sufficient for permission to enter?
Is having a ticket necessary for permission to enter?
Reformulation task: The final task required participants to choose the best reformulation for describing the
complete deontic norm. Again, the basic situation and
the condition(s) were repeated first. Next, several reformulations were given in a multi-choice format, together
with the instruction: Which statement best represents the
admission regulation as you understood it? Please
choose one statement. In the ponly scenario, participants
had to choose between a conditional and a biconditional
reformulation:
“If a person has a ticket, then this person may enter;
otherwise you don’t know whether this person may
enter or must stay out.” (conditional)
“If a person has a ticket, then this person may enter;
otherwise this person must stay out.” (biconditional)
In the +palt and +padd scenarios with two conditions for
the deontic norm, four rules were given from which to
choose. The rules were constructed by combining the
conditions either conjunctively (e.g., “If a person has a
ticket and is one of the musicians, then ...”) or disjunctively (e.g., “If a person has a ticket or is one of the
musicians, then ...”) and completing them in either the
conditional or biconditional format explained above.
Participants: 33 students from the University of
Freiburg participated in the experiment. They came
from various disciplines (excluding psychology, mathematics, and philosophy). 17 students were male and 16
female, and the mean age was M = 21.1 years (range:
18-28). Each student received € 5 for participating.
Procedure: The experiment was conducted in conjunction with another study on a different topic running
in the Psychology Department. Each participant received
a booklet that presented the basic situation and the relevant conditions of the social norm on the first page. In
addition, it was explained that several possible answers
were given, which were mutually exclusive, and that no
other answers were possible. Participants were instructed to choose the answer that they considered to be correct and to work on all tasks in the given order.

130

Results
In order to determine whether the experimental manipulation had the expected effect, the evaluation task is analyzed first.
Evaluation task: The three deontic scenarios (ponly ,
+palt, and +padd) differed with respect to the conditions
for admission. The primary condition of “having a
ticket” was either the only condition, or combined with
an alternative versus an additional condition – its sufficiency and necessity should change accordingly.
Participants’ evaluations of the primary condition are
shown in Table 2. Necessity and sufficiency ratings varied as expected. In the ponly group, “having a ticket” was
interpreted quite uniformly as sufficient and necessary
(81.8 %). The interpretation changed in the other groups
depending on the second condition. The introduction of
an alternative condition +palt reduced the necessity:
when musicians are allowed to enter as well, having a
ticket is still sufficient but not necessary (81.8 %). Mentioning an additional condition +padd instead had the
opposite effect of reducing the sufficiency: when people
have to be checked for weapons as well, having a ticket
is a necessary but not a sufficient condition (100 %).
Inference tasks: Six different tasks were distinguished and each was formulated in two analogous
modal versions (cf. Table 1). Two predictions were
derived from DMM theory: first, people’s inferences
should change across the three deontic versions according to the sufficiency and necessity ratings they made in
the evaluation task, and second, participants should
solve both analogous modal versions consistently.
To test the latter hypothesis, a log-linear analysis
(Kennedy, 1992) was performed for each deontic scenario (ponly , +palt, and +padd). Two independent variables entered into the analyses: the type of task (1-6)
and the modal version (A and B). The dependent variable “answer” was coded in three categories (affirmative, negated, or undecidable), as shown in Table 3. All
analyses revealed that the modal version did not significantly contribute to the data. This factor could be
removed from the analyses without loosing the fit of the
resulting log-linear model (for each of the three analyses: G2 < 16.3, df = 12, p > 0.18). This confirms the prediction that people answer both modal versions
Table 2: Sufficiency (suff.) and necessity (nec.) ratings
of primary condition p (n = 11 in each group; predicted
ratings bold-faced).
p evaluated as

ponly

+palt

+padd

suff. and nec.

9

–

–

suff. but not nec.

2

9

–

not suff. but nec.

–

2

11

not suff. and not nec.

–

–

–

Table 3: Proportions of the various answers in the six inference tasks aggregated over the modal versions (number of
inferences in each task = 22; predicted inferences bold-faced).
1

2

3

Person X has ...

+padd

+palt

ponly

answer

a ticket no ticket

4

5

Permission to enter
answer

yes

no

6

Person X ...
answer

enters

stays out
.05

permission

.95

.00

has a ticket

.86

.00

ticket is necessary

.82

no permission

.05

.95

has no ticket

.00

.91

ticket is not nec.

.00

.64

undecidable

.00

.05

undecidable

.14

.09

undecidable

.18

.32

permission

.82

.14

has a ticket

.14

.00

ticket is necessary

.09

.14

no permission

.05

.27

has no ticket

.00

.82

ticket is not nec.

.45

.36

undecidable

.14

.59

undecidable

.86

.18

undecidable

.45

.50

permission

.05

.00

has a ticket

1.00

.00

ticket is necessary

.95

.14

no permission

.05

1.00

has no ticket

.00

.14

ticket is not nec.

.00

.64

undecidable

.91

.00

undecidable

.00

.86

undecidable

.05

.23

consistently, making it justifiable to aggregate the data.
The aggregated results are shown in Table 3.
As predicted by DMM theory, people reasoned from
the condition to the permission (tasks 1 and 2) and in
reversed direction (tasks 3 and 4) equally well. In the
ponly scenario, 92.0 % of the participants’ inferences
reflected a biconditional interpretation of the norm: a
person is permitted to enter if and only if he or she has a
ticket. Introducing the alternative condition “musician”
(+palt) reduced the necessity of a ticket. Consequently,
it could not be decided whether a person is permitted to
enter the concert when he or she has no ticket (task 2:
59.1 % undecidable), nor was it clear whether a person
has a ticket when he or she is admitted (task 3: 86.4 %
undecidable). Complementarily, the sufficiency of the
ticket was reduced by introducing the additive condition
“no weapons” (+padd): this time, having a ticket is not
sufficient to decide whether a person is permitted to
enter (task 1: 90.9 % undecidable), and analogously the
reason for not having the permission to enter is unclear
– the person may have no ticket or may have a weapon
(task 4: 86.4 % undecidable).
Let us now turn to the inference tasks (5) and (6). In
order to enter the concert (task 5) a ticket should be necessary in two scenarios (ponly and +padd “no weapons”),
while in the third (+palt) necessity should depend on
whether the person is a member of the musicians (ticket
not necessary) or of the audience (ticket necessary).
Nearly all participants identified when a ticket is necessary (88.6 %), and necessity decreased as predicted in
the +palt musician groups (9.1 %; χ2(2, N = 66) = 40.3;
p < 0.001). In this latter case, 45.4 % of the participants
inferred that the necessity of having a ticket is in question. For task (6), DMM theory predicts that people
staying outside do not need a ticket. The data confirm

131

this prediction: “ticket not necessary” was the most frequent answer (54.5 % on average) – independent of the
scenario (χ2(2, N = 66) = 4.4; p = 0.111). 34.8 % of the
participants could not decide whether a ticket is needed.
This uncertainty was presumably due to a lack of information about the intention: people who want to attend
the concert need a ticket, while people who stay outside
for other reasons need none.
Reformulation task: In all previous tasks, the equivalence principle could be checked directly only in the
ponly scenario. The reformulation task makes it possible
to check this principle in all three scenarios. Choosing
an adequate reformulation for the complete deontic
norm requires participants to consider two aspects at the
same time. In all scenarios, they must determine the
relation between the conditions of the norm and the permission as either conditional or biconditional. The scenarios with two conditions (+palt vs. +padd) required
participants to decide additionally which relation holds
between the conditions, that is, whether they are to combine disjunctively or conjunctively.

Table 4: The number of selected reformulations (n = 11
in each group; predicted choices bold-faced).
ponly
biconditional

9

conditional

2

+palt

+padd

or

8

–

and

2

10

or

1

–

and

–

1

As indicated in Table 4, participants were very sensitive to both aspects. Across all groups, 87.9 % preferred
a biconditional reformulation and only 12.1 % used a
conditional statement (χ2(1, N = 33) = 18.9; p < 0.001).
The second precondition was considered in accordance
with the evaluation and inference results: the alternative
condition was integrated by using a disjunction (+palt:
81.8 % or vs. 18.2 % and) and the additive condition by
using a conjunction (+padd: 0 % or vs. 100 % and;
χ2(1, n = 22) = 15.2; p < 0.001).

Discussion
The experimental results confirm DMM theory in two
different ways. First, they provide clear evidence for the
basic representational assumptions. Across all tasks, the
data of the ponly scenario directly reflect the equivalence
principle: if the conditions of a ban are fulfilled, then the
action is forbidden; otherwise it is allowed. And the data
of all three scenarios suggest that people consider the
condition(s) mentioned in the respective scenario in correspondence with the closed world principle and integrate them into their deontic mental models according to
their background knowledge.
Second, people are very accurate in determining the
implications of a social norm. As predicted by DMM
theory, they use modal operators flexibly and in accordance with principles of modal logic. It was further
demonstrated that deontic reasoning also includes inferences from modal premises to facts. This finding has not
yet been predicted by any other theory. PRS theory
(Cheng & Holyoak, 1985) lacks corresponding inference rules. Acknowledging that this problem may be
solved by supplementing further rules, the DMM
approach nevertheless appears to be more promising: It
uses a unified representation for social rules instead of
different schemas and considers relations known from
deontic logic. Current evolutionary approaches (e.g.,
Cosmides, 1989; Cummins, 1996) have not predicted
deontic inferences on the same fine-grained level as
DMM theory either. Apart from that, they are intended
to answer a different question: What is the ultimate origin
of domain-specificity – learning or evolutionary adaptation? DMM theory does not attempt to answer this question, but suggests to approach it with respect to people’s
general capability to build and use mental representations of real world situations for particular purposes.
Independent of the answer to the origin question,
however, it seems unquestionable that social rules in
general and deontic concepts in particular are core concepts of social life. By indicating what is forbidden and
what is allowed, they guide individual behavior in favor
of group interests and thus constitute an essential part of
what defines the identity of the group or culture. The
particular content of social rules as well as their linguistic expression may vary considerably; the underlying
concepts, however, as they are described by DMM theory, seem to be comparable even across cultures (e.g.,
Bender & Beller, 2003).

132

Acknowledgements This research was supported in
part by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to Hans Spada (project Content effects in propositional reasoning; contract Sp 251/15-1). I am grateful to
Stefan Kleinbeck and Gregory Kuhnmünch for conducting the experiment, and to Andrea Bender for her valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Anderson, A. R. (1956). The formal analysis of normative systems. In N. Rescher (Ed.), The logic of decision
and action. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Beller, S. (2001). A model theory of deontic reasoning
about social norms. In J. D. Moore, & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 63-68).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2003). Polynesian tapu in the
“deontic square”: A cognitive concept, its linguistic
expression and cultural context. To appear in Proceedings of the 25th Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences
with conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Chellas, B. F. (1980). Modal logic: An introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1985). Pragmatic reasoning schemas. Cognitive Psychology, 17, 391-416.
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has
natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies
with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.
Cummins, D. D. (1996). Evidence for the innateness of
deontic reasoning. Mind & Language, 11, 160-190.
Dominowski, R. L. (1995). Content effects in Wason’s
selection task. In S. Newstead, & J. St. B. T. Evans
(Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove:
Erlbaum.
Jackson, S. L., & Griggs, R. A. (1990). The elusive
pragmatic reasoning schemas effect. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42A, 353-373.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1978). The meaning of modality.
Cognitive Science, 2, 17-26.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1992). Modal
reasoning, models, and Manktelow and Over. Cognition, 43, 173-182.
Kennedy, J. J. (1992). Analyzing qualitative data. New
York: Praeger.
Manktelow, K. I., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deontic reasoning. In S. Newstead, & J. St. B. T. Evans (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Newstead, S., & Evans, J. St. B. T. (Eds.) (1995). Perspectives on thinking and reasoning. Hove: Erlbaum.
Noveck, I. A., & O’Brien, D. P. (1996). To what extent
do pragmatic reasoning schemas affect performance
on Wason’s selection task? The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 463-489.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss (Ed.),
New horizons in psychology. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

