UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interaction between Informational and Computational Properties of External
Representations on Problem-Solving and Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qg8x7bw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Ainsworth, Shaaron
Peevers, Gareth

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interaction between Informational and Computational Properties of
External Representations on Problem-Solving and Learning
Shaaron Ainsworth (Shaaron.Ainsworth@nottingham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK

Gareth Peevers (gjp@psychology.nottinghm.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK

Abstract
This paper reports an experiment that explores if the way
instructions for operating a complex device are
represented influences problem-solving and learning
about the task. Instructions were presented in one
complex representation or in multiple simpler ones. The
form this information took was tabular, diagrammatic or
textual. Participants found the optimal solution more
often when given instructions in text representations or
in a single representation. However, the single text
representation was associated with significantly slower
performance. Participants recalled more about the task
with text representations, irrespective of how the
information was distributed. This experiment confirmed
that representations that display instructions in such a
way as to increase the cost of operating with them can
paradoxically lead to better performance.

Introduction
There are many claims for the benefits that multiple
external representations (MERs) can bring to learning
and problem-solving (e.g. Cheng, Lowe & Scaife, 2001;
Kozma, Chin, Russell & Marx, 2000). However
empirical support for the benefits to learners is mixed
with some studies reporting benefits of either
constructing or using MERs in educational
environments (e.g. Cox & Brna, 1995; Mayer & Sims,
1994; Tabachneck, Koedinger & Nathan, 1994) and
some not (e.g. Ainsworth, Bibby & Wood, 2002;
Tabachneck-Schijf & Simon, 1998).
One key factor that may underlie any benefits of
MERs is that of computational non-equivalence.
Representations that theoretically contain the same
information (informational equivalence) differ in the
ease with which people can extract this information.
Larkin & Simon (1987) contrasted interpretation of
graphical and textual ERs in terms of search,
recognition and inference. They showed how search
processes are considerably more efficient in diagrams.
They propose that text has a high cost of perceptual
enhancement when compared to the diagrams. Tables
tend to make information explicit, emphasize empty
cells that directs attention to unexplored alternatives,
and allow quicker and more accurate read-off (e.g. Cox

67

& Brna, 1995; Meyer, Shinar & Leiser, 1997). These
findings help explain the match-mismatch hypothesis
(Gilmore & Green, 1984) that argues that no notation is
perfect; it is only good with respect to a particular task.
Bibby & Payne (1993) showed that different ERs that
explained the operation of a complex device facilitated
alternative aspects of the task. Identifying a faulty
component was helped if instructions were presented as
procedures whereas a topological diagram improved
recognition of a misaligned switch. Consequently,
MERs may offer benefits for solving complex problems
by allowing for these alternative perspectives.
However, the majority of the research on MERs has
addressed only the computational properties of ERs
without also considering how information is distributed.
The combinations of ERs studied are almost invariably
informationally equivalent. Yet, MERs are commonly
used to distribute information over a number of separate
ERs, so that each one displays a subset of the total
information. This is often done when one ER would be
very complicated if it expressed all the necessary
information (Ainsworth, 1999). It is likely that there
may be a match-mismatch effect for informational as
well as computational properties of ERs.
One possibility is that separate ERs that isolate
dimensions of information will allow learners to focus
on separate aspects of the tasks. Each aspect could be
learnt separately and then integrated with others when it
was fully understood. Ainsworth, Bibby & Wood
(1997) found that two ERs that each displayed a single
dimension
of
information
(no
informational
redundancy) allowed children to learn to perform an
estimation task faster than two ERs that simultaneously
displayed two dimensions of information (full
redundancy). This was true when the information was
represented in both mathematical expressions and
pictures. In this case, it would appear that multiple
simple ERs allowed learners to incrementally build
their knowledge of the task, so facilitating performance.
However, a single ER that contains all the necessary
information may facilitate problem-solving in other
circumstances, as it: a) minimizes the number of ERs to
be learnt, which can be demanding if these ERs have

complex format and operators; b) often makes explicit
the relations between dimensions of information and; c)
presents this information in close proximity, which has
been shown to reduce a split-attention effect (e.g.
Chandler & Sweller, 1992). Research within the
cognitive load paradigm would suggest that a single
integrated ER (normally text and graphics) improves
learning by reducing the working memory demands
associated with integrating information (e.g. Kalyuga,
Chandler & Sweller, 1999).
One further prediction that follows from the matchmismatch hypothesis is that ERs, which enhance the
efficiency of problem-solving, may not be the same
ones that facilitate learning. Svendsen (1991) showed
that a command-line interface to the Tower of Hanoi
task led problem-solvers to spend more time per trial,
but they engaged in more planning and subsequently
were able to remember more about the task. O'Hara &
Payne, (1998) similarly found that increasing cost of
operations in the 8-puzzle led to increased planning.
Representations that increase the users’ cognitive load
may require learners to remember, evaluate, and design
better solutions to problems.
This experiment explores whether the informational
and computational properties of external representations
interact to influence problem-solving and learning. The
ERs provided instructions for operating a complex
device – an Alchemist’s Factory. The task required
chemicals to bought (or made), combined in specific
ratios, placed in the appropriate apparatus (which must
be paid for) and then set to correct values. Furthermore,
participants were requested to create gold in the
cheapest possible way, as there are multiple correct
solutions for this task that differ in their cost and
complexity. Accordingly, the task requires information
to be integrated (for planning solutions) but then
efficient operation of the factory requires focusing on
single factors. Instructions were presented either in one
complete ER or in MERs, which each presents only a
subset of the necessary information. They were
displayed in text, diagrams or tabular forms.

Hypotheses
1) Does the form of representation influence efficiency
and effectiveness of problem-solving? Given the prior
research on the computational properties of ERs, it is
proposed that the diagrams should enhance search and
recognition compared to text. Hence, participants given
diagrams should solve the problem faster. The
structuring information provided by tables should also
make them more efficient than text.
2) Does the complexity of representation influence
efficiency and effectiveness of problem-solving? We
hypothesized that finding the best solution to the task
would be facilitated if all the information was available
at once as participants would be able to more directly

68

compare the different solutions paths. However, there
may be no difference in efficiency, as although
planning may be more effective with one ER,
performing the task should be facilitated by separating
information as this will reduce cost of navigation and
may enhance memorization.
3) Does the form and complexity of representation
interact to influence efficiency and effectiveness of
problem-solving? We hypothesized that text, given its
high cost of search and recognition, will take longer to
study when presented as a single complex ER.
However, diagrams and tables should be more efficient
when presenting complete information as the additional
costs of navigating more complex ERs will be
minimized given the way diagrams and tables facilitate
search and recognition. However, if the research on
adding “interface costs” to encourage planning also
applies to these ERs, then it possible that there will be
reverse effects of the effectiveness of problem-solving:
i.e. better solutions will be found when ERs are costly.
4) Does the form and complexity of representations
interact to influence learning? Two alternative
hypotheses are proposed. Learning may be facilitated
when working memory demands associated with search
and recognition are lower as this will promote transfer
to long term memory. This suggests that diagrams and
tables will enhance learning (Cognitive Load account).
Alternatively, learning may be facilitated by ERs that
are associated with higher costs of search and
recognition as participants will be encouraged to
remember this information. In this case, the complexity
of the single text ER may lead to enhanced learning
(Interface Costs account).

Method
Design
A two factor between groups design was used. The first
factor (complexity) had two levels: single, which
presented instructions in one complex ER and multiple,
which presented the same instructions but in four
simpler ERs. The second factor (form) had three levels:
table, diagram and text.

Participants
Eighty-four students took part in the experiment for
payment (£4). There were 56 females and 28 males
with an average age of 21.5 years.

Materials
Participants were requested to create gold using an
Alchemist’s Factory in the cheapest possible way. A
typical step (in single text form) is “Blue Vitriol is a
liquid and costs 22sl per litre. Mercury is a liquid and
costs 3sl per litre. These can be mixed together in the

mixer to form Vermillion. The Mixer costs 5sl per use. 1
unit of Vermillion is made from 2/3rd of a unit of Blue
Vitriol and 1/3rd of a unit of Mercury. The Mixer
settings to make Vermillion from Mercury and Blue
Vitriol are 1 hour and slow”. There are six such steps
that can be combined in various ways, as there are a
number of possible recipes for making gold. The single
versions of the task present this information in one ER.
The multiple versions present this information in four
separate ERs, which are not available co-presently. The
content of the ERs is:
• Chemicals - the costs of chemicals
• Apparatus - the cost of apparatus
• Formula - how chemicals must be combined to
create new chemicals
• Settings – the apparatus settings.
Consequently, for planning solutions information
must be integrated from all the ERs. Then when
operating the factory, only certain ERs needed to
considered at each stage (e.g. when starting the fusion
generator only the settings is needed).

Apparatus
The Alchemist’s Factory was created in Macromedia
Director. Six different versions that varied in how
instructions were represented were created. These
instructions are available before starting the factory and
on request once inside the factory, but are not visible
when someone is interacting with the factory.

Procedure
The Alchemist’s Factory first gives a general
introduction to the task and shows a sample single step
with operations similar to that of the “gold” task.
Participants were provided the appropriate form of
instructions labeled with explanatory text. The
experimenter demonstrated how to use the factory to
follow these instructions. Finally, they were told that
their aim should be to make gold in the cheapest way.
Participants were then told to work independently with
the factory until they were successful. If participants
made an error such as overheating a chemical, they
were informed of their mistake at the end of that step,
and given the opportunity to repeat the process. After
making gold, participants were asked to teach their
apprentice to operate the factory by recording as much
of the process as possible. Participants were given pen
and paper and told they could use any format they
chose for recording this information.

Dependent Variables
Efficiency was assessed by the amount of time that
participants spent studying instructions. This was also
computed prior to participants making their first move
as indication of initial time spent planning. The

69

effectiveness of ERs was determined by calculating the
number of errors made in operating the factory, which
solution participants chose and the money left after the
gold was made. Learning was assessed by examining
how many items the participants recalled correctly
during the teachback. Given that participants who
choose more complex solutions have a greater
opportunity to recall more items, this was also coded as
a percentage of the maximum they could have recalled
given their solution. If it was not possible to determine
what step they were trying to record because they had
recalled insufficient correct details, the simplest
solution was chosen.

Results
To examine the influence of information and
computational properties of ERs on problem-solving, a
[2 by 3] between groups MANOVA was computed (see
Table 1). Analysis revealed a single main effect of
complexity (F1,78 = 130.11, MSE = 151.79, p<0.001);
unsurprisingly the total of instruction requests was
much higher when the instructions were presented in
MERs although not four times as high. There were
significant main effects of form on time spent studying
instructions overall and prior to making a first move
(F2,78 = 5.17, MSE = 29921, p<0.01 & F2,78 = 6.71, MSE
= 8731, p<0.002). Post hoc comparisons showed that
text was associated with significantly greater instruction
times than either tables or diagrams (q= 3.6 p<0.05 & q
= 4.1 p<0.05) overall and just with tables prior to
operating the factory (q= 5.18 p<0.01). There was also
a significant main effect of form on recall. Both for
total number of items recalled (F2,78 = 3.85, MSE =
69.50, p<0.025) where text was associated with
significantly greater recall than tables (q = 4.47 p<0.01)
and the percentage of items recalled (F2,78 = 4.35, MSE
= 33.13, p<0.02) where text was associated with
significantly greater percentage recall than either tables
or diagrams (q = 4.24 p<0.05 & q = 4.24, p<0.05).
Finally, there were interactions between form and
complexity for the amount of time spent studying
instructions overall (Figure 1) and prior to operating
factory (F2,78 = 4.01, MSE = 29921, p<0.025 & F2,78 =
4.37, MSE = 8731, p<0.02). Simple main effects
analysis showed that distribution of information
influenced text but no other form of ERs (F1,78 = 6.52,
MSE = 29921, p<0.02 & F1,78 = 7.52, MSE = 8731,
p<0.01) and that the computational form of ERs was
only significant for single ERs (F2,78 = 9.0, MSE =
29921, p<0.001 & F2,78 = 9.0, MSE = 8731, p<0.001).
Tukey’s post-hoc comparisons showed that single text
led to significantly greater instruction times than both
single diagram or single table overall (q = 5.20, p<0.01
& q = 5.19, p<0.01) and for prior to operation (q = 4.48,
p<0.01 & q = 5.71, p<0.001).

Table 1: The influence of representational complexity and form on problem-solving and learning.

In. Times
St. Dev.
In. Times (pre)
St. Dev.
No. Errors
St. Dev.
Money Left
St. Dev.
Items Recalled
St. Dev.
Percentage Recalled
St. Dev.

Multiple
Diagrams
N = 14
426.7
(134.1)
193.0
(82.7)
1.7
(1.8)
391.1
(18.8)
20.6
(10.6)
41.8%
(19.2%)

Tables
N = 14
392.1
(166.0)
121.0
(49.3)
2.0
(2.1)
399.0
(11.5)
19.3
(8.8)
37.3%
(19.2%)

Single
Diagram
N = 14
351.4
(166.6)
148.4
(86.5)
2.1
(3.0)
393.3
(21.4)
22.5
(8.9)
56.6%
(18.1%)

Texts
N = 14
424.9
(178.1)
161.3
(71.3)
1.4
(1.8)
395.1
(13.7)
27.6
(4.4)
51.2%
(13.8%)

Table
N = 14
351.8
(163.3)
117.5
(54.4)
1.1
(1.1)
388.1
(26.3)
27.7
(8.1)
37.1%
(21.9%)

Text
N = 14
591.9
(218.7)
260.2
(166.1)
0.9
(0.9)
396.2
(13.0)
20.7
(8.9)
49.0%
(15.8%)

Key: In. Times = time studying instructions in seconds; In. Times (pre) = time studying instructions prior to making
a first move. No. Errors = mistakes in operation; Money Left = Cost of the solution; Items Recalled = items correctly
recalled after the task; Percentage Recalled = percentage of items correctly recalled given the participant's solution.
Table 2: Pearson correlation co-efficients
Multiple
Single

650

2
3
4
5
1. In. Times
0.67** 0.34** -0.21* 0.02
2. In. Times (pre)
0.01 0.17 0.09
3. No. Error
-0.49** 0.03
4. Money Left
0.07
5. No. Recalled
6. % Recalled

Seconds

550

450

350

250
Diagram

Table

Text

Figure 1: The time spent studying instructions by
complexity and format.
Pearson correlation co-efficients were calculated for
these dependent variables to determine if time studying
instructions was related to performance. Instruction
time correlated with number of errors but and
negatively with the amount money left. However, there
was no correlation between instruction time and what
participants remembered about the task.

70

6
-0.04
0.09
0.05
0.10
0.85**

* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01, (two tailed test).
To determine if the form or complexity of ER
influenced whether participants found the best solution
to the problem (i.e. the cheapest solution), the number
of participants who identified this ideal solution
(irrespective of whether they made any errors in
following this solution) was calculated by complexity
(Table 3 Panel A) and form (Table 3 Panel B)
Table 3: No. of optimum solutions by (a) complexity
and (b) form

Multiple
Single
Diagram
Table
Text

Optimum Solution

Other Solutions

10
18
8
6
14

32
24
20
22
14

Chi squares analysis showed that there were more
optimum solutions in the single conditions (X2 = 3.42,
df = 1= p<0.032 (one sided)). There was also a trend for
the form of ER to affect whether the optimal solution
was found (X2 = 5.57, df = 2, p<0.062 (two sided)).
Finally, we examined if the way instructions were
represented influenced the way participants recalled the
information. Three main types of form were evident in
participants’ records – text, diagrams (either as a flow
chart or the presented diagram), and a formula ER that
presented the solution in pseudo chemical notation
(Figure 2). Only one subject produced a table ER (in the
diagrams condition). The form of instruction influenced
the way that participants wrote their teachbacks
(Fisher’s exact test = 12.71, p <0.05). Three one way
chi square analyses showed that that were equal number
of formula representations in all three conditions but
that use of text (X2 = 7.47, df = 2, p<0.025) and
diagrams (X2 = 5.92, df = 2, p<0.05) was affected by
condition
Diagram
25

Formula

20

Text

15
10
5
0
Diagram
Table
Text
Form of Instruction

Figure 2: Form of teachbacks by instructional form.
Irrespective of the number of ERs studied,
participants tended to integrate all the information into
a singe ER (Fisher’s exact = 2.40, p = ns) (Table 4).
Table 4. No of representations in teachbacks by
representational complexity.

Multiple
Single

One

Two

29
33

10
7

Three
2
0

Discussion
Participants in all conditions made the same number of
errors in completing the task. They also produced
roughly equivalent solutions in that the average number
of silver pieces spent to create gold (which is a result of
the cost of solution and any errors made) was equal.

71

However, the number of participants who found the
best solution for the problem was influenced by the way
that the instructions were represented. As predicted, a
single complete ER did lead to better performance.
Presenting information in one ER seemed to allow
easier comparison of information, which helps
participants identify the best solution. There was also a
trend for ER form to influence whether the best solution
was found. Participants given text found the optimum
solution more often. Overall, more people in the single
text condition discovered the optimal solution than in
any other condition (9/14 in ST compared to a
maximum of 5/14 in the other conditions). The single
text ER was also associated with significantly greater
reading times prior to action and overall. We propose
that finding the optimal solution was not ‘easier’ in this
condition but instead, in line with O’Hara & Payne
(1998) and Svendsen (1991), increasing cost of
operation encouraged people to engage in more
planning behavior. In this case increased planning was
associated with increased performance.
After successfully completing the task, participants
were asked to record as much of their solution as
possible so as to teach their apprentice how to make
gold. Consequently, it was possible to assess a simple
form of learning – how much information participants
had successfully encoded during the task. The form of
instruction influenced the amount of information people
recalled about the task. Participants in the text condition
remembered more about the task than people in the
table or diagrams conditions. This was true both for
amount of information recalled and as a percentage of
the maximum information that could have been recalled
given their solution.
Two alternative hypotheses were identified for the
influence of ERs on learning. One possibility was that
those ERs which make the task easier by reducing
working memory demands whilst problem-solving
would facilitate learning. The second hypothesis was
that ERs, which are difficult to search, will lead to
greater learning as participants will aim to minimize the
time spent searching by memorizing information. The
results do not unequivocally support either hypothesis.
Recall in both text conditions was nearly identical – yet
the single text had been associated with increased time
whereas the multiple text led to no more reading time
than the other MERs. In fact there was no relationship
between time spent studying instructions and what was
subsequently remembered about the task.
One possibility is a stimulus-response compatibility
effect. Although participants could use any form of ER,
a high number chose to use text. Overall, nearly 60% of
people use either text by itself or combined it with a
pseudo-chemical ER. In the text condition, 88% of
participants used a text form compared to the diagrams
condition (50%) or table condition (62.5%).

Overall, there is little evidence that problem solving
or learning was enhanced by using MERs, adding
further evidence for the negative effects of MERs. This
may because this task requires participants to integrate
information from separate ERs in order to successfully
plan solutions. That they did so is evident from the fact
that the majority of teachback ERs are in a single
integrated form. If tasks require less coordination of
information then potentially MERs may be more
beneficial. Furthermore, all the ERs in each condition
were of the same form (i.e. all tables or all diagrams or
all text). Once information is distributed, it can be
represented in different forms. For example, it may be
the case that information primarily useful for planning
should be presented textually, whilst that aimed at
efficient operation of the device in tabular form.

Conclusions
The results of this experiment suggests there is a
complex relationship between computational and
information properties of ERs and effects on problemsolving and learning between these factors in this
domain. The optimum form of ER depends on whether
the task was to find the single best solution, to find a
satisfactory solution in a time-effective manner or to
memorize the most about how to complete the task.
These results suggest that if the aim is to encourage
people to find the optimum solution to a problem, then
performance will be facilitated if the instructions are
presented either in text rather than diagrams or tables
and/or in one complete ER rather than in MERs. As the
most successful ER was single text, it would suggest
that this may occur, apparently paradoxically, because
of the difficulty of working with this form of ER.
However, finding this solution occurred at the expense
of increasing time spent reading instructions. Hence, if
the goal is to encourage quick task completion or if
solutions are roughly equivalent, then the worst ER to
select may be a textual ER that presents a great deal of
information. In this case performance will be facilitated
by either using MERs or a single diagram or table.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Engineering and
Physical Research Council. The authors would like to
thank David Clarke for helpful comments on a draft of
this paper and J.K. Rowling for inspiring the task.

References
Ainsworth, S. E. (1999). The functions of multiple
representations. Computers & Education, 33, 131152.
Ainsworth, S. E., Bibby, P., & Wood, D. (2002).
Examining the effects of multiple representational

72

systems in learning primary mathematics. Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 11, 25-61.
Ainsworth, S. E., Bibby, P. A., & Wood, D. J. (1997).
Evaluating principles for multi-representational
learning environments. Paper presented at the 7th
EARLI Conference, Athens.
Bibby, P. A., & Payne, S. J. (1993). Internalization and
the use specificity of device knowledge. HumanComputer Interaction, 8, 25-56.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention
effect as a factor in the design of instruction. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 62, 233-246.
Cheng, P. C., Lowe, R. K., & Scaife, M. (2001).
Cognitive science approaches to understanding
diagrammatic representations. Artificial Intelligence
Review, 15, 79-94.
Cox, R., & Brna, P. (1995). Supporting the use of
external representations in problem solving: The need
for flexible learning environments. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 6, 239-302.
Gilmore, D. J., & Green, T. R. G. (1984).
Comprehension and recall of miniature programs. Int.
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 21, 31-48.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1999).
Managing split-attention and redundancy in
multimedia instruction. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 13, 351-371.
Kozma, R., Chin, E., Russell, J., & Marx, N. (2000).
The roles of representations and tools in the
chemistry laboratory and their implications for
chemistry learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
9, 105-143.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a
picture worth 1000 words - Extensions of a dualcoding theory of multimedia learning. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 86, 389-401.
Meyer, J., Shinar, D., & Leiser, D. (1997). Multiple
factors that determine performance with tables and
graphs. Human Factors, 39, 268-286.
O'Hara, K. P., & Payne, S. J. (1998). The effects of
operator implementation cost on planfulness of
problem solving and learning. Cognitive Psychology,
35, 34-70.
Svendsen. (1991). The influence of interface style on
problem solving. International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 35, 379-397.
Tabachneck, H. J. M., Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M.
J. (1994). Towards a theoretical account of strategy
use and sense making in mathematical problem
solving. 16th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M., & Simon, H. A. (1998).
Alternative representations of instructional material.
In D. Peterson (Ed.), Forms of representation. Exeter:
Intellect Books.

