UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Coherence in Category-Based Explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6819b908

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Patalano, Andrea L.
Chin-Parker, Seth
Ross, Brian H.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Coherence in Category-Based Explanation
Andrea L. Patalano (apatalano@wesleyan.edu)
Department of Psychology, Wesleyan University, 207 High Street
Middletown, CT 06459 USA

Seth Chin-Parker (chinpark@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, 603 East Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Brian H. Ross (bross@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois, 405 North Mathews Avenue
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
Category coherence refers to the extent to which a category is
perceived to be a meaningful whole (Patalano & Ross, 2002;
Ross & Patalano, 2002). We tested the hypothesis that
category coherence influences the extent to which a category
is used in the generation of category-based causal
explanations of social behavior and preferences.
In
Experiments 1a and b, participants were told that members of
a category shared a particular preference (e.g., sky divers
prefer fiction to non-fiction), and were asked to generate the
most plausible explanation for the preference. Explanations
generated for high coherence categories were more plausible
than those generated for low coherence categories. In
Experiment 2, high and low coherence categories were
contrasted in the context of a single problem. Participants
were told that members of two categories (e.g., people who
are both sky divers and pianists) shared a particular
preference and were again asked for the most plausible
explanation of the preference. References to the high
coherence category occurred more often than those to the low
coherence category. It is concluded that coherence influences
both category selection and quality of category-based causal
explanation. Implications of this work and future research
directions are discussed.

Introduction
We are constantly engaged in trying to make sense of the
world around us. Towards this goal, we rely on multiple
kinds of causal explanations for events, behaviors,
properties, etc. For example, sometimes we attribute human
behavior to a situation (e.g., “the picketers’ actions were
caused by unfair management”). At other times we attribute
it to a personality trait (e.g., “the donors gave money to the
church because they were kind-hearted”). And at still other
times we attribute it to a category membership (e.g., “the
concert goers enjoyed the loud music because they were
teenagers”). Developing and testing our theories allows us
to integrate knowledge, to generate predictions and
expectations, and to acquire a deeper understanding of how
our environment works.
Category-based explanations may play a particularly
important role in social reasoning. People are frequently

910

described in terms of social categories, making these
categories a salient source of potentially useful information.
One challenge to explanation in this context, however, is
that most people belong to multiple social categories. So it
is difficult to know to which of the multiple categories to
attribute a behavior or preference in question. For example,
imagine noticing that a group of people who happen to be
both war veterans and Italian-American immigrants are very
patriotic. Is this because war veterans are patriotic as a
result of military experience? Or is it because certain
groups of immigrants may feel patriotic as a result of their
immigrant experience? Because entities and events often
belong to multiple categories, developing category-based
explanations must rely on some cognitive heuristics or
strategies for relevant explanatory categories.
One obvious way that people might choose relevant
explanatory categories is by looking for pre-existing
relationships between the property in question and known
categories. For example, if I already know for certain that
veterans are patriotic because the military works to instill
patriotism in its soldiers, then I will likely rely on this
knowledge. In this case, I may simply be retrieving the
explanation. But what about situations in which people are
striving to explain a newly discovered property or to
construct a novel explanation for a pattern of behavior? Are
there any properties of categories that might lead these
categories to be used over others?
One answer to this question is to think about what is
needed of a category in order for it to be useful for categorybased explanation. First, use of a category requires
considerable knowledge about the category so that novel
connections might be developed between the category and
the to-be-explained behavior. At least, the more knowledge
is available, the more likely a plausible connection might be
found. Second, explanation relies not just on knowledge of
surface features of categories, but also on knowledge of
deeper causal properties that could give rise to a host of
surface properties (e.g., Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981).
For example, the category “sky diver” suggests the property
of being “risk-seeking” which may explain many other
behaviors and preferences of members of this category.

Third, explanation works best when a category has little
within-category variability, so that one can be reasonably
confident that a property associated with the category
applies to many of its members.
Some of these identified characteristics have, in fact,
already been studied in the context of understanding
structural differences in social categories. Haslam and
colleagues (Haslam, Rothschild, & Ernst, 2000), for
example, asked participants to rate social categories on
twelve properties, including properties similar to those
identified in the previous paragraph. A factor analysis
revealed a cluster of associated properties, which the authors
referred to as an entitativity factor, which included:
uniformity (degree of within-category similarity of category
members), informativeness (extent to which the category
provides information about its members), and inherence (the
extent to which the category is associated with deep,
underlying features).
Because the term “entitativity” has multiple meanings in
the social psychology literature, we will use the alternative
term coherence here to refer to the extent to which a
category is treated as a meaningful whole. The notion of
coherence is connected with a theory based view of
concepts (Murphy & Medin, 1985) in that coherence
depends on an understanding of the category that goes
beyond an enumeration of category properties (as in a
prototype structure; e.g, Medin & Smith, 1984), or an
unanalyzed storage of exemplars in memory (e.g., Medin &
Schaffer, 1978).
There is little research on the relationship between
category coherence and the use of categories in explanation.
This is an important topic for cognitive science because
explanation is known to play a central role in education and
self-discovery (e.g., Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher,
1994), machine learning (e.g., DeJong & Mooney, 1976),
and knowledge representation and use (e.g., Keil & Wilson,
1995). The topic is also central to philosophical thought on
the nature of causality and explanation (e.g., Pettit, 1995), as
well as to cross-cultural approaches to reasoning (e.g.,
Lopez, Atran, Coley, & Medin, 1997).
The goal in conducting the following two experiments
was to investigate the extent to which category coherence
predicts the quality of category-based causal explanations
(Experiment 1), and therefore the relative use of a category
for causal explanation when multiple categories are
available (Experiment 2).

Experiments 1a and b
Experiment 1a
In this experiment, participants were given information
about a hypothetical preference of members of a social
category (e.g., that most soldiers prefer gin to whiskey), and
were asked to generate the most plausible explanation for
this preference. For half of the problems given to each
participant, the categories were high in coherence; for the
other half they were low in coherence.

911

Categories high and low in coherence were selected from
a database of social categories that had been previously
rated by University of Illinois undergraduates (Patalano &
Ross, 2002; Ross & Patalano, 2002). These categories were
rated, using Likert scales, on the previously-described
coherence dimensions of uniformity, informativeness, and
inherence, as well as a related scale called similarity (which
taps into the same property as uniformity). Because
correlations between pairs of dimensions were high (r>.93),
the dimension of similarity was selected as an estimate of
coherence for creating the materials used in Experiments 1
and 2. However, the same categories could have been
selected using any or all of the other dimensions.
After completing the problems, participants rated each
explanation for plausibility. We hypothesized that high
coherence category explanations would be rated as more
plausible than low coherence ones.

Method
Participants Eight undergraduates at the University of
Illinois participated in exchange for introductory
psychology course credit.
Materials Each booklet consisted of 12 problems, 6 with
high coherence categories and 6 with low coherence
categories. The problems were of the following format
(professional wrestlers, the category used in this example, is
a high coherence category):
Approximately half of all people in the United States
prefer vacationing in Bermuda over vacationing in the
Bahamas. Among professional wrestlers, however,
there is a strong preference for Bermuda over the
Bahamas.
Please generate the most plausible
explanation you can think of as to why this might be the
case.
Categories high versus low in coherence were selected
from a database of categories for which coherence ratings
had been previously obtained (Patalano & Ross, 2002;
Ross & Patalano, 2002). For the experiments in this
paper, coherence was estimated from a single coherence
measure called similarity. Similarity refers to “the
similarity of two randomly selected category members to
one another” where a rating of 1 corresponds to “Not at
all similar” and a 7 corresponds to “Highly similar.” In
Experiment 1, the similarity ratings for the high
coherence categories ranged from 4.3-5.4 with a mean of
4.7; the ratings for the low coherence categories ranged
from 2.3-3.1 with a mean of 2.8 (see Appendix for
materials).
The following two additional constraints were placed
on category selection. First, categories were selected so
that half of the categories at each coherence level were
occupation categories and half were hobby categories.
Second, the estimated frequencies of category members
per 1000 people (also in the previously-mentioned

database) were matched across high and low coherence
categories. On average, the estimated frequency of high
coherence category members was 21/1000 versus 23/1000
for low coherence ones. These two constraints assured
that coherence was not confounded with category type or
estimated category frequency in this experiment.
The properties used in each problem (e.g., preferring
Bermuda versus the Bahamas), also shown in the
Appendix, were chosen to be relatively “blank” in the
sense that would not have been previously associated with
the problem category.
Two versions of the booklets were made, with different
random orders of problems and different pairings of
categories and properties in each version.

Method
Participants Twenty four undergraduates at the University
of Illinois participated in exchange for introductory course
credit.
Materials The explanations from the 8 booklets from
Experiment 1a were typed into 8 new booklets (simply so
that the new participants would see typed rather than
hand-written explanations), and the earlier plausibility
ratings were omitted.

Procedure Participants were tested in a group in a 30 min
session. They were given the booklet of problems and
asked to work on it at their own pace. On the last page of
the booklet, instructions asked participants to go back
through the problems in order and to rate each generated
explanation for plausibility on a scale of 1 (Highly
implausible) to 7 (Highly plausible).

Results
The results from the two booklet versions showed the same
pattern and so the data were collapsed. Every participant
generated an explanation and a rating for each problem. For
example, a response given by one participant to the highcoherence wrestler example used earlier was “Wrestlers are
more daring and want to go to dangerous, risky areas such
as Bermuda [over the Bahamas]” (given a plausibility rating
of 4). A response by the same participant to the lowcoherence rubber-stamp collector category (whose members
“have a strong preference for tulips over roses”) was
“Rubber-stamp collectors are passive and prefer lighter and
softer colors, such as tulips [over roses]” (given a
plausibility rating of 2).
The mean plausibility rating for high coherence categories
was 3.83 (SD=0.93) versus 3.10 (SD=1.00) for low
coherence ones, t(7)=2.44, p=.04. The difference in
magnitude is 0.73 Likert-scale points. In other words,
participants generated better (in their opinions) explanations
for high as compared with low coherence categories.

Experiment 1b
It is possible that plausibility ratings in Experiment 1a were
influenced by participants having actually generated the
explanations themselves. While it is not clear how this
could have lead to different ratings for the two kinds of
categories, Experiment 1b addresses this potential problem.
In this experiment, each of the eight completed booklets of
Experiment 1a (except for the plausibility ratings) was given
to new participants. These participants were asked to assign
a plausibility rating for each explanation in their booklet.
We expected the plausibility ratings generated by these
participants to show the same pattern of results as those of
Experiment 1a.

912

Procedure Each of the 8 booklets was given to 3
participants. The participants were asked to go through the
booklets, to read each explanation, and to rate each on a
scale from 1 (Highly implausible) to 7 (Highly plausible).
Participants were tested in groups of 8 in 30 min sessions.

Results
As in Experiment 1a, the same pattern of results was found
for both versions of the booklets so the data were collapsed.
The high coherence category explanations (M=3.95,
SD=.74) were again rated as being more plausible than the
low coherence category ones (M=3.36, SD=.79), t(23)=4.01,
p<.001. The difference in magnitude is 0.59 Likert-scale
points.

Discussion
The goal of Experiment 1 was to investigate the extent to
which category coherence predicts quality of category-based
causal explanations of preferences. The results provide
evidence in support of the hypothesis that people generate
better causal explanations for high coherence as compared
with low coherence categories.
The order of magnitude of this effect is, on average, 0.66
Likert-scale points. While this effect may appear somewhat
small in size, it should be considered in the context of the
following three qualifications. First, the only information
available to participants was category membership, and
participants were essentially forced to use this information
to generate a response for each problem. Thus any categorycoherence differences in willingness to generate an
explanation could not be observed. Second, though related,
participants were given unlimited time in which to generate
responses. So the results do not consider any relative effort
that may have gone into generating plausible responses for
high versus low coherence categories. Third, any reliable
difference in effect size is likely to be important in
situations in which multiple categories are available as
sources of explanation. As long as one category is deemed
a better source of explanation, it may be more likely to be
used to explain behavior in the context of multiple
competing categories.
The last point is related to the goal of Experiment 2.
Recall that the motivation for these studies, as described in
the introduction, is to understand the role of category
coherence in category-based explanation for preferences. It
was hypothesized that, when multiple categories are

available, people may be more inclined to reason from
higher coherence categories. The first experiment provided
evidence that coherence is in fact related to perceived
plausibility of category-based explanations. The second
experiment considered whether or not relative coherence
predicts use of one category over another in explaining
preferences.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, each problem made reference to people
who were members of two categories (one high coherence
and one low coherence) and had a novel hypothetical
preference. Participants were asked to generate three
different explanations for the stated preference. At the end
of the task, they were asked to go back and circle the most
plausible explanation (from among the three) for each
problem. We hypothesized that explanations would make
reference to high coherence categories more often than to
low coherence categories, especially among the “most
plausible” explanations.

Method
Participants Eighteen undergraduates at the University of
Illinois participated in exchange for introductory
psychology course credit.
Materials Booklets consisted of 12 problems, each
problem containing one high and one low coherence
category. The problems were of the following format:
Approximately half of all people in the United States
prefer fiction over non-fiction. Among people who
happen to be both weekend badminton players and
professional wrestlers, however, there is a strong
preference for fiction over non-fiction. Please list three
separate plausible explanations as to why this might be
the case.
Categories high versus low in coherence were selected
from a database of categories as in Experiment 1. The 12
categories used in Experiment 1 were paired here to
create 6 problems; 6 more problem were created using
new categories. The similarity ratings for the high
coherence categories ranged from 3.6-6.6 with a mean of
4.6; the ratings for the low coherence categories ranged
from 2.1-3.9 with a mean of 2.6. Though the distributions
overlapped (it was not possible to create non-overlapping
sets, using the existing database, with the additional
constraints given below), categories in the same problem
differed by at least 0.5 points in the right direction.
As in Experiment 1, high and low coherence category
sets were matched on number of job versus hobby
categories (half of each) and on estimated frequency of
category members per 1000 people. Overall, the average
frequency was 30 people per 1000 for both high and low
coherence categories. In addition to equating frequency

913

across the categories, individual-problem category pairs
were approximately matched on frequency as well.
The properties used in each problem (e.g., preferring
Bermuda versus the Bahamas) were again chosen to be
relatively “blank” in the sense that they would not have
been previously associated with the problem category.
One version of the booklet was created, with problems
presented in a single random order.
Procedure Participants were tested in groups of 6 in 30 min
sessions. They were given the booklet of problems and
asked to work on it at their own pace. On the last page of
the booklet, instructions asked participants to go back
through the problems and to circle the most plausible
explanation for each one.

Results
Coding Two students (one undergraduate and one
graduate), unaware of the experimental hypothesis, were
paid to code the data. For each problem, they were asked to
decide whether the explanation made reference to only the
first presented category, to only the second presented
category, to both categories, or to neither category. The
experimenter then recoded the results of the coders as
follows: Hi-Coh (explanation makes reference only to the
high coherence category, Lo-Coh (explanation makes
reference only to the low coherence category), Both
(explanation makes reference to both categories), or Neither
(explanation makes reference to neither category). Coders
were told to only count a category as being mentioned if the
participant “made direct reference to the category.” This
could occur if the participant used the category itself in the
explanation (e.g., “professional wrestlers like danger…”) or
if direct reference was made to a clear property of the
category (e.g., people who fight one another in their jobs
must like danger…”).
For each explanation, the responses of the two coders were
combined by assigning 0.5 points to the category selected
by each coder. Thus, if both coders chose the same code,
the code for that explanation would receive a combined
points value of 1.0, otherwise the two chosen codes would
each receive 0.5 points. This was done after ensuring that
the inter-rater agreement was high – raters were in
agreement for 97% (627 out of 648) of the responses. It
should nonetheless be noted that the results would not
change in pattern if either one or the other of the coder’s
responses, rather than both of them, had been used.
Summary values for each participant were computed both
(1) for all explanations (All-Explanations analysis), and (2)
for the most plausible explanations only (one per problem,
as identified by participants; Plausible-Only analysis).
Summary values were computed by simply adding the
points given to each code for that participant. The total
number of points available to be divided among the codes
was 36 (12 problems x 3 explanations per problem) for the
All-Explanations analysis, and 12 (12 problems x 1
explanation per problem) for the Plausible-Only analysis.
For intuitiveness of understanding, the points for each
code for each participant were then recomputed as a

percentage of the total number of points. Percentages
technically refer to relative points assigned to a category
rather than relative use of the category. These are slightly
different things given that coders occasionally disagreed on
how to code an explanation resulting in points being divided
over two codes. However, because discrepancies occurred
on such a small number of occasions (21 out of 648), for
ease of discussion, no distinction will be made between
these two interpretations of the percentages.
Analyses The results of the All-Explanations analysis will
be described first. As illustrated in Table 1, for nearly half
of the explanations (49%), participants made explicit
reference to neither category. In these cases, participants
generally ignored the base rate information (e.g., that
vacations in Bermuda and the Bahamas are equally popular
in the population at large) and gave an explanation for why
anyone might prefer one over the other (e.g., “it is warmer
in the Bahamas”). These results are consistent with
literature suggesting that people frequently ignore base rates
in reasoning (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). The
results also likely reflect the inherent difficulty in drawing
causal explanations from nearly blank properties, especially
when there is little incentive to do so.
In the remainder of cases, participants used one category
or the other the majority of the time (39% of all
explanations), and only rarely made reference to both
categories (12% of all explanations). This finding is
consistent with other evidence suggesting that people often
do not integrate multiple categories in reasoning (e.g., Malt,
Ross, & Murphy, 1995).
Of central importance to the present investigation is the
relative use of the high versus low coherence category in the
large subset of cases in which only one category was
selected. In these cases, we found that participants relied on
the high coherence categories (for 22% of all explanations;
56% for this subset of the data) reliably more often than the
low coherence categories (for 17% of all explanations; 44%
for this subset of the data; t(17)=2.58, p=.02).
The results for the Plausible-Only analysis follow the
same pattern but show even greater reliance on high as
compared with low coherence categories. Again, as
illustrated in Table 1, approximately half of the time (53%
of all most-plausible explanations), participants made
reference to neither category. In the remainder of cases,
participants used one category or the other the majority of
the time (33% of all most-plausible explanations), and
considerably less often made reference to both categories
(14% of all most-plausible explanations).
We were again interested in the relative use of high versus
low coherence categories in the large subset of situations in
which only one category was used. We found that
participants relied on the high coherence categories (for
22% of all most-plausible explanations; 67% for this subset
of the data) twice as often as the low coherence categories
(for 11% of all most-plausible explanations; 33% for this
subset of the data; t(17)=2.62, p=.02). In other words, as
with the results with all data, high coherence categories
were used more often than low coherence ones in generating
explanations.

914

Table 1: Categories Used in Explanations
Hi-Coh Lo-Coh

Both

Neither

All Explanations 22%(13) 17%(17) 12%(13) 49%(32)
Plausible Only 22%(14) 11%(11) 14%(20) 53%(32)
Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses.

Discussion
The goal of this experiment was to assess the extent to
which category coherence influences category use in causal
explanation when multiple categories are available. The
results are consistent with the hypothesis that high
coherence categories are used more often than low
coherence ones in generating novel causal explanations. In
fact, when considering only the most plausible explanations,
high coherence categories were mentioned twice as often as
low coherence ones.
These results build on Experiment 1 in which it was found
that more-plausible explanations were generated for high
coherence as compared with low coherence categories. The
studies taken together suggest that high coherence
categories are more often used in causal explanation
precisely because these categories afford generation of
plausible explanations.

General Discussion
The experiments described here provide an initial
understanding of one aspect of category structure – category
coherence – that influences category selection in the service
of category-based causal explanation.
Coherence is
important in that high coherence categories are used more
often than low coherence categories for generating
explanations, and in that the explanations generated for high
coherence categories are more plausible ones.
This work also provides evidence for the validity of the
construct of category coherence. Past work has shown that
people consistently rate some categories as high in
coherence and others as low (as measured by uniformity,
similarity, informativeness, and inherence scales).
However, there has been little work showing the actual
influence of coherence on reasoning. In addition to the
work described here, we are exploring the role of coherence
in other category-based reasoning tasks such as induction
and generalization.
In related research, we are also beginning to do a more
refined analysis of the content and structure of mental
representations of high versus low coherence categories.
This work will allow us to provide further evidence for the
greater inter-connectedness of deep and surface properties in
high coherence categories. A careful analysis of the content
of various categories could allow us to better understand

coherence and to better understand how causal explanations
use category knowledge for high versus low coherence
categories.
This current work raises many other questions as well
regarding the mechanism by which coherence influences
category selection in explanation, how category information
interacts with other kinds of information (e.g., personality,
situational, etc.) in the service of aiding explanation, and
how coherence influence what is learned about categories of
various coherence levels as a result of category use in
explanation.

Lopez, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., & Medin, D. L. (1997).
The tree of life: Universal and cultural features of
folkbiological taxonomies and inductions. Cognitive
Psychology, 32(3), 251-295.
Malt, B. C, Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1995).
Predicting features for members of natural categories
when categorization is uncertain.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 21(3), 646-661.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). A context theory
of classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Medin, D. L., & Smith, E. E. (1984). Concepts and concept
formation. Anuual Review of Psychology, 35, 113-138.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Patalano, A. L., & Ross, B. H. (2002, June). The role of
coherence in reasoning about individuals belonging to
multiple categories. Poster presented at the Fifth Annual
Meeting of the American Psychological Society, New
Orleans, Louisiana.
Pettit, P. (1995). Causality at higher levels. In D. Sperber,
D. Premack, & R. Premack (Eds.), Causal Cognition (pp.
399-422). New York: Oxford University Press.
Ross, B. H., & Patalano, A. L., (2002, November).
Category-based inference from cross-categorized items.
Paper presented at the Forty-Third Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Kansas City, Missouri.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded in part by NSF grant SBR 97-20304
to Brian H. Ross. We thank Jane Erickson for her assistance
in conducting these studies.

References
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-125.
Chi, M. H. T., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanation
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-447.
DeJong, G., & Mooney, R. J. (1986). Explanation-based
learning: An alternative view. Machine Learning, 1(2),
145-176.
Haslam, N., Rothschild, L., & Ernst, D. (2000). Essentialist
beliefs about social categories. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 39, 113-127.
Keil, F. C., & Wilson, R. A. (Eds). (2000). Explanation and
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Appendix: Materials Used in Experiment 1
Coh refers to coherence as estimated by pretest participants’ mean ratings of with-category similarity on a scale from 1 (low
similarity) to 7 (high similarity). Frequency refers to pretest participants’ estimated frequency per 1000 people in the United
Stated. Property sets used in Version A of the materials are listed in parentheses. Version B used a different pairing of the
same categories and properties. One category and property set was used for each problem in Experiment 1.
Hi Coherence Categories
1. soldier (gin/whiskey)
2. feminist supporter (red/blue)
3. minister (Coke/Pepsi)
4. pro wrestler (fiction/non-fiction)
5. yacht club member (Mex/Chin food)
6. rare-sculpture collector (NBC/ABC)
M=

Coh
4.3
4.5
4.9
5.4
4.7
4.6
4.7

Freq
32
55
12
3
16
6
21

Lo Coherence Categories
7. matchbook collector (terrier/beagle)
8. waiter (football/basketball)
9. rubber-stamp collector (tulips/roses)
10. badminton player (fiction/non)
11. county clerk (Mandarin/Cantonese)
12. limo driver (adventures/comedies)
M=

915

Coh
2.9
2.3
3.1
2.4
2.8
3.1
2.8

Freq
17
73
11
14
10
13
23

