UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Semantic Relatedness and Typicality upon Visual Detection of a Target

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81b9j6tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Leger, Laure
Chene, Denis
Baccino, Thierry
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Semantic Relatedness and Typicality upon Visual Detection of a
Target
Laure Léger (laure.leger@free.fr)
Laboratoire Cognition & Usages (CNRS FRE 2627)
Université Paris 8, 2 rue de la Liberté
F-93526 Saint-Denis Cedex, France
Denis Chêne (denis.chene@francetelecom.com)
France Télécom Recherche et Developpement, DIH/UCE/RCE
38-40 avenue du Général Leclerc
F-92794 Issy les Moulineaux Cedex 09, France
Thierry Baccino (Thierry.Baccino@unice.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie Expérimentale et Quantitative (EA 1189)
Université Nice Sophia-Antipolis, 24, Av. Des Diables Bleus
F-06357 NICE cdx4 France
Charles Tijus (tijus@idf.ext.jussieu.fr)
Laboratoire Cognition & Usages (CNRS FRE 2627)
Université Paris 8, 2 rue de la Liberté
F-93526 Saint-Denis Cedex, France

Abstract
In line with previous work by Treisman, many studies
have demonstrated effects of perceptual discrimination
between visual targets and distractors. Few studies
however have investigated semantic discrimination
effects. We report the findings of two experiments that
were carried out in order to demonstrate the influence of
semantic relatedness between a target word and
distractor words in interaction with perceptual
discrimination. The results demonstrate perceptual
discrimination effects within a semantic task (e.g. from a
group of words finding a word which means a type of
fish), the role of degree of target typicality and,
importantly, the effect of semantic relatedness between a
target and its distractor context.

Introduction
Numerous studies have demonstrated the role of visual
discrimination in target detection tasks. In particular,
such studies have shown that target detection is simple,
and unaffected by the number of distractors, when the
target is completely distinguishable from its
surrounding distractors (for example: identifying a blue
X amongst greens Os and red Rs) (Treisman & Gelade,
1980). Conversely, if the target contains perceptual
features that are common to the distractors (for
example: identifying a red O amongst green Os and red
Rs), then detection response time increases in direct
proportion to the number of distractors (Treisman &
Gelade, 1980; Treisman & Souther, 1985). This

716

increase in response time depends specifically on the
proportion of the first type of distractor (green Os)
compared to the number of the second kind (red Rs).
Target detection is facilitated when these two types of
distractor do not appear in equal number in the visual
display; as the numbers of each type approach
equivalence, response time increases (Poisson &
Wilkinson, 1992).
Whilst numerous studies have examined the effects of
a target's and of its surrounding distractors’ visual
features, very few have investigated the influence of
semantic features. In one study, White (1977) showed
that semantic category could play a facilitative role in
target detection; thus detecting the letter O is easier
when surrounded by numbers rather than letters. In the
same way, it is easier to detect the number O (zero)
from a display of letters rather than other numbers.
White’s study was interesting because the semantic
category was under the experimenter’s control; in
effect, the form of the target remained constant yet its
meaning changed from the letter O to the number O. In
other words, detection is made easier when the target
belongs to a different semantic category to the
distractors.
Such effects must operate for more complex stimuli
such as words. The semantic properties of perceived
words might influence target detection in situations
such as scanning an index, a newspaper or a web page.
Whenever a group of words is perceived, these words
could be classified semantically (provided that

simultaneous and parallel semantic access is possible
for each), allowing a semantically contrasting target to
be distinguished with varying degrees of ease. In the
present study, therefore, we hypothesized that a target
typical of its semantic category (e.g. a trout as a type of
fish) would be easier to detect from a visual display of a
group of words than an atypical target (e.g. a shark as a
type of fish). Furthermore, we hypothesized that it
would be easier to detect a target that is distantly
semantically related to its distractors (e.g. a fish
amongst types of toy) than one which is more closely
semantically related (e.g. a fish amongst types of
insect). Although the semantic similarity facilitates the
memory retrieval or the analogical transfer in problem
solving (Gick & Holyoak, 1980), we hypothesize that it
disturbes the visual search. Indeed, this semantic
similarity could generate difficulty to determine if
fixated item is the target or not. So it generates
difficulty to reject this item because two words closely
semantically related have more common properties than
two words distantly semantically related (Poitrenaud,
1998). These common properties disturbe the great
categorical attribution.
This study also examined the interaction of these
semantic effects with visual effects by varying the
number of distractors possessing the same forms (e.g.
italic, bold …) and colors (e.g. black, red) as the target
item, and in conditions where the target was composed
of a conjunction of visual features (half red, half black
amongst black and red distractors).
The first experiment in this study aimed to investigate
the effects of target typicality, semantic relatedness, and
the number of distractors that were visually identical to
the target. The second experiment aimed to examine the
effects of semantic relatedness and number of
distractors in conditions where the target's perceptual
features represented a conjunction of distractor
perceptual features.
The effects of these independent variables were
measured in terms of a number of dependent variables:
success rate, response time and also eye movement
variables (number of saccades, fixation duration).
Effects of varying task stimuli semantically were
measured using mean fixation times. This method
enables processing difficulty due to task requirements
or semantic material to be evaluated since items, which
are more difficult to process involve longer fixation
times (Just & Carpenter, 1980). For example, we
hypothesized that trials where distractors had close
semantic links to the target would produce higher mean
fixation times than those where semantic links between
distractors and target were weaker. Longer fixation
times on trials where distractors have close semantic
links to the target demonstrate the greater level of
difficulty involved in deciding to reject a fixated item as
not being the target item.

717

General Method
Participants
Participants were aged between 18 and 40 years old,
were native French speakers and were capable of
reading a monitor from a viewing distance of 0.50 m
without the need for spectacles or contact lenses. Each
participant was paid expenses of 30 euros.

Apparatus
The oculometer used to measure eye movements was a
device using corneal reflection centered on the pupil
(ASL 504 model). This technique involves illuminating
the participant's eye using infrared light and collecting
reflections from the cornea and pupil. The position of
the eye in x and y coordinates is sampled every 20ms.
Ocular fixation is defined using a minimum of five
sampled points separated from each other by at least
0.5° visual angle. This apparatus also enables
measurements to be taken of response time for each
trial, number of fixations, average fixation time and
saccadic amplitudes.
Trial presentations were generated and response time
was measured using a microcomputer. Experimental
stimuli were presented on a 21-inch flat monitor screen
(resolution: 1280 x 1024 pixels; color: 32 bytes).

Stimuli
Each trial consisted of presenting 32 words (arial font,
16 pts) including the target on a white background. The
position of the target was randomized, but
counterbalanced across different areas designated by
the columns and rows of the visual display. In order to
study the effect of semantic relatedness, we created a
database. This semantic database comprised 24
category classes: birds, insects, vegetables, fruits, toys,
musical instruments, animals, vehicles, furniture, tools,
male first names, female first names, famous authors,
buildings, sweet foods, drinks, flowers, trees, weapons,
professions, sports, items that are read, clothes; these
were collected from 70 voluntary participants. Each
participant was required to provide a list of as many
words as possible for each of the 24 categories. The
following types of word were excluded from the
database: words containing less than 4 letters,
compound forms (e.g. fruit juice) and words capable of
belonging to two different categories (for example, in
French, the word 'grenade' can signify both a weapon
and a type of fruit). A minimum of 32 words was
obtained for each category.

Procedure
Each participant was seated comfortably at a viewing
distance of 0.50m from the monitor screen and the eye
tracker video, with her/his chin stabilized in a chin rest.
The experimenter read out the instructions which
informed the participant that her/his eye movements

would be recorded and that s/he should avoid any
further head movements. The instructions also
described the experimental task to be carried out: 'the
type of item to be detected will appear in the center of
the screen, for example 'animal'; when you left-click on
the mouse, a group of words will appear on the screen;
your task is to find a word which fits, for example ‘cat’,
as quickly as possible and without making errors; as
soon as you have found it, press the key and say aloud
which word you have found; if you cannot find it, say
'no' '. Next the experimenter began calibrating the
oculometer; this process used a calibration card
composed of nine colored dots on a white background.
After calibration was complete, six practice trials were
presented to the participant before the experimental
trials began.
On each trial, the participant clicked on the mouse
and the category of word to be detected was displayed
at the center of the screen. When the participant clicked
again, the 32 words appeared on the screen. As soon as
the participant had detected the target, s/he clicked
again and said aloud the detected word. The
experimenter then recorded this word. If the participant
could not detect the target, s/he clicked and then said
'no'.
The order of presentation of different trials for each of
the different experimental conditions was randomized.
When all trials were over, the experimenter obtained the
ocular data for each trial. Each block of data included
response time (as determined by the participant's click),
the number of fixation points, average fixation time,
and saccadic amplitude.

Data Analysis
Data were analyzed using an ANOVA statistical test
with level of significance p=.05. Only those response
times and eye movements (number of fixations, mean
fixation duration) for trials where the target was
detected correctly were included in the analysis. The
mean fixation duration is the average time per fixation
before target selection (total amount of fixation duration
divided by the number of fixations).

Method
Participants : 20 participants were recruited.
Stimuli : The target for each trial was taken from one of
the 24 categories. The typicality of targets was
determined by its inclusion frequency during the
construction of the database: those words which were
mentioned most often were designated 'typical' (more
than ten times on 30 participants), whilst those
mentioned least often were designated 'atypical' (less
three times on 30 participants). For each target,
distractors were either taken from a close semantic
category (i.e. capable of being included together with
words from the target's category in a single direct
superordinate category; e.g. 'trout' from the 'fish'
category together with words from the 'insects'
category), or from a semantically distant category (i.e.
not able to be grouped with the target in a single
superordinate category; e.g. 'trout' from the 'fish'
category together with words from the 'tools' category).
Each array of 32 words included a word in red and
black ('mixed' color: the left-hand part of the word in
one color and the other part in another). Variations in
the number of black words and red words enabled five
experimental conditions to be created: c1 (1 red word
and 30 black words), c2 (7 red words and 24 black
words), c3 (16 red words and 15 black words), c4 (24
red words and 7 black words) and c5 (30 red words and
1 black word). The target could be any one of the 32
words and appeared in either 'mixed' color, or as the
only word in its color, or having the same color as 6,
15, 23 or 29 of its distractors.
The experimental materials comprised 60 arrays
according to the following design: T2 x D2 x C5 x M3,
where T2 represented the typicality of the target
(typical, atypical), D2 the semantic relatedness of the
target and its distractors (distant or close), C5 the
number of words in one color (1, 7, 16, 24 or 20) and
M3 represented the color of the target (red, black or
mixed). Each of the 20 participants responded to 2 trials
per array (i.e. 120 trials).

Results

Experiment 1
The aim of this experiment was to examine the effects
of target typicality and target-distractor semantic
relatedness on target detection. We hypothesized that
target detection would be facilitated on trials with
typical targets and distractors having only distant
semantic links to targets. These effects were observed
by varying the number of same color distractors (red or
black) and by making targets both either red, black or
half red and black (mixed color).

718

Target typicality effect: The mean percentage of
correct responses was 82% for trials including typical
targets and 62% for those including 'not typical' targets
(F(1,18)=78.96, p<.01). The mean correct response
time was 4.7s for typical targets and 5.97s for atypical
targets (F(1,16)=34.09, p<.01) and the number of
fixations was 10,34 for typical targets and 12,19 for
atypical targets (F(1,16)=24,09, p<.01). There was no
target typicality effect on mean duration fixation
(448ms for typical target and 441ms for atypical target,
F(1,16)<1, ns). Detection of typical targets was found to
be easier than detection of atypical targets.

and where P2- corresponds to c5 for black target and c1
for red target), where targets and distractors were
closely related semantically caused success rates to fall
from 81% to 50% (F(4,72)=19.24, p<.01) and response
time to increase significantly from 3s to 7.5s
(F(4,68)=25.13, p<.01). Detection of a target was
influenced by the size of the perceptual group to which
it belonged.
1,1

Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance

1,0

8

0,9
Response Time (seconds)

0,8

success rate

0,7
0,6

Short semantic distance
large semantic distance

0,5
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0,0
1

7

16

24

1

30

7

16

24

30

Number of black items in the perceptual scene

Number of Black stimuli in the perceptual scene

Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance
18
16
14
Number of fixation

Semantic relatedness effect: The mean percentage of
correct responses was 81% for trials where distractors
had close semantic relatedness with the target and 68%
for trials with only distant relatedness (F(1,18)=66.03,
p<.01). The mean correct response time was 4.64s for
the distant semantic relatedness condition and 6.02s for
the
close
semantic
relatedness
condition
(F(1,16)=46.37, p<.01). The mean fixation time was
430 ms for distant semantic relatedness trials and 460
ms for close semantic relatedness trials (F(1,16)=16.66,
p<.01). Detection was found to be faster when
semantically distant distractors surrounded the target
rather than semantically close distractors.
Interaction between typicality and semantic
relate dness : There was no interaction effect of target
typicality and semantic relatedness on response success
rate (F(1,18)=2,95; p=.1, ns) and on mean fixation
duration (F(1,16)<1, ns) . In contrast, significant
interaction effects were found for response time
(F(1,16)=43.25, p<.01) and number of fixations
(F(1,16)=21.28, p<.01). That is, participants took
significantly more time and more fixations to detect an
atypical target surrounded by closely semantically
related distractors (see fig. 1).

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1

7

16

24

30

Number of black stimuli in the perceptual scene
typical target
non typical target

8

Typical target
Non typical target
14

Figure 3: Effect of number of distractors on success
rate (%), response time and number of fixations in trials
with conjunction targets (i.e. red and black).

7
12

Nombre de fixations

response time

6
5
4
3
2

10
8
6

4
2

1

0

0
long

long

short

short

semantic distance

semantic distance

Figure 1: Response times and number of fixations as
a function of semantic relatedness between targets and
distractors and target typicality.
Effect of number of distractors that were identical to
the target :
1,0

7,5

Response Times (seconds)

0,8
0,7

success rate

Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance

8,0

0,9

0,6
0,5
0,4

short semantic distance
large semantic distance

0,3
0,2
0,1
0,0

7,0
6,5
6,0
5,5
5,0

In contrast, when the target was a conjunction item
(one part in one color, the rest in another), detection
success rate was dependent on the ratio of red to black
distractors (see fig. 3). That is, as the number of red
distractors approached the number of black distractors,
response time and number of fixations increased (test
statistics for response time on trials with semantically
close targets and distractors: F(4,64)=4.78, p<.01; for
trials with semantically distant targets and distractors:
F(4,64)=22.32, p<.01; test statistics for number of
fixations/close semantic relatedness: F(4,64)=4.59,
p<.01; for distant semantic relatedness: F(4,64)=14.03,
p<.01). These results are consistent with Poisson &
Wilkinson’s (1992) findings.

4,5
4,0

Experiment 2

3,5
3,0
2,5

P2+

P1+

P=

D1-

target perceptual discriminability

P2-

P2+

P1+

P=

D1-

P2-

target perceptual discriminability

Figure 2: Effect of number of distractors on success
rate (%) and response time for non-conjunction targets
(i.e. red or black).
When the target was either red or black (see fig. 2),
increasing the number of distractors of the same color
on trials (in fig. 2: P2+, P1+, P=, P1-, P2-, where P2+
corresponds to c1 for black target and c5 for red target,

719

Typicality, semantic relatedness and (for conjunction
targets) distractor type ratio effects were observed in
experiment 1. Thus, detecting a conjunction target
surrounded by seven red distractors and 24 black
distractors took 4s whilst detecting a red target among
six red distractors and 24 black distractors took 5s.
Combining visual features within a conjunction target
only exerted a negative effect on its detection when the
target was surrounded by an equal number of red and

Results
Semantic relatedness effects : The detection success
rate was 94% on trials where targets were not closely
related semantically to the distractors surrounding them,
whereas the rate was 89% for trials involving close
semantic relatedness between targets and their
distractors (F(1,38)=13.34, p<.01). Mean response
times were 7.15s for the close semantic relatedness
condition and 8.16s for distant semantic relatedness
(F(1,38)=9.19, p<.01). Mean fixation times were 389
ms and 425 ms respectively (F(1,38)=24.45, p<.01).
Effect of number of distractors sharing perceptual
features with the target : Varying the number of
distractors with the same perceptual features as the
target had differing effects according to the degree of
semantic relatedness between the target and its
distractors (see fig. 4).
Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance

1,0

Sucees rate

black distractors. However, no effect of semantic
facilitation in association with visual facilitation was
observed. On the contrary, the results of experiment 1
demonstrate that target detection is dependent on the
number of same color distractors and that semantic
facilitation effects only occur when a large number of
distractors have the same color as the target (as shown
in fig. 2).
The aim of experiment 2 was to investigate the
influence of semantic relatedness on detection of a
target predetermined by its superordinate category, by
demonstrating a semantic facilitation effect in
association with a perceptual facilitation effect. The
search task, which involved finding a target in groups
of small perceptual stimuli, was made more demanding
by including visually more complex stimuli; words
could be black or red, underlined or not, and in italic
font or not. These combinations enabled eight
perceptual groups to be constructed instead of two in
experiment 1 (black and red). Moreover, the size of
each of these groups was varied from one to four to
seven elements. The target could belong to any one of
these three groups and was then either the only stimulus
from its perceptual group, or had the same perceptual
features as three or as seven of its distractors.

0,8

0,6

Method

0-DISTR

3-DISTR

6-DISTR

Number of distractors similar to the target

720

Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance

9,0

Response Time (seconds)

8,5
8,0
7,5
7,0
6,5
6,0
5,5
5,0
0-DISTR

3-DISTR

6-DISTR

Number of distractors similar to the target

Short semantic distance
Large semantic distance

500
480
460

mean fixation times (ms)

Participants : 40 participants were recruited.
Stimuli : Two different distractor conditions were
created: close semantic relatedness between target and
distractors (e.g. finding an insect amongst types of
birds) and distant semantic relatedness between target
and distractors (e.g. finding an insect amongst types of
toys).
The stimuli varied according to the following
perceptual features: color (red or black), font (italics or
not), and underlining (underlined or not). Combinations
of these three features enabled eight dis tinct groups of
conjunction word stimuli to be constructed. The size of
each group varied from one to four to seven words with
the same perceptual feature conjunctions. The target,
which could belong to any of these three groups, was
therefore perceptually distinct within the one word
group (0-DISTR), surrounded by three perceptually
identical distractors in the four word group (3-DISTR),
or surrounded by six identical distractors in the seven
word group (6-DISTR).
A D2 x G8 x S3 experimental design enabled each
semantic relatedness condition (D2) for distractor
context to be combined with all visual feature
conditions: eight word groups (G8) varying according
to the three sizes (S3). This design produced 48
different arrays, each repeated three times.

440
420
400
380
360
340
320
300
0-DISTR

3-DISTR

6-DISTR

Number of distractors similar to the target

Figure 4: Success rate, response time and fixation
time as a function of semantic relatedness between
target and distractors and number of distractors
identical to the target.
When the target was closely semantically related to
the surrounding distractors, there was no observed
effect on either success rate or response time. When the
target was only distantly related semantically to its
distractors (in conditions 0-DISTR and 3-DISTR),

detection success rates were higher (F(1,38)=16.33,
p<.01) and response times were shorter (F(2,76)=4.71,
p<.01) than in close semantic relatedness conditions.
This was not true for the 7-DISTR condition (ns).
As shown in figure 4, increasing the number of
distractors, which were perceptually identical to the
target, in trials with distant semantic relatedness
between targets and distractors, produced a significant
increase in response time (F(2,76)=10.25, p<.01). This
was not true for close target-distractor semantic
relatedness conditions (F(2,76)=0.38, p=0.68; ns). In
fact, the greater the number of distractors, the more the
degree of semantic relatedness between target and
distractors produced increases in mean fixation time
(F(2,76)=10.55, p<.01).

Discussion and conclusion
The visual search for a word, which is an exemplar of a
particular category, is facilitated by its perceptual
features. For instance, the probability of detecting a
single red word amongst a group of black words is high
and search time is short. When the target is a
conjunction of two perceptual features (colors), its
detection is dependent on the ratio of red to black
distractors. This effect, which was observed in both
experiments, is similar to the ‘pop out’ phenomenon
(Treisman & Gelade, 1980); until now, this
phenomenon has been studied in terms of perceptual
features and can be interpreted as an effect of
discriminating a target from its surrounding distractors.
We observed that the degree of a target’s typicality
affects its detection, in addition to the level of semantic
relatedness between the target and its distractors.
This begs the question of how perceptual and
semantic facilitation effects might interact. In
experiment 1, when words were either red or black (two
perceptual groups), we observed a semantic effect on
trials where the target was the same color as a large
proportion of its distractors. A type of ‘semantic pop
out’ effect was observed because success rates and
response times did not vary across trials with 7, 15 or
24 perceptually identical words and when targets and
distractors were only distantly semantically related.
However this result was not observed on trials where
the target could be rapidly perceptually discriminated.
The stimuli used in experiment 2 were perceptually
more complex (eight groups instead of two) and we
observed a facilitation effect due to semantic
relatedness when the target could be perceptually
discriminated.
When perceiving a group of words, it is likely that we
notice not only their perceptual features, but also their
meanings very rapidly. If this is the case, it should be
possible to investigate at a semantic level what
Treisman & Gelade (1980) and Treisman & Souther

721

(1985) have observed at a perceptual level: the effect of
the number of distractors in the visual array when
distraction operates semantically. It should also be
possible to study the effect of different variables on a
conjunction target, which is a target that could belong
to two different categories (e.g. in French, ‘grenade’ is
both a type of fruit and a weapon). Our study represents
a first step in that direction.
Our study completes work on visual search by
integrating semantic features and do have some
implications in several psychological domains. For
example, the first experiment shows that perceptual
discrimination of a target that is semantically close to
the background, facilitates its detection. This perceptual
discrimination effect is less efficient for a target that is
semantically distant to its background. We also found
that a semantically distant background facilitates the
detection of a non typical target. Note that this effect
works for discrimination based on simple perceptual
features structure. Finally, this study provides some
bases to study the facilitation of visual search and it
might help evaluating web interfaces from the task of
searching a target.

References
Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K.J. (1980). Analogical
problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Just, M.A. & Carpenter, P.A. (1980). A theory of
reading : From eye fixations to comprehension.
Psychological Review, 87, 329-354.
Poisson, M.E. et Wilkinson, F. (1992). Distractor ratio
and grouping processes in visual conjunction search.
Perception, 21, 21-38.
Poitrenaud, S (1998). La représentation des procédures
chez l’opérateur: description et mise en oeuvre des
savoir- faire. Unipublished Phd Thesis, University of
Paris 8, France.
Treisman, A. & Gelade, G. (1980). A featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology,
12, 97-136.
Treisman, A. & Souther, J. (1985).Search asymetry : A
diagnostic for preattentive processing of separable
feature. Journal of Experimental Psychology :
General, 114, 285-310.
White, M.J. (1977). Identification and catégorization in
visual search. Memory and Cognition, 5, 648-657.

