UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thematic Integration in the Similarity of Abstract and Concrete Items

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ff811pv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Wiemer-Hastings, Katja
Xu, Xu

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thematic Integration in the Similarity of Abstract and Concrete Items
Katja Wiemer-Hastings (KATJA@NIU.EDU)
Xu Xu (XXU@NIU.EDU)
Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115

Abstract
Thematic integration plays a role in similarity judgments of
pairs of items that are unrelated taxonomically, like soup and
spoon. We hypothesized that integration serves as a more
central process in the similarity evaluation of abstract items
because of their temporality, their large variability, and
relational nature.
Participants rated the similarity of
concrete or abstract word pairs, followed by a written
explanation of the ratings. Explanations were coded as
thematic integration and taxonomic comparison. Consistent
with our hypothesis, the rate of integration responses was
higher overall for abstract items, and integration of abstract
items occurred frequently even for item pairs for which
taxonomic comparison was possible, unlike for concrete
nouns.

Thematic Relation
Objects, persons, events, thoughts and other entities are
situated in a spatial and temporal context, in which they are
related systematically to other things. For example, a
spoon is typically found in a kitchen or eating setting
alongside a bowl and a fluid meal. A moment of sadness is
typically preceded by some event that brought about this
feeling in a person, and is reflected by specific behaviors.
The action of playing involves one or more individuals,
occasionally some toys, a set of rules, perhaps a framing
event such as a party, and a setting such as a playroom, a
gym, or a park. Thus, entities are related in everyday
settings to other things and events through temporal
sequences, functions and use, common locations, etc. Such
thematic relations integrate entities into scenarios, such as
specific settings commonly associated with particular
activities and objects (e.g., the beach) or event sequences in
which events are organized temporally or causally.
Relations of this kind have been explored in different
lines of research. To name just a few, event sequences that
are thematically organized form scripts (Schank &
Abelson, 1977), organized schemata of actions, events,
locations, and objects that are organized in memory as a
unit. Objects have been shown to be associated with the
settings in which they occur. If the spatial relations
between an object and the contextual scene are violated,
individuals’ processing of a scene is slowed down (see
Biederman, Glass, & Stacey, 1973; Biederman,
Mezzanotte, & Rabinowitz, 1982). Entities can also be
organized in “ad hoc categories” by the way in which they
are used to achieve goals, broadly defined (Barsalou, 1983).

are not alignable (Bassok & Medin, 1997; Wisniewski &
Bassok, 1999). In one of their experiments, Wisniewski
and Bassok compared the explanations participants give for
their similarity judgments for item pairs that varied in their
taxonomic and thematic relation (1999, Exp. 1).
Taxonomically related items were members of the same
category (e.g., animals), unrelated items were members of
distinct categories. The results showed that participants
used thematic integration to justify ratings for item pairs
that were taxonomically unrelated, but that were related
thematically. For example, tea and cup were judged to be
similar because cups hold tea, even though they are not
similar.
Typically, when judging similarity, people evaluate the
extent to which two items share common properties, set in
some relation to their differences (Tversky, 1977). More
recently, a more accurate prediction of similarity ratings
has been achieved by measuring similarity as a function of
the extent to which their properties can be aligned, that is,
to what extent they share commonalities, such as being a
vehicle of transportation, and alignable differences, such as
two versus four wheels (e.g., Markman & Gentner, 1993).
This differs markedly from what happens in integration
according to a thematic relation. For example, items like
soup and spoon should not be considered similar because
their properties are different and not alignable. Yet,
individuals appear to rate such nonalignable items as
similar because they can be integrated thematically.
Wisniewski and Bassok found that integration and
comparison are in a tradeoff relation in the determination
of similarity, where entities tend to be integrated only when
individuals fail to align two items to be compared. Thus, if
the items are taxonomically similar, e.g., cat and mouse,
participants predominantly refer to their actual
commonalities (animal, alive, four legs, etc.) rather than
their thematic relation (cats chase mice). Only on other
cases do participants resort to an integration strategy, and
only if the item pairs are related thematically.
In this study, we explored the role of comparison of
properties and thematic integration for abstract entities, as
expressed by many verbs (e.g., meeting, finding) and
abstract nouns (e.g., thought, riddle). In particular, given
the characteristics of such entities, which are described
below, we hypothesized that integration may be a more
natural process for such items than property comparison,
and thus may play a more central role in similarity
judgments of such items than it does for concrete objects.

The Nature of Abstract Entities

Thematic Integration
Individuals occasionally use information about relations
among entities when they judge the similarity of items that

1236

Our prediction is based on three characteristics of abstract
items which (among others) distinguish them from concrete

items. First, a majority of abstract items are temporal in
nature and can thus be integrated quite flexibly into
sequences of temporal or causal events. For example, the
verbs meeting and finding, unrelated at first glance, could
be integrated temporally as “one has to find a place before
meeting someone”.
How general is the temporal nature of abstract items?
Miller and Fellbaum (1991) describe taxonomies that
accommodate all verbs and nouns in WordNet (Miller,
1990). In this model, all verbs fall into classes of action,
event and state verbs. Likewise, roughly 13 out of 26 noun
categories that contain abstract nouns can almost all be
characterized temporally as processes and events (e.g.,
communication, activity, cognition) or as states (e.g.,
feelings). Thus, temporality can be considered a quite
central characteristic of abstract entities.
Second, abstract items have been characterized as being
more dependent on and closely linked to item-external
entities and events (Gentner, 1981; Huttenlocher & Lui,
1979), thus perhaps making it easier to describe them in
terms of their temporal co-occurrences, than in terms of
their sparse internal structure. This point is further
supported by the observation that individuals find it
awkward and difficult to think of “properties” of abstract
items, relative to concrete objects (e.g., Markman &
Gentner, 1993).
Finally, abstract items allow for large variation in their
exemplars because they abstract from a multitude of quite
different concrete situations (Galbraith & Underwood,
1973). This allows individuals to construct specific
exemplars in the context of an item comparison so that it
can be integrated with the other item. We suspect that
these three characteristics together contribute to integration
being a frequent process in judging the similarity of two
abstract items, making the abstract items more
“compatible” with integration than with comparison.
Wisniewski and Bassok (1999) proposed that items that
occur together in a scenario may be more compatible with
integration while typically being nonalignable (i.e., belong
to different taxonomic categories). While they were
examining integration processes for concrete items, the
principle argument can be extended to abstract items. If
abstract item are characterized predominantly by external
items and events and, being temporally defined, are part of
event sequences, they may present a stimulus type that is
most compatible with integration. Our experiment tested
this possibility by comparing integration rates in a
similarity judgment experiment for abstract versus concrete
stimuli.
It is important to add that, due to the different nature of
abstract and concrete entities, the thematic relations that
they enter are also systematically different. Temporally
defined entities presumably are related to each other
temporally or causally (e.g., traveling comes before
arriving), whereas objects are typically related through the
settings or locations in which they occur (e.g., syringe,
band-aid), or through complementary use (e.g., table and
chair). This is evident in previous research. For example,
when using noun-verb-noun triplets that describe simple
scenarios involving an action, Bassok and Medin (1997)

1237

observed examples for temporal and causal integration,
whereas concrete object stimuli (Wisniewski & Bassok,
1999) were integrated through “static” relations such as
function and location.

Experiment
We conducted an experiment with three types of words
varied between three groups of participants: concrete
nouns, abstract nouns, and verbs. For each group, 16 word
pairs were constructed that varied with respect to their
taxonomic similarity (same category membership, TX+, vs.
different category membership, TX-), and the degree of
thematic relatedness (high, TH+, vs. low, TH-). We
expected for all three word types that integration would
occur more frequently overall if word pairs were
thematically related.
However, we predicted that taxonomic relatedness would
only affect the rate of integration for concrete nouns, where
integration should only occur if taxonomic comparison is
not possible, consistent with previous findings (Wisniewski
& Bassok). Thus, we expected to see a tradeoff relation for
comparison and integration for concrete items according to
which items are integrated only if alignment fails. We
predicted that there would be no such tradeoff relation for
abstract items. In contrast, we predicted that thematic
relations would be considered more regularly in similarity
judgments of abstract items (both verbs and nouns), and
would be involved in the similarity evaluations independent
of taxonomic relatedness. The reasoning is that integration
of abstract items may be possible through flexible
construction of a thematic relation for abstract items even if
there is no obvious preexisting thematic relation.
We particularly expected a difference in integration
responses for abstract versus concrete items in the
conditions that allowed for an alternative, taxonomic
justification of ratings (TX+TH+, TX-TH-).
The
conditions in which items are related only thematically
(TX-TH+) or only taxonomically (TX+TH-) were not
particularly interesting for our hypothesis because in such
cases, individuals almost have no choice but to use the
strategy suggested by the word materials. However, when
item pairs are either related both taxonomically and
thematically, or neither, the situation allows for either
justification to be applied to the rating. One would expect
that when participants have a choice, they would apply
whichever strategy the items activate more naturally. We
hypothesized that for abstract items, integration would be
an equivalent procedure to taxonomic comparison when
both are possible, in contrast to the predominance of
taxonomic comparisons for concrete nouns.

Method
Participants were 54 college students at Northern Illinois
University. Experiments were conducted in groups of 1012 participants. Each participant rated the similarity of 16
word pairs in a booklet, and wrote down justifications for
their ratings. The data were collected in a paper-and-pencil
format. Each session took about 25 minutes.

Materials. Word type (concrete noun, abstract noun, and
verb) was tested between subjects so that processes that may
be specific to a particular word type would not influence the
processing of other words.
Taxonomic relatedness
(allowing for comparison processes) and thematic
relatedness (allowing for integration) were varied within
subject in a 2 by 2 design, resulting in four sets of 4 word
pairs that were either both taxonomically and thematically
related, unrelated in both ways, or related in only one of the
two ways. For each set of word pairs, 3 booklets were
created that presented the word pairs in a different random
order. The word pairs were always preceded by a three
word pairs of a word type consistent with the set that
included similar and dissimilar items, to provide a
standardized similarity range. These items were not
included in the analysis.
In previous studies on integration, item pairs were
constructed so that the four conditions only differed in the
second item of the word pairs (e.g.. Wisniewski & Bassok,
1999). Because of the difficulties in constructing such sets
for abstract items, we used different word pairs in each
condition. Taxonomically related items were constructed
by selecting two words from the same category, such as
cognitive processes for verbs, attributes for abstract nouns,
and artifacts for concrete nouns. Unrelated item pairs were
selected from two distinctive categories. Within each level
of similarity, half of the items were related thematically.
Table 1 shows example pairs for abstract nouns (AN),
concrete nouns (CN), and verbs (VB) that are either related
thematically (TH+) or not (TH-), and related taxonomically
(TX+) or not (TX-). Participants were instructed to rate the
similarity for each word pair on a 6-point scale, where 1
indicated “not at all similar”, and 6 indicated “very
similar”.
Table 1: Example word pairs for all conditions

TX+

TX-

AN
CN
VB
AN
CN
VB

TH+
weight, fullness
cat, mouse
asking, answering
strategy, battle
hunter, deer
snowing, skiing

THsadness, surprise
giraffe, horse
losing, inheriting
thought, journey
rubber, rose
talking, scratching

Results
The report of results will focus on the analysis of the
explanations provided by participants for their similarity
ratings, and more specifically, the rate of integration
responses. This measure allows for the most direct test of
the predictions. Other results will only be summarized
briefly. Similarity ratings were significantly affected by
both TH and TX for all but abstract nouns, for which TX
had only a marginally significant effect (p=0.071). The
mean ratings are shown in Table 2. As expected, the
ratings were higher for conditions in which TX or TH or

1238

both were high. No significant interactive effect on
similarity ratings was found between TX and TH.
Table 2: Mean Similarity Ratings by Word Type and
Relation Type

Concrete Nouns
Abstract Nouns
Verbs

TX+
TH+
TH4.46
3.43
4.11
3.46
4.29
3.51

TXTH+
4.00
3.83
3.25

TH1.49
2.04
1.97

To test the predictions, the author and two coders who
were trained but ignorant with respect to the experiment
purpose classified the justifications. Items were coded in a
random order so that the coders would not be cued into
systematic variances in integrative versus comparative
explanations. The coders coded all justifications either as
comparison, integration, or uninformative.
The last
category was used to code items such as they are similar,
which did not provide information beyond the rating. The
percentage of uninformative justifications was highest for
abstract nouns (almost 25% on a subset of 140), which is
consistent with other research using abstract items in which
participants find processing the items quite difficult. The
initial coder agreement was tested on a set of 140 items.
The agreement was not exactly high, but acceptable (78%).
Differences in coding were resolved through discussion.
The remaining coding was handled by the individual
coders.
The first hypothesis was that the proportion of
explanations related to thematic integration would be
higher for relational terms than for concrete terms.
Second, the rate of integration was expected to be higher
for abstract item pairs in the two ambiguous conditions
(TX+TH+ and TX-TH-). Third, we tested whether the
proportion of integration justifications would be less
affected by taxonomic relatedness for the relational terms.
Hypothesis 1. Our data supported the first hypothesis.
Participants mentioned thematic integration as reasons for
their ratings significantly more often for abstract items
(M=44% for abstract nouns and M=45% for verbs) than for
concrete nouns (M=28%), as measured by an item analysis
of variance (F(1,24)=5.61, p<0.05). This effect was
marginally significant in a subject analysis (F(1,51)=2.99,
p=0.06). Thus, integration was a more central process in
the similarity judgments for the relational terms.
To test the next two predictions, we computed the mean
frequency of integration responses for abstract and concrete
items for the four conditions. Figure 1 displays the
proportions of integration-based explanations separately for
word types and conditions. As expected, the proportion of
integrations was significantly affected by the integration
manipulation for all word types. That is, participants
integrated more when item pairs were related thematically.

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
A b s tract N o u n
Verb
Concrete Noun

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
TX+ TH+

TX+ TH-

T X -T H +

TX- TH-

T a x o n o m ic and thematic relatedness

Figure 1: Integration rates for item pairs of high and low thematic (TH) and taxonomic (TX) relatedness.
Hypothesis 2. Figure 1 shows that in conditions where
items were either both or neither related taxonomically and
thematically, abstract items had higher integration rates
than concrete items. This effect was significant as
measured by an analysis of variance with the two extreme
conditions, TX+TH+ and TX-TH-, as within subject
variable and word type as between subject variable
(F(1,51)=7.43, p<0.05). A post hoc analysis revealed
significant differences between concrete nouns and verbs
(p<0.005) and abstract nouns (p<0.05). There was no
difference between the two types of abstract items. Thus,
abstract item similarity judgments were justified with
integration more often than concrete items when an
alternative taxonomic justification was equally (un)likely.
Hypothesis 3. To what extent did taxonomic relatedness
(TX) predict the rate of integrations for the three word
types? We examined hypothesis 3 in two ways. First, we
examined the statistical effect of TX on integration rate
separately for the three word types. Second, we looked at
the interaction of TX and TI to examine the “tradeoff”
relationship between TX and TI as suggested for concrete
items (Wisniewski & Bassok).
Overall, the rate of integration responses was significantly
higher for concrete items that were not taxonomically
related (M=0.39) than for the related ones (M=0.18)
(subject analysis: F(1,15)=39.47, p<0.001; the item
analysis revealed a marginally significant effect,
F(1,12)=4.64, p=0.052).
That is, participants used
integration mostly when comparison was not possible.
Again, this is consistent with the argument that integration
is used only when stimuli cannot be aligned.
For abstract items, TX had no significant effect on the
proportion of integration responses. Participants used
integration justifications equally often for abstract nouns
that belonged to the same taxonomic category (M=0.40) or
different ones (M=0.48). Likewise, verbs that belonged to
the same taxonomic category were integrated equally often
(M=0.48) as pairs from different ones (M=0.42). On
average, abstract thematically related (TH+) pairs were

1239

integrated by participants over half of the time in either
taxonomic condition (TX+, TX-).
Wisniewski and Bassok (1999) found a tradeoff relation
between integration and comparison for concrete stimuli,
thus that nonalignable stimuli (here: taxonomically
unrelated items) were integrated, but alignable
(taxonomically related) items were not. We have argued
that for abstract items, integration may be a quite natural
process in similarity evaluations, and may thus also occur
when taxonomic comparison is possible. A tradeoff
relationship should express itself as an interactive effect
such that integration responses are higher for thematically
related items only if they are not related taxonomically.
That is, we expected an interactive effect of thematic
relation by taxonomic relation on integration rate. This
effect was obtained for concrete items in a subject analysis
(F(1,15)=22.15, p<0.001).
The interaction was not
significant in an item analysis (p=0.12). Figure 1 shows
that the rate of integration was the highest for concrete
items when there was a thematic, but not a taxonomic,
relation.
Consistent with our predictions, the interactive effect was
absent for abstract items in both item and subject analyses
for both verbs and abstract nouns. Figure 1 shows that the
mean rate of integration for both abstract word types did
not differ between (TX+TH+) and (TX-TH+) conditions;
neither did it differ for (TX+TH-) and (TX-TH-)
conditions.
This pattern of differences for concrete nouns versus the
two types of abstract items was found significant in a threeway interaction of TH, TX and word type, F(2,51)=7.81,
p<0.005, as measured by a subject analysis with TX and TI
as within-subject and word type as between-subject
variable. That is, when taxonomic relatedness was low and
thematic relation was present, the rate of integration was
increased only for concrete nouns. This analysis suggests
that integration and comparison are not in a tradeoff
relation for abstract items.

Comparison Rates

Concrete Items

Comparison rates across conditions mirrored the results we
described for integration rates (see Figure 2).
The
comparison rate was higher for concrete items (M=0.70)
than for either abstract nouns (M=0.30) or for verbs
(M=0.27), F(2,51)=30.08, p<0.001. Thematic relatedness
significantly affected comparison rates only for concrete
items (F(1,12)=36.84, p<0.001), with a higher comparison
rate when no thematic relation was present (M=0.92) than
otherwise (M=0.49).

Our data were consistent with previous findings
(Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999), replicating the tradeoff
relation between comparison and integration processes for
concrete items. Explanations for similarity ratings of
concrete item pairs were integration-based frequently only
if the items are not taxonomically related, and if they are
thematically related (TX-TH+). For stimuli in this group,
participants were quite resilient to obvious thematic
relations, and found ways to compare the items that
sometimes required looking beyond obvious features. For
example, dog and fence were “somewhat similar” because
“they both can serve as a form of protection”, glass and
water because “they both are clear and translucent”, and
waiter and table “both hold food”.

1
0.8
CN
AN
VB

0.6

Abstract versus Concrete Items

0.4
0.2
0
TX+TH+

TX+TH-

TX-TH+

TX-TH-

Figure 2: Comparison rates for item pairs of high and low
thematic (TH) and taxonomic (TX) relatedness.
The comparison rates also supported the tradeoff effect
for concrete nouns only. The comparison rate was lower in
the “tradeoff condition”, TX-TH+, an expected mirror
effect of the increase of integrations in this condition.
Also, comparisons built the majority of justifications for
concrete nouns in the TX+TH+ and TX-TH- conditions,
just like integrations do for abstract items in the same
conditions. Thus, participants mostly used comparison for
concrete items and mostly integration for abstract items
when either applied equally, that is, when thematic and
taxonomic relatedness were either both present or both
absent.

Discussion
We compared the use of thematic integration in similarity
judgments of abstract and concrete items. We proposed
that integration is a more natural and thus, more frequent
process when individuals evaluate relations between
abstract items, because they are relational, highly variable,
and often temporal. In our experiment, participants
provided written explanations for their similarity ratings of
word pairs. The rate of integration was computed for word
types in each of four conditions: item pairs that were
related taxonomically and thematically, related only
taxonomically, only thematically, or neither. We predicted
and found that participants produce more integration
justifications for abstract than for concrete items, averaged
across items and conditions, and produce more integrations
for abstract than for concrete items when comparisons are
equally plausible as justifications. We predicted and found
a tradeoff relation between comparison and integration only
for concrete items, where integration occurs only when
integration, but not comparison, is feasible.

1240

In contrast to concrete items, abstract items were integrated
frequently even if they were related taxonomically. This
occurred about twice as often as for concrete items,
consistent with our assumption that integrative processes
occur more naturally in the processing of abstract items.
Interestingly, abstract items were also frequently integrated
when they were not thematically related. Some responses
were quite creative.
For example, melancholy and
purchase, an abstract TX-TH- pair, was integrated as
follows: “occasionally, purchases leads to feelings of
remorse which may lead to melancholy or sadness”, or “a
person may purchase a life long dream or wish, and find
out that they are unhappy with their purchase”. Thus,
participants seemed able to come up with flexible ways to
integrate abstract items. This is consistent with the view
that abstract entities can be integrated flexibly.
For concrete items, integration practically did not occur
for thematically unrelated items. However, analogous to
the creative integration of abstract items, participants
creatively discovered comparison-based similarities of
unrelated concrete items. For example, one participant
rated bumblebee and spoon as quite similar because they
are both “shaped similar and oval”. The item pair bicycle
and therapist prompted the response “they both can serve
as a form of relief”. It seems that concrete items offer as
flexible ways to compare items either perceptually or
functionally, as abstract items offer flexible ways for
integration into event sequences.
This raises interesting questions regarding the basis for
similarity in concrete versus abstract items. Integration is
the exception for concrete item pairs when performing
similarity ratings, and arguably does not lead to true
similarity. Gentner and Brem (1999) showed that given
training with feedback and sufficient time to make
judgments, integration rates are reduced substantially in
comparison to a limited-time condition. They argue for a
confusability account, according to which integration does
not play a legitimate role in similarity ratings, but affects
ratings if the cognitive load disables proper metacognitive
processing controls.
It will be interesting to explore this account with respect
to abstract items, where, as we have shown, integration

occurs as a predominant processing strategy. This may
indicate an overwhelming demand on the processing
capacity for all abstract items, consistent with the argument
that integration is unrelated to similarity processing.
Alternatively, integration may be centrally related to the
similarity of abstract items. For example, it is possible that
abstract items that have properties in common can also be
integrated more easily. On a related note, integration may
also be relevant in the categorization of abstract items. It
has recently been shown that integration is used in
categorization of concrete items when thematic relations
offer an equivalent sorting strategy to taxonomic similarity
(e.g., Lin & Murphy, 2001). Considering the high
integration rate in the current study, it is very likely that
integration may also feature prominently in classification of
abstract items.

Item Variability
Abstract entities were described as being variable because
they abstract from quite different situations (Galbraith &
Underwood, 1973), leaving many aspects of their actual
occurrence in a concrete context unspecified. For example,
an idea may be brilliant and positive in one context and
have impact on many people, in a different scenario, an
idea can be bad and have terrible consequences. To the
extent that the abstract entity is underspecified in memory,
participants were able to flexibly construct a specific
example that can be integrated with the other item. For
example, surprise and sadness, two items which are
taxonomically related (emotions) but not thematically,
twice prompted the justification “sometimes surprises are
bad, which can lead to sadness”.

Flexibility of Integration
An example of the remarkable flexibility of integration
processes in abstract nouns is the item pair “thought,
journey”, which was an item pair in the unrelated condition
(TX-TH-). The taxonomic explanation, provided by a few
participants, would be the distinction between a mental
event and a physical action. There was a large number of
integrations, in which thought and journey were integrated
in various ways that illustrate how easily individuals can
integrate two unrelated abstract items in creative and
variable ways. Thought and journey were integrated
temporally as concurrent processes (“thoughts and thinking
can be involved in a journey”, “most people have time to
think when he/she on long trips”), as one requiring the
other (“on any journey you will need much thought”), as
thoughts preceding the journey (“a lot of people or couples
give thought into taking a vacation”, “a journey starts with
a thought”), or with the journey being conceptualized as a
mental experience to integrate it with thought (“our
thoughts often take us on journeys through imagined
experiences”).
It seems, thus, that abstract items with no predetermined
thematic relation are so unconstrained in how to be related
to another item that they can not only be integrated, but can
be integrated in different ways. Explanations at this point
must be speculative, but this variability may be related to

1241

the variability of abstract items’ contexts. Presumably, in
each context in which a thought occurs, it is related to a
different topic, preceded and followed by different actions,
and so on. Abstract items are only little constrained with
respect to what situations they can occur in. It may be in
consequence of this that people can integrate unrelated
abstract items in so many different ways.

Acknowledgements
We are indebted to Brent Muñoz and Jodie Sommer, who
spent a lot of time and effort coding the explanations for
the similarity judgments provided by our participants.
Thanks also to three anonymous reviewers for insightful
comments on an earlier version of this paper.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Bassok, M., & Medin, D.L. (1997). Birds of a feather flock
together: similarity judgments with semantically rich
stimuli. Journal of Memory and Language, 36, 311-336.
Biederman, I., Glass, A.L., & Stacey, E.W. (1973).
Searching for objects in real-world scenes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 97, 22-27.
Biederman, I., Mezzanotte, R.J., & Rabinowitz, J.C.
(1982). Scene perception: Detecting and judging objects
undergoing relational violations. Cognitive Psychology,
14, 143-177.
Galbraith, R.C., & Underwood, B.J. (1973). Perceived
frequency of concrete and abstract words. Memory &
Cognition, 1, 56-60.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161178.
Gentner, D., & Brem, S.K. (1999). Is snow really like a
shovel? Distinguishing similarity from thematic
relatedness. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 179-184). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lin, E.L., & Murphy, G.L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
Markman, A.B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Splitting the
differences: a structural alignment view. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
Miller, G.A. (1990) (Ed.). WordNet: An on-line lexical
database. International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235312.
Miller, G.A., & Fellbaum, C. (1991). Semantic networks of
English. Cognition, 41, 197-229.
Schank, R.C., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, goals, plans,
and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Wisniewski, E.J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man
similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with comparison
and integration. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208-238.

