UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tick Talk

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2w88p5hf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Davidson, Douglas J.
Bock, Kathryn
Irwin, David E.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tick Talk
Douglas J. Davidson (dvdsn@casper.beckman.uiuc.edu)
Kathryn Bock (kbock@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
David E. Irwin (dirwin@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
Beckman Institute
University of Illinois
405 N. Mathews
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Abstract
Three experiments on the production of time expressions are reported. In each experiment, speakers produced time expressions to analog clock faces
while their eye movements were recorded with a
headband-mounted eye tracker. Previous work has
shown that speakers can apprehend the visualconceptual information in a clock display very
quickly, and that this is followed by relatively slow,
incremental formulation of the time expressions.
Analyses of fixation patterns from the present experiments lend additional support to this model.

Introduction
Clock time-telling offers an unusually efficient and
effective means of studying how speakers formulate
linguistic expressions to relatively simple visual displays. American English speakers can produce either absolute (e.g., nine thirty) or relative (e.g., half
past nine) time forms for the same clock, and this
provides a contrast between two opposite word orders for the same visual display. Clock faces also
contain a reasonably large response set. Considering just the times at five minute intervals (e.g., 9:30,
9:35, 9:40 . . . ) an analog clock face contains a small
combinatorial explosion of at least 276 unique time
expressions, each corresponding to exactly the same
hour and minute hand arranged in different orientations. In addition, there is an unambiguous mapping
from the hands of a clock display to the components
of time expressions. This mapping allows techniques
such as eye tracking to be applied to study the relationship between gaze patterns and speech.
Eye tracking has emerged as a powerful tool to investigate language production because, among other
things, it can be used to observe whether speakers
seek visual information corresponding to the individual terms of a multi-word expression before they
begin to articulate those terms. Under some circumstances, the properties of the recorded eye movements (e.g., gaze position, duration, sequence) can
be related to the properties of the recorded speech
(timing, expression choice, fluency) to provide evidence for or against hypotheses about the mechanisms of speech planning.

294

Griffin and Bock (2001) proposed a general decomposition of the process of formulating descriptions based on data from experiments in which participants produced spontaneous descriptions of simple visual events. The first phase in this account,
apprehension, involves the rapid extraction of visual features and conceptual relationships relevant
to the upcoming utterance. The second phase, linguistic formulation, involves retrieving words and
constructing the expression form to convey the intended description. Importantly, linguistic formulation occurs more slowly than apprehension, and it is
accompanied by gaze patterns that match the order
of the spoken words.
Time telling provides a strong test of this hypothesized decomposition because unlike the description of a novel scene using a novel sentence, both
clock reading and time telling are well-rehearsed
procedures that many speakers perform habitually
throughout the day. In addition, time expressions
form a finite set. In principle, speakers could map
each conceptual representation of a time to a geometrical representation of a corresponding clock in
memory. This, in turn, could permit a fast mapping
from the perception of a clock display to the formulation of the time expression, potentially bypassing
slow formulation requirements.
Bock, Irwin, Davidson & Levelt (2003) showed
that this bypass is not taken. In their experiments,
speakers started to look to regions of the clock faces
that corresponded to the first term of the ultimate
expression that they produced approximately 400
ms after the onset of the clock displays, suggesting
very fast apprehension for the clock displays. The
signature pattern of successive gazes to regions corresponding to successive terms of utterances was as
robust for clock displays as in earlier studies of scene
description. The experiments reported here extend
the results of Bock et al. by investigating several
alternative explanations for the data patterns that
were originally observed.
The speakers in Bock et al. were asked to produce
time expressions as either absolute or relative time
forms. By knowing the format required for the time
expression in advance, in principle speakers could
have adopted a task set that biased them to indi-

viduate the clock hands in the order of the required
expression. For example, if speakers are aware that
they should produce a time consisting of first the
hour and then the minute value, an efficient strategy would be to first look for the hour hand. The
task set, in this case, would be the primary determinant of the observed eye movement patterns, rather
than an intrinsic tendency to link gaze patterns with
speech planning processes. Left to their own devices,
without explicit instructions to produce one or the
other form, speakers could provide eye movement
patterns that are less closely linked to planning processes. In Experiment 1 reported below, speakers
were simply asked to produce time expressions without specific instructions about the required form. In
addition, half of the participants heard instructions
that presented a relative time expression as an example utterance, while the other half heard an absolute
example.
The hands of analog clock displays are differentially informative, insofar as the hour hand conveys
information about both the hour and the minute.
This is the case because the hour hand moves parametrically from one hour to the next for each increment of the minute (see the top right clock in
Figure 1). For example, one can deduce that the
time is 9:30 just by observing that the hour hand
is halfway between 9 and 10 –the hour hand could
provide all the information necessary for the clock
time. The hands are differentially informative because while the hour hand conveys this information
about the value of the minute, the minute hand does
not convey any information about the hour. The
location of the minute hand at the 6 position, for
example, does not provide the exact angular position of the hour hand. It only conveys that the hour
hand is midway between some (unspecified) pair of
hours.

not have parametrically-arranged hour hands. In
their stimuli, the hour hand remained fixed at one location for varying locations of the minute hand (see
top left in Figure 1). It is possible that Bock et al.
observed gaze paths that mimicked word order patterns because unlike a regular clock, the hour hand
region of the clock face did not contain all of the information usually found in a clock display. Speakers
might have needed to inspect both hands in those experiments to understand the time, whereas on a regular clock, the differential relationship of the hands
could in principle permit speakers’ gaze to favor the
hour more. Experiment 1 investigates this possibility.
Among the requirements of time telling, a speaker
must understand both where the hands are located,
and to what the hands refer. On a clock face without
any numbers, speakers must determine the angular
relationship between the hand locations and some
reference point, and they must determine which hour
and minute regions are relevant.
Numbered clock faces may make this process simpler, because the digits present on an ordinary numbered clock face provide both identity and location
information. The value for the hour can be acquired
by simply reading the digit to which the hour hand
points, and the value of the minute can be acquired
by calculating the appropriate minute value after
the digit has been read, or by retrieving this value
from memory once the digit has been identified. Digits also encode location information by providing a
point of reference for nearby hands, relative to the
orientation of the entire clock face. It could be that
either identity and location information is enough to
circumvent the need for incremental gaze patterns
during time phrase production. Experiments 2 and
3 compare numberless clock faces like those in Experiment 1 with numbered and tick-marked clock
faces (see Figure 1) to examine the contribution of
these factors to time telling.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Sixteen participants from the Psychology Department subject pool at the University
of Illinois took part for course credit or for monetary
payment. All participants had normal or corrected
to normal vision, and spoke American English as
their native language. None had taken part in the
other experiments reported here.

Figure 1: Numberless fixed, numberless parametric,
numbered, and tick-marked clocks.
The analog clock displays used in Bock et al. did

295

Design and Materials The experiment was a
two-factor design with type of clock (fixed hour
hand, parametric hour hand) and instruction (absolute biased, relative biased) as between-participant
factors. Each participant saw 144 clock faces, consisting of all combinations of hour and 5-minute
times. The fixed hour hand clock faces were constructed so that the hour hand always pointed to

the location of the hour, while the parametric clock
faces were constructed so that the hour hand advanced for each 5-minute increment of the minute
hand.
Apparatus Eye movements were recorded using
an headband-mounted Eyelink (SR Research, Ltd.)
eye tracker. Clock displays were presented on a 51
cm monitor, each clock subtending approximately 23
deg of visual angle. Participants pressed a button on
a hand-held button box to begin and end each trial.
Speech was recorded using a sound card and a preamplified microphone.
Procedure Participants were simply asked to produce time expressions to the clock faces. One example of an absolute expression was provided in
the absolute-biased instructions, and one example of
a relative expression was provided for the relativebiased instructions. Participants were not given explicit instructions about the form of the time expressions.
Each trial began with the presentation of a central
fixation point. Participants pressed a button to start
a trial, and drift correction was applied while they
held fixation to the center point. If drift correction
was successful and participants held fixation, a clock
face was presented for a maximum of five seconds,
or until participants pressed a button indicating that
they had finished the trial. The clock face remained
on screen for a minimum of three seconds. The next
trial began after a one second delay.
Data Analysis Participants’ fluent utterances
were classified as absolute, relative, or full -hour time
expressions. Full hour time expressions were excluded from further analysis, because there was no
choice of construction for those cases. Also, times
corresponding to displays in which the number and
minute hand overlapped (e.g., 2:10 ) were excluded,
as these did not contain different fixation target regions for hours and minutes.
For the fixation duration data, an extension of the
standard Cox proportional hazards model was used
to compare cumulative hazard rate functions of fixation durations in different experimental conditions.
This extension allows for the analysis of repeated
measurements and random effects in survival analysis (Therneau & Grambsch, 2000; also known as
“frailty” models).

Results and Discussion
Speech Table 1 shows the average proportion of
relative time expressions observed in all conditions.
Speakers preferred to produce absolute expressions
for both types of clocks and for both types of instruction by a wide margin. Given this preference,
speakers were more likely to produce a relative expression when the instructions contained a relative
example (p < .001), but there was no difference be-

296

tween the two clock types.
Table 1: Average Proportion of Relative Expressions.
Instruction Bias
Relative
Absolute
Ave.

Clock Type
Orig. Param.
0.113
0.103
0.000
0.032
0.056
0.068

Ave.
0.108
0.016

Further inspection of the data revealed that most
of the relatives were produced by just two speakers. When they produced relative expressions, these
speakers were more likely to do so for times near
the top of the hour. An analysis of the proportion
of expressions that were relative showed that there
was a linear main effect of minute value (p < .001),
as well as a quadratic trend (p < .001), indicating
that these participants produced a few relatives for
minute values 0-15, almost no relatives for times near
the half hour, and progressively more relatives for
minute values greater than 40. See Bock, Irwin, and
Davidson (in press) for an account of this pattern.
There were no statistically significant differences
for speech onset times for the speakers who saw the
fixed clocks (mean latency: 1658 ms) versus the
speakers who saw the parametric clocks (1769 ms).
Eye Movements Figure 2 shows a global profile
of the gaze patterns for absolute expressions. It plots
the average proportion of fixations to the hour and
minute hands relative to the onset of the clock display (top plot) and to the onset of speech (bottom)
for absolute expressions. The proportions were calculated by summing the number of fixations in 100
ms intervals over subjects.
The top plot shows that the two types of clock
faces led to similar distributions of fixations to the
hour and minute hands. Speakers first fixated the
hour hand region and then the minute, regardless
of whether the clock faces were fixed or parametric.
The bottom plot of Figure 2 shows that, relative
to speech, the peak in the proportion of fixations
to the hour hand occurred earlier than the peak of
the minute hand, and that the peak of the minute
hand occurred near the onset of speech. Both the
hour and minute distributions appear to be shifted
somewhat earlier for the parametric clocks, which
could be due to differences between the two subject
groups.
There was a median of four fixations before the
onset of speech across the experimental conditions.
Table 2 shows the pattern of saccade transitions for
the first four fixations, providing a more fine-grained
analysis of the data shown in Figure 2. Each cell
contains the proportion of transitions to the hour,
minute, and other regions for each transition pair

Table 2: Transition matrices for fixations 1-4 (source
region along the left side, destination region along
the top).

0.4

0.8

Hour
Minute

0.0

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

Fixations to Parametric and Fixed Clocks

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

0.8
0.4
0.0

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

Time (ms) From Display Onset

−3000

−2000

−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

Transition: Center:1
Hour Minute
Center 0.436
0.215

Other
0.311

Transition: 1:2
Hour
Hour
0.409
Minute 0.146
Other
0.139

Minute
0.014
0.013
0.021

Other
0.014
0.054
0.150

Transition: 2:3
Hour
Hour
0.519
Minute 0.033
Other
0.036

Minute
0.129
0.017
0.056

Other
0.059
0.009
0.135

Transition: 3:4
Hour
Hour
0.266
Minute 0.022
Other
0.020

Minute
0.218
0.143
0.079

Other
0.105
0.033
0.103

Transition: 4:5
Hour
Hour
0.133
Minute 0.056
Other
0.038

Minute
0.115
0.309
0.077

Other
0.060
0.075
0.117

Time (ms) From Voice Onset

Figure 2: Average proportions of fixations to fixed
(solid) and parametric (dotted) clock faces relative
to display onset (top) and speech onset (bottom).
(transitions to the center region are not shown). Table 2 shows that the early fixations 1-4 were more
likely to target the hour hand region. For example,
at the transition from the first to the second fixation
after leaving the center, 14.6% of transitions were
from the minute to the hour, but there were fewer of
the reverse, hour-to-minute transitions, 1.4%. This
initial fixation to the hour hand was then most often
followed by a series of refixations to the hour hand.
Later, at the transition from fixation 4 to 5, there
were more transitions to the minute region.
Parametric Hour Hand
Fix 2

7

7

Fixed Hour Hand

Fix 1

6

6

Fix 1
Fix 4

Fix 4 Fix 3

5
4
3

Cumulative Hazard

rate at which the fixations end in a saccade at that
time point. Figure 3 shows that the first fixation
after clock onset did not last as long as the fixations
that came later, as the estimated cumulative hazard function for the first fixation has a steeper slope
(exp(coef)=0.36, χ2 =1077, p < 0.005) than the later
fixations, which appear to have similar, more shallow
slopes. In addition, both the fixed and parametric
hour hand clocks show this pattern.

1
0

0

1

2

3

4

Fix 2

2

Cumulative Hazard

5

Fix 3

0

500

1000

1500

Fixation Duration (ms)

2000

0

500

1000

1500

2000

Fixation Duration (ms)

Figure 3: Cumulative hazard functions for the first
four fixations of the fixed and parametric clocks.
Figure 3 plots cumulative hazard functions for fixations 1-4 after participants’ gaze left the center region. These fixations correspond to fixations 1-4 in
Table 2. The slope of the cumulative hazard function
at a particular time point can be interpreted as the

297

The data from Experiment 1 suggest that speakers
produced time expressions to fixed analog clock faces
much like they do for parametrically-arranged faces.
A similar global profile of fixations was observed
for both types of clocks, and speakers did not appear to have more (or less) trouble with fixed clocks.
The initial fixation after clock onset appeared to be
shorter than the other fixations for both the fixed
and parametric clocks.

Design and Materials Experiment 2 was a onefactor within-participant design with clock type
(numbered, numberless) as the main experimental
factor. The numberless clocks were the same stimuli
as the parametric condition of Experiment 1 (see
Figure 1, top right). The numbered clocks were
again the same clocks, but with digits placed at the
periphery (see Figure 1, bottom left). Each participant saw 144 trials total, consisting of 72 numbered
and 72 numberless clocks. The stimulus lists for presenting the clocks were counterbalanced so that four
of the participants saw one version of a clock as a
numbered clock, while the other four saw the same
clock as numberless (and vice versa). Instructions
to participants were like those in Experiment 1, except that both relative and absolute time expressions
were provided as examples (participants were told
that either form would be an acceptable response).

Results and Discussion
Like Experiment 1, two speakers produced the majority of relative expressions in Experiment 2. Overall, a similar proportion of relatives (0.08 percent of
the expressions) were produced as in Experiment 1,
and they were more common near the top of the
hour.
For the absolute expressions, speakers were faster
to start time expressions for the numbered clocks
(1638 ms) compared to the numberless clocks (2326
ms), t(7) = 8.47, p < 0.001, as expected. There were
too few relative expressions across subjects to make
a meaningful comparison.
Figure 4 shows the aggregate profile of fixations to
the hour and minute hands over time for numberless
and numbered clocks for absolute expressions. The
data pattern suggests that speakers spent less gaze
time at the time-relevant regions for the numbered
clocks. The top plot of Figure 4 shows that after
display onset, fixations to the hour hand started to
decrease earlier, and fixations to the minute hand
increase earlier for the numbered clocked compared
to the numberless clocks.
The plot of fixations relative to speech (bottom
plot) shows that the span between the peak of the
hour hand region fixations and voice onset was some-

298

0.8
0.4
0.0

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

1000

2000

3000

4000

Time (ms) From Display Onset

Hour
Minute

0.8

Participants Eight participants from the University of Illinois community took part for course credit
or pay. All participants were native speakers of
American English, and none of the participants had
taken part in the other experiments reported here.

0

0.4

Experiment 2 compared the performance of speakers to numbered clock faces versus numberless clock
faces. In most respects except the design and stimuli, the experiment was like Experiment 1 (differences are outlined below).

Fixations to Numberless and Numbered Clocks

0.0

Method

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

Experiment 2

−3000

−2000

−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

Time (ms) From Voice Onset

Figure 4: Average proportions of fixations to numberless (solid) and numbered (dotted) clock faces relative to display onset (top) and speech onset (bottom).
what shorter for numbered clocks compared to numberless clocks.
The data from Experiment 2 suggest that the display of number information accelerates the production of the hour term, but does not change the incremental pattern of formulation. The global profile of fixations showed that speakers were faster to
leave the hour region to start fixations to the minute
region for numbered clocks. Nonetheless, the same
basic pattern of incremental looking first to the hour
hand and then to the minute hand in concert with
speech was observed for both types of clocks.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 examined performance on clock faces
without tick-marks to clock faces with tick-marks.
In most respects except the design and stimuli, the
experiment was like Experiment 2. The differences
are outlined below.

Method
Participants Eight participants from the University of Illinois community took part in the experiment for course credit or pay. All participants were
native speakers of American English, and none had
participated in the other experiments reported here.
Design and Materials Experiment 3 was a onefactor within-participant design with clock type
(tick-free, tick-marked) as the main experimental
factor. The tick-free clocks were the same stimuli
as the parametric condition of Experiment 1 (see
Figure 1, top right), while the tick-marked clocks
were the same clocks as the tick-free, but with small
dots placed at the periphery (see Figure 1, bottom
right). Both types of clocks had parametric hour

hands. Each participant saw 144 trials total, consisting of 72 tick-free and 72 tick-marked clocks. The
stimulus lists for presenting the clocks were counterbalanced as in Experiment 2, and the instructions
were the same.

Results and Discussion

0.4

0.8

Fixations to Tick−Free and Tick−Marked Clocks

0.0

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

In Experiment 3, one participant produced the majority of relative expressions (57), while two others
produced 15 or less (out of the 132 opportunities for
each subject). The majority of the relative expressions had minute values at 45, 50, and 55, as in the
other experiments.
For the absolute expressions, speakers were faster
to produce times to the tick-marked clocks (1764 ms)
compared to the tick-free clocks (2004 ms), t(7) =
4.17, p < 0.005. There were too few relatives across
subjects for a meaningful comparison.
Figure 5 shows the aggregate proportion of fixations to hour and minute hands for clocks with and
without tick-marks. Like Experiment 2 with numbered clocks, it appears that speakers were somewhat faster to leave the hour hand and start fixating the minute hand with the tick-marked clocks,
although the effect is smaller than with the numbered clocks. There appears to be little effect of the
tick-marks for the span between fixations to the hour
region and the onset of speech.

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

0.4

0.8

Hour
Minute

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by research and training grants from the National Science Foundation
(SBR 94-11627 and SBR 98-73450) and the National
Institute of Mental Health (RO1-MH66089 and T32MH18990).

References

0.0

Ave. Proportion of Fixations

Time (ms) From Display Onset

General Discussion
It appears that speakers’ gaze patterns are largely
insensitive to small changes in the details of analog
clock faces, while at the same time, speech performance parameters may be more strongly affected.
Across all three manipulations, most speakers chose
to produce absolute time expressions, and they provided very similar fixation patterns. When numbers
were present on the clock faces, speakers were faster
to start utterances and appeared to be faster to move
from one hand to the next, but otherwise provided
similar fixation profiles. If speakers had faster access
to phonological information by reading the numbers
in Experiment 2, this may have enabled them to
spend less time gazing at the relevant time regions.
These patterns would be consistent with results from
Meyer and van der Meulen (2000) suggesting that a
substantial factor influencing fixation times during
object naming is phonological form retrieval. The effect of tick-marks on the fixation profiles was small,
but did affect utterance latencies as well.
In general, the data from these experiments provide additional support for hypothesized properties
of formulation in language production, and for the
usefulness of eyetracking and measures of eye-voice
coordination during time telling in assessing those
properties. Across all three experiments, when producing absolute expressions, speakers appeared to
locate the hour hand region quickly (within the first
or second fixation). This was followed by a series
of fixations that reflected the order of the words
that participants produced. It appears that even
with highly formulaic expressions and a fixed and
finite vocabulary, the eyes still foreshadow the path
of speech.

Bock, J. K., Irwin, D., Davidson, D. J. & Levelt,
Time (ms) From Voice Onset
W. J. M. (2003). Minding the clock. Journal of
Memory and Language, 48, 653-685.
Figure 5: Average proportions of fixations to tickBock, J. K., Irwin, D. E., & Davidson, D. J. (in
press). Putting first things first. J. M. Henderfree (solid) and tick-marked (dotted) clock faces relson & F. Ferreira (Eds.), The interface of lanative to display onset (top) and speech onset (botguage, vision, and action: What we can learn from
tom).
free-viewing eyetracking. New York: Psychology
Press.
Experiment 3 shows that the tick marks do not
Griffin,
Z. & Bock, J. K. (2000). What the eyes say
greatly affect the patterns of fixations or perforabout
speaking. Psychological Science, 11, 274mance of time telling to the clock faces. The
279.
same incremental pattern of fixations was observed,
Meyer, A. & van der Meulen, F. F. (2000). Phonoalthough shorter latencies were observed for ticklogical priming effects on speech onset latencies
marked clocks.
and viewing times in object naming. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 7, 314-319.
Therneau, T. M. & Grambsch, P. M. (2000). Modeling survival data: Extending the Cox model. New
299
York: Springer-Verlag.
−3000

−2000

−1000

0

1000

2000

3000

