UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding Interactive Graphical Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5sg7v74v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Fay, Nicolas
Garrod, Simon
Lee, John
et al.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding Interactive Graphical Communication
Nicolas Fay (nfay@atr.co.jp)
ATR Media Information Science Labs, 2-2-2 Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City,
Kyoto 619-0228, Japan

Simon Garrod (simon@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, G12 8QB, Scotland

John Lee (j.lee@ed.ac.uk)
Jon Oberlander (j.oberlander@ed.ac.uk)
HCRC, University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland

Abstract

way, interactive graphical communication is a frequent
occurrence (e.g. collaborative map sketching or
architect-architect design interaction). A questionnaire
study conducted by van Sommers (1984) illustrates that
fifty percent of non-work related drawing activity
involves drawings that take place with, or for, an
audience.

We demonstrate several parallels between interactive
verbal communication and graphical communication.
Experiment 1 shows that through interaction partners’
graphical representations converge, and are refined,
although degree of refinement is dictated by level of
interaction. Experiment 2 shows that through interaction
graphical representations lose their iconicity, taking on a
more symbolic form. Again, this is dictated by the
closeness of the interaction. Results are discussed both
in terms of the evolution of writing systems and
applications that support interactive graphical
communication.

Figure 1. The change over time in two Kanji forms.

Background
We are exposed to pictures, diagrams and symbols of
many different kinds every day, and more often than
not, many times a day. A graphic may signal where the
toilet is, or it may indicate that you cannot park your car
in a particular area. Indeed, in reading this paper you
are party to graphical communication, the symbolic
script conveying the research of the above authors.
It is widely believed that most writing systems
were derived from pictures drawn to represent meaning
directly (Gelb, 1963). Japanese Kanji provides a clear
example of this. While Kanji take their origin in
pictographs, Kanji forms have changed over time, with
few Kanji retaining their original pictographic form.
The development of two Kanji characters is provided in
Figure 1. To enable faster writing, Kanji have been
schematized, their complexity reduced through the
removal of peripheral information, such that their
meaning has become more indirect, or symbolic. For a
comprehensive discussion of the origins of graphic
productions see Tversky (1995).
Like the Kanji examples, graphical communication
is typically thought to be a form of one-way
communication (graphic to person). However, two-

384

While research has addressed applied aspects of
interactive graphical communication, such as when
electronic whiteboards are useful (Bly, 1988;
Whittaker, Brennan & Clark, 1991; Whittaker,
Geelhoed & Robinson, 1993), few have investigated the
principles governing interactive graphical
communication (Healy, Swoboda, Umata & Katagiri,
2001; Healy, Swoboda, Umata & Katagiri, 2002). By
comparing the process of interactive graphical
communication with that of verbal communication, we
address this fundamental question.
Arguably the most dominant model of
interpersonal communication is the Collaborative
Model (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). According to
the Collaborative Model, the successful transfer of
meaning between speaker and addressee is established
through their interaction, undertaken to ensure that what
is said is mutually agreed, or grounded (Clark &
Schaefer, 1987). Furthermore, conversationalists
ground information using the least collaborative effort
(Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986).
Support for the Collaborative Model has been
gained using a verbal referential communication task

(Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986). In the Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs study a speaker
and addressee interact, verbally, to identify a set of
abstract geometric shapes. Over repeated games,
referring expressions become shorter and more concise,
such that a figure initially described as ‘a person who’s
ice skating, except they’re sticking two arms out in
front’ is described as ‘the ice skater’ by the sixth game.
In addition to this reduction in collaborative effort,
description type moves from an iconic form
(description of what the figure looks like) to a more
symbolic, or abstract form. Furthermore, understanding
of the referring expression is determined by degree of
participation in the dialogue, such that overhearers,
side-participants and bystanders understand less of what
is said when compared with active participants
(Schober & Clark, 1989; Wilkes-Gibbs & Clark, 1992).
Other, related research addresses the
convergence in referring expressions brought about by
interaction. Having partners play a computerised maze
game, Garrod and Anderson (1987) observed that the
referring expressions used by one partner predicted
those used by the other partner. This observation led to
the notion of ‘input-output co-ordination’, that
conversational partners linguistically entrain one
another through their interaction, which in turn
simplifies the process of production and
comprehension.
To illuminate the principles of interactive
graphical communication we created a graphical
referential communication task. Like the well-known
game ‘Pictionary’, participants interact, graphically, in
order to identify concepts from a list. Having concepts
recur over games made it possible to study the effects
on interaction upon representational form.

Experiment 1

such that the matcher, or chooser, can identify each
drawing from their unordered list. Both participants are
permitted to draw. Subjects play six games using the
same set of items (presented in a different random order
on each game), alternating roles (director or matcher)
from game to game. Alternating the drawing and
matching roles allows an investigation of interaction
upon both graphical refinement and convergence.
Drawing took place on a standard whiteboard.
Participants’ drawings were recorded on digital camera.

Figure 2. Items used in the graphical communication
task.

Design
The influence of interaction upon representational form
was studied at three levels, h i g h , l o w and z e r o
interaction. In the high, or full interaction condition,
graphical interaction took place in real-time, partners
standing side-by-side at the whiteboard. This condition
is synonymous with face-to-face verbal communication.
In the low interaction condition, a visual barrier
separated partners during drawing. This condition is
comparable to Email communication, in that
participants’ exchange completed drawing turns.
Finally, in the zero interaction condition participants
carried out the task alone, communicating to a future
partner who they were told would be presented with
their drawings at a later date. This condition was
necessary to ensure that effects observed in the
interaction conditions were caused by interaction, not
repetition.

Subjects

Experiment 1 investigates the influence of graphical
interaction upon graphical refinement and convergence.

Task and Procedure
The task is the graphical equivalent of a verbal
referential communication task. Like the game
‘Pictionary’, participants are required to depict various
concepts, in such a way that a partner can identify them.
Again, like ‘Pictionary’, participants are not allowed to
speak or use letters in their drawings. Unlike
‘Pictionary’, concepts are drawn from a list of 16 items,
which are known to both participants. Concepts include
easily confused groups such as drama, soap opera,
theatre, Clint Eastwood and Robert DeNiro (see Figure
2 for a complete listing).
The director, or drawer, depicts the first 12
items from an ordered list (12 targets plus 4 distracters)

385

The participants were 80 undergraduates, each of whom
were randomly assigned to the experimental conditions,
high, low and zero interaction. 12 pairs participated in
the high interaction condition, 16 in the low interaction
condition and 12 individuals in the zero interaction
condition. Each pair had not met prior to the
experiment.

Results
Identification Accuracy. As can be seen from Figure
3, identification rates (proportion of items correctly
identified by matchers) in the high and low interaction
conditions1 were comparable.
In both cases,
identification rates improved across games.
1

With those in the zero interaction condition not having a
partner, it was not possible to gauge identification success.

Figure 3. Mean proportion of items correctly identified
by matchers in the high and low interaction conditions
across six games of the task.
Proportion scores were entered into a 2 x 6 Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA). Analyses were carried out by
subject (F1) and by item (F2). By subject tests used a
mixed design, treating Level (high and low) as a
between subject factor and Game (1 to 6) as within,
while by item tests treated both factors as within.
Analyses returned a main effect of Game F1(5, 26) =
11.59 and F2(5, 75) = 13.46, but no effect of Level, or
interaction between Game and Level, Fs < 1.87 (for all
results reported p < .01 unless otherwise stated). Thus,
participants’ ability to identify their partner’s referent
was not influenced by interaction level.
Graphical Refinement. To illustrate the typical
changes in representational form across games we
provide an example from each of the three conditions,
high, low and zero interaction, given in Figures 4, 5 and
6 respectively.

conditions (Figures 4 and 5). In both, the initial
drawings take an iconic form, resembling the concepts
they depict. However, through interaction participants
minimize their collaborative effort, stripping
unnecessary information from the initial representation,
leaving only the salient aspects of the image. Note also,
that through interaction participants’ representations
converge; contrast the first two drawing by Drawer 1
and Drawer 2 of computer monitor and Clint Eastwood
with the last two drawings made by the same
participants. A very different pattern emerges in the
zero interaction condition (Figure 6). Here participants’
drawings become more complex over games2.
To quantify drawing complexity we adopted
the Perimetric Complexity formula developed by Pelli,
Burns, Farrell and Moore (2003), used to measure the
visual complexity of letters, Complexity =
Perimeter2/Ink. Using a subset of the drawings, we
compared the human judgment of complexity (rank
order) with the order produced by Pelli et. al.’s
complexity measure (continuous measure transformed
to rank order). There was a reliable correlation between
the two, r = .66.
Figure 7 illustrates the changing complexity of
drawings across games in the high, low and zero
interaction conditions. The mean complexity scores
were calculated after the removal of scores 2.5 standard
deviations (SD) from the condition mean. These
extremes were replaced with values corresponding to
the mean plus or minus 2.5 SDs. Such cases accounted
for only 1.92% of the data.

Figure 4. Computer Monitor over 6 games in the high
interaction condition.

Figure 5. Clint Eastwood over 6 games in the low
interaction condition.

Figure 6. Art gallery over 4 games in the zero
interaction condition.

Figure 7. Mean Complexity (Perimeter2/Ink) of
drawings across games in the high, low and zero
interaction conditions.
In contrast to the zero interaction condition, where
graphical complexity increases across games, in the
high and low interaction conditions graphical
complexity decreases. Note also that the complexity of
2

Observe the reduction in graphical complexity of the
drawings produced in the high and low interaction

386

Due to the reported difficulty of the task, and time required
to complete the task, participants played 4 games in the zero
interaction condition.

drawings decreases more rapidly, and more smoothly in
the high interaction condition. These observations are
corroborated by ANOVA.
To accommodate the fewer games played in
the zero interaction condition, the first ANOVA
concerns only the first 4 games of the experiment.
Complexity scores were thus entered into 3 x 4
ANOVA. By subject tests used a mixed design,
treating Level (high, low and zero) as a between subject
factor and Game (1 to 4) as within, while by item tests
treated both factors as within. ANOVA returned a main
effect of Level and Game, both of which were qualified
by the interaction between Level and Game F1(6, 37) =
8.11 and F2(6, 90) = 32.65. Tests of simple effects
corroborate the observations made above, namely that
images produced in the zero interaction condition
increase in complexity over games F1(3, 111) = 5.60
and F2(3, 45) = 17.96, whereas those in the high and
low interaction conditions decrease in complexity over
games, F1(3, 111) = 8.06 and F2(3, 45) = 26.57, F1(3,
111) = 4.61 and F2(3, 45) = 10.67 respectively.
Next, a 2 x 6 ANOVA compared the
complexity of drawings produced in the six games
played in the high and low interaction conditions.
Although not reliable by subject, p > .10, by item tests
show an interaction between Level and Game F2(5, 75)
= 5.78. As is evident from Figure 7, this was due to the
continual reduction in drawing complexity by
participants in the high interaction condition (between
level effects of complexity are reliable at p < .01 from
game 4 onwards).
Thus, as is the case in verbal communication,
degree of interaction is important in graphical
communication.
Without interaction graphical
representations become more complex across games.
This effect reproduces those found in verbal referential
communication tasks; without feedback speakers’
referring expressions become more elaborate (number
of words) over games (Fussell, 1990; Hupet &
Chantraine, 1992). Furthermore, more closely coupled
graphical interaction allowed partners to maximally
reduce their collaborative effort.
Graphical Convergence. Graphical convergence was
studied using the images produced in the high and low
interaction conditions. For each pair, the images for
each item (e.g. drama, as drawn by each subject, i.e.
Director 1 and Director 2) were placed in three
categories: early (game 1 and 2 images), middle (game
3 and 4 images) and late (game 5 and 6 images). The
images for each category were placed side by side on a
sheet of A4 paper. To determine the influence of
interaction upon graphical convergence, two
independent coders ranked each item set (presented in a
random order) in order of similarity. The pair of
images thought to be most similar were given a rank of

387

1, those deemed to be least similar were given a rank of
3. Inter-coder agreement, on the item pair deemed most
similar, was well above chance (50.1% agreement as
opposed to 33.3% chance agreement).
As can be seen from Figure 8, graphical
convergence increased across games. In both the high
and low interaction conditions, a higher proportion of
middle images were given a rank of 1 (most similar)
when compared with early images. Also, more late
images were ranked as most similar when compared
with middle images.
The proportion scores were entered into two 2
x 2 ANOVAs. By subject tests treated Game (Early vs.
Middle OR Middle vs. Late) as a between subject factor
and Level as within (High vs. Low), while by item
analyses treated both as within subject factors. The
results were as predicted; middle game images were
ranked most similar more often than early game images
F1(1, 26) = 11.05 and F2(1, 15) = 13.27, and late game
images were ranked most similar more often than
middle game images F1(1, 26) = 11.59 and F2(1, 15) =
18.43. No other effects were reliable.
Thus, as is the case in verbal communication,
where conversational partners entrain one another’s
verbal expressions, partners’ graphical expressions
converge through interaction. While coders reported
that graphical convergence was clearer in the high
interaction condition, corroborated by inter-coder
agreement scores (52.8% agreement on images ranked
most similar in the high condition as opposed to 47.4%
agreement in the low interaction condition), our
categorical measure does not permit an investigation of
degree of graphical convergence.

Figure 8. Mean proportion of high and low interaction
condition images ranked most similar from the early
(games 1 and 2), middle (games 3 and 4), and late
(games 5 and 6) interaction games.

Experiment 2
To better understand the influence of interaction upon
representational form, an ‘overseer’ experiment was

run. Overseers’ ability to identify the drawings made
by directors in the high, low and zero interaction
conditions was compared. If, as predicted, interaction
causes representations to move from an iconic to a more
symbolic form, then overseers should more accurately
identify director’s first drawings (prior to interaction)
when compared with their last drawings.

drawings contain less semantic information, or are less
iconic, when compared with their earlier counterparts.
This was not the case in the low and zero interaction
conditions where early and late drawings were equally
well identified by overseers.

Task and Procedure
Image sampling was conducted such that each
‘overseer’ was exposed to a comparable number of
drawings made in the high, low and zero interaction
conditions, and a representative sample of the different
drawing types produced in each condition (e.g. art
gallery, museum etc.). To negate the effect of
interaction, only the images produced by the first
director from each interacting pair were used (i.e. the
director on game 1). Overseers’ identification success
on this first drawing was compared with that of the
third and final drawing made by the same director (i.e.
game 5). The first and third drawings made by each
director in the zero interaction condition were likewise
sampled.
Each overseer was provided with a workbook
containing 160 images (each image was seen by two
overseers), presented in a random order. To the left of
each image was a table that contained a list of the 16
possible identities of the image. Participants placed a
tick in the box next to their choice. 16 participants
acted as overseers in this study.

Results
Figure 9 displays the mean proportion of early and late
drawings produced by directors in the high, low and
zero interaction conditions that were correctly identified
by overseers. It can be seen that the early and late
drawings made in the low and zero interaction
conditions were identified equally well by overseers. In
contrast, overseers identified more of the early
drawings than late drawings produced in the high
interaction condition. These observations were
corroborated by ANOVA.
Proportion scores were entered into 3 x 2
ANOVA, treating Level (High, Low and Zero) and
Game (Early and Late) as within subject factors.
Analyses revealed a main effect of Level which was
qualified by the interaction between Level and Game
F1(2, 30) = 4.25, p < .05 and F2(2, 30) = 3.84, p < .05.
This interaction was caused by the simple effect of
Game in the high interaction condition F1(1, 15) =
5.37, p < .05 and F2(1, 15) = 5.42, p < .05, with no such
effect in the low and zero interaction conditions Fs < 1.
Thus, only in the high interaction condition are
overseers less able to identify the directors’ later
drawings. We can therefore conclude that these

388

Figure 9. Mean proportion of Early (game 1) and Late
(game 5 in the interaction conditions and game 3 in the
zero interaction condition) drawings made by directors
in the high, low and zero interaction conditions that
were correctly identified by overseers.

Discussion
The studies reported here present evidence suggesting
several parallels between verbal and graphical
communication. Like verbal communication, graphical
‘conversationalists’ first ground (Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986) what they mean. Over repeated reference
partners’ graphical representations converge and are
refined. Again, like verbal communication this
graphical convergence aids both the production and
comprehension of future representations (Garrod &
Anderson, 1987). The process of graphical refinement
is dictated by degree of interaction, such that more
closely coupled interaction facilitates greater
refinement. Thus, closer graphical interaction enables
partners to more substantially reduce their collaborative
effort (Clark & Schaefer, 1987).
Furthermore, degree of interaction influences
the semantics of the representation, such that overseers
find high interaction partners’ later drawings difficult to
identify. If iconicity can be measured on a scale
ranging from icon to symbol, we can conclude that
closely coupled graphical interaction causes
representations to move toward the symbol end of the
scale. Similar observations are made by Healy,
Swoboda, Umata and Katagiri (2001), who found that
more interactive graphical communication leads to a
higher incidence of abstract, as opposed to figurative,
representations. Comparable findings have been made
in verbal referential communication tasks, where verbal
descriptions are found to contain more definite

reference (e.g. ‘the ice skater’) in high interaction
conditions (Traxler & Gernsbacher, 1992).
Comparison of identification rates between
matchers (Game 1 = 81%, Game 5 = 95%) and
overseers (Game 1 = 70%, Game 5 = 68%) suggest an
‘overseer effect’ comparable to that found in verbal
referential communication tasks (Schober & Clark,
1989). However, before such a claim can be
substantiated, a full overseer experiment is required,
where overseers are party to the build up of common
ground between director and matcher (i.e. real time
observation of drawing activity in each game).
The observed schematization of drawings
across games, particularly those in the high interaction
condition, bear a striking similarity to the evolution of
writing systems, such as the Kanji system documented
in Figure 1. While the development of writing systems
has generally been attributed to changes in writing
medium (e.g. shells to bronze to paper. See Tversky,
1995), the results reported here suggest this explanation
may underestimate the importance of interaction.
Finally, from an applied point of view, the
research reported emphasizes the importance of
coupling, or concurrency, to devices that support
multiparty interactive graphical communication. Only
through closely coupled interactions can partners fully
realize the potential of interactive graphical
communication.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the
Telecommunications Advancement Organization of
Japan, and the ESRC and EPSRC (grant L323253003).
We are grateful to Yasuhiro Katagiri, Nik Swoboda and
two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Bly, S. A. (1988) A Use of Drawing Surfaces in
Different Collaborative Settings. Proceedings of the
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work, Portland, OR, Sept 1988, Pages 250-256.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1987). Collaborating on
contributions to conversation. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 2, 19-41.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Fussell, S. R. (1990). The effects of intended audience
on message production and comprehension:
Reference in a common ground framework.
Unpublished doctoral thesis, Columbia University,
New York.

389

Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue: a study in conceptual and semantic
co-ordination. Cognition, 27,181-218.
Gelb, I. (1963). A study of writing. Second Edition.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Healy, P. G. T., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & Katagiri, Y.
(2001). Representational form and communicative
use. In Moore J.D. and Stenning, K. (Ed.s)
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. 1-4 August, Edinburgh,
Scotland. pp. 411-416.
Healy, P. G. T., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & Katagiri, Y.
(2002). Graphical representation in graphical
dialogue. International Journal of Human Computer
Studies. Special Issue on Interactive Graphical
Communication. 57(4), pp. 375-395.
Hupet, M., & Chantraine, Y. (1992). Changes in
repeated references: Collaboration or repetition
effects? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 21,
485-496.
Krauss, R. M. & Weinheimer, S. (1964). Changes in
reference phrases as a function of frequency of usage
in social interaction: A preliminary study.
Psychonomic Science, 1, 113-114.
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farrell, B., & Moore, D.C.
(2003). Identifying letters. Vision Research, Accepted
with minor revisions.
Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding
by addressees and overhearers. Cognitive Psychology,
21, 211-232.
Sommers, P. van. (1984). Drawing and cognition:
Descriptive and experimental studies of graphic
production processes. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Traxler, M. J., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (1992).
Improving written communication through minimal
feedback. Language and Cognitive Processes, 7, 122.
Tversky, B. (1995). Cognitive origins of graphic
conventions. In F. T. Marchese (Editor).
Understanding images. pp. 29-53. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Whittaker, S., Geelhoed, E., & Robinson, E. (1993).
Shared workspaces: how do they work and when are
they useful? International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies, 39, pp 813-842.
Whittaker, S., Brennan, S., & Clark, H (1991). Coordinating activity: an analysis of computer supported
cooperative work. In Proceedings of CHI'91 Human
Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, USA,
Eds., S. Robertson, J. Olson & G. Olson, NY: ACM
Press, 360-367.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H. H. (1992). Coordinating
beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 31, 183-194.

