UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When A’s and B’s are C’s and D’s: The effect of the cross-classification of items on learned
concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0rn1z0kb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Chin-Parker, Seth
Ross, Brian H.

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When A’s and B’s are C’s and D’s: The effect of the cross-classification of items on
learned concepts
Seth Chin-Parker (chinpark@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 East Daniel Street
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Brian H. Ross (bross@s.psych.uiuc.edu)
Beckman Institute, 405 North Mathews Avenue
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801 USA
Abstract
Category learning plays a crucial role in cognition because the
acquired concepts are used later for categorization, explanation,
communication, problem solving, and inference. However, there
is little information about how category learning can affect
previously acquired concepts. This issue is especially
interesting when one considers items that belong to multiple
categories, items that can be cross-classified. The current study
investigates a learning situation where one classification set is
learned and the knowledge gained is assessed. Then a second,
orthogonal classification set is learned for the same items. The
experiments show that there is an effect of the crossclassification on judgements made about items in terms of the
initial classification set. There seem to be two possible effects
of learning a cross-classification for items. The secondary
learning causes either an intrusion of attribute information
critical for the second classification set, or a specification as to
what attributes are critical for the first classification set.

Introduction
Things we encounter in the world belong to multiple
categories. The same person can be a runner, a mother, an
intellectual. The same car can be a station wagon, a Toyota,
a danger to pedestrians. This complex organization
involving the cross-classification of items can be seen in
common categories (Ross & Murphy, 1999), but its effect
on category learning has been largely overlooked. In a
typical category learning study, a subject learns to categorize
a set of items into two categories. The focus has been on
how the learning proceeds and what knowledge is acquired
through the learning, as well as how the knowledge is
represented by the learner. These are critical issues, but if
the aim is to understand or model human category learning,
more complex learning situations should be studied.
One type of complex learning situation that has received
attention recently involves category learning in contexts
where background knowledge has some bearing on the
categories of interest (for reviews see Heit, 2001, and
Murphy, 2002). However, the effect of knowledge in these
studies is unidirectional. The background knowledge
available to the learner has some effect on how category
learning proceeds. The current study expands our
understanding of how background knowledge interacts with
current learning, focusing on whether current learning can
affect established knowledge.

240

For example, a young child learns from both picture
books and adult interaction which creatures in the world are
“cats,” and which ones are “dogs.” The learning is extensive
enough that the child can recognize easily what is a “cat”
and what is a “dog,” even that a tiger is a categorized as a
“cat” and a wolf as a “dog.” Later, the child learns that
people keep some animals as “pets.” Now, the child learns
which animals are pets and which are not. This category
would cut across the “cat” and “dog” distinction that the
child already has learned – some cats (and dogs) are pets
while others are not. The question arises as to whether this
later learning would have any predictable effect on category based decisions the child makes about cats and dogs. The
learning about “pets” and “not pets” might have no effect on
how the child thinks about a cat she happens to encounter.
However, learning about the critical attributes that determine
“petness” might affect the child’s concept of cats (or dogs)
in general.
An intelligent system uses past experience to make
successful predictions about novel situations (Anderson,
1991), and category research has helped us understand how
this takes place. At the same time, it is important to
recognize that the learning that occurs in these new
situations can interact with and possibly modify stored
knowledge. An understanding of these interactions could
help to specify how the system is representing knowledge
and how best to model the processes at work. Studying the
effects of cross-classification is one means of examining this
issue.

Effects of Cross-Classification
Much study and thought has gone into understanding how
people recognize the category membership of things. The
focus of current category learning research has been largely
on the learning of one classification set – an item
encountered during the learning can belong to one of two
contrasting categories. Although there is still debate on
several key issues, it is generally agreed that when learning
to classify items, subjects attend to diagnostic attributes,
those attributes that are predictive of category membership
(Tversky, 1977). These attributes are subsequently more
salient in the category representation, having a greater effect
on later classification decisions (Kruschke, 1992) and on
typicality ratings of items (Chin-Parker & Ross, 2002).

The cross-classification of items adds an interesting and
important dimension to these ideas. One possibility is that
category learning proceeds independently for orthogonal
classification sets. Given that a child already knows how to
classify creatures as “cats” and “dogs,” learning how to
classify “pets” and “not pets” would have no effect on the
decisions that the child makes about cats and dogs. Even
though the child could interact with the same set of items,
the attributes that are diagnostic of an item’s “petness”
would only affect the representation the child has for “pet”
and “not pet.” Another possibility is that interacting with an
item that is both a cat (or dog) and a pet (or not a pet)
would result in some modification of the original category
representations acquired.
The simplest modification of existing knowledge would
be that the attributes that are diagnostic in terms of the
second classification set would have increased saliency in
both category representations. Even though size is not
diagnostic of “cat" (tigers and lions are quite large whereas
domestic short-hairs are not), it is diagnostic of being a
“pet,” so size would have increased salience in the “cat”
representation following the learning of the second
classification set. The knowledge gained about the items
from classifying them into the second classification set
would essentially intrude into the representations of the
primary classification set. Work by Ross (1997, 1999)
shows that further interaction with the members of a learned
classification set can result in this type of modification of
the category representations. Although this work was not
done with cross-classifiable items, it indicates that there
might be some effect of the secondary learning on previous
knowledge.
Current models of inductive category learning do not
clearly address issues related to updating category
representations by means of cross-classification. They rely
on corrective feedback that would be specific to the category
label of interest. So, if a tiger (a cat) is incorrectly classified
as a pet, there is no readily available mechanism which
might adjust the learner’s representation of “cat.” The topic
of formally modeling the effects of cross-classification are
addressed in the General Discussion.

Current Experiments
The purpose of the current studies is to assess whether
category learning, specifically the increased salience of
diagnostic attributes due to classification learning, will
affect previous knowledge. In the experiments, the subjects
learned about fictional creatures that could be classified by
two different means. The attributes that were critical to learn
the first classification set were non-informative for the
secondary distinction (e.g., the legs were diagnostic in one
classification set, but non-diagnostic in the other). The
subjects initially learned one classification set and were
asked to make category membership judgements about a
series of the creatures. Then, the subjects were told that they
would learn about different categories of creatures. The
subjects saw the same creatures
during this second
classification learning, however, classification decisions
were made in terms of the second classification set. After a
transfer task concerning the second classification set, the

241

subjects were asked to make the same judgements about the
creatures they had after the initial learning. The analyses
focus on whether there is a systematic effect of the
secondary classification learning on the decisions the
subjects make about the initial set.
It is hypothesized that subjects will alter their decisions
regarding the items following the secondary learning
primarily as a result of the increased salience of the
attributes diagnostic for the second classification set. This
would represent an intrusion effect, the knowledge critical
for the second classification set would intrude upon the
category knowledge of the primary classification set.

Experiment 1
A simple cross-classification structure was used to
determine whether decisions based on an initially learned
classification set were affected by subsequent learning of an
orthogonal classification set. Individual creatures belonged
to both a biological category and a category determined by
eating habits. The attributes that were diagnostic of the
biological classification set (the body shape, body covering,
and legs) were more perceptually salient than the attributes
that were diagnostic for the second classification set (the
eyes, the mouth, and the hands). This difference is based on
the assumption that most biological classifications do
depend on salient features (such as body shape), while other
distinctions may be more subtle (such as the mouth
indicating a food preference). Also, since the attributes
which are diagnostic for the second classification set are less
salient, they will be less likely to inadvertently intrude
upon decisions made about the primary classification set.
A typicality rating task was used to test for intrusion
effects. Following learning, subjects rated the typicality of
items that were perfectly consistent with the items they had
seen during study and items that were inconsistent in terms
of one of the two classification sets. The analyses focus on
the subject responses to the items that were inconsistent in
terms of the classification set learned second. For example,
the eyes of the creatures were non-diagnostic during the
initial classification learning, but during the typicality
rating task, subjects saw creatures with eyes that had never
occurred with the given hand shape and mouth. Since the
attributes manipulated in these items were non-diagnostic in
the first classification set, they should not have much
influence on the initial typicality ratings. If there is no
intrusion effect following the learning of the second
classification set, the final typicality rating task should
show the same pattern of results. If there is an intrusion
effect, the typicality ratings of the items inconsistent with
the second classification set should show a drop compared
to the initial ratings.

Method
Subjects Sixteen undergraduates at the University of
Illinois participated in the experiment for class credit.
Design Subjects first learned to classify the biological
classification set (the AB set), and subsequently classify on
the basis eating habits (the CD set). The stimuli within each

study block were presented randomly. The order of the items
during the typicality rating tasks was also randomized.
Materials The stimuli for this experiment were drawings
of fictional creatures which were presented on computers.
The creatures varied along six binary attributes; the body
shape (squat or elongated), body covering (scales or fur), leg
type (long and skinny or short and squat), eye type (cat-like
or bug-like), mouth type (large and toothy or small and
pursed), and hand type (rounded and stubby or long and clawlike). The first three attributes were correlated in how they
were specifically instantiated, as were the last three
attributes. The first three attributes were diagnostic of the
AB classification set, and the other three attributes were
diagnostic of the CD classification set. The classification
sets were orthogonal so that an equal number of the study
items were “Rosk Newbs” (or “Surk Tolls”) that ate
“Meabs” (or “Plats”). Abstractly, the attributes could be
instantiated with a value of 1 or 0. A creature that had the
values 111xxx, would be a “Rosk Newb,” 000xxx would be
a “Surk Toll,” xxx111 would be a “Meab Eater,” and
xxx000 would be a “Plat Eater.” By cross-classifying the
items, a creature could have values of 111111, 111000,
000111, or 000000. The study stimuli were created by
slightly modifying the features that instantiated the
attributes of these four subset prototypes. This way, each of
creatures within a subset were easily differentiated from one
another, but they also clearly shared basic features within the
classification sets. Four of each subset were made for study,
and all 16 items were seen during each study block.
The stimuli for the typicality rating tasks were created in a
similar manner. The stimuli were either novel consistent
items, AB inconsistent items, CD inconsistent items, or old
items. The old items were simply eight stimuli (two from
each category subset) selected from the study items. The
eight novel consistent items were created in the same way as
the study items. These creatures were perfectly good
members of one of the four creature subsets. The 24
inconsistent items were created by swapping one of the
attribute values. The AB inconsistent items had one of the
attribute values that was diagnostic for the taxonomic
classification set in conflict (such as 110111) while the CD
inconsistent items had a conflicting value present for one the
attributes that was diagnostic for the other classification set
(such as 111101). There were 40 items total in the typicality
rating task, and the same items were used in all typicality
rating tasks.
Procedure Subjects were told that they would be
participating in a category learning experiment and that they
should learn as much as they could about each of the
creatures as they would be asked to make judgements about
the creatures once they had finished the learning. No
mention was made of the cross-classification of the items.

242

All of the following instructions and tasks took place on the
computer.
Subjects were told a biologist had discovered some new
creatures on an island and their job was to learn how to
identify these creatures. For each study trial, a creature
appeared centered on the screen with the two possible
category labels offset from center just below the picture. The
subject clicked the mouse on either of the labels, and
feedback on the classification was immediately given by the
appearance of either “Correct” (in green) or “Incorrect” (in
red) on both sides of the picture. The correct category label
also appeared centered beneath the picture, and the subject
could study the picture along with the category label as long
as necessary. Each subject continued until a learning
criterion of 15 out of 16 correct in a block was met and at
least two blocks of study had been completed.
Once the learning criterion was met, instructions for the
initial typicality rating task (AB1) were given. Items in the
task were presented individually, blocked by the category of
creatures. Beneath each picture was the question, “How
typical is this creature of a Rosk Newb (or Surk Toll)?”
along with a rating scale going from one (“Not at all
Typical”) to seven (“Very Typical”). The subject used the
mouse to indicate the typicality rating, and then the next
item appeared. After rating the typicality of items in both
categories of the AB set, subjects were given instructions for
the second classification set. Subjects were told that the
biologist had discovered some new creatures, and the task
was to learn how to identify the two types. The subjects
were not told that they would be seeing the same creatures
during this second classification task, although they most
likely realized that fact once the second classification task
began. The classification task and typicality rating task
proceeded just as before, except that all decisions were made
with regard to the CD classification set.
After completing the second typicality rating task, the
subjects were informed about one last task – rating the
typicality of a series of creatures in terms of the AB
classification set. The final typicality rating task (AB2) was
identical to AB1.

Results and Discussion
Did the typicality ratings of items change from AB1 to
AB2? The analyses focus on the difference between ratings
of the consistent items and the CD inconsistent items. The
ratings of consistent items provide a baseline typicality for
creatures that match the study items. By subtracting the
mean typicality rating of the CD inconsistent items from
that of the consistent items, the effect of the inconsistency
among the attributes diagnostic for the second classification
set is determined. If these features become more salient as a
result of learning the CD classification set (even though
they are not diagnostic in terms of the AB classification
set), the drop in the typicality ratings for the CD
inconsistent items should increase from AB1 to AB2. This
change in the difference score is referred to as the intrusion

effect score. All effects reported as significant are p < .05,
two-tailed.
The mean typicality ratings for the items of interest are
shown in Table 1. When the subjects had learned only about
the AB classification set, there was a significant difference
between the consistent items and the CD inconsistent items,
m = 0.34, SD = 0.46, t(15) = 2.92. Although not intended,
the attributes diagnostic for the CD classification set were
apparently salient enough that subjects showed an effect of
inconsistencies among those attributes. This effect was
marginal in AB2, m = 0.59, SD = 1.09, t(15) = 2.17,
because of the greater variability. The important question is
whether there was a change in the level of the effect from
AB1 to AB2. A significant increase would support the
hypothesis that learning the CD classification set increased
the salience of the attributes diagnostic in that set, and this
affected the representations of the categories learned in the
AB classification set. The intrusion effect score was
positive, but it was not significant, m = 0.26, SD = 1.09,
t(15) < 1.
Table 1: Mean Typicality Ratings by Item Type

Consistent
CD Inconsistent
Difference

Experiment 1
AB1
AB2
5.51
5.90
5.17
5.31
0.34
0.59

Experiment 1b
AB1
AB2
5.38
5.97
4.92
5.34
0.45
0.63

Note: AB1 = initial typicality rating task, AB2 = final
typicality rating task.

Experiment 1b
The intrusion effect score found in Experiment 1a was in the
direction hypothesized, but non-significant. It is possible
that the unlimited response time the subjects had in the
typicality rating task was masking the effect. The attributes
diagnostic for the CD classification set may have been more
salient during AB2, as predicted by the intrusion effect, but
the subjects had enough time to strategically ignore that
source of information when making their typicality ratings.
In this way, the intrusion effect score would have been
diminished. To test for this, the rating task was modified so
that the creature being rated was only briefly presented,
reducing strategic effects.
Sixteen subjects were tested in a new version of
Experiment 1a. All materials were the same. The subjects
were told that the stimulus presentation in the rating task
would be short, and during the task, the creatures were
displayed for only one second following a 500ms fixation
point.

Results and Discussion
The results of Experiment 1b were very similar to
Experiment 1a. The modification of the typicality rating
task did not increase the intrusion effect as expected. In
AB1, the difference between ratings for the consistent items
and the CD inconsistent items was significant, m = 0.45,
SD = 0.69, t(15) = 2.63. The difference was also significant

243

in AB2, m = 0.63, SD = 1.02, t(15) = 2.48, but the
intrusion effect score (m = 0.18, SD = 1.26) was not
significant, t(15) < 1.
As before, there was an increase in the difference scores
from AB1 to AB2, but this increase did not indicate a
reliable intrusion effect.

Experiment 1 Summary and Discussion
The initial analyses of data from Experiment 1a and 1b do
not support the idea that the learning of an orthogonal
classification set for a group of items has an effect on a
previously learned classification set. However, in further
analyses, a pattern was noticed between the AB1 difference
scores and the intrusion effect scores. Small difference
scores in AB1 occurred with positive intrusion effect scores,
and larger difference scores in AB1 occurred with negative
intrusion effect scores. A number of the subjects showed
little sensitivity to the violations in the CD inconsistent
items during AB1, which was what we had expected, and
those subjects also showed the hypothesized intrusion
effect. This was similar to the subjects in the studies by
Ross (1997,1999). During the initial learning in those
studies, the subjects were not sensitive to the use relevant
attributes. The later use of the categories resulted in those
attributes becoming more salient, much like what was
expected by the intrusion effect.
So, for those subjects who were not sensitive to the nondiagnostic attributes following learning the AB
classification set, there is evidence of the predicted intrusion
effect. However, the subjects that were sensitive to the nondiagnostic attributes in AB1 show a qualitatively different
effect. The typicality ratings for the CD inconsistent items
increased after learning the CD classification set, the
opposite of what was predicted by the intrusion effect. It
appears that learning the CD classification set allowed these
subjects to recognize what attributes were non-critical for the
AB classification set, and they adjusted later decisions made
about members of the initial categories accordingly. This
strategic effect can be described as a specification effect. The
subsequent learning helped to specify what was critical, and
what was not critical, information in terms of the AB
classification set.
All of this is highly speculative, but the occurrence of a
specification effect would be important if true. If the
previous summary is accurate, and the variation in the
subject responses is not simply due to a lack of effect of
learning the CD classification set, we should be able to
make more specific predictions about the specification effect
and when it is likely to occur. The second experiment is a
test of the conclusions we drew from the post hoc
exploration of the results of Experiment 1a and 1b.

Experiment 2
According to the proposed interpretation of the results of the
first experiments, it should be possible to influence the
effect score by manipulating the salience of the attributes
diagnostic for the second classification set. To accomplish
this, we had group of subjects learn the CD classification
set first. Since the features for the AB classification set were
more perceptually salient, they would more likely be

incorporated into the initial learning of the CD classification
set. The difference between the typicality ratings for the
consistent items and the AB inconsistent items during the
first typicality rating task should be large, even though the
violations found within the AB inconsistent items occur
within the non-diagnostic attributes. Once the subject has
the opportunity to learn about the AB classification set, the
secondary learning in this experiment, the subject would be
more likely to modify his or her knowledge of the CD
classification set by discounting the importance of attributes
diagnostic of the AB classification set. The effect score
should tend to be negative since the difference between the
typicality ratings for the consistent items and the AB
inconsistent items would decrease. Notice that this is
contrary to the hypothesis initially proposed. If the negative
effect score is found, it would provide support for the
occurrence of a specification effect.

Method
The materials and procedures used in this experiment were
identical to Experiment 1. The crucial difference was that
the 16 subjects learned the CD classification set first and
then learned the AB classification set.

Results and Discussion
The difference scores and intrusion effect score for each
subject in Experiment 2 were determined as in Experiment
1. The mean typicality ratings for the items of interest can
be found in Table 2. The first typicality rating task showed
a large difference between the ratings for the consistent
items and the AB inconsistent items, m = 1.69, SD = 1.16,
and this difference was greater than zero, t(15) = 5.84. The
difference in the final rating task was smaller, but still
greater than zero, m = 1.21, SD = 1.31, t(15) = 3.71. The
mean intrusion effect score for Experiment 2 was -0.48 (SD
= 0.89), which was both different from the mean intrusion
effect score found in Experiment 1 (m = 0.26), t(30) = 3.12,
and different from zero, t(15) = 2.16. Whereas just over
half of the subjects in Experiments 1a and 1b showed
positive intrusion effect scores, only four of the sixteen
subjects showed a positive intrusion effect score in
Experiment 2. There is a clear tendency for the effect of
violations to the diagnostic attributes for the second
classification set to be reduced as result of learning the
cross-classification. The predicted evidence for the
specification effect was found.
When the CD classification set was learned first, the
attributes for the AB classification set, although nondiagnostic, were salient. The AB inconsistent items, which
contained violations to those attributes, were initially rated
as being not very typical in terms of the CD classification
set. After the subjects learned about the AB classification
set, they adjusted how much they considered the attributes
diagnostic of the AB classification set when rating the items
in terms of CD classification set. The subjects were more
able to specify what information was important when
dealing with members of the CD classification set. The
majority of the subjects in this experiment showed this
specification effect because of how available the information

244

about the AB diagnostic attributes was during the initial
learning.
Table 2: Mean Typicality Ratings by Item Type from
Experiment 2
Consistent
AB Inconsistent
Difference

CD1
5.83
4.14
1.69

CD2
5.95
4.74
1.21

Note: CD1 = initial typicality rating task, CD2 = final
typicality rating task.

General Discussion
The current study was intended to begin an investigation
into an important issue, how category learning might affect
prior knowledge. Although an important issue, it has
received relatively little study, and past work indicates that
once established, knowledge is fairly resistant to
modification (Lewandowsky, Kalish, & Griffiths, 2000;
Potts, St. John, & Kirson, 1989). Since the items we deal
with on a daily basis can be considered to be members of
more than one category, this cross-classification structure
seemed to be an especially appropriate means to explore the
possible effects. There has been little research into complex
non-hierarchical category structures, and almost none
dealing directly with category learning. This direction in
category learning research is important since it reflects
structure found in the real world, and because it raises
important theoretical issues. The work that has been done
showing the effect of prior knowledge on category learning
has allowed for great gains to be made in our understanding
of how intelligent systems learn. There is a great deal more
to be learned as we come understand how current learning
modifies previous knowledge.
The current research was intended to establish a
methodology for investigating whether category learning
leads to systematic changes in prior knowledge. Although
the results are not entirely clear, the initial experiments were
successful in challenging our predictions as to the possible
effects of learning in a cross-classification structure. Based
primarily on the results of Ross (1997, 1999), we expected
to find evidence of an intrusion effect. Instead, we found
evidence for two means by which category learning can
affect prior knowledge. The results of Experiments 1 and 1b
indicated that some subjects showed the predicted increase
in salience for attributes diagnostic for the secondary
classification set after learning to classify in terms of that
classification set. However, other subjects showed a contrary
tendency to reduce the importance of those attributes
following the secondary learning. The second experiment
showed further evidence of this unanticipated specification
effect.
Both the intrusion and specification effects represent the
interaction of knowledge from multiple categories for a
given item. It is possible that the secondary learning
directly causes the modification of preexisting category
knowledge. However, it is also quite possible that the

effects on the typicality ratings are the result of the
synthesis of available information during the decision
making process. This initial study is not able to
differentiate between these possibilities. Still, there has been
work both in the domain of machine learning (Dejong &
Mooney, 1986) and cognitive psychology (Murphy &
Allopenna, 1994; Wisniewski & Medin, 1994) that
illustrates how prior knowledge constrains current learning
because the information being learned is situated within the
framework of knowledge already available. This process
explains how prior knowledge affects learning, and it may
also be a way to explain how prior knowledge is modified
by the learning. If this is the case, the interaction between
prior knowledge and learning is occurring sooner as opposed
to later, but further study is necessary.
Most current models of category learning are not designed
to account for the cross-classification of items (although see
OLOC; Martin & Billman, 1994). Because of this, it is
difficult to determine how applicable various models might
be to the issue or how easily they might be modified in
order to account for the effects found. The effects could be
the result of a simple attribute weighting mechanism (like
that found in ALCOVE; Kruschke, 1992). The intrusion
effect could be the result of the increased saliency of
attributes critical for the secondary classification set, and if
the same mechanism was able to decrease the saliency of a
given attribute as the result of learning a second
classification set, it could also be considered an explanation
for the specification effect. However, there would have to be
some other process that informs the attribute weighting
decision, and it is unclear what would fill this role. More
recent models of categorization may have different
solutions. SUSTAIN (Love, Markman, & Yamauchi, 2000)
partitions categories in ways that would allow for
subcategories to form, but again it is unclear how this
might account for the contradictory effects. KRES (Rehder
& Murphy, in press) offers another approach by placing
knowledge modules into the system to guide the category
learning. Although designed to account for knowledge
effects on learning, there is a means to turn off unhelpful
prior knowledge. With some modification, this could
represent a mechanism for the specification effect. However
these effects are modeled, it would be important for the
mechanisms responsible for shifts in knowledge to be
intimately connected to the knowledge itself, as proposed
by Wisniewski and Medin (1994).
As people learn about categories, they face the challenge
developing a sense of what is important among a grouping
of items and how those items relate to other items and
groupings of items. Category learning research has tended to
not use learning situations where there are complex systems
of relations present among items and categories. As a result,
it has been difficult to gain an understanding of how it is
that people develop dynamic and flexible knowledge
structures.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Kristine Onishi for helpful comments. This work
was supported by NSF Grant SBR 97-20304.

245

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 1409-1429.
Chin-Parker, S & Ross, B. H. (2002). Diagnosticity in
category learning by classification and inference. In W. D.
Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DeJong, G. F. & Mooney, R. (1986) Explanation-based
learning: An alternative view. Machine Learning, 1, 145176.
Heit, E. (2001). Background knowledge and models of
categorization. In Similarity and Categorization (eds.
Hahn and Ramscar), 155-178. Oxford University Press.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 1922-1944.
Lewandowsky, S., Kalish, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2000).
Competing strategies in categorization: Expediency and
resistance to knowledge restructuring. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 1666-1684.
Love, B. C., Markman, A. B., & Yamauchi, T. (2000).
Modeling Classification and Inference Learning. Paper
presented at the Seventeenth National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI - 2000), Austin, TX.
Martin, J. D. & Billman, D. O. (1994). Acquiring and
combining overlapping concepts. Machine Learning, 16,
121-155.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambrige, MA; MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Allopenna, P. D. (1994). The locus of
knowledge effects in concept learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 20, 1904-1919.
Potts, G. R., St. John, M. F., & Kirson, D. (1989).
Incorporating new information into existing world
knowledge. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 1303-1333.
Rehder, B. & Murphy, G. L. (in press). A knowledgeresonance (KRES) model of knowledge-based category
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review.
Ross, B. H. (1997). The use of categories affects
classification. Journal of Memory and Language, 37,
1240-1267.
Ross, B. H. (1999). Postclassification category use: The
effects of learning to use categories after learning to
classify. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1743-1757.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
1495-1553.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Medin, D. L. (1994). On the
interaction of theory and data in concept learning.
Cognitive Science, 18, 1221-1281.

