UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why children sometimes say “mice-eater”

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45p9w2kx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 25(25)

Authors
Ramscar, Michael
Pearson, Ivan
Ali, Shamuna

Publication Date
2003-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why children sometimes say “mice-eater”
Michael Ramscar (michael@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305

Ivan Pearson and Shamuna Ali
Division of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland.
Abstract

Although the communicative abilities of all animals are
determined by their genetic endowment, and human
communicative skills dwarf those of even our nearest
animal neighbors, the exact relationship between
language and genetics remains to be determined, and is
the subject of spirited debate. Is human language itself
genetically specified? Or are our unrivalled
communicative powers just one facet of the spectacular,
but more general cognitive advantage humans enjoy?
This paper focuses on just one aspect of the search
for answers to these questions: the claim that the
production patterns of plural forms in noun-noun
compounds reveal the workings of innate constraints
that govern morphological processing. According to
Gordon (1985; see also Pinker, 1999) children’s
patterns of inflection in noun compounding, and in
particular their tendency to produce mice-eater but not
rats-eater in compounds, strongly supports the notion
that a series of built in constraints known as level
ordering serve to impose constraints on compounding
that prevent regular plurals from entering compounds
whilst allowing irregular plurals to do so.

1983). Level ordering proposes that lexical processes in
English are assigned to one of three levels. Level One is
essentially the repository of stored forms (such as
idiosyncratic forms and irregulars forms of verbs and
nouns, pluralia tantum nouns, etc.) and some basic
derivational processes such as those that tend to affect
the phonology of hosts to which they apply and or
forms that are semantically unpredictable, as well as
affixes that change the stress patterns or vowel
structures of stems. At Level Two processes such as
“neutral” derivational processes (those that do not affect
phonology and are semantically predictable) and
compounding are found. Finally inflection takes place
in Level Three.
This theory naturally leads to predictions that can
be used to explain a number of phenomena associated
with noun compounding. In an elicitation task, Gordon
(1985) found that 3 to 5 year-old children produced
compounds containing irregular plurals in the non-head
(i.e.. left) position of noun-noun compounds (e.g., mice
eater) but avoided compounds containing regular
plurals in the non-head position (e.g., rats eater). Level
ordering predicts that once a compound is formed at
Level Two, its constituents cannot be inflected at Level
Three (although the compound itself can be inflected to
the right), i.e., it predicts that since mice, mouse, rat and
eater are stored/formed at Level One, and compounding
takes place at Level Two, before inflection at Level
Three, the constraints assumed by level ordering predict
that the word formation system can compound mice,
mouse or rat to eater (and pluralize these compounds to
produce mice-, mouse-, or rat- eaters) but that
ordinarily rats, since it is inflected at Level Three after
compounding takes place at Level Two, accordingly
cannot enter into a compound. Gordon (1985) argues
that the patterns of inflection obtained in his study,
which are consistent with these predictions, is evidence
that children are innately sensitive to the difference
between irregular and regular plurals in compounds,
and to different constraints applying to them.

Level-ordering in lexical development

Level ordering in adults

According to level ordering theory, a series of (innate)
constraints on word formation affect the production and
acceptability of plural forms in compounds (Kiparsky,

In order to examine whether the principles described by
level ordering were learnable or not, Experiment 1
examined the performance of adults on Gordon’s

Do the production patterns of plural forms in noun-noun
compounds reveal the workings of innate constraints that
govern morphological processing? Gordon (1985) claims
that the fact that children in elicitation tasks produce
“rat-eater" but “mice-eater” to describe monsters that eat
either rats or mice is evidence for a structural constraint
on word formation that prevents regularly inflected
forms from entering compounds. This paper re-examines
the claim that adults and children ordinarily describe an
eater of mice as a "mice-eater". Contrary to the nativist
claim that people say "mice-eater" because they lack an
innate constraint to prevent them from doing so, it is
found that once lexical priming is controlled for, even
children describe a monster that eats mice as a "mouseeater", which is in keeping with the kind of forms that
they encounter in the input.

Introduction

952

(1985) “cookie monster’ task. Level ordering, insofar as
it embodies a set of innate constraints on lexical
processing, predicts that adults should optionally
produce compounds containing irregular plurals in a
manner that is qualitatively different from compounds
involving nouns that pluralize regularly (Gordon,
1985). Experiments 1 sought to repeat Gordon’s
procedure on adults, in order to illuminate how
language develops by isolating what develops by
examining the constraints applying to noun compound
production by adult speakers in tasks that replicated and
extended the paradigm used by Gordon (1985).

Experiment 1
In Gordon’s (1985) elicitation task, 3 to 5 year-old
children first named the singular form of a stimulus
item, and then the name of plural stimulus items, and
then they were shown a Monster who might eat the
items. They were then asked “What do you think you
would call someone who eats X”, where X was the
plural form of the stimulus item, and “????-eater” the
expected compound. Gordon found that when children
knew correct irregular plurals they overwhelmingly
included them in compounds (e.g., saying mice eater).
However children avoided regular plurals in
compounds (e.g., they did not say rats eater). As
described above, since level ordering predicts that once
a compound is formed at Level Two, its constituents
cannot be inflected at Level Three (although the
compound itself can be inflected to the right). Gordon
(1985) argues that the patterns of inflection obtained in
his study, which are consistent with these predictions, is
evidence that children are innately sensitive to the
difference between irregular and regular plurals in
compounds, and to different constraints applying to
them. Further, Alegre & Gordon (1996, p 67) argue that
adult competence embodies the same constraints that
are innately present in children. If this is the case, then
it follows that, qualitatively, adult performance in
Gordon’s elicitation task ought not to differ the
performance of children (Gordon, 1985).
In order to test this, a replication of Gordon’s
(1985) elicitation task was conducted in which nounagentive compounds (e.g., rat-eater) were elicited from
fully competent adult Native English speakers. As in
Gordon’s study, in the main replication, “the context
was biased to predispose [participants] to use plural
forms inside the compound. This was done both by
having a plural referent for the non-head (left) noun,
and by having participants produce the plural form
(rats) prior to the compound form (rat(s)-eater),”
Gordon, 1985, p 78) Additionally, since the focus of
interest here is on what kinds of noun-noun compounds
competent adult Native English speakers ordinarily
produce (as opposed to the kind of speech-errors that
can be induced from them), two other variations on
Gordon’s original task were examined to control for the
possibility that, since participants performing Gordon’s
task voice a plural immediately prior to compound

953

production, this might result in priming effects that are
not necessarily reflective of ordinary, spontaneous
noun-compound production.

Participants
45 Native-English speaking students at the University
of Edinburgh voluntarily took part in this experiment.

Materials
Following Gordon (1985), participants were trained in
the compounding task using non-pluralizable mass
nouns. The stimuli were pictures of mud, sand, bread,
fruit and corn. The main test items were pluralizable
count nouns. Gordon (1985) elicited the singular form
for items before eliciting the plural in order to check
that the children had lexical knowledge of the items
(where possible -- for some items the majority of
children had to be supplied with the singular form).
Since we were confident that this was not a problem, in
the replication (and its variant) participants were
supplied the name of the item with a picture of it in
singular form, and then the plural was elicited using an
unlabelled picture of multiple examples of the item. The
items tested were: regular – ear, hammer, shirt, knife,
hand, ring, cow, doll, duck, rat; irregular – goose,
snowman, mouse, tooth, child, foot; pluralia tantum
nouns – trousers, pliers, scissors, glasses. (Note that as
in Gordon’s original study, each irregular or pluralia
tantum noun had a regular semantic complement.)

Procedure
Trials were videotaped and later transcribed.
Participants were tested individually, and told that they
were assisting in piloting a task that was subsequently
to be conducted on children. They were told that the
task might seem trivial, but that their answers were
important, and that they should give the answers that
seemed most natural to them.
As in Gordon’s original study, the 14 participants
in the main replication condition introduced to a
“Biscuit Monster” (“biscuit” being British-English for
“cookie”) and told: “Do you know who this is? … It’s
the Biscuit Monster. Do you know what he likes to eat?
(Answer: Biscuits.) Yes. But this is a particularly
greedy Monster – he eats all sorts of things …”
Participants were then shown a picture of one of the
training items, and asked, “What is this? (Answer: X) –
What would you call someone who eats X?” (Answer:
An X-eater). Replicating Gordon (1985), this procedure
was used to elicit compounds of the form corn-eater,
fruit-eater, etc. (see also Graves & Koziol, 1971).
For the main items, the singular, plural and
compound forms were elicited. To elicit the singular
form, participants were shown a labeled picture of a
single item and asked, “What is this?” For the plural, an
unlabelled picture of a group of the items was
presented, and participants were asked, “And what are
these?” The Monster was then made to eye the picture

greedily, and the participant was asked, “And what
would you call a Monster that eats X?” where X was
the form of the noun produced by the participants in
response to the plural elicitation.
For the 11 participants in the first priming control
condition, the procedure was identical to that in the
main condition, except that in the compound task,
participants were asked “And what would you call a
Monster that eats them?” This was to see whether the
experimenter’s voicing of the plural immediately prior
to the compound production, in addition to the
participants’ having just done so, had any effect in
priming the production of plurals in compounds.
In the second priming control condition, which was
designed to control for the fact that simply voicing the
plural form of a noun immediately prior to
compounding might prime plurals in compounds, 16
participants first took part in a naming task, where
singular forms of the items were elicited, after which
they were shown two training items that were labeled
(sand and mud), after which for two other raining items
(bread and fruit), participants were simply shown
pictures and asked to say what kind of monster they
thought it was (e.g. Answer: bread-monster, etc.).
Participants were then shown pictures of large green
Monsters that were depicted with their preferred dietary
items. In all of these main test items, the Monster’s
dietary preferences were presented as multiple items
(i.e. participants saw a monster and a bunch of rats).
Participants were first asked to name the monster. They
were then presented with a picture showing only its diet
and asked to state what it was that he ate. Thus this
condition tested the learning prediction tested in
Gordon’s original experiment that:
[if someone] “were presented with a context in which
there were a number of rats being referred to, one
might expect him or her to denote an eater of such
animals as a *rats-eater rather than a rat-eater.
However, if we assume that level ordering constrains
pluralization in this case, then such errors should
never be found… if [one] has to learn that reduction
of regular plurals is required in compounds, there is
little reason to assume that this rule would apply only
to regular plurals. This is especially true considering
the fact that… the input data tends not to include
compounds containing irregular plurals… a natural
induction from such evidence would be that irregular
plurals are also subject to reduction inside
compounds.” (Gordon, 1985, pp 77-78).
Participants produced a compound to describe a
monster that was depicted eying several examples of
each test item hungrily prior to naming the plural form
to control for any interference that voicing the plural
might have on the compounding task.

Manipulation Check
The pictures of monsters that eat multiple items in the
second priming control condition were intended to
semantically suggest a monster that ate items in the

954

plural (i.e., a monster that is eating mice/rats). To test
this, 3 participants were shown single items and then
asked to go through the ‘monster items’ (e.g., Figure 1)
and state what it was that the monster was eating. 100%
of these answers were in the plural form (i.e., “That is a
monster that is eating teeth.”).

Results
All participants completed the test items without much
difficulty. As Gordon (1985) notes, occasionally
participants changed their responses as if to correct
themselves. Gordon’s (1985) practice of scoring the
second ‘corrected’ response was adopted.
All of the participants successfully produced the
singular form of each noun, and 100% of participants
successfully produced the correct irregular plural. One
participant produced the overregularized knifes as the
plural for knife, but otherwise all other regular plurals
were successfully pluralized.
Irregular and regular plurals
The predictions made by the level ordering hypothesis
are simply stated: first, participants should consistently
reduce regular plurals to singular forms inside
compounds (e.g., rat-eater); second, participants should
optionally allow irregular plurals in compounds (e.g.,
mice-eater). Further, as Gordon notes, the degree to
which participants allow irregular plurals in compounds
may well be subject to context; the fact that the
semantics of the situation suggest a plural, and that a
participant’s previous utterance will contain mice (and
this had just been repeated by the experimenter) ought
to lead to many mice-eater responses.
These predictions are not supported in the adult
data. For the regularly pluralized nouns, participants
overwhelmingly showed the predicted pattern of
reducing plural to singular forms in compounds (e.g.,
rat-eater), with 86/90 such patterns (Gordon’s figure
with children was 161/164). As per Gordon (1985),
participants were categorized as supporting the pattern
predicted by level ordering if all regular plurals were
reduced inside compounds, and chi-square analysis
showed that the tendency to reduce regular plurals was
significant (χ2(1, N=15) = 5.40 p<.025).
However, the adult participants in this study also
tended to reduce irregular plurals in compounds as well
(if to a slightly lesser extent). 73/90 responses in this
category were of the form mouse-eater, as compared to
only 4/40 in Gordon’s study. As in Gordon (1985),
since level ordering predicts that the inclusion of
irregular plurals in compounds should be at chance
(notwithstanding the particular demands inherent in the
elicitation task that should tend to prime irregular plural
inclusion), chi-square values were calculated for
participants showing less than 50% of the inclusion of
the irregular plural inside the compound, and again the
results were significant (χ 2(1, N=15) = 5.40 p<.025).
(Gordon’s children produced the exact opposite effect,
showing a significant tendency to include >50% of
irregular plurals in compounds.) However, the effect of

participants putting no irregular plurals in compounds
was not significant (χ2(1, N=15)=0.67 p>.75).
The were no differences in the rates between the
main replication condition and the first priming control
in which the experimenter did not repeat the plural: the
rate of regular reduction in compounds in the first
priming control was 94% (62/66) as compared to 96%
(86/90) in the replication condition. The figures for
irregular reduction were 82% (54/66) in the first
priming control and 81% (73/90) in the replication.
Thus it did not appear that the experimenter’s repeating
the plural form uttered by the participants had any
significant effect on whether they included an irregular
plural in a compound or not.
The results of second priming control condition, in
which participants saw a picture of a Monster eating
multiple items (thereby creating semantic conditions
that suggest a plural compound such as teeth-eater
might be appropriate) further underlined the extent to
which the behavior of the participants in this
experiment diverged from the predictions of the level
ordering hypothesis. Although they saw pictures of
monsters eating mice, geese, teeth etc., the rate at which
participants produced singular forms of the irregular
non-head nouns in compounds (e.g., tooth-eater) was
99% (95/96). Singular forms of the regular non-head
nouns in the compounds were produced 98% (94/96) of
the time.
Considering the twin predictions of level ordering:
first, as predicted, the effect of participants producing
singular forms for regular plurals in compounds 100%
of the time was significant (χ2(1, N=16) = 9.0 p<.005).
However, the second prediction, that the inclusion of
irregular plurals ought to be at chance (or, given the
semantics of the task, that participants should prefer
irregular plurals in compounds), was not confirmed.
The effects of participants producing plural forms of the
irregular plural nouns in compounds less than 50% of
the time was highly significant (χ 2(1, N=16) = 16
p<.0001). Moreover, a highly significant majority of
these participants produced no irregular plurals in
compounds (χ2(1, N=16) = 12.2, p<.0001).

Discussion
The results of this experiment are surprisingly clear-cut
in the case of both regular and irregular nouns. Contrary
to the predictions of level ordering, competent adult
speakers of English overwhelmingly produce
compounds containing singular (or ‘reduced’) forms of
both regular and irregular nouns, even in conditions that
are specifically designed to elicit ‘erroneous’ plural
forms in compounds (Gordon, 1985). In Experiment 1
adult speakers of English applied exactly the same
pattern of constraints irrespective of whether a noun
was regular or irregular.
Further, the results of Experiment 1 suggest that
other factors have been confounded in interpreting
previous studies of compounding behavior, and in
expositions of level ordering. It is important to untangle

955

these factors: First, although the majority of irregular
compounds produced in all of the conditions were
singular, there were significant differences in the
number of participants who produced any irregular
plurals in compounds when comparing the two
conditions that replicated Gordon’s method of having
participants voice the plural form prior to compounding
to the condition which simply tested Gordon’s
prediction that presenting someone with a context in
which there were a number of mice being referred to,
one might expect him or her to denote an eater of such
animals as a mice-eater rather than a mouse-eater. In
the conditions where a plural was voiced first, 11/26
(42.3%) participants produced at least one irregular
plural compound (8/15 in the straight replication) as
compared to only 1/16 (6.3%) in the second control
condition (χ2(1, N=42) = 4.667, p<.05; comparing the
straight replication only, χ2(1, N=31) = 4.663, p<.05).
The overall rates at which irregular plural compound
were produced were 19% in the replication, 18% in the
first control condition and just 1% in the second control
condition. On the other hand, the overall rate at which
regular plurals were produced in compounds remained
relatively constant (at 2 to 4%) across all three
conditions for regular plurals.
This suggests two things: first, that in situations
where the semantics of a situation suggest that multiple
items need to be referred to in a noun-compound (say
describing a monster eating mice), ordinarily, exactly
the same constraints apply to both irregular and regular
compound production (i.e., that all other things being
equal, the non-head noun should be in singular form, as
in mouse-eater); and second, that (at least some)
compounds involving irregular nouns might be more
susceptible to induced performance errors (i.e. priming)
in tasks that involve participants voicing the plural form
immediately prior to plural production.

Children, compounding and priming
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that that, contrary
to the predictions of Gordon (1985), in situations where
the semantics of a situation suggest that multiple items
need to be referred to in a noun-compound (say
describing a monster eating mice), adults apply exactly
the same constraints apply in both irregular and regular
compound production. Further, they suggest that
compounds involving irregular nouns might be more
susceptible to induced performance errors (i.e. priming)
in tasks that involve participants voicing the plural form
immediately prior to plural production.

Experiment 2
To facilitate a full examination of the possibility that
the results of Gordon (1985) stem from artifacts of the
experimental procedure rather than from any specific
constraint on language production, Gordon’s original
study was first decomposed into its logical elements.
These comprised four basic elements: (1) checking that

children knew the singular form of nouns, (2) checking
to see that they knew the plural forms, (3) training them
in noun-compound production, and (4) presenting them
with a situation which had a semantic construal
involving a single eater consuming multiple (plural)
examples of items and asking children to produce a
compound to describe the eater. Since the singular
naming was a manipulation check to see whether
children could identify the items independently in
Gordon’s original study (and as Gordon reports,
children in fact required a lot of prompting in this task),
in the following experiments, this procedure was
separated from the plural naming and production part of
the procedure. In both of the experiments described
below, children performed the singular naming
condition prior to receiving training in compound
production (which was as per Gordon 1985, and is
described in Experiment 1, above).
This meant that the main body of the experimental
procedure comprised two elements: presenting a set of
items to elicit a plural, and presenting a monster eating
multiple items to elicit a compound (in circumstances
where the semantics suggested that the eater was an
“items-eater” rather than an “item-eater” as described in
relation to Experiment 1, above).
This allowed two versions of Gordon’s procedure
to be tested. In the first, the plural form was elicited
prior to the compound. This was to see whether
Gordon’s results could be replicated without the
experimenter priming the children’s responses to the
compound task (e.g. to ensure that the result did not
rely on the question “And what do you call a monster
that eats MICE?”). The second version of the procedure
inverted the order of plural elicitation and compound
production. Children were asked to produce a
compound to describe the eater eating multiple items,
and then were presented with just the multiple items
alone in order to elicit a plural. This second version was
intended to ensure that the results of the compounding
task did in fact result from factors inherent in Gordon’s
original hypothesis, and not from priming resulting
from children having just uttered a plural form.
Gordon’s hypothesis was that “[if someone] “were
presented with a context in which there were a number
of rats being referred to, one might expect him or her to
denote an eater of such animals as a *rats-eater rather
than a rat-eater,” unless constrained by level ordering.
If this was hypothesis was indeed correct, then the order
of presentation of the plural elicitation and
compounding tasks ought to be irrelevant. On the other
hand, any differences resulting from these changes in
the presentation order of the tasks would be attributable
to interactions between the demands of the various
tasks interfering with the child’s performance on the
tasks, rather than to the responses of the child’s
language production system to the semantics of the
stimulus.

956

Participants
Participants were 50 children aged between 3 and 8
(average age 5:11) recruited form a school and a
kindergarten in Edinburgh, Scotland.

Materials
The same materials as those in Experiment 1 were used.

Procedure
Trials were transcribed contemporaneously, and
videotaped to aid with resolving any ambiguities.
Participants were tested individually, and told that they
were helping to teach a particularly stupid monster to
learn the names of his friends.
Participants were then shown a picture of one of
the training items, and asked, “What is this? (Answer:
X). This was repeated until the child had named all the
items. As in Gordon (1985), feedback was given where
children could not name items spontaneously.
Participants were then introduced to a monster that
had a terrible memory. They were going to be
introduced to a number of his friends, and they were
asked to assist the monster by telling him the names of
his friends.
After training on mass nouns as per Gordon (1985),
participants were randomly assigned to one of two
versions of the main experimental procedure.
Experiment 2a: in this version of the procedure, plural
forms were elicited prior to compounds. Participants in
were first shown a picture of multiple items to elicit the
plural, being asked, “what are these?”
Having named the plural, children were then shown
a monster eating the plural items and simply asked, “So
what is this monster? Called?” (these superficial
changes to the procedure were made to enable the task
to be run without the experimenter having to ask,
“What would you call someone who eats X,” and
thereby priming the child with the plural form of X).
Experiment 2b: in Experiment 2b trial procedure was
as per Experiment 2a except that the order of
compounding and plural production was reversed.

Results
Experiment 2a
Regular nouns: In Gordon (1985), participants
consistently reduced consistently reduced regular
plurals to single forms inside compounds; 161/164 of
responses were of this form. This was the case in the
present study as well with 135/142 of regular plurals
reduced to singles when compounded in Experiment 2a
Correct irregular nouns: In Experiment 2a, 58/86 of the
responses giving the correct irregular plural carried this
on into the compound word to form, e.g., producing
mice-eater. Gordon (1986) found that 36/40 of correct
irregular responses were of this form;
As in Gordon’s study, a chi-square calculated for
subjects showing greater than 50% inclusion of the
irregular plural within compounds showed this trend to

be significant (χ2 (1, N = 24) = 8.2, p < 0.005).
Experiment 2b
Reversing the order of compound production and plural
elicitation in this task produced two significant
alterations in the pattern of data observed in experiment
2a. First, it was found that when participants produced
the compound first, they tended to produce the singular
form of irregular plurals in their compounds (i.e.,
saying mouse-eater, not mice-eater). A chi square test
calculated for subjects showing greater than 50%
inclusion of the singular form of the irregular noun
within compounds showed this trend to be significant
(χ2 (1, N = 26) =3.85, p < 0.05).
Secondly, an increase in overregularization of
irregular nouns was noted in Experiment 2b as
compared to Experiment 2a. The mean number of plural
overregularizations in Experiment 2a was 1.29. this
figure rose to 2.35 in Experiment 2b (t(45)=2.48,
p<0.05).

Discussion
The main effects and trends reported in Gordon (1985)
were replicated in Experiment 2a. However, the key
finding in Gordon’s original study–children’s inclusion
of irregular plurals in compounds–entirely disappeared
when compounding occurred before plural elicitation.
This was despite the fact that the semantics depicted in
the stimuli (which were supposed to be the driving
force in Gordon’s hypothesis) remained unchanged.
As the results of Experiment 1 suggested, it
appears that the main effect in Gordon (1985) – the
inclusion of irregular plurals in compounds is a result
of priming before production in Gordon’s task affecting
children’s performance, and is not reflective of
children’s underlying competence when it comes to
noun compounding.
This priming explanation gains further support
from the increase in overregularization observed in
Experiment 2b as compared to Experiment 2a. This
finding suggests that the priming effect on children’s
irregular plural production is bi-directionalpriming
“mice” in Experiment 2a caused children to say “miceeater”, despite the fact that all of the evidence collected
here (and available to children) points to a rather
general prohibition on plurals in compounds. On the
other hand, saying “mouse-eater” immediately before
producing a plural form caused children to say
“mouses”, another form that is not warranted by either
the input or later production patterns.

General Discussion
According to Alegre & Gordon (1996, p65), “advances
in our understanding of phenomena often arise from
paradoxes.” The claim has been that explaining the
“paradox” between people’s behavior in forming and
interpreting regular and irregular noun plurals in
compounds advances our understanding of the innate
mechanisms that govern language.

957

The results of the experiments described here
suggest that plurals in compounds present neither a
paradox, nor evidence for native constraints. Putting
these results together yields a straightforward, nonparadoxical picture of learning: first, we have the input,
which is rich in the case of regular nouns, and very
sparse in the case of stem-change irregular nouns
(Gordon, 1985). Unsurprisingly, the initial quality of
the output mirrors the quality of the input: as Gordon
(1985) showed, children are initially much poorer at
forming irregular plurals than regulars; given the
distribution of the input, the irregular constraints
children extract from the environment will be
correspondingly less strongly learned than the regular
constraints and thus will be more susceptible to priming
However, in spite of the sparseness of the input data,
once the priming in the Gordon task is controlled for it
is quite apparent that over time, children readily begin
to acquire compounding constraints for both regular and
irregular nouns that reflect the patterns in the input.
Finally, adult output comes to match the input
presented to the child. The production of adult speakers
in the third (un-primed) control condition in Experiment
3 matched the proportions of regular and irregular
nouns in plural and singular form in the linguistic
environment (Gordon, 1985). This latter fact points to
the resolution of the knottiest “paradox” of level
ordering: how to explain how a balanced input of
regular and irregular plural compounds in the linguistic
environment could result from very different constraints
on linguistic production. The evidence suggests that
(perhaps unsurprisingly) the patterns governing the
output ultimately align with those in the input. There is
no paradox: people succeed in learning similar
constraints for all compounds, and use these in
producing the patterns of output that serve as input to
succeeding generations.

References
Alegre, M. A. & Gordon, P. (1996) Red rats eater
exposes recursion in children's word formation.
Cognition, 60, 65-82
Gordon, P. (1985) level ordering in lexical
development. Cognition, 21, 73-93.
Kiparsky, P. (1983). Word-formation and the lexicon.
In F. Ingemann, Ed., Proceedings of the 1982 MidAmerican Linguistics Conference. Lawrence, KS:
University of Kansas.
Pinker, S. (1999) Words and Rules, New York: Basic
Books.
Rumelhart D. E. and McClelland J. L (1986) On
learning past tenses of English verbs. In Rumelhart
D.E. and McClelland J.L (eds) Parallel Distributed
Processing: Vol 2: Psychological and Biological
Models. Cambridge, MA: MIT press

