UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Complex Skill Learning in Varied-Priority Training

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55q9z5th

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Fu, Wai-Tat
Rong, Panying
Lee, Hyunkyu
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Complex Skill Learning in Varied-Priority Training
1

Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinois.edu), 1Panying Rong, 1Hyunkyu Lee, 1Arthur F. Kramer, & 2Ann M. Graybiel
1

Beckman Institute of Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801 USA
2McGovern	  Institute	  for	  Brain	  Research,	  Massachusetts	  Institute	  of	  Technology,	  Cambridge,	  MA	  02139,	  USA

Abstract

efficiency of their efforts. As a result, VP training makes
people better able to strategically allocate attention to
multiple components of the task to comply with the change
in emphases during training. In contrast, in fixed-priority
(FP) training, all components are equally weighted, which
was found to lead to learning of less flexible skills.
Although benefits of VP training on global performance
have been demonstrated through a number of studies, there
is still a lack of understanding on the specifics of how it
promotes learning and transfer. To the best of our
knowledge, our model was the first that is developed at the
neural computation level that explains the observed effects
of the FP and VP training methods.

We reported a computational model of complex skill learning
that captures the differential effects of Fixed Priority (FP) and
Varied Priority (VP) training on complex skill learning. The
model is developed based on learning mechanisms associated
with the modular circuits linking Basal Ganglia, the prefrontal
association cortex, and the pre-motor cortex during skill
learning. Two forms of learning occur simultaneously. In
discrimination learning, goal-directed actions are selected
through recognition of external stimuli through the
connections between the frontal cortex and the striatum, and
is mediated by dopaminergic signals through a reinforcement
learning mechanism. With practice, skill learning shifts from
discrimination learning to Hebbian learning, which directly
associates stimuli to responses by strengthening the
connection between the prefrontal and pre-motor cortex. The
model shows that FP training, in which all task components
are equally weighted during training, leads to less flexible
discrimination learning than VP training. The model explains
why VP training benefits lower performance participants
more, and why learning was more strongly correlated with the
size of the striatum in VP than FP training.

Neural Basis of Complex Skill Learning

Keywords: skill acquisition, skill transfer, multi-tasking,
varied priority training, computational modeling

Introduction
Skill learning in complex, multi-tasking environments has
long been an important cognitive science research topic.
Although practice generally improves performance
regardless of training methods, researchers have found that
skill acquisition (practice time) alone is not sufficient to
explain differences in effectiveness of these methods. It has
been found that, for example, even though a training method
may require a longer acquisition time, it may lead to better
flexibility of skills to novel situations (Karmer, Larish,
Strayer, 1995). In fact, in many practical domains (e.g., pilot
training) the goal of training is seldom focused solely on
training acquisition, as the trainee is often expected to
perform in novel situations that require the skills to be
flexibly deployed (Gopher, Weil, & Siegel, 1989).
Training Methods for Complex Skills
Among the different training methods for tasks with
complex components, varied-priority (VP) training (e.g.,
Kramer et al., 1995) manipulates the relative emphasis of
selected subcomponents in the multi-tasking environment
while leaving the whole task intact (Gopher et al., 1989).
Gopher et al. showed that systematically varying levels of
priorities on attentional control through instruction and
feedback could lead to better learning and performance in
multi-tasking tasks. They argued that VP training enabled
participants to explore different strategies and thus develop
a better match between the requirements of the tasks and the

Research shows that skill learning emerges as a result of the
experience-dependent plasticity in the basal-ganglia-cortical
neural circuits (e.g., Graybiel, 2008). Two major forms of
learning are observed in these circuits. Discrimination
learning allows recognition of pattern of stimuli and
selection of correct responses. This form of learning
requires executive processing of information at the
prefrontal cortex (PFC) that guides the selection of actions,
and is found to be mediated by external feedback. In
contrast, Hebbian stimulus-response (S-R) learning allows
direct association between stimuli and responses. This form
of learning requires little executive processing, but often
requires extensive training. Theories of skill acquisition
often assumes that learning shifts from slow goal-direction
behavior that requires executive processing to fast execution
of S-R behavioral rules that requires less executive
processing (e.g., Schneider & Shriffin, 1977).
Discrimination learning
During discrimination learning, goal-directed actions that
require attentional function at the prefrontal cortex (PFC)
are selected based on behavioral rules acquired through the
declarative system (i.e., by following instructions in an
experiment to associate a stimulus to a response). This form
of learning involves the connections between the prefrontal
cortex to the diverse set of spiny neurons in the striatum for
pattern recognition computations (Houk & Wise, 1995) and
the existence of relatively “private” feedback loops of
connectivity from diverse cortical regions that converge
onto those striatal spiny cells, via the pallidum and thalamus,
and lead back to the frontal cortex (e.g., Amos, 2000; Kelly
& Strick, 2004). Unlike neurons that learn through a
Hebbian-like mechanism, spiny neurons are found to
receive specialized inputs that appear to contain training
signals from dopamine (DA) neurons (Fu & Anderson, 2006;
Schultz, Dayan, & Montague, 1997; Schultz et al., 1995).

1482

Hebbian S-R learning
Hebbian learning between the frontal cortex and the
premotor cortex allows fast selection of responses tied to an
environmental stimulus. Unlike learning at the striatum,
Hebbian learning is often independent of the outcome of the
responses, i.e., association is strengthened whenever the
response is selected when the stimulus is perceived. During
initial learning, because the correct S-R rules have not yet
been learned, none of the responses will be activated.
Instead, goal-directed behavior will guide the selection of
the right response. With practice, the correct S-R rules are
strengthened, which allow correct responses to be activated
when the stimuli that tied to them are perceived.
Figure 1. The basic structure of the model (left) and the two
learning mechanisms (right) that allow the model to select the
right actions. Detailed equations of the model can be found at the
Appendix.

The Role of the Striatum in Skill Learning
Research shows that the striatum are activated while
performing tasks that require cognitive flexibility such as
task switching and transfer to untrained tasks (Ragozzino et
al. 2002; Meiran et al. 2004; Dahlin et al. 2008). PET
studies in humans have shown that dopamine release and
binding are increased in both of these striatal regions when
subjects play a video game, and that greater dopamine
binding is associated with better performance (Koepp et al.
1998). Erickson et al., (2010) shows that the differential size
of the striatal regions predicts learning on an unfamiliar
video game. They used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)based brain volumetry to measure striatal volumes of
subjects with little previous video game experience before
they received training on the classic Space Fortress video
game (Mane & Donchin, 1989). They also compared the
predictive value of the brain measures for different phases
of learning including the initial acquisition period when
performance was lowest but performance gains were highest.
They found that individual structural differences in the
striatum were effective predictors of procedural learning and
cognitive flexibility, and were sensitive indicators of
ventral-to-dorsal differences in striatal recruitment during
learning. These findings suggest that changes in the striatum
are predictive of learning effects observed during the video
game. As we will show later, our model shows that
discrimination learning at the striatum induced by different
training methods can explain differences of their
effectiveness in skill transfer.

The Model
The general structure of the model is shown in Figure 1. The
activations of the neurons at the PFC (P) represent the
different stimulus patterns perceived by the corresponding
sensory cortical units (I). Neurons at the PFC are fully
connected to the neurons at the association striatum (S), and
the connection strength is changed through a dopaminemoderated discrimination learning mechanism (discussed
next). The activated neurons at the striatum then send
inhibitory signals to the globus pallidus (G), which send
inhibitory signals to the thalamus (T). Neurons at the
premotor cortex (M) are connected to both the thalamus and
the PFC.

Goal-directed behavior is modeled by the connections
from the PFC to the striatum, through the globus pallidus
and thalamus, and eventually responses are selected in the
premotor area. The thalamus is connected to both the PFC
and the premotor area. The PFC is also directly connected to
the premotor area, but the connections are weak initially,
and thus selection of responses needs to go through the
goal-directed path during the initial stage of learning.
Discrimination learning occurs at the connections
between the PFC and the striatum (W), which is moderated
by dopaminergic signals that reflect the valence (correctness)
of the responses. Specifically, when the response was
correct (a positive score) or incorrect (negative), the
dopaminergic signal (D) would moderate learning of the
connections (eqn 8-11). This form of dopamine-mediated
learning is shown to resemble the reinforcement learning
process that is extensively studied in machine learning (Fu
& Anderson, 2006; Sutton & Barto, 1998). With practice
and directed feedback, the model learns to select the correct
responses when external stimuli are perceived (and
interpreted by the PFC). The repeated firing of the correct SR pairs strengthens the connections between the PFC and
the premotor area through Hebbian learning. With enough
practice, the connections become strong enough that the
correct responses can be directly selected when the
associated stimuli are perceived at the PFC, by-passing the
slower subcortical path through the basal ganglia. The
model therefore characterizes skill learning through the shift
from discrimination learning through the basal ganglia to
direct activation of the S-R rules at the cortex. The
computational model was implemented by differential
equations (see appendix) that simulate the activations of
neurons in each brain structure shown in Figure 1.

Empirical Results
The goal of the model was to explain the functional
characteristics of the model that explains the differences
between VP and FP training. In this paper, we will focus on
highlighting two major predictions of the model: (1)
differences between VP and FP training for low and high

1483

performance trainees, and (2) pre-existing size of striatum
predicts later learning in VP more than in FP training.
However, we will first describe empirical results
demonstrating effects of VP and FP training schedules in an
experiment that used a complex video game called Space
Fortress.

The Space Fortress Game
The Space Fortress game was originally developed to study
the acquisition of complex skills in fast-paced multi-tasking
environments (Mane & Donchin, 1989). The main objective
of the game was to maximize the total scores by shooting
missiles at and destroying the space fortress, while
maintaining a spaceship within a certain velocity limit and
pre-specified boundaries on the screen (Figure 2). Missiles
were fired from the spaceship. In addition to destroying the
fortress, the participant had to protect his/her spaceship
against damage from the fortress and mine. Participants
used a joystick to control the spaceship, which flied in a
frictionless environment. Participants not only needed to
control the spaceship within boundaries, but also maintain
its velocity within limits in the frictionless environment.

consecutive days. Each day they did a 2-hour session, with
each session consisting of 7 blocks. The first and last blocks
are test blocks in which participants are required to
emphasize total scores. There were 5 emphasis (practice)
blocks between the test blocks. For the VP group, in each
emphasis block participants were asked to emphasize some
aspect of the game in the order of control, velocity, speed,
points, and total score, and every other day, the reverse
order. All emphasis conditions were communicated to
participants by pop-up windows between sessions.
Additionally, for the VP group, reminder text appeared at
the corner of the display telling participants what they
should be focusing on (see Figure 2). For the FP group,
participants did the same amount of trials but are told to
always emphasize total score.
To study whether pre-training performance difference
might influence later learning, we performed a median split
on the total scores of the first test block to identify the High
(H) and Low (L) performance groups in each condition.
Figure 3 shows the total scores for each group across the 20
test blocks. ANOVA showed a significant main effect of
blocks (F(19, 627) =106.946, p<.001), H-L (F(19, 627)
=106.946, p<.001), but not for conditions (FP vs. VP).
There was a significant interaction between blocks and H-L
(F(19,627) =3.891, p<.001), and blocks and conditions
(F(19,627) =1.745, p<.05). Participants in the High and VP
groups learned significantly faster than the Low and FP
groups, respectively. The three-way interaction conditions x
HL x blocks was marginally significant (p=0.18).
7000
6000

Figure 2. The Space Fortress game display

5000

Total	  Scores

Participants were instructed to learn to control and
maintain the spaceship within a particular range of velocity
and a bounded area on the screen. These two subtasks were
reflected by the velocity and control scores respectively,
which were continuously updated on the screen. Participants
also had to protect the spaceship from being hit by bombs
emitted from the fortress and mines that periodically
emerged on the screen. Participants could also shoot the
mines to gain points. The four subscores: points (P), control
(C), velocity (V), and speed (S) added up to the total scores,
which were also continuously displayed on the screen.
In the Fixed Priority (FP) training condition, participants
were instructed to give equal weight to the subscores
throughout the sessions. In the Varied Priority (VP) training
condition, participants were instructed to emphasize one of
the four subscores in each game, and the emphasis changed
throughout the sessions. Due to space limitation, we will
focus on effects of the training conditions on the velocity
subscore, which reflected how well the participants could
successfully control the velocity of the spaceship. This
subscore was also the most predictive of overall
performance for all participants.
Effects of VP and FP training
Thirty-six participants from the University of Illinois
community were randomly assigned to either the VP or FP
training group. All participants completed the training in 10

4000

FP-L
FP-H
VP-L

VP-­‐H

VP-H

FP-­‐H
VP-­‐L

VP-­‐L

3000
2000

FP-­‐L

1000
0
-­‐1000

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

-­‐2000

Figure 3. Average total scores across test blocks for the High (H)
and Low (L) groups in each condition.

The results showed that, in general, VP training was more
successful than FP training. Interestingly, the difference was
larger in the Low performance group, in which participants
started with a much lower score and was consistently lower
throughout the 20 test blocks. In fact, Figure 3 shows that
for the High performance group, participants in the VP
condition were only slightly better than those in the FP
conditions. However, for the Low performance group, the
total scores for participants in the VP condition increased to
almost the same level as the High performance group at the
last block, but participants in the FP condition had a much
lower total score even after 20 hours of training.
Size of the Striatum Predicts Learning
In the study by Erickson et al., (2010), they imaged the
striatum with high-resolution MRI before the video game

1484

training but after familiarization with the video game. They
used an automated segmentation algorithm that employs a
point distribution model from manual tracing of defined
regions. After segmentation, the volume of each region was
calculated based on voxel dimensions and adjusted for total
ICV. The normalized volumes of the left and right caudate
nucleus ranged from 3.80 to 7.43 cm3 (mean = 5.33; SD =
0.85).
Analysis was conducted on performance across the entire
20-h training period, collapsed across both training groups,
to determine whether striatal volumes were predictive of
performance improvements in the Space Fortress game.
Multiple regression analyses were conducted between
change in performance and the volume of each region of the
striatum, while including initial performance as covariates
in the model. No correlation was found between striatum
volumes and initial total scores in both groups, suggesting
that initial performance of the task was not correlated with
striatum volumes. However, striatum volumes significantly
predicted change in performance when the groups were
collapsed for the left (F(2,33) = 4.00; p < 0.03) and right
(F(2,33) = 3.94; p < 0.03) caudate nucleus. The volumes of
the dorsal striatal regions were positively correlated with
training-induced performance improvements, and accounted
for 23% of the variance in learning amounts across training.
Analysis including the two training groups showed
significant positive training group X volume interactions for
the Points, Velocity, and Speed sub-scores. The dorsal
striatal volumes were predictive of performance only for
subjects in the VP group, but not for the FP group. In sum,
results showed that the pre-existing volumes of the striatum
predicted learning improvements only in the VP group, but
not in the FP group. In other words, individuals with a
larger striatum learned more effectively in VP training, but
this benefit was not found in FP training. No such
correlation was found between performance and other brain
regions, such as the putamen and hippocampus.

In addition to inputs from different regions, activations in
each neuron were also decreased by two mechanisms
(indicated by the negative terms, see eqn 1-5 at appendix):
(a) lateral inhibition from neighboring neurons, and (b)
decay of activation over time. Discrimination learning
occurred at the connections (W) between PFC (P) and the
striatum (S) (eqn 7). Discrimination learning depended on
the strength of P, S, and the reward signal received (D).
When the response was correct, the value of D would be
positive (see eqn 10); when the response was incorrect, the
value of D would be negative (see eqn 11). The connections
that led to the correct response would then be reinforced
based on the weighted sum of the task components (eqn 9).
In VP training, the weights would change across blocks; in
FP training the weights were all set to 0.25. This process
was based on the reinforcement learning process that was
shown to reflect the reward-based learning process at the
basal ganglia (Fu & Anderson, 2006). Connections (V)
between P and M were updated based on Hebbian learning
mechanism (eqn 8), in which the strength of the connection
is strengthened by an amount proportional to P x M.
Training and Testing of the Model
We randomly selected 500 stimuli for training in each
session, and repeated the training for 20 sessions. In VP
training, the weight for one task component was set to 0.85
and the rest set to 0.05 every 100 stimuli. We changed the
parameter α to simulate the low (α = 0.01) and high (α =
0.05) performance groups, which controlled how fast it
learns to select the correct responses.

The Simulations
For the present purpose, it suffices to use an abstract
representation of the SF game and neuron activations in
each brain region. Specifically, there were 1000 possible
stimuli and 1000 possible responses, each represented by a
vector with length 100. Each of the four subscores (velocity,
speed, control, points) was considered a task component.
Each response was randomly assigned a score in each task
component (ranged from -4 to 4), such that the maximum
total point for a response was 16 (4x4) and the minimum is
-16 (-4x4). Each stimulus vector was directly fed to 100
neurons (P) in the PFC, which were fully connected to 100
neurons at the premotor cortex (M). The size of the striatum
(S) varied from 20 to 100 neurons, each of which was
connected to other structures (G & T) as shown in Figure 1.
Based on the diffusion model of response decision (Ratcliff,
1978), when the integral of the difference between any two
responses exceeded a threshold, the response with the
largest activation would be selected (see eqn 6).

Figure 4. Mean scores of 100 simulations of the model across the
20 sessions.

Separate simulations were conducted for the low and high
performance groups in VP and FP training. Figure 4 shows
the mean proportion correct of the model during testing in
each performance group in the VP and FP training
conditions across 20 sessions. The simulation results show
close resemblance to the empirical results shown in Figure 3.
In particular, for the high performance groups, there was
virtually no difference between VP and FP training.
However, for the low performance groups, VP training led
to much better learning than FP training.
In the model, the main reason why VP training was better
than FP training in the low performance group was that
discrimination learning was more effective in VP than FP
training. Given that the learning rate (α) was lower, initial
learning was equally slow for both VP and FP. However,

1485

because the weight given to the emphasized task component
was higher in VP training, feedback received was more
effective because the value of D would be more distinctive
when encoding the correctness of the response with respect
to the emphasized task component (see eqn 9). In particular,
when responses that were more important for a specific task
component (e.g., a score of 4 in one component and 1 in the
rest) and were emphasized during VP training, these
responses would be reinforced more strongly in VP than FP
training (another way to look at it is that in FP training,
learning from feedback was diluted across components). In
VP, feedback encoded by the dopaminergic signal is
therefore more effective than in FP in guiding the model to
strengthen the correct S-R pair through the feedback-driven
reinforcement of the connections that activate the right set
of neurons at the striatum, which eventually activate the
correct responses at the premotor area. This subcortical
pathway for response selection was then slowly transferred
to the cortical-cortical S-R rules through the Hebbian
learning mechanism (eqn 8).
In the high performance group, because the higher
learning rate (α) compensated for the diluted feedback
received in FP, the difference between VP and FP was
reduced. As both groups achieved asymptotic performance,
the difference between the two groups was not significant.
However, further analysis did show that even in the high
performance group, participants in VP training seemed more
effective in learning sophisticated strategies than FP
training, suggesting that VP training would more likely
induce optimization of strategies with respect to each task
component, while in FP training, responses that were
generally good across components were learned. Due the
space limitation, these analyses could not be included here.
To simulate effects of size of striatum on learning, the
number of neurons in the striatum was increased from 20 to
100. Figure 5 shows the correlations between the percentage
increase in performance of the model and the size of the
striatum in the VP and FP training conditions. Consistent
with empirical results, we found that the size of the striatum
was positively correlated with performance improvement in
VP training more than in FP training.

Figure 5. Correlations between percentage improvement (session
20 –1) and the number of nodes in the striatum.

In the model, the main reason why the size of the striatum
predicted performance improvement more in VP training
was because discrimination learning was more efficient with
more neurons in the striatum. This effect was apparent from
the model’s perspective, considering the fact that the
number of connections between the PFC and striatum would
increase as the size of the striatum increased. A higher

number of connections would naturally expand the capacity
of the network to encode more S-R patterns.
The interesting question is why the model showed a
stronger correlation in VP than FP training. This was again
because discrimination learning was more effective in VP
than in FP training. When different task components were
emphasized, learning responses that led to higher score to
that task component would be learned more efficiently in
VP training. On the other hand, in FP training, learning of
actions would more likely be based on their total scores,
rather than their specific effects on each task component.
The overall effect was that responses specific to certain task
components were more likely encoded to different striatal
neurons in the model in VP training (which would more
likely lead to distinct responses selected), while FP training
would more likely learn to select generally good responses.
Because the granularity of the discrimination was higher in
VP, learning would more likely be limited by the number of
neurons at the striatum than in FP training (i.e., mapping
between stimuli and responses was more sensitive to
whether it was correct with respect to each task component
in VP, thus practically creating another dimension in the
mapping). This explained why performance improvement
was more highly correlated with the size of the striatum in
VP than FP training.

Conclusions and Discussion
We presented a computational model of complex skill
learning at the level of neural computations between the
prefrontal cortex, the basal ganglia, and the premotor cortex.
The model successfully explained how VP and FP training
induced different discrimination learning at the converging
connections between the prefrontal cortex and the striatum,
and how they eventually led to different effectiveness in
overall learning. The model provided novel explanations to
two major phenomena: (1) VP training benefits low
performance participants more than FP training, and (2) the
size of the striatum is highly correlated with performance
improvement in VP but not in FP training.
In VP training, experiences of how different
subcomponents were dynamically related to each other were
learned more effectively than in FP training. Under FP
training, participants received feedback based on the total
score that represented the sum of subcomponents; while
under VP training, participants received feedback that
emphasized individual subcomponents. This difference led
to more distributed and effective encoding of stimulusresponse patterns at the striatum, which led to better overall
training effectiveness.
The model demonstrated that the preexisting volumes of
the striatum predicted performance improvement as subjects
learning a complex video game, and the predictive power of
the size of the striatum was much stronger in VP training.
The model also captured these relations by showing that a
larger striatum could accommodate more distributed S-R
patterns experienced in VP training. In contrast, in FP
training, discrimination learning would more likely select
actions that were generally good across all task components,

1486

and did not require as many neurons to encode the mapping.
Thus, the size of the striatum was not a limiting factor in FP
training. The model thus provided an explanation based on
the interactions between training procedures and the
computational characteristics of brain structures. The
explanation was consistent with previous hypothesis that VP
training could enhance coordination and integration of
cognitive, motor, and perceptual operations, and allow more
development of more flexible learning strategies. If VP
training is more effective than FP for learning by
capitalizing on the computational characteristics of basal
ganglia-based circuits as a consequence, then this type of
training could prove more useful for enhancing cognitive
function in a number of applied settings.

References
Adams, J.A. (1987). Historical review and appraisal of
research on learning, retention and transfer of human
motor skills. Psychological Bulletin 101, 41-77.
Amos, A. (2000). A computational model of information
processing in the frontal cortex and basal ganglia.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 505–519.
Dahlin E, Neely AS, Larsson A, Backman L, Nyberg L.
2008. Transfer of learning after updating training
mediated by the striatum. Science. 320,1510--1512.
Gopher, D., Weil, M., & Siegel, D. (1989). Practice under
changing priorities: An approach to training of complex
skills. Acta Psychologica, 71, 147-179
Graybiel, A. M. (2008). Habits, rituals and the evaluative
brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 31, 359--387.
Erickson, Boot, Basak, Neider, Prakash, Voss, Graybiel,
Simons, Fabiani, Gratton, Kramer (2010). Striatal
volume predicts level of video game skill acquisition.
Cerebral Cortex, 293, 1-9.
Fu, W.-T. & Anderson, J. R. (2006). From recurrent choice
to skill learning: A reinforcement learning model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135, 184206.
Houk, J. C., & Wise, S. P. (1995). Distributed modular
architectures linking basal ganglia, cerebellum, and
cerebral cortex: Their role in planning and controlling
action. Cerebral Cortex, 2, 95–110.
Kelly, R. M., & Strick, P. L. (2004). Macro-architecture of
basal ganglia loops with the cerebral cortex: Use of
rabies virus to reveal multisynaptic circuits. Progress in
Brain Research, 143, 449–459.
Koepp MJ, Gunn RN, Lawrence AD, Cunningham VJ,
Dagher A, Jones T, Brooks DJ, Bench CJ, Grasby PM.
1998. Evidence for striatal dopamine release during a
video game. Nature. 393, 266--268.
Kramer, A.F., Larish, J.F., & Strayer, D.L. (1995). Training
for Attentional Control in Dual Task Settings: A
Comparison of Young and Old Adults. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 1 (10), 50-76.
Mane A., & Donchin, E. (1989). The space fortress game.
Acta Psychological, 71, 17-22.
Meiran N, Friedman G, Yehene E. 2004. Parkinson’s
disease is associated with goal setting deficits during
task switching. Brain Cogn. 54:260--262.

Ragozzino ME, Jih J, Tzavos A. 2002. Involvement of the
dorsomedial striatum in behavioral flexibility: role of
muscarinic cholinergic receptors. Brain Res. 953:205-214.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59–108.
Schneider, W. (1985). Training high performance skills:
Fallacies and guidelines. Human Factors 27, 285-301.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending, and a general theory.
Psychological Review, 84, 127–190.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997, March
14). A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science,
275, 1593–1599.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement
learning: An introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Appendix
The model was implemented as a set of differential
equations shown below. The equation for one neuron at
each brain structure was shown below. P=prefrontal cortex,
S=Striatum, G=globus pallidus, T=thalams, M=premotor,
D=dopaminergic signal, w=weights between prefrontal and
striatum, v=weights between prefrontal and premotor, and
i=input stimuli. α, β, and γ are free parameters that control
the learning, and they were chosen to be equal (0.05) in each
structure to minimize the number of parameters. The value
of D depends on whether the response is correct (positive
score) or incorrect (negative score).

1487

