UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Developmental Perspective on Order and Learning: Temporal Effects on Cued Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mm1r83d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Burling, Joseph
Yoshida, Hanako

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Developmental Perspective on Order and Learning: Temporal Effects on Cued
Attention
Joseph Burling (jmburling@uh.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Houston, 126 Heyne Building
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA

Hanako Yoshida (yoshida@uh.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Houston, 126 Heyne Building
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA
Abstract

behavioral peculiarities. Medin & Edelson’s (1988) original
work placed considerable weight on base-rate knowledge,
such as sensitivity to the frequency of presented cues. Over
the course of experimentation on the issue, other influences
have been shown to be of particular importance. One
underlying factor that has been previously ignored—a factor
that is integrated not only in base-rate information, but
throughout all types of learning—is the order in which
information is presented.

The two experiments in this paper provide evidence for order
effects obtained from adult and child populations. Experiment
1 compares different versions of base-rate and canonical
highlighting tasks investigating the differences between visual
processing of cues and inference based knowledge.
Comparisons based on adults’ individual performance are also
addressed. Experiment 2 implements designs from
Experiment 1 to investigate the nature of order effects on
children ages 4-5-years-old.
Keywords: order effect; temporal factors; learning
asymmetry; inverse base-rate; highlighting; selective
attention; cue competition

Temporal Factors

Asymmetrical Learning
There are an infinite number of complexities involved when
trying to provide explanations and descriptions of human
learning ability; however, this adversity does not prevent
experimenters from trying to search for answers. This
ambitious problem has been confronted from many different
perspectives, but one approach among many that provides a
small glimpse into how humans acquire knowledge over
time is to investigate behavioral anomalies that seem to
contradict statistical expectation. Specifically, observing
abnormal response patterns during decision making tasks
may supply some answers that explain the processes
involved in category formation.
The types of asymmetrical response patterns—responses
that deviate from expectation—have been observed in a
specific phenomenon known as the inverse base-rate effect
(Medin & Edelson, 1988), or alternatively referred to as the
highlighting effect due to the prominent role of rapid
attentional shifts (Kruschke, 2003). These response biases
seen in tasks involving the inverse base-rate effect are
considerably robust across many different iterations of the
experimental structure. Alterations in the proportion of
objects pairs presented during training have shown
consistent results in decision making patterns, in addition to
dual-task implementations or time restrictions placed on
outcome choice (Lamberts & Kent, 2007; Medin & Bettger,
1991; Shanks, 1992). Given the degree of stability across
the different iterations, the validity of observed response
biases is not under scrutiny; the existence of such response
asymmetry is widely accepted. However, much contention
is derived from the explanations provided to account for the

Order effects manipulating categorical representations can
be accounted for by different models of explanation. These
models propose different cognitive influences and may be
divided based on their emphasis on either top-down or
bottom-up processes. The proposed mechanisms based on
higher-level inferences can take the form of explicit
strategies implemented during a cost-benefit analysis
(Medin et al, 1988), or rule-based processing, in which less
familiar categories are actively eliminated as possible
candidates during ambiguous forced-choice tasks (Juslin,
Wennerholm, & Winman, 2001). An alternative viewpoint
is that the patterns emerging over time that influence
decision making are the result of shifts in attention away
from erroneous cues inherent in the training structure,
resulting in unequally weighted representations across
different cue combinations (Kruschke, 1996).
Common to both paradigms is the reliance on certain sets
of cues to be learned before later cue combinations;
however, frequency theories place little importance on this
factor. We believe that the order in which cues are presented
is critical. In addition to the proposed mechanisms suspected
of leading to variability in object representations, the nature
of observing a subset of elements before others determines
the fate of future learning for upcoming elements, which
may contain some overlap in composition between time
slices. The gradation of current knowledge sets the path for
the identity and make-up of future knowledge. Taking the
opposite perspective on temporality, prior experience and
perceptual history accumulates in the form of stored
memories. Not only does current knowledge matter in the
way it affects future knowledge, one must also consider the
current state of knowledge derived from one’s entire history
of learning. Invoking the necessary tools from the cognitive

2937

toolbox that may be generally suitable for the task at hand,
this in turn influences the kind of information processing
during that given moment. Disparity in the contents of the
individual’s toolbox induces different methods for solving
some yet unspecified problem.

Order Effects and Children
What is considered relevant during a given moment depends
on the timescale of observation. Specific tasks such as the
highlighting paradigm can be thought of as a continuous
learning trajectory over the course of training, each trial
shaping the features of categorical representations along its
path. A certain degree of categorical stability is maintained
well into testing in order to display the types of response
biases witnessed during the later assessment of cue
preference. This notion poses two questions regarding
development. Firstly, are children capable of reaching the
same state of categorical stability, the type of stability seen
in past adult literature which arises from unequally weighted
representations and accounts for the behavioral outcomes?
Secondly, how does the influence of order differ between
young children and adults; i.e., what is the magnitude of
temporal influence given two very different cognitive
histories? The latter concern may address some of the
necessary cognitive constraints required for this type of
asymmetrical learning by assessing the likelihood of
bottom-up and top-down mechanisms playing independent
or interactive roles, as well as estimating the balance of bidirectionality between the two levels of processing.
Concerning the abilities of young children and detecting
similar patterns of processing as adults, both constructs
(either rule-based inferences or attentional shifting) can
potentially lead to the same behavioral outcomes, yet only
the rule-based approach posits that children are incapable of
showing the same patterns in decision making due to their
underdeveloped high-level reasoning skills (Winman,
Wennerholm, Juslin, 2005). Winman et al (2005) found that
only one third of the tested children aged 8-9-years-old
showed a clear inverse base-rate effect, suggesting that the
children within this age range are at the initial stages of
acquiring the necessary cognitive abilities required for
deductive reasoning. If the focus is shifted away from
frequency evaluation of cues toward effects of temporal
order, it is likely that the difficulties inherent in an
inference-heavy task structure may not be a suitable
measurement of order effects on conjunctive cue
categorization for young children. It is suspected that
different domains of processing may be required to possibly
witness equivalent biases—the type of biases exhibited from
adult judgments given a deductive reasoning task.
In this paper we propose an alternative approach that may
be better suited for testing young children, with an emphasis
on visual processing of predictive cues. This is achieved
through the implementation of child-friendly imagery that
serves as the basis for creating asymmetrical associations
over time. Beforehand, using adults as controls we will
make preliminary comparisons between learning paradigms

that place an emphasis on visual processing of cues versus
typical designs investigating learning asymmetries.
Specifically, we will compare a child oriented version of the
highlighting task with and without base-rate information to
a version focusing on the use of logic to draw conclusions
about ambiguous cues. But first we introduce the
implications of the highlighting effect as a domain-general
learning mechanism as well as its potential application
toward different types of tasks involving associative
learning.

Developmental Perspective
The attention-shifting model is of particular interest from a
developmental perspective. In opposition to the exclusive
use of explicit top-down processes, this model is based on
the deployment of basic cognitive mechanisms such as
attention and memory. Its simplistic explanations can
encompass many types of learning, including language
acquisition, pattern recognition, and heuristics. Entertaining
cognitive processes heavily based on an attentional
framework—such that across time spans, asymmetrical
representations are driven by cue competition—provides
plenty of groundwork for potential application. This
theoretical foundation is especially useful when
investigating temporal learning theories at various
developmental time slices. When trying to understand the
nature of early learning, it is important to consider how
temporal factors may interact with existing cognitive
abilities at any given stage of development. Advantages for
establishing the highlighting effect as an attentional
byproduct is that across the entire lifespan, this model can
provide explanations pertaining to the complex dynamics
inherent in temporal learning theories. Its central focus is on
attentional influence and the process of how attention is
reallocated over the course of training, resulting in the
formation of specific categories. In addition, it can be
postulated that low-level mechanisms such as attentional
control are sufficient in being able to account for the type of
outcomes driven by order effects, given that young children
are adequately capable of exploiting such mechanisms for
this type of learning. By preschool age, children’s
attentional flexibility becomes evident in that they are
capable of taking control over such mechanisms during this
point of transition (Rueda, Posner, & Rothbart, 2005).
However, relatively little is known about the interactive
processes involved between temporal factors and attention
in children, especially with regards to how the order of
perceived information assists in constructing certain types
of biases, and at the same time considering the underlying
capacity for attentional flexibility at a given period in
cognitive development.

Interactions between Cued Attention and Order
The structure of the highlighting paradigm allows for sets of
items consisting of a conjunctive cue and its outcome to be
learned symmetrically during initial stages of training. For
example, conjunctive cue I.PE (I is one part of a pair of cues

2938

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 is to evaluate the similarities
between different variations of the highlighting paradigm.
Adults participated in three tasks in which they were
required to learn specific sets of conjunctive cues before
others. The differences between each task are dependent on
the use of base-rate information versus equal training of
early and late cue sets, described in previous work as a
canonical design (Kruschke, 2009). A direct comparison of
performance on visual training of object pairs versus
symptom training was made using a within-subjects design.
It is expected that learning of the training sets will be
analogous across the different types of tasks (visual object
cues versus symptom diagnosis), and that ambiguous testing
cues will elicit similar trends in performance across task
type and structure (base-rate and canonical designs).

Method

Cues

Participants Fifteen adults participated in the visual task
with objects as cues and with weighted base-rate
information. Eleven different adults participated in both the
visual task with equal base rate information and the
symptom training task with equal base rates. Task order for
this second sample was counterbalanced across conditions.
All adults received partial class credit for their participation.
Visual object cues

Symptom cues

I

I

PE

PE

+

“ear +
aches”

↓

↓

Outcomes

and PE is the other) predicts the following event or concept
represented as outcome E. Symbolic objects I and PE are
paired cues that initially have equal associative weight in
their predictability of outcome E. Order effects come into
play with the later introduction of a new conjunctive cue
I.PL predicting a distinct outcome L. Note that one specific
element—cue I—was repeated across both sets, leading to
the classification of such as an imperfect predictor of either
outcome. Its repetitive nature has little informative value
given its equal probability as a predictive cue; therefore cues
PE and PL inherit the roles of certainty in predicting their
respective outcomes. Given the timeline of early set I.PE →
E and late set I.PL → L, attention is redirected away from
potentially erroneous cues and reallocated toward more
useful pieces of information. Due to its place in time, the
association between cue I and outcome L is attenuated
provided that attentional resources are actively being
focused
toward
meaningful
input,
consequently
strengthening or highlighting the link between PL and L
considering it is no longer prudent to treat I and PL equally.
Order effects are one influence among many that can
govern the structure of categories. Factors such as memory
capacity may influence the quantity of stored
representations. Other factors might depend on feature
characteristics of an individual stimulus, which might alter
overall saliency of an object. But it is the interaction
between selective attention and temporal components, in
addition to these other factors, that give rise to unique
patterns of associations over time. This complexity is
beyond the scope of explanation provided by recency
effects, in which the most current inputs are more accessible
due to the nature of memory storage and retrieval. If this
were in fact the case, a recency account would posit that
independently observed cues I and PL—disregarding degree
of predictability—will lead to responses of outcome L due
to their later occurrence. However, when probing for a
response to classify the imperfect cue, the attenuation of cue
I during later learning leaves the individual with having to
rely on previous knowledge about the nature of cue I, in
which it was formerly categorized as belonging to outcome
E.
It is this type of dynamic temporal interaction that may
give rise to the accumulation of knowledge responsible for
activating higher-level generalizations. A general learning
mechanism responsible for building complex knowledge
can serve as a bootstrap for explaining how complexity in
behavior and cognition, whether manifesting itself as
language, heuristics, or deductive reasoning, can be derived
from a subset of highly influential underlying properties.
Through the experiments conducted in this paper, observing
similar learning patterns in young children can bridge the
gap between adult cognitive literature and developmental
literature, and account for what types of decisions children
are capable of making given limitations in concrete topdown processing.

“back
pain”

“Terrigitis”
E

E

Figure 1: Examples of cues and outcomes for both the
child and adult versions of the task.
Stimulus and Materials The visual implementation of the
highlighting task consisted of a series of two-dimensional
images presented on a touch screen monitor, which recorded
the participant’s responses. A total of 3 predictive cues were
taken from a sample of 9 custom images to serve as items I,
PE, and PL, while 2 cues from a sample of 6 served as
outcomes E and L. The total number of available images
allowed for the creation of different groups of stimuli
consisting of cues I.PE → E and I.PL → L. From this, a
total of 3 sessions were randomly compiled, exhausting all
available images at the end of the last session. Predictive
cues took the form of familiar objects, while outcomes were
represented as known animals. Figure 1 illustrates the

2939

quality of images used throughout the experiment. Each trial
presented two conjunctive cues, which synchronously
moved across the screen toward the animal, after which the
objects disappeared. This animation lasted for a total of 2.5
seconds; probes during the testing phase were presented for
the same amount of time; no time constraints were placed
on outcome selection.
For the symptom cues experiment, text-based cues instead
of images were programmed to be displayed from a touch
screen monitor in a quiet room; all responses were collected
via touch input. The terms for symptoms serving as
predictive cues and names of diseases serving as outcomes
were taken from Medin & Edelson (1988). Conjunctive cues
were assigned from the array [I.PE, I.PL, IO.PEO, IO.PLO]
and were centered toward the top of the screen one above
the other while all possible outcomes [E, L, EO, LO] were
presented equally spaced and in random order at the bottom
of the screen. Time constraints were not implemented in this
experiment.
Procedure After initial instructions, all tasks began by
administering a training phase in which the participants
learned or viewed early sets of cues before moving onto
later cue sets. The testing phase consisted of probes of cue
combinations that required a subsequent response to
complete the trial and move to the next probe. Cues that
were viewed in training as well as novel cue combinations
were tested in order to observe outcome preferences.
For the visual object cue task with an unequally weighted
training structure, a base-rate of 3:1 was assigned to the
common and rare sets, resulting in participants viewing
early common cue sets for a total of 15 times, while the late
rare sets were watched for a total of 5 times. To account for
order effects, the first 5 trials were always I.PE → E sets.
Introduction of I.PL → L was present at the start of the sixth
trial. The remaining training trials were randomized until a
total of 20 trials was viewed, keeping in line with the base
rate constraints. Only one set was assigned per phase (early
versus late); participants were not required to learn multiple
early sets and late sets simultaneously. Table 1 shows the
cue combinations that were presented during testing for this
particular design. Participants repeated the training and
testing procedure for an additional two sessions with the
remaining collection of images.
The canonical visual object cue task was identical to the
previous task except for the removal of base-rate
information. Overall, early sets were viewed at the
frequency as late sets with a shift from early to late over the
course of training. The total number of trials remained the
same. Testing objects are presented in Table 1.
The symptom cue task’s training structure was taken from
previous literature implementing a canonical design, in
which early sets of cues are learned before later sets, but at
equal frequencies (for details over structure and number of
training and testing trials see Kruschke, 2009). Late cue sets
are gradually introduced over the course of training
resulting in a difference of exposure by the time of testing,

while still maintaining total equality in presentation of early
and late sets. Two different cue set configurations were
learned simultaneously and classified as early training sets,
while another two sets were learned at a further time point
in training and categorized as late sets. For example, trials
of set I.PE → E in addition to trials of IO.PEO → EO were
presented randomly during initial training; the ‘O’ subscript
represents the ‘other’ cue of that type. Exposure to sets I.PL
→ L and IO.PLO → LO was gradually increased over time.
Participants were instructed to learn which pairs of
symptoms predicted the appropriate disease, and that they
were allowed to choose from all four possible outcomes
(even though only 2 of the 4 diseases were relevant in the
beginning), with the correct pairs of symptoms and diseases
remaining constant throughout training. New symptoms
were to be learned in the same manner. Feedback was given
during training if they chose the wrong outcome based on
the given predictive cues. During testing, they were
instructed to choose which disease they thought best
represented the set of symptoms presented on the screen.
The types of testing probes were taken from Kruschke
(2009) and tested, but due to the sake of comparison
between the different types of tasks, only a subset is
presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Response types and percentages collected from
adults and children for each testing cue and each
version of the highlighting task.
Child

Adult
Visual

base-rate

Cues

E

L

Visual

Symptom

canonical
E

L

Visual

canonical

E

L

EO

canonical
LO

E

L

I.PE

96.7 3.3

91.7 8.3

89.7 2.3 3.4 4.6

83.9 16.1

I.PL

3.3 96.7

9.8 90.2

12 85.5 1.2 1.2

11.1 88.9

I

74.4 25.6

PE.PL
PE
PL
I.PE.PL

65.9 34.1

70.5 15.9 6.8 6.8

48.6 51.4

40

60

40.2 59.8

44.2 41.9 4.7 9.3

33.3 66.7

-

-

91.7 8.3

93.2 2.3 4.5

1.7 98.3
-

-

0

0

70

30

9.1 90.9

2.3 88.6

9.1

22.2 77.8

48.5 51.5

45.2 40.5 9.5 4.8

42.1 57.9

Results
Performance across the different task variations was similar
given the type of testing cues. A percentage comparison
based on individual outcome choices can be viewed in
Table 1 across all of the different formats. The left-most
column shows the type of testing cue, while the rest of the
columns show the proportion of responses for each possible
outcome option. In assessing individual performance
between the visual and symptom cue tasks, Table 2 shows
the correlation value that a given participant made related
response patterns during both versions of the canonical
design. Analogous probes are presented in bold. Testing
cues that evoked significantly consistent response behaviors
from both versions were I.PL, PL, PE and PE.PL. Other

2940

pairs showed high correlations but were not significant
based on Pearson’s correlation coefficient (p < .05). A chisquare test was conducted on critical testing probes which
demonstrate response biases and a measure of order effects
differentially influencing outcome preferences.
The results for the visual base-rate task show a strong
effect for the ambiguous pair PE.PL and imperfect cue I, in
that PE.PL → L and I → E were preferred associations, x2
(1, N = 180) = 7.2, p < .01, and x2 (1, N = 180) = 42.29, p <
.01, respectively.
The results for the visual canonical design show similar
patterns in choice preference in that PE.PL → L and I → E,
with x2 (1, N = 132) = 5.12, p = .023, and x2 (1, N = 132) =
13.36, p < .01, respectively.
For the symptom cue version, a significant effect was
only observed in the case of I → E, with x2 (1, N = 38) =
15.15, p < .01. Given the test case PE.PL, this did not elicit
a significant effect with participants choosing outcome E
slightly more often than outcome L (N = 19:18), with x2 (1,
N = 37) = .027, p < .869.
Table 2: Correlation matrix comparing canonical
versions of the symptom cue and visual cue tasks.
Correlations are based on expected accuracy of
outcome choices given previous literature. Significant
correlations are marked with an asterisk.

Symptom cues

Visual cues
PE

PE.PL

I

PE

*0.83

-0.03

-0.15

0.01

I.PE I.PE.PL I.PL
-0.47

0.07

0.13

PL

PE.PL

0.31

*0.69

0.15

-0.42

0.20

-0.03

0.44

I

0.30

-0.14

0.83

0.33

-0.57

-0.22

-0.20

I.PE

*0.85

0.12

0.11

0.84

-0.24

0.11

-0.02

I.PE.PL 0.19

0.57

0.29

-0.24

0.85

-0.35

0.13

I.PL

0.59

0.08

-0.25

-0.31

0.32

*0.74

-0.03

PL

*0.84

-0.23

-0.21

0.09

*-0.61

0.19

*0.88

Method
Participants 10 children ages 4- to 5-years-old participated
in this version of the task (mean age = 56.3 months) and
were included in the final analysis. The criterion for
inclusion was that the children had to obtain at least 80%
accuracy on the training cues. This led to the removal of 6
children who failed to learn during training. Table 1 and the
Results section reflect the results obtained based on these
criteria.
Stimulus, Materials, and Procedure The stimulus and
materials used for this study were identical to the visual
canonical task conducted in Experiment 1. The procedure
was also identical except that the participants were
instructed on how and when to respond to the training and
testing phases of the experiment using the touch screen
monitor.

Results
Outcome proportions are presented along with the adult data
in Table 1. A chi-square analysis was conducted to assess
response frequencies between testing cues and outcomes.
Training cues I.PE and I.PL were adequately learned, with
x2 (1, N = 31) = 14.23, p < .01, and x2 (1, N = 36) = 21.78, p
< .01, respectively.
Perfect predictors PE and PL were also successful in
individually representing their respective outcomes without
the inclusion of the imperfect cue, with x2 (1, N = 40) = 6.4,
p = .011, and x2 (1, N = 36) = 11.11, p < .01. The test
statistic obtained for PL → L was higher than any other
testing probe other than the training cues. There was a
significant effect for the ambiguous cue PE.PL, with x2 (1, N
= 36) = 4, p = .046.
Testing cues I, and I.PE.PL did not show significant
differences in outcome preference, with x2 (1, N = 35) =
.029, p = .866, and x2 (1, N = 38) = .947, p = .330,
respectively.

General Discussion

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that the visual cue version of the
highlighting task with an equal base-rate design was
successful in demonstrating order effects without relying on
a highly conceptual task format. The use of stimuli
generating visual object associations is sufficient in
accounting for the presentation of predictive cues and
outcomes. The question is whether or not children are
capable of categorizing sets of visual cues and updating
their categorical information over the course of training.
This implies that children must perceptually separate
conjunctive cues when necessary and implicitly consider the
relevancy of individual items to target them as possibly
being erroneous. Children are expected to implement such
expectations through the process of selective attention in
order to accommodate such inconsistencies in cue
predictability.

The main argument from this paper is that order effects play
a much larger role than previously given credit for in that
they directly influence how information is categorized,
which results in decision making behavior inconsistent with
statistical expectancy. Experiment 1 demonstrated two
points. One, whether given base-rate information or
providing equal occurrences of training cues, the visual
object version of the conjunctive cue task structure elicits
similar effects. Visual learning seems to be just as effective
in creating response biases, if not more so. Two, the
comparisons made between the symptom cue and visual cue
canonical designs showed similar trends. However, adults
did not show a significant effect for the ambiguous cue for
symptom version of the design. This may be due in part to
the number of observations required for obtaining
significant results using the chi-square distribution. Further
analytical approaches must be considered in subsequent data

2941

collection. Experiment 1 provides justification for studying
order effects using primarily visually based stimuli.
Experiment 2 showed that order effects do matter when
certain sets of cues are presented before others; early and
late learning created certain response biases in children
during testing. When comparing performance in the visual
task to adults, response frequencies were similar across both
groups except for the I → E | L testing probe. Children were
not able to significantly choose the early outcome when
given the imperfect cue, in which they preferred both
outcomes equally. It may be possible that children are
sensitive to both types of temporal factors presented in this
paper, in that recency effects of later cues as well as shifting
attention away from erroneous predictors may dynamically
play a role in decision making during this developmental
stage. Failure to completely shift attention away from
erroneous cues might lead to the imperfect cue garnering
more attention than it should during later learning. Research
addressing these factors individually should be taken into
consideration. Experiment 2 also established the fact that
children are highly capable of distinguishing and separating
individual conjunctive cues as well as combining cue
information across different stages of learning. This can be
witnessed in the outcome preferences for the probes PE, PL,
and PE.PL. Children are able to simultaneously process cue
combinations as well as assess the predictability of these
cues in absence of their conjunctive counterpart in order to
make decisions about their respective categories. Further
research must be conducted to understand the nature
between the two equally probable cue sets, especially in
regards to how they differentially influence object
preferences.
In conclusion, the canonical visual implementation of the
highlighting task distances itself from the use of higherlevel knowledge required to show asymmetrical response
patterns. Rules based on frequency of occurrence cannot be
established given that training sets are equally presented,
and that children and adults are not actively engaging in
explicit processing of frequency and rule-based information
over the course of training. They are merely observing sets
of objects in a passive manner, with attentional mechanisms
implicitly accounting for the differences in object
categorization. If base rate information is critical for
observing the typical asymmetrical patterns seen in previous
literature, we would expect the canonical designs to deviate
from such expectations. However, given that such patterns
are observed in both designs, this is more consistent with an
attentional shifting account. Testing certain cue
combinations and witnessing asymmetrical behavioral
outputs represents the type of associations created through
visual processing of objects, without the initial goal of
future application of those items. Participants ultimately
relied on previous knowledge to make judgments based on
visual categories, while the order in which this information
was presented directly influenced their outcome preferences
given ambiguous and individual cue combinations. Order
effects do have an impact on multiple levels of processing

across different age ranges, in which the building of
knowledge over time can be explained by basic properties
inherent within all individuals.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported in part by a National Institutes of
Health grant (R01 HD058620), the Foundation for Child
Development, and University of Houston’s Enhance and
Advance Research (GEAR) program. We thank the children
and parents who participated in this study.

References
Juslin, P., Wennerholm, P., & Winman, A. (2001). High
level reasoning and base-rate use: Do we need cue
competition to explain the inverse base-rate effect?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 27, 849–871.
Kruschke, J. K. (1996). Base rates in category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 22, 3-26.
Kruschke, J. K. (2003). Attention in learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 171-175.
Kruschke, J. K. (2009). Highlighting: A canonical
experiment. In: B. Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, 51, 153-185.
Lamberts, K., & Kent, C. (2007). No evidence for rulebased processing in the inverse baserate effect. Memory &
Cognition, 35(8), 2097–2105.
Medin, D. L., & Edelson, S. M. (1988). Problem structure
and the use of base-rate information from experience.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 68–
85.
Medin, D. L., & Bettger, J. G. (1991). Sensitivity to changes
in base-rate information. American Journal of
Psychology, 104, 311–332.
Rueda, R. M., Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. K. (2005). The
development of executive attention: Contributions to the
emergence
of
self-regulation.
Developmental
Neuropsychology, 28, 573-594.
Shanks, D. R. (1992). Connectionist accounts of the inverse
base-rate effect in categorization. Connection Science, 4,
3–18.
Winman, A., Wennerholm, P., Juslin, P., & Shanks, D. R.
(2005). Evidence for rule-based processes in the inverse
base-rate effect. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology A: Human Experimental Psychology, 58A(5),
789-815.

2942

