UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Fresh Look at Vocabulary Spurts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/36f265q7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dandurand, Frederic
Shultz, Thomas

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Fresh Look at Vocabulary Spurts
Frédéric Dandurand (frederic.dandurand@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Université de Montréal, 90 ave. Vincent-d'Indy
Montréal, QC H2V 2S9 Canada

Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Abstract
There is currently rather little agreement about the existence
of, and explanation for, a vocabulary spurt in children during
the second year. Here we apply a Functional Data Analysisbased technique called Automatic Maxima Detection to the
problem of finding vocabulary spurts in a sample of 20
children. Even with considerable smoothing of the data,
children were found to exhibit multiple vocabulary spurts of
varying intensity and location. These results should provide a
clearer target for researchers interested in detecting and
explaining these deviations from linear growth.
Keywords: vocabulary spurts; functional data analysis;
automatic maxima detection.

Vocabulary Spurts
The psychological literature on vocabulary spurts in
children is in an interesting state of turmoil. The spurt is
usually taken to mean a sharp increase in vocabulary
acquisition in the second year of life. There are at least eight
different explanations of the vocabulary spurt with rather
little consensus on which is the right explanation, and there
is disagreement about whether a spurt even exists in most
children. Here, we apply a new statistical methodology to
the problem of detecting spurts and find evidence for a
surprisingly larger number of vocabulary spurts in most
children.

Other endogenous factors emphasize leveraging
techniques, such that known words facilitate learning of
new words. These leveraging methods include mutual
exclusivity (Markman, Wasow, & Hanson, 2003), syntactic
bootstrapping (Gleitman & Gleitman, 1992), and word
segmentation (Plunkett, 1993; Walley, 1993).
A third kind of explanation does not emphasize the child,
but rather the statistical properties of word distributions in
the child’s language environment. Assuming due to the
central limit theorem that word-learning difficulty is
normally distributed and that words are learned in parallel,
computer simulations show that an early vocabulary spurt is
mathematically inevitable (McMurray, 2007). The same
result was obtained with several other distributions of word
difficulty (Mitchell & McMurray, 2008).
Most of these explanations have been disputed, including
this last one. Under alternate assumptions that all words are
equally difficult to learn and their frequencies are
distributed under Zipf’s law, simulations show that word
acquisition is linear rather than spurt-like (Mayor &
Plunkett, 2010). In a Zipf distribution, item frequency is
inversely proportional to its rank (Zipf, 1949). This
distribution is characteristic of word learning and many
other phenomena such as city populations (Itti & Baldi,
2006).

Methods of Spurt Detection

Explanations of the Vocabulary Spurt
The assertion that there is a substantial and reliable
vocabulary spurt during the second year has been repeated
so often that most developmental psychologists readily
accept it. This apparent consensus on an interesting
phenomenon has led to a variety of explanations. Most of
these explanations emphasize factors endogenous to the
child, some based on sudden developmental changes and
others based on leveraging of previous learning.
Among the sudden developmental changes are realizing
that things have names (Dore, Franklin, Miller, & Ramer,
1976; Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; McShane, 1979; Reznick
& Goldfield, 1992), ability to categorize (Bates, Benigni,
Bretherton, Camaioni, & Volterra, 1979; Gopnik &
Meltzoff, 1987; Lifter & Bloom, 1989; Mervis & Bertrand,
1994; Nazzi & Bertoncini, 2003; Poulin-Dubois, Graham, &
Sippola, 1995), pragmatic skill (Ninio, 1995), and
hemispheric specialization (Mills, Coffey-Corina, &
Neville, 1993).

Four techniques have been used to assess the vocabulary
spurt. The simplest is to calculate a ratio of vocabulary size
to age and argue whether it is large enough to be a spurt
(Schafer & Plunkett, 1998). This method is not particularly
convincing as it does not assess change or rate of change.
The most common approach is to specify a certain number
of words that must be learned in a given time period
(Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1987;
Lifter & Bloom, 1989; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; Ninio,
1995; Poulin-Dubois, et al., 1995; Reznick & Goldfield,
1992). A third approach is to plot vocabulary growth over
age and visually judge whether a spurt is present (Dromi,
1987).
All three of these techniques use subjective and arbitrary
specifications, and it is not too surprising that values are
chosen in a way that guarantees that the expected spurt is
found. Moreover, none of these methods distinguish a true
spurt from a gradual continuous increase in words (Bloom,
2000).

1134

The fourth, and more sophisticated, technique fit
particular functions to vocabulary growth data (Ganger &
Brent, 2004). If a logistic (S-shaped) function fit the data
better than a quadratic (curvilinear or linear) function, then a
spurt was considered to be present. Presence of a spurt was
assessed by noting whether the root mean-squared residual
for the quadratic function was more than twice that for the
logistic function. Such residuals are smaller for better fits.
Comparing the two values by dividing one by the other is
known the log-likelihood ratio. Interestingly, only 4 of 20
children showed a vocabulary spurt by this measure, leading
the authors to question the general existence of this spurt.
This kind of curve fitting is a definite improvement over
the other three methods in objectivity and precision, but
there are some limitations. Only two functions are tried, and
it is not clear that these two functions can always
differentially identify a spurt. For example, only a part of
the logistic (just before the inflection point) can identify a
spurt, and the rapidly increasing section of a quadratic could
also resemble a spurt. As well, to optimize a function’s fit,
hundreds of parameter values for the functions had to be
searched for and tried. Finally, this technique, like the other
three, assumes that there is at most one spurt to find. None
of these techniques are able to objectively identify the start,
end, central location, or amplitudes of single or multiple
spurts.

The AMD Technique
Automatic Maxima Detection (AMD) 1 is a technique to
automatically detect and measure statistically reliable
maxima in functions of one variable or any of their
derivatives (Dandurand & Shultz, 2010). Because growth
spurts are characterized by local increases in the rate of
change, AMD finds spurts as maxima in the first derivative
of time-varying measures. In AMD, only two free
parameters influence the number of spurts detected: (1) the
smoothing parameter lambda (λ), and (2) the p-value that
determines the threshold used for statistical significance
(Dandurand & Shultz, in press).
AMD takes as input a sample of data pairs (yj, tj) where yj
is a measure of interest (e.g., vocabulary size) and tj are
corresponding sampling times. AMD first uses Functional
Data Analysis (FDA) (Ramsay & Silverman, 2005) to fit a
spline-based smooth function to approximate the data
sample, as well the first three derivatives of this smoothed,
continuous function to identify important function markers
(see Figure 2).
The fitted function takes the form of a weighted linear
combination of B-spline basis functions φk , k = 1,...,K:
K

x(t ) = ∑ ckφk (t )
k

FDA uses a roughness penalty approach to smoothing
which limits or penalizes the size of some higher-order
1
A Matlab implementation of AMD, bundled with FDA, can be
downloaded from: http://lnsclab.org/lib/AMD/.

derivative of the smoothed function. Coefficients ck are
selected to minimize a penalized sum of squared errors
(SSE) between the estimated function and observed data
vector y:

PENSSE ( y | c ) = ( y − φc )'W ( y − φc ) + λc' Rc

Where: c is a vector of coefficients ck; W is a symmetric
positive definite weight matrix; φ is the matrix of basis
function values

φk (tj); λ is a smoothing parameter; and R is

a roughness penalty matrix, computed as follows:

 d2
 d 2

R = ∫  2 φ (t )  2 φ ' (t ) dt
 dt
  dt

Note that the fitted curve x(t) becomes increasingly
smooth as lambda (λ) increases; this smoothing value
lambda is the only parameter in AMD that is manually set.
There are techniques to automate selection of lambda
(Dandurand & Shultz, 2010). However, existing techniques
have important limitations, and so a careful manual
selection is preferred (Ramsay, Hooker, & Graves, 2009).

Determining which spurts are significant
To determine which spurts are significant, AMD first
estimates a confidence interval of the derivative (velocity)
of the curve (see dotted lines surrounding the fitted curve in
Figures 1 and 2) for the p-value provided (a standard value
of .05 is used here). Width of confidence intervals (also
called point-wise bands) is based on the variance of the
fitted function:

Var [x ] = φ 'Var [c ]φ
Where: φ is a matrix of basis function values at the

observation points and Var[c] is the variance of coefficients
ck, computed as follows:

Var [c ] = (φ 'Wφ ) φ 'W ∑ e Wφ (φ 'Wφ )
−1

−1

Where: W is a symmetric positive definite weight matrix;
is the variance-covariance matrix of the residual
and
vector ε.
Second, AMD lists all local maxima in the velocity
function as spurt candidates. Finally, for each spurt
candidate, a null hypothesis is tested in which a straight line
between the two local minima adjacent to the maximum in
velocity is contained within the confidence band. This null
hypothesis thus corresponds to an absence of spurt. A
candidate is a genuine spurt when this null hypothesis has to
be rejected, that is, the maximum of velocity is significant
(see Figure 1). For a spurt to be considered significant,
velocity not only has to significantly increase to indicate the
beginning of a spurt, it must also significantly decrease to
mark the end of the spurt (Dandurand & Shultz, 2010).
For example, in Figure 7, a spurt is not detected in the
upper section of the curve because velocity keeps on
increasing (that is, acceleration is always positive). This
design decision reflects the fact that not all processes
eventually decelerate or stop, like physical growth does. In

1135

other processes, such as growth of national economies, the
existence of such upper bounds is less clear. In such cases,
an acceleration in growth may not mark a spurt per se, but
instead a transition for a slower steady-state rate of increase
to another, faster steady-state rate. The definition of spurts
in AMD excludes the latter case.

benefit of automated detection of significance (Shultz,
2003). Hence, identification of spurts and plateaus had to be
performed manually. These early results suggested that
children exhibit multiple vocabulary spurts, but the analysis
was limited by the small sample size and limited number of
observations. In the current project, we analyze a new set of
data with a larger sample size and more densely sampled
observations.

Figure 1: Example of a significant spurt. Dotted lines
above and below the smooth function correspond to 95%
confidence bands.

Quantifying spurts
AMD also provides rigorous quantification of the important
features of significant spurts: (1) when the spurt starts, (2)
the point where it is most intense (maximal velocity), (3) the
spurt amplitude and (4) the spurt duration. An example is
given in Figure 2. A spurt starts when velocity is at an
inflection point, acceleration is at a local maximum, and jerk
crosses 0 at a negative slope. A spurt peaks when velocity is
at a local maximum, acceleration crosses 0 at a negative
slope, and jerk is negative. A spurt ends when velocity is at
an inflection point, acceleration is at a local minimum, and
jerk crosses 0 on a positive slope. Spurt amplitude is given
by the vertical distance from acceleration at the start to
acceleration at the end.
In previous work, AMD successfully detected and
measured three important and well-known phenomena of
physical growth of children: (1) An adolescent growth spurt
in virtually all children; (2) an earlier age of onset for girls’
adolescent growth spurts than for boys’; and (3) a smaller,
pre-adolescent growth spurt in some children. Such spurts
tend to be small and difficult to detect without techniques
like AMD (Dandurand & Shultz, 2010).

Figure 2: Example of quantification of spurt features: where
it starts, where it is most intense, its amplitude and duration.

Applying AMD to the vocabulary spurt
Our previous work also included some preliminary results
for vocabulary spurts. In simulated data derived from a
computational model of this spurt (McMurray, 2007), AMD
flexibly found one large, global spurt under a low degree of
sampling, and many local, mini-spurts under higher
sampling.
In real vocabulary data from three English-speaking
children (Corrigan, 1978), AMD found an average of 2.0
spurts per child. An example of a child who had 3
significant spurts is presented in Figure 3. These data had
also been previously analyzed using FDA but without the

1136

Figure 3: Example of an AMD analysis of vocabulary
growth in a child over a few observations.

Here we apply the AMD method to data from each of 20
children from an online database (Ganger, 2004) whose
vocabulary growth had been recorded daily over the second
year of life (Ganger & Brent, 2004). These are the same 20
children studied in Ganger and Brent’s (2004) Experiment
1. Parents had listed the words used by their child every day,
even if the words had been used previously. Imitations had
been excluded and context noted. As Ganger and Brent
(2004) note, systematic parental reports on vocabulary
enable large sample sizes, enhanced validity, and good
reliability. We converted new words per day to cumulative
vocabulary, and assumed a variation of zero when an
observation value was not available (i.e., for missing data).
The main unspecified parameter in AMD, as in most FDA
techniques, is lambda, which controls the amount of
smoothing that is applied to the raw data. We tried several
lambda values (1, 100, 1 × 105, and 1 × 1010) and noticed the
usual decrease in detected spurts with increases in lambda.
For this paper, we concentrate on the results with a lambda
of 1 × 1010, which is a very large value. Our results are
therefore conservative; even more spurts were found using
less smoothing.

Results

distinguish gradual linear vocabulary growth from a genuine
spurt, defined as a sharp increase against a background of
linear growth.

Participant (child) id

Method

Figure 4: Spurts in vocabulary growth for 20 children
(lambda = 1 × 1010). Spurt length is indicated by a horizontal
line, spurt number by a number on the line, spurt amplitude
by line thickness, and spurt peak by the location of the
number.

A plot of spurt locations and amplitudes for all 20 children
at a lambda value of 1 × 1010 is presented in Figure 4. The
number of spurts in this smoothing condition ranged from 1
to 6, with a mean of 3.0 and SD of 1.5. Three children
showed only 1 spurt. Examples of representative individual
cases are shown in Figures 5 and 6. Child 10 had 2 spurts,
with the largest one being last at 554 days. Child 22 showed
4 spurts, the largest one being first, at 269 days. The
variability in number, location, and amplitude of spurts is
notable, all of which is obscured in a group plot of
vocabulary spurts averaged across all 20 children (see
Figure 7). Only 2 spurts appear in the averaged plot and
they bear very little relation to results for any of the 20
individual children. The dynamics and variability of
vocabulary growth are nearly completely obscured by group
plots because spurts in individuals vary greatly in location,
number, and intensity.
For comparison, the mean number of spurts at a smaller
lambda value of 1 × 105 was 6.5, with SD 2.8. The range
was from 3 to 15 spurts.

Discussion
There has been considerable disagreement about both the
existence and causes of the vocabulary spurt, but until now
virtually no consideration of the number of such spurts. The
classical position has assumed one such spurt, during the
second year. More recently, reviews of this evidence
(Bloom, 2000) and results from more precise methods
(Ganger & Brent, 2004) have cast serious doubts on the
general existence of a vocabulary spurt. Earlier work had
not taken the existence issue very seriously and had failed to

Figure 5: Vocabulary growth for child 10. The 2 spurt
peaks are indicated by filled circles.
The present work applies a relatively new FDA technique
to vocabulary spurts. This AMD technique automatically
detects growth spurts from densely-recorded observations
on an individual, ensuring that each detected spurt is
statistically reliable, thus distinguishing spurts from linear
growth. AMD had been successfully applied to several
growth phenomena including longitudinally-measured
physical growth (Dandurand & Shultz, 2010). As in
previous AMD applications to vocabulary growth, we found
multiple spurts in most children tested. And like in previous
work applying FDA methods to growth (Shultz, 2003), the

1137

number of spurts detected increased with less smoothing of
the data.

included in the research design. For example, volubility of
children could vary according to their health status, mood,
and transient environmental stimuli. Empirical studies
should control as much as possible for such effects, because,
based on data alone, no statistical tool can distinguish
reliable spurts caused by such effects from those due to
cognitive and developmental processes.
Our findings could influence the literature on spurt
causation, most of which has assumed only a single spurt at
a particular age. Some of the proposed explanations,
particularly those dealing with sudden developmental
changes in other systems, may not enjoy being stretched to
cover various multiple spurts at different ages, along with
large individual differences in number, timing, and intensity
of spurts. In any case, better documentation on the number
and location of statistically reliable vocabulary spurts
should provide researchers seeking explanations of these
spurts with a clearer and more realistic target.

Figure 6: Vocabulary growth for child 22. The 4 spurt peaks
are indicated by filled circles.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by a grant to TRS and a postdoctoral fellowship to FD, both from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada. Marie
Lippeveld, Kyler Brown, Caitlin Mouri, and Vincent
Berthiaume each provided helpful comments on an earlier
draft.

References

Figure 7: Mean vocabulary growth across all 20 children.
The 2 spurt peaks are indicated by filled circles.
Smoothing is valuable for ignoring small, random, and
uninteresting bumps in growth curves. In other words,
smoothing allows AMD to focus only on the larger and
more noticeable spurts. Even with an extremely large, and
thus conservative, value of 1 × 1010 for the lambda
smoothing parameter, multiple vocabulary spurts were
found in the majority of children (17 of 20). With a still
large and conservative lambda of 1 × 105, all children
showed at least 3 spurts and a mean of 6.5 spurts. In future
work, we plan to apply AMD to other available datasets on
vocabulary and other kinds of growth.
Although AMD can detect statistically significant
departures from linearity, interpretation of their theoretical
importance requires expertise in the domain of the relevant
study (Dandurand & Shultz, 2010). Interpretations of
identified spurts may depend on the quality of the controls

Bates, E., Benigni, L., Bretherton, I., Camaioni, L., &
Volterra, V. (1979). The emergence of symbols:
Cognition and communication in infancy. New York:
Academic Press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Corrigan, R. (1978). Language development as related to
stage 6 object permanence development. Journal of
Child Language, 5, 173-189.
Dandurand, F., & Shultz, T. R. (2010). Automatic detection
and quantification of growth spurts. Behavior Research
Methods, 42(3), 809-823.
Dandurand, F., & Shultz, T. R. (in press). Automatic
Maxima Detection: A graphical user interface and a
tutorial. Tutorials in Quantitative Methods for
Psychology.
Dore, J., Franklin, M. B., Miller, R. T., & Ramer, A. L. H.
(1976). Transitional phenomena in early language
acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 3, 13-28.
Dromi, E. (1987). Early lexical development. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ganger, J. (2004). Data from Ganger & Brent 2004
Retrieved
24
January
2011
http://www.pitt.edu/~jganger/spurtdownloads.html
Ganger, J., & Brent, M. (2004). Reexamining the
vocabulary spurt. Developmental Psychology, 40, 621632.

1138

Goldfield, B., & Reznick, J. S. (1990). Early lexical
acquisition: Rate, content, and vocabulary spurt. Journal
of Child Language, 17, 171-183.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1987). The development of
categorization in the second year and its relation to other
cognitive and linguistic
developments.
Child
Development, 58, 1523-1531.
Itti, L., & Baldi, P. (2006). Bayesian surprise attracts human
attention. In Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf & J. Platt (Eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(Vol. 18 ).
Lifter, K., & Bloom, L. (1989). Object knowledge and the
emergence of language. Infant Behavior & Development,
12, 395-423.
Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L., & Hanson, M. B. (2003).
Use of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young
word learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 241-275.
Mayor, J., & Plunkett, K. (2010). Vocabulary spurt: Are
infants full of Zipf? In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 836-841). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
McMurray, B. (2007). Defusing the childhood vocabulary
explosion. Science, 317, 631.
McShane, J. (1979). The development of naming.
Linguistics, 17, 879-905.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name-nameless category (N3C) principle. Child
Development, 65, 1646-1662.
Mills, D. L., Coffey-Corina, S. A., & Neville, H. J. (1993).
Language acquisition and cerebral specialization in 20month-old infants. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5,
317-334.
Mitchell, C. C., & McMurray, B. (2008). A stochastic
model for the vocabulary explosion. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1919-1924). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Nazzi, T., & Bertoncini, J. (2003). Before and after the
vocabulary spurt: two modes of word acquisition?
Developmental Science, 6(2), 136-142.
Ninio, A. (1995). Expression of communicative intents in
the single-word period and the vocabulary spurt.
Childrens Language, 8, 103-124.
Plunkett, K. (1993). Lexical segmentation and vocabulary
growth in early language acquisition. Journal of Child
Language, 20, 1-19.
Poulin-Dubois, D., Graham, S., & Sippola, L. (1995). Early
lexical development: The contribution of parental
labeling and infants’ categorization abilities. Journal of
Child Language, 22, 325-343.
Ramsay, J., Hooker, G., & Graves, S. (2009). Functional
data analysis with R and MATLAB. New York: Springer.
Ramsay, J., & Silverman, B. (2005). Functional data
analysis (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.

Reznick, J. S., & Goldfield, B. A. (1992). Rapid change in
lexical development in comprehension and production.
Developmental Psychology, 28, 406-413.
Schafer, G., & Plunkett, K. (1998). Rapid word learning by
fifteen-month-olds under tightly controlled conditions.
Child Development, 69, 309-320.
Shultz, T. R. (2003). Computational developmental
psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walley, A. (1993). The role of vocabulary development in
children’s spoken word recognition and segmentation
ability. Developmental Review, 13, 286-350.
Zipf, G. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of least
effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

1139

