UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A mechanism to increase argument strength with negative evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xg4m5px

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Heussen, Daniel
Voorspoels, Wouter
Storms, Gert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A mechanism to increase argument strength
with negative evidence
Daniel Heussen (Daniel.Heussen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Wouter Voorspoels (Wouter.Voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (Gert.Storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
In most cases, if relevant, positive evidence raises and
negative evidence lowers argument strength in induction.
Previous research, however, has shown that it is possible to
raise the argument strength of a single positive premise
argument by introducing negative evidence (Heussen, et al.,
2011). Here we test one possible mechanism for such an
increase in argument strength. When people consider the
positive premise they develop a set of hypotheses.
Subsequently encountering a negative premise would render
some of these hypotheses less likely and hence, if participants
see the hypotheses as an exhaustive set, shift the probability
to the remaining hypotheses to varying degrees. We test this
idea by asking people to choose between four hierarchically
nested conclusions across various conditions of evidence. The
results are discussed in the light of models of induction.
Keywords: Induction; Negative evidence; Hypothesis Space

Negative evidence in induction
In its broadest sense, inductive reasoning can be defined as
inference to an uncertain conclusion (Lipton, 2004). There
are at least two main approaches to make such inferences.
One is to generalize over time. “My car has always started,
so it’s reliable and will start today.” There are a number of
philosophical arguments why such an approach is not
reliable (Russell, 1912), but owning an aging car will
quickly teach you the same. Another approach is to
generalize across instances of a category. “My car is a
German car, so it’s reliable and will start today.” Although
this approach similarly has its problems, it is certainly
pervasive in everyday reasoning. As a consequence a large
amount of research, particularly in psychology, has been
looking at category-based property induction (see Feeney &
Heit, 2007 and Heit, 2000 for overviews). In these studies,
participants might be asked to judge how likely it is that
Bobcats use serotonin as neurotransmitter given that both
Tigers and Cougars do (Smith, Shafir & Osherson, 1993).
What is striking though is that in the majority of this
research the focus has been on positive evidence, evidence
that states that some entity has a particular property. And
only very little is known about the influence of negative
evidence, evidence that states that some entity does not have
a particular property.

So what do we know about the influence of negative
evidence on argument strength? In work on category-based
property induction, negative evidence has been found to
behave in a similar manner to positive evidence, however,
with the reverse effect on argument strength (Heussen &
Hampton, 2009; Heussen, Voorspoels, & Storms, 2010). For
instance, just as for positive evidence the similarity between
the negative evidence and the conclusion is a key predictor
of the influence of the evidence on the conclusion.
Similarly, in generalizations to the category, negative
evidence instantiated by a less typical exemplar has a less
detrimental impact on argument strength than from a more
typical exemplar. Other studies have shown that in mixed
premise arguments, containing both positive and negative
evidence, the similarity between the contradicting evidence
plays an important role with greater similarity between
positive and negative evidence resulting in a stronger impact
of the negative evidence (Blok, Medin & Osherson, 2007).
In line with intuition, these studies show that positive
evidence raises argument strength—“Lions have enzyme x,
tigers have enzyme x, how likely is it that cheetahs have
enzyme x?”—and negative evidence lowers it—“Lions have
enzyme x, tigers DO NOT have enzyme x, how likely is it
that cheetahs have enzyme x?” Argument strength never
goes against the “sign” of the evidence. Elsewhere we call
this the Monotonicity Principle (Heussen et al., 2011).

Against the monotonicity principle
Contrary to the Monotonicity Principle, however, it has
been found that in some circumstances it is possible to raise
argument strength by introducing negative evidence
(Heussen et al., 2011). Participants were asked to consider
scenarios like the following: “Scientists have established
that in certain brain regions the music of Dmitri
Shostakovich elicits particular brain waves called alpha
waves. Given that Shostakovich’s music causes these alpha
waves, you might wonder whether this similarly applies to
other kinds of music like, for instance, the music of Bach.”
Participants were then asked to judge how likely it is that
Bach’s music also causes alpha waves? Participants then
received additional information, that the same group of
scientists found that the music of the hard rock band AC/DC
does NOT elicit alpha waves in the brain. And again they

1470

were asked to make a judgment about whether Bach’s music
elicits alpha waves.
The results revealed a significant increase in argument
strength from the first to the second judgment. Presenting
people with exemplars from contrasting subcategories
within the immediate superordinate category of all
exemplars in the argument resulted in an increased
endorsement of the conclusion. Counter the monotonicity
principle, adding some kinds of negative evidence to a
single positive premise argument increased rather than
decreased argument strength.
In contrast, when presented with negative evidence from
the same subcategory (e.g., classical music), as in “Haydn
does not elicit alpha waves”, participants showed a dramatic
drop in argument strength. In line with the Monotonicity
Principle negative evidence from the same subcategory
resulted in a strong decline in argument strength.
The results of our study suggest that negative evidence
can be used to highlight a relevant dimension or criterion on
which to make the inductive leap. In the scenario above,
general knowledge provides a range of commonalities and
differences between Shostakovich’s and Bach’s music and
the negative premise reduces these down to the relevant
ones by highlighting respects of similarity (Medin,
Goldstone & Gentner, 1993). In addition to influencing the
inductive process at a similarity level, negative evidence
may also impact the inductive process at the hypothesis
level, affecting the kinds of hypothesis that are entertained.
The search for commonalities and differences between the
positive evidence and the conclusion exemplars leads to a
range of hypotheses about why they may or may not share
the particular property in question. By explicitly
contradicting some of the generated hypotheses (e.g., not all
music elicits alpha waves), negative evidence clearly helps
in reducing the number of hypotheses. But not only that,
evidence from concept learning suggests that negative
evidence even constrains the generation of hypotheses
already at the outset of learning (Houtz, Moore, & Davis,
1973). In sum, previous work suggests that negative
evidence may in some circumstances constrain the process
of induction both in terms of highlighting the relevant
dimensions of similarity as well as constraining the
generation and selection of hypotheses (Heussen et al.,
2011).

Models of induction
Most models of induction, to date, have focused on the
influence of positive evidence (e.g., Osherson et al., 1990;
Rips, 1975; Sloman, 1993). To our knowledge, the SimProb
model (Blok, Medin & Osherson, 2007) and Bayesian
models of induction (e.g., Heit, 1998; Kemp & Tenenbaum,
2009) are the only two approaches to modeling induction
that have explicitly incorporated the influence of negative
evidence. All approaches, however, endorse the
Monotonicity Principle—positive evidence raises and
negative evidence lowers the credence in the generalization.
The finding that negative evidence can in fact raise

argument strength hence poses a serious challenge to all
models of induction (Heussen et al., 2011).
The challenge to models of induction is twofold. First, the
way models of induction currently incorporate negative
evidence is limited to subtracting from existing argument
strength in proportion to the influence of the evidence.
Hence the effect of negative evidence ranges from no
influence to a strong negative influence. This however does
not allow for an increase in argument strength. Thus models
require a mechanism to allow an increase in argument
strength such that the effect of negative evidence can range
from a strong negative to a slight positive influence.
Second, models of induction need an a priori way to
distinguish between negative evidence that reduces and
negative evidence that increases argument strength. The
former challenge is certainly easier to meet than the latter.
Here we would, therefore, like to address the easier of these
two questions and test a possible mechanism by which
argument strength might increase when encountering
negative evidence.

Rationale of the present study
The aim of the present study is to look at a possible
explanation for the increase in argument strength in the
above mentioned study. One way to introduce a possible
increase in argument strength through negative evidence is
to posit that people generate a finite set of hypotheses when
encountering the positive premise. For instance, in the
Shostakovich – Bach example above, people may develop a
set of hypotheses for the ‘elicitation of alpha waves’
consisting of ‘sound in general elicits alpha waves’, ‘only
music does’, ‘only classical music does’ or ‘it only applies
to Shostakovich’. Assuming a probability distribution over
these hypotheses, would imply that, when excluding one
hypothesis, there should be an increase in probability of
those hypotheses further down in the hierarchy. In the
example above, introducing negative evidence that excludes
or reduces the likelihood of the ‘music in general’
hypothesis and as a consequence also the ‘sound in general’
hypothesis would hence lead to an increase in likelihood for
the remaining two hypotheses.
In order to test this idea, we presented participants with
either single positive or mixed positive and negative
premise arguments. The arguments had four hierarchically
nested conclusions ranging from the exemplar (e.g.,
Shostakovich) presented in the positive premise via its
subcategory (e.g., classical music) and basic category (e.g.,
music) to its superordinate (e.g., sound). Using
hierarchically nested hypotheses allowed us to enforce an
exhaustive set of hypotheses. Participants were asked to
choose the most general conclusion that is still acceptable
based on the given information. Among the mixed premise
arguments the negative evidence was varied by choosing
exemplars at different levels of hierarchy. The negative
premise either came from the same (e.g., Haydn) or a
contrasting subcategory (e.g., AC/DC) as the positive

1471

evidence or it came from a different superordinate category
(e.g., the sound of a falling screwdriver).
The idea of varying the exemplars in the negative premise
was to elicit the shift in probability from the general to the
most specific conclusion. More precisely, the single positive
premise arguments constitute the baseline with the
distribution across the conclusion predicted to show a
monotonic decline in probability from exemplar to the
superordinate level. Negative evidence from the same
subcategory as the positive evidence should shift most of
the probability to the exemplar level leaving the remaining
three with little to no probability density. In contrast,
negative evidence from a contrasting subcategory should
result in a large probability for the subcategory level as
conclusion as well as the exemplar level. Both basic level
and superordinate level conclusions should receive little
density. Furthermore, negative evidence from a different
superordinate category should spread the probability making
the basic level category more likely as a conclusion. This
redistribution of the probability density should hence trace
the level at which the negative evidence is pitched precisely
one level lower in the hierarchy.
In order to show that this mechanism can lead to a
significant increase in argument strength we need to focus
on the specific conclusion at the subcategory level. In order
for the mechanism to be sufficient to raise argument
strength, the results need to show a significant increase in
probability from the single to the mixed premise argument
for the subcategory level conclusion, when the negative
evidence is instantiated by a contrasting subcategory
exemplar. In addition the usual detrimental influence of
negative evidence should be observed in a significant
decrease in probability for that conclusion from the single
premise argument when the negative evidence is instantiated
by an exemplar from the same subcategory.

Method
Participants. 163 students from the University of Leuven,
Belgium, participated in the study. Participants received
course credits in return for their participation.
Design. In a between-subjects design, participants were
presented with single positive premise or mixed positive and
negative premise arguments with four possible
hierarchically nested conclusions. The task was to select the
conclusion with the broadest tenable scope given the
premises. The mixed premise arguments contained either
negative evidence from the same or a contrasting
subcategory as the positive premise or from a different
superordinate category entirely. Participants were thus
allocated to one of four conditions, one of which evaluated
the single positive premise arguments and the remaining
three the mixed premise arguments. Participants chose
between four possible conclusions: the exemplar contained
in the positive premise (e.g., Shostakovich); a salient
subcategory that the exemplar belongs to (e.g., classical
music), its basic level category (e.g., music) or its

superordinate category (e.g., sound). The responses hence
reflect the breath of the generalization elicited by the given
premises.
Materials. Ten target items and 30 filler items were
created. All items were arguments consisting of either a
single positive premise or a positive and a negative premise
with four possible conclusions. The conclusions were
hierarchically nested going from the exemplar presented in
the positive premise up to its superordinate category. The
premises and the conclusion of each argument contained
exemplars from a single basic level category (e.g., insects,
fruit, wines, car companies). Our three conditions for the
double premise arguments varied in the type of negative
evidence that were included in the target items. The
negative evidence either came from the same subcategory
(e.g., Hayden) as the positive premise or a contrasting
subcategory (e.g., AC/DC) or a different superordinate
category (e.g., the sound of a falling screwdriver). The
properties used in the arguments were realistic
characteristics that participants were likely to have very
little knowledge about (e.g., produce ocytoncine; have
mitochondrion in their cells; create a conversion current). In
addition to our target items, we used 30 filler items across
the four conditions that mimicked each of the conditions to
reduce an effect of the ratio of the different item types
across conditions. One random order of items and its reverse
was used.
Procedure. The induction task was presented as part of a
battery of test. Students participated in groups of 25 and
took no longer than 5 minutes to complete the task.

Results & Discussion
Figure 1 shows the proportion of responses across the four
possible conclusions for each of the four conditions. Single
premise arguments showed a monotonic decline across the
conclusions from the exemplar to the superordinate. For
arguments with negative evidence from the same
subcategory, most responses shifted to the exemplar level.
Those arguments with negative evidence from a contrasting
subcategory showed most responses divided between the
exemplar and subcategory level. In contrast negative
evidence at the broadest level lead to evenly spread
responses across all level bar the superordinate level.
In order to confirm the reliability of these shifts in
response proportions across the four conclusions a 3 × 4
mixed factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) across
participants (F1) and items (F2) was carried out (Clark,
1973). The fourth response option was omitted from the
analyses to avoid violations of the independence assumption
of ANOVA. The analysis revealed a two-way interaction
between Responses and Condition (minF’(6,135) = 8.2, p <
.001). Broken down by Response, there was a significant
shift of the proportion of responses for each of the response
options across the four conditions except the superordinate
level conclusion (Exemplar: minF’(3,81) = 10.0, p < .001;

1472

Subcategory: minF’(3,53) = 3.7, p < .05; Category:
minF’(3,85) = 16.6, p < .001; Superordinate: F1(3, 162) =
3.0, p < .05, F2(3, 27) = 3.8, p < .05, minF’(3,109) = 1.7, p
= .176).
These overall shifts confirm that pitching the negative
evidence at different levels of hierarchy changes the scope
of people’s generalization. However they are not sufficient
to claim that the mechanism of redistributing the probability
can explain a rise in argument strength observed in Heussen
et al. (2011). In order to do that we need to look more
closely at the exemplar and subcategory level between the
single positive condition and both the negative evidence
from the same and contrasting subcategory condition.
Starting with a comparison of the single with the mixed
premise argument containing negative evidence from a
contrasting subcategory, the results revealed a significant
increase in probability at the subcategory level both across
participants (t(79) = 2.2, p < .05) and items (t(9) = 2.3, p <
.05). As a result, all three remaining response options
showed a decrease in probability, however this decrease was
only significant for the response at category level
(Participants: t(79) = 2.7, p < .01; Items: t(9) = 3.1, p < .05).

These results show that by redistributing the probabilities
across an exhaustive hypothesis space a significant increase
in the generalization to the subcategory level can be
achieved.
For negative evidence that lowers argument strength and
is hence in line with the Monotonicity Principle, we look at
the difference between the single premise and mixed
premise argument with negative evidence from the same
subcategory. Here we would expect a significant shift in
probability from the subcategory to the exemplar level and
hence a decrease at the former and an increase at the latter.
In a planned comparison across participants (t(78) = 5.3, p <
.01) and items (t(9) = 3.9, p < .01) we found a significant
increase in proportions at the exemplar level. All remaining
response options show a decrease with the largest difference
at the subcategory level (Mdiff = .18, SEdiff = .04;
Participants: t(79) = 4.2, p < .001; Items: t(9) = 2.2, p < .05)
followed by the category level (Mdiff = .09, SEdiff = .02;
Participants: t(79) = 4.2, p < .001; Items: t(9) = 2.8, p < .05)
and the superordinate level (Mdiff = .03, SEdiff = .01;
Participants: t(79) = 2.0, p < .05; Items: t(9) = 2.3, p < .05).

Figure 1: Average proportion of responses for selecting one of the four response options as a function of condition

1473

General Discussion
In most cases, encountering negative evidence for a
generalization lowers one’s credence in that generalization.
Contrary to this intuition however, Heussen et al. (2011)
have found evidence that, in principle, it is possible to raise
argument strength using negative evidence. In their study,
presenting people with negative evidence from a
subcategory that was contrasting both the positive premise
and the conclusion led people to judge arguments containing
negative evidence as stronger than single positive premise
arguments. This implies that the range of the influence of
negative evidence extends over the no effect point to a small
but positive effect.
This poses two challenges for models of induction. First,
models of induction to date use the ‘sign’ of the evidence to
determine the direction of the influence (e.g., Blok, Medin
& Osherson, 2007; Kemp & Tenenbaum, 2009). This
implies that negative evidence can never raise argument
strength. Hence models require a mechanism by which
negative evidence can lead to an increase in argument
strength. Second, even with a mechanism that could handle
such an increase in argument strength, models would still
require an a priori way to determine whether the negative
evidence is of the kind that lowers argument strength or
raises it.
Here we have only tried to address the first of the two
challenges. How can argument strength increase from a
single positive premise argument—Shostakovich elicits
alpha waves, therefore Bach elicits alpha waves—to a
double premise argument containing negative evidence—
Shostakovich elicits alpha waves, the music of AC/DC does
not elicit alpha waves, therefore Bach elicits alpha waves?
The present results show that when people are faced with an
exhaustive set of hypotheses—or in this case possible
conclusions—it is possible to shift their preference to a
particular conclusion by introducing negative evidence.
More specifically, in comparison to the single premise
argument, negative evidence from a contrasting subcategory
to the positive evidence significantly increased people’s
preference for the generalization to the subcategory level. In
contrast, negative evidence from the same subcategory led
participants to shift their preference away from the
subcategory level to the exemplar level generalization.
How do these results explain the increase in argument
strength in the Shostakovich – AC/CD – Bach case? The
idea is that when participants encounter the single premise
argument, they develop a set of hypotheses and judge the
believability of each one. These are assumed to be similar to
the one’s collected in the single positive premise condition.
If confronted with the fact that the music of AC/DC does
not cause alpha waves then participants think the
generalization to the subcategory—in this case the one that
Bach belongs to—is more likely than before, as evidenced
by the condition with negative evidence from a contrasting
subcategory.

What assumptions have to be met for this account to
hold? First, people have to generate a list of possible
hypotheses in response to the single premise. Second, at the
time of encountering the negative evidence, that list must—
at least in their mind—be exhaustive. Third, they have to
assign a probability distribution across the set of
hypotheses. The first and the third assumption are far from
being controversial. People are easily able to generate a
range of hypothesis and are even more sensitive to their
accuracy than when evaluating other people’s hypotheses
(e.g., Dougherty & Hunter, 2003; Koehler, 1994).
Furthermore the idea that people use probabilities to
represent their fine-grained beliefs is common place in
psychological models of induction (e.g., Heit, 1998; Kemp
& Tenenbaum, 2009). Whether people’s generated
hypotheses constitute an exhaustive list in their minds is
questionable. A humble person would surely admit the
possibility that there are hypotheses that she has not yet
considered. The solution for this would be to grant a bin
category of hypotheses that have not yet been considered. A
problem with that though is how much credence should one
attribute to that category in comparison to the other
hypotheses. In some circumstances, when people for
instance have very little knowledge about a particular
subject area, they may not be confident about their
hypotheses and hence attribute a lot of credence to such a
bin category. In those cases, it would be difficult for
negative evidence to contradict the complete bin category
and thereby raise the probability for the other hypotheses.
Thus we might not expect to be able to increase people’s
judgment about argument strength in those cases. However
in cases where people have some level of knowledge that
enables them to have some confidence in their own
hypotheses, it would seem odd to attribute a larger amount
of credence to the bin category at the expense of the
generated hypotheses. Thus in normal circumstances
granting a bin category for hypotheses, would not constitute
a problem and hence makes the assumption of an exhaustive
hypothesis space rather tenable.
What are the implications of these finding for models of
induction? For models of induction, these findings are good
news because they provide an easy to implement
mechanism to meet one of the challenges posed by negative
evidence that raises argument strength (Heussen et al.,
2011). The only thing that models of induction need to
assume to implement this mechanism is a probability
distribution across a set of generated hypotheses to represent
people’s relative credence in the truth or strength of those
hypotheses. Assuming this mechanism, makes it at least in
principle possible to raise argument strength with negative
evidence. However, it does not address the question of when
a raise actually occurs? How do models of induction
distinguish between negative evidence that is detrimental to
argument strength and negative evidence that raises
argument strength?

1474

Based on the relevance theory of induction, we would
here like to propose a tentative mechanism of what makes
negative evidence relevant either to a negative or a positive
effect? Although not formally specified the relevance theory
of induction (Medin et al., 2003) provides at least a
framework for such a mechanism. The underlying idea is
that distinctive properties of the premises bring to light
relevant dimensions for induction. These dimensions are
then either reinforced (in case of a match) or undermined (in
case of a mismatch) by comparing the premises with the
conclusion. If people find a relevant dimension for
induction (e.g., classical music) that is common to the
positive premise and the conclusion, negative evidence can
either undermine or reinforce the validity of the dimension.
The validity of a dimension is undermined when negative
evidence shares that dimension with the positive premise
and the conclusion (e.g., Haydn doesn’t elicit alpha waves,
thus classical music cannot be the basis for induction) and
reinforced when it does not share that dimension (e.g.,
AC/DC does not elicit alpha waves but it is also not
classical music). Whether negative evidence that reinforces
a dimension is then considered relevant enough to increase
argument strength depends on whether the negative
evidence increases the salience of the dimension sufficiently
above what it would have been without the negative
evidence. In other words, the likelihood of a generalization
from Shostakovich to Bach will increase with the
introduction of negative evidence, if the negative evidence
raises the salience of classical music as a basis for induction.
How might that happen? The relevance approach suggest
that both the level of effort necessary to process an input
and the effect that such an input has, affect the relevance of
such an input (Sperber & Wilson, 1995). Hence, if the
negative evidence lowers the effort necessary to draw out
the dimension used for induction, then inductive strength
may increase. Furthermore, inductive strength may increase,
if the introduction of negative evidence highlights a
particular dimension that brings about a stronger effect than
a dimension that had been considered before the
introduction of negative evidence.

Acknowledgments
The work was supported in part by an F+ Fellowship within
the framework of international mobility awarded to the first
author by KU Leuven under the supervision of Gert Storms.
The authors would like to thank Steven Verheyen and James
Hampton for helpful input to the project.

References
Blok, S. V., Medin, D. L., & Osherson, D. (2007). Induction
as conditional probability judgment. Memory and
Cognition, 35, 1353–1364.
Dougherty, M. R. P., & Hunter, J.E. (2003). Hypothesis
generation, probability judgment, and individual
differences in working memory capacity. Acta
Psychologica, 113, 263-282.

Feeney, A., & Heit, E. (2007). Inductive reasoning.
Cambridge University Press.
Heit, E. (1998). A Bayesian analysis of some forms of
inductive reasoning. In M. Oaksford & N. Chater (Eds.),
Rational models of cognition (pp. 248-274). Oxford
University Press.
Heit, E. (2000).
Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569-592.
Heussen, D. & Hampton, J. A. (2009). Counterexamples in
category-based property induction. Poster presented at the
50th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomics Society.
Heussen, D., Voorspoels, W. & Storms, G. (2010). Can
similarity-based models of induction handle negative
evidence. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2033-2038). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Heussen, D., Voorspoels, W., Verheyen, S., Storms, G., &
Hampton, J.A. (2011). Raising argument strength using
negative evidence: A constraint on models of induction.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Houtz, J. C., Moore, J. W., & Davis, J. K. (1973). Effects of
different types of positive and negative instances in
learning “nondimensioned” concepts. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 64, 206–211.
Kalish, C. W. & Lawson, C. A. (2007). Negative evidence
and inductive generalisation. Thinking & Reasoning, 13,
394-425.
Kemp, C. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Structured statistical
models of inductive reasoning. Psychological Review,
116, 20-58.
Koehler, D. J. (1994). Hypothesis generation and confidence
in judgment. Journal of experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20, 461-469.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the best explanation.
London, Routledge.
Medin, D. L., Coley, J. D., Storms, G., & Hayes, B. K.
(2003). A relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 10, 517-532.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97(2), 185–200.
Rips, L. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural
categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Russell, B. (1912). Problems of Philosophy. Oxford
University Press (1972).
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231–280.
Smith, E.E., Shafir, E., & Osherson, D.N. 1993. Similarity,
plausibility, and judgments of probability. Cognition, 49,
2, 67-96.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and cognition (2nd ed.) Oxford:
Blackwell.

1475

