UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Model-Based Approach to Measuring Expertise in Ranking Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73f8x1dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Lee, Michael
Steyvers, Mark
DeYoung, Mindy
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Model-Based Approach to Measuring Expertise in Ranking Tasks
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Mark Steyvers (msteyver@uci.edu)
Mindy de Young (mdeyoung@uci.edu)
Brent J. Miller (brentm@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences,University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA 92697-5100
Abstract
We apply a cognitive modeling approach to the problem
of measuring expertise on rank ordering tasks. In these
tasks, people must order a set of items in terms of a given
criterion. Using a cognitive model of behavior on this
task that allows for individual differences in knowledge,
we are able to infer people’s expertise directly from the
rankings they provide. We show that our model-based
measure of expertise outperforms self-report measures,
taken both before and after doing the task, in terms
of correlation with the actual accuracy of the answers.
Based on these results, we discuss the potential and
limitations of using cognitive models in assessing
expertise.
Keywords: expertise, ordering task, wisdom of
crowds, model-based measurement

Introduction
Understanding expertise is an important goal for cognitive science, for both theoretical and practical reasons.
Theoretically, expertise is closely related to the structure
of individual differences in knowledge, representation,
decision-making, and a range of other cognitive capabilities (Wright & Bolderm, 1992). Practically, the ability to identify and use experts is important in a wide
range of real-world settings. There are many possible
tasks that people could do to provide their expertise, including estimating numerical values (e.g., ”what is the
length of the Nile?”), predicting categorical future outcomes (”who will win the FIFA World Cup?”), and so
on. In this paper, we focus on the task of ranking a set of
given items in terms of some criterion, such as ordering
a set of cities from most to least populous.
One prominent theory of expertise argues that the key
requirements are discriminability and consistency (e.g.,
Shanteau, Weiss, Thomas, & Pounds, 2002). Experts
must be able to discriminate between different stimuli,
and they must be able to make these discriminations reliably or consistently. Protocols for measuring expertise in terms of these two properties are well-developed,
and have been applied in settings as diverse as audit judgment, livestock judgment, personnel hiring, and
decision-making in the oil and gas industry (Malhotra,
Lee, & Khurana, 2007). However, because these protocols need to assess discriminability and consistency,
they have two features that will not work in all applied

settings. First, they rely on knowing the answers to the
discrimination questions, and so must have access to a
ground truth. Second, they must ask the same (or very
similar) questions of people repeatedly, and so are time
consuming. Given these limitations, it is perhaps not surprising that expertise is often measured in simpler and
cruder ways, such as by self-report.
In this paper, we approach the problem of expertise
from the perspective of cognitive modeling. The basic
idea is to build a model of how a number of people with
different levels of expertise produce judgments or estimates that reflect their knowledge. This requires making
assumptions about how individual differences in knowledge are structured, and how people apply decisionmaking processes to their knowledge to produce answers.
There are two key attractive properties of this approach. The first is that, if a reasonable model can be
formulated, the knowledge people have can be inferred
by fitting the model to their behavior. This avoids the
need to rely on self-reported measures of expertise, or
to use elaborate protocols to extract a measure of expertise. The cognitive model does all of the work, providing
an account of task behavior that is sensitive to the latent
expertise of the people who do the task.
The second attraction is that expertise is determined
by making inferences about the structure of the different
answers provided by individuals. This means that performance does not have to be assessed in terms of an accuracy measure relative to the ground truth. It is possible
to measure the relative expertise of individuals, without
already having the expertise to answer the question.
The structure of this paper is as follows. We first describe an experiment that asks people to rank order sets
of items, and rate their expertise both before and after
having done the ranking. We then describe a simple cognitive model of the ranking task, and use the model to
infer individual differences in the precision of the knowledge each person has. In the results section, we show that
this individual differences parameter provides a good
measure of expertise, in the sense that it correlates well
with actual performance. We also show it outperforms
the self-reported measures of expertise. We conclude
with some discussion of the strengths and limitations of
our cognitive modeling approach to assessing expertise.

1304

Table 1: The six rank ordering tasks. Each involves ten items, shown in correct order.
Holidays
New Year’s
Martin Luther King
President’s
Memorial
Independence
Labor
Columbus
Halloween
Veteran’s
Thanksgiving

Landmass
Russia
Canada
China
United States
Brazil
Australia
India
Argentina
Kazakhstan
Sudan

Amendments
Freedom speech and religion
Right to bear arms
No quartering of soldiers
No unreasonable searches
Due process
Trial by jury
Civil trial by jury
No cruel punishment
Right to non-specified rights
Power for states and people

Experiment
Participants
A total of 70 participants completed the experiment. Participants were undergraduate students recruited from the
University of California, Irvine subject pool, and given
course credit as compensation.

Stimuli
We used six rank ordering problems, all with ten items,
as shown in Table 1. All involve general ‘book’ knowledge, and were intended to be of a varying levels of difficulty for our participants, and lead to individual differences in expertise.

Procedure
The experimental procedure involved three parts. In the
first part, participants completed a pre-test self-report of
their level of expertise in the general content area of each
of the stimuli. This was done on a 5-point scale, simply
by asking questions like “Please rate, on a scale from
1 to 5, where 1 is no knowledge and 5 is expert, your
knowledge of the order of American holidays.”.
In the second part, participants completed each of the
six ranking questions from Table 1 in a random order.
Within each problem, the ten items were presented in an
initially random order, and could then be ‘dragged and
dropped’ to any part of the list to update the order. Participants were free to move items as often as they wanted,
with no time restrictions. They hit a ‘submit’ button once
they were satisfied with their answer. No time limit was
placed
The third part of the experimental procedure was completed immediately after each final ordering answer was
submitted. Participants were asked to express their level
of confidence in their answer, again on a 5-point scale,
were 1 was ‘not confident at all’ and 5 was ‘extremely
confident’.

US Cities
New York
Los Angeles
Chicago.
Houston
Phoenix
Philadelphia
San Antonio
San Diego
Dallas
San Jose

Presidents
Washington
Adams
Jefferson
Monroe
Jackson
Roosevelt
Wilson
Roosevelt
Truman
Eisenhower

World Cities
Tokyo
Mexico City
New York
Sao Paulo
Mumbai
Delhi
Shanghai
Kolkata
Buenos Aires
Dhaka

developed in the context of the ‘wisdom of the crowd’
phenomenon as applied to order data. The basic wisdom
of the crowd idea is that the average of the answers of
many individuals may be as good as or better than all of
the individual answers (Surowiecki, 2004). An important
component in developing good group answers is weighting those individuals who know more, and so the model
we use already is designed to accommodate individual
differences in expertise.
We first illustrate the model intuitively, and explain
how its parameters can be interpreted in terms of levels of knowledge and expertise. We then provide some
more formal details, including some information about
the inference procedures we used to fit the model to our
data.

Overview of Model

A Thurstonian Model of Ranking

The model is described in Figure 1, using a simple example involving three items and two individuals. Figure 1(a) shows the ‘latent ground truth’ representation
for the three items, represented by µ1 , µ2 , and µ3 on an
interval scale. Importantly, these coordinates do not necessarily correspond to the actual ground truth, but rather
represent the knowledge that is shared among individuals. Therefore, these coordinates are latent variables in
the model that can be estimated on the basis of the orderings from a group of individuals.
Figure 1(b) and (c) show how these items might give
rise to mental representations for two individuals. The
individuals might not have precise knowledge about the
exact location of each item on the interval scale due to
some sort of noise or uncertainty. This mental noise
might be due to a variety of sources such as encoding
and retrieval errors. In the model, all these sources of
noise are combined together into a single Gaussian distribution1.
The model assumes that the means of these item distributions are the same for every individual, because, every
individual is assumed to have access to the same infor-

We use a previously developed Thurstonian model of
how people complete ranking tasks (Steyvers, Lee,
Miller, & Hemmer, 2009). Originally, this model was

1 In our experiment, participants give only one ranking for
each problem. Therefore, the model cannot disentangle the different sources of error related to encoding and retrieval.

1305

.

/

0

1

2

3

4

5

3

6

7

8

9

5

:

3

7

9

3

;

µ
!



















"

#



"#




























σi

xi
?

@

A

B

C

D

C

E

F

<

=























!

!
>

!

"

#

$

%

&

'

(

&

)

#

'

)

&

'

*

+

,

-

yi

"!
G

H

O

I

J

K

L

K

M

N

i participants

Q

!

!
P

Figure 2:
model.

Figure 1: Illustration of the Thurstonian model.

mation about the objective ground truth. The widths of
the distributions, however, are allowed to vary, to capture
the notion of individual differences. There is a single
standard deviation parameter, σi for the ith participant,
that is applied to the distribution of all items. In Figure 1
Individual 1 is shown as having more precise item information than Individual 2, and so σ1 < σ2 .
The model assumes that the realized (latent) mental
representation is based on a single sample from each item
distribution, represented by x in Figure 1, where xi j is the
sample for the ith item and jth participant. The ordering
produced by each individual is then based on an ordering
of the mental samples. For example, individual 1 in Figure 1(b) draws sample for items that leads to the ordering
(1,2,3) whereas individual 2 draws a sample for the third
item that is smaller than the sample for the second item,
leading to the ordering (1,3,2). Therefore, the overlap in
the item distributions can lead to errors in the orderings
produced by individuals.
The key parameters in the model are µ and σi . In
terms of the original wisdom of the crowd motivation, the
most important was µ, because it represents the assumed
common latent ordering individuals share. Inferring this
ordering corresponds to constructing a group answer to
the ranking problem. In our context of measuring expertise, however, it is the σi parameters that are important.
These are naturally interpreted as a measure of expertise. Smaller values will lead to more consistent answers
closer to the underlying ordering. Larger values will lead
to more variable answers, with more possibility of deviating from the underlying ordering.

Generative Model and Inference
Figure 2 shows the Thurstonian model, as it applies to
a single question, using graphical model notation (see
Koller, Friedman, Getoor, & Taskar, 2007; Lee, 2008;
Shiffrin, Lee, Kim, & Wagenmakers, 2008, for statistical and psychological introduction). The nodes represent variables and the graph structure is used to indicate the conditional dependencies between variables.

Graphical representation of Thurstonian

Stochastic and deterministic variables are indicated by
single and double-bordered nodes, and observed data are
represented by shaded nodes. The plates represent independent replications of the graph structure, which corresponds to individual participants in this model.
The observed data are the ordering given by the ith
participant, denoted by the vector y i , where y i j represents
the item placed in the jth position by the participant.
To explain how these data are generated, the model begins with the underlying location of the items, given by
the vector µ . Each individual is assumed to have access
to this group-level information. To determine the order
of items, the ith participant samples for the jth item, as
xi j ∼ Gaussian(µ j , σi ), where σi is the uncertainty that
the ith individual has about the items, and the samples xi j
represent the realized mental representation for the individual. The ordering for each individual is determined
by the ordering of their mental samples y i = rank(xxi ).
We used a flat prior for µ and a σi ∼ Gamma(λ, 1/λ)
prior on the standard deviations, where λ is a hyperparameter that determines the variability of the noise distributions across individuals. We set λ = 3 in the current
modeling, but plan to explore a more general approach
where λ is given a prior, and inferred, in the future.
Although the model is straightforward as a generative
process for the observed data, some aspects of inference
are difficult because the observed variable y j is a deterministic ranking. Yao and Böckenholt (1999), however,
have developed appropriate Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) methods. We used an MCMC sampling procedure that allowed us to estimate the posterior distribution
over the latent variables xi j , σi , and µ, given the observed
orderings y i . We use Gibbs sampling to update the mental samples xi j , and Metropolis-Hastings updates for σi
and µ. Details of the MCMC inference procedure are
provided in the appendix.

Results
We first describe how we measure the accuracy of a rank
order provided by a participant, as a ground truth assess-

1306

Holidays

26

0

Landmass

40

−0.24

1 2 3 4 5
Pre−Report

0

−0.09

1 2 3 4 5

40

0

Amendments

27

−0.28

0

1 2 3 4 5

27

US Cities

24

−0.16

1 2 3 4 5

27

0

Presidents

−0.24

1 2 3 4 5

34

0

World Cities

−0.11

1 2 3 4 5

34

24

Tau

26

27

0

−0.47

1 2 3 4 5
Post−Report

−0.25

1 2 3 4 5

40

26

0

0

0.92

0

3

0

0

−0.54

27

0.92

0

3

0

0

1 2 3 4 5

−0.28

1 2 3 4 5

27

0.81

0

0

3

0

−0.61

1 2 3 4 5

0.78

3

0

−0.09

1 2 3 4 5

34

24

0

0

0.95

0

3

0

0.56

0

3

Sigma

Figure 3: Results comparing the relationship between the three measures of expertise and the accuracy of individual
answers. The plots are organized with the measures in rows, and the problems in columns.

ment of their expertise. We then examine the correlations between this ground truth and their pre- and postreported self-assessments, and the model-based measure.

Ground Truth Accuracy
To evaluate the performance of participants, we measured the distance between their provided order, and the
correct orders given in Table 1. A commonly used distance metric for orderings is Kendall’s τ, which counts
the number of adjacent pairwise disagreements between
orderings. Values of τ range from 0 ≤ τ ≤ n (n − 1)/2,
where n = 10 is the number of items. A value of zero
means the ordering is exactly right, and a value of one
means that the ordering is correct except for two neighboring items being transposed, and so on, up to the maximum possible value of 45.

Relationship Between Expertise and Accuracy
Figure 3 presents the relationship between the three measures of expertise—pre-reported expertise, post-reported
confidence, and the mean of the σ parameter inferred in
the Thurstonian model—and the τ measures of accuracy.
In each plot, a point corresponds to a participant. The
plots are organized with the six problems in columns, and
the three measures as rows. The Pearson correlations are
also shown. Note that, for the self-reported measures,
the goal is for higher levels of rated expertise should correspond to lower (more accurate) values of τ, and so a
negative correlation would mean the measure was effective. For the model-based σ measure, smaller values correspond to higher expertise, and so a positive correlation
means the measure is effective.

Figure 3 shows that the six different problems ranged
in difficulty. Looking at the maximum τ needed to show
results, the Holidays, Amendments, US Cities and Presidents questions were more accurately answered than the
Landmass and World Cities questions. This finding accords with our intuitions about the difficulty of the topic
domains and the experience of our participant pool.
More importantly, there is a clear pattern, for all six
problems, in the way the three expertise measures relate
to accuracy. The correlations are generally in the right
direction, but small in absolute size, for the pre-reported
expertise. They continue to be in the right direction, and
have larger absolute values, for the post-reported confidence measure of expertise. But correlations are in
the right direction, and strongest, for the model-based σ
measure of expertise.
Perhaps most importantly, it is also clear that the
model-based measure improves upon the self-reported
measures. It achieves, for all but the world cities problem, an impressively high level of correlation with accuracy. With correlations around 0.9, the σ measure of expertise explains about 80% of the variance between people in their accuracy in completing the rank orderings.2
2 A legitimate concern is that the correlations for the
Thurstonian model benefit from σ being continuous, whereas
the pre- and post-report measures are binned. To check this, we
also calculated correlations for the Thurstonian model using 5
binned values of σ, and found correlations of 0.88, 0.88, 0.80,
0.77, 0.92 and 0.54 for the six problems in the order shown
in Figure 3. While slightly reduced, these correlations clearly
support the same conclusions.

1307

Discussion
We first discuss the advantages of the modeling approach
we have explored for measuring expertise, then acknowledge some of its limitations, before finally mentioning
some possible extensions.

Advantages
Our results could be used to make a strong case for the
assessment of expertise, at least in the context of rank
order questions, using the Thurstonian model. We have
shown that by having a group of participants complete
the ordering task, the model can infer an interpretable
measure of expertise that correlates highly with the actual accuracy of the answers.
One attractive feature of this approach is that it does
not require self-ratings of expertise. It simply requires
people to do the ordering task. Our results indicate that
the model-based measure is much more useful than selfreported assessments taken before doing the task, focusing on general domain knowledge, or confidence ratings
done after having done the task, focusing on the specific
answer provided.
An even more attractive feature of the modeling approach is that it does not require access to the ground
truth to assess expertise. We used ground truth accuracies to assess whether the measured expertise was useful,
but we did not need the τ values to estimate the σ measures themselves. The model-based expertise emerges
from the patterns of agreement and disagreement across
the participants, under the assumption there is some fixed
(but unknown) ground truth, as per the wisdom of the
crowd origins of the model.
A natural consequence is that the approach developed
here could be applied to prediction tasks, where there is
not (yet) a ground truth. For example, we could ask people to predict the end-of-season rankings of sports teams,
and potentially use the model to assess their expertise
ahead of time. If the model-based approach continues
to perform well with prediction, it would be especially
valuable, since standard measures of expertise based on
self-report are have often been found to be unreliable predictors of forecasting accuracy (e.g., Tetlock, 2006).

Limitations
A basic property of the approach we have presented is
that it involves assessing the relative expertise for a large
group of people. There are two inherent limitations with
this.
One is that a possibly quite large number of participants need to complete the task. The other limitation
is that the measure of expertise makes sense as a comparison between individuals, and predicts their relative
performance, but does not automatically say anything
about the absolute level of performance. As the results
in Figure 3 show, the relationship between σ and τ is
well correlated, but with different slopes and intercepts.
This means we cannot equate an inferred σ value for the
expertise of an individual with a predicted τ level of ac-

curacy. We can merely say which individuals are more
accurate.
For this reason, our approach is best suited to realworld problems where the goal is to be able to find the
most expert individuals from a large pool. If more precise statements about levels of accuracy are important the
sorts of protocols we mentioned in the Introduction, measuring discriminability and consistency, seem likely to be
better suited.

Extensions
Our current results are specific to rank ordering tasks,
but the basic approach could be applied to other sorts of
tasks for expressing knowledge and expertise. One obvious possibility is estimation tasks, in which people have
to give values for quantities (Merkle & Steyvers, 2011).
It should also be possible to develop suitable models for
tasks, such as multiple choice questions, where the answers are discrete and nominally scaled.
Our analysis considered each problem independent of
the others, which seems reasonable as a starting point.
However, if there was reason to believe a domain-level
expertise might exist for a set of related questions (e.g., if
we had believed there was expertise for city populations,
linking the US and World Cities questions), that assumption could be incorporated into the model. The basic idea
would be to create a hierarchical model, with a single
σ for each participant that applied to all of the relevant
problems in the domain (e.g., Klementiev, Roth, Small,
& Titov, 2009). Usually, when hierarchical assumptions
are reasonable, they improve inference, leading to better
estimates of parameters from fewer data. As such, this
is an interesting possibility worth exploring, both to test
the theoretical assumption of domain-level expertise, and
to make the measurement of expertise more efficient in
practical applications.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have developed and demonstrated a
model-based approach to measuring expertise for rank
ordering tasks. The approach simply requires people
to complete the task on which their expertise is sought,
with parameter inference then automatically providing
the measure of expertise. The method was shown to
work extremely well, giving expertise measures that correlated strongly with the actual accuracy of people’s performance, and providing significantly better information
that two self-reported measures.

Acknowledgments
MdY acknowledges the support of UROP and SURP
funding from UCI.

References
Klementiev, A., Roth, D., Small, K., & Titov, I.
(2009).
Unsupervised rank aggregation with
domain-specific expertise. IJCAI, 1101–1106.

1308

Koller, D., Friedman, N., Getoor, L., & Taskar, B.
(2007). Graphical models in a nutshell. In
L. Getoor & B. Taskar (Eds.), Introduction to statistical relational learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Lee, M. D. (2008). Three case studies in the Bayesian
analysis of cognitive models. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 1–15.
Malhotra, V., Lee, M. D., & Khurana, A. K. (2007). Domain experts influence decision quality: Towards
a robust method for their identification. Journal of
Petroleum Science and Engineering, 57, 181–194.
Merkle, E. C., & Steyvers, M. (2011). A psychological model for aggregating judgments of magnitude. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 6589,
236–243.
Shanteau, J., Weiss, D. J., Thomas, R. P., & Pounds,
J. C. (2002). Performance-based assessment of
expertise: How to decide if someone is an expert
or not. European Journal of Operations Research,
136, 253–263.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W.-J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with a tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian
methods. Cognitive Science, 32(8), 1248–1284.
Steyvers, M., Lee, M. D., Miller, B., & Hemmer, P.
(2009). The wisdom of crowds in the recollection
of order information. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, & A. Culotta
(Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22 (pp. 1785–1793).
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds. New
York: Random House.
Tetlock, P. E. (2006). Expert political judgment. Princeton University Press.
Wright, G., & Bolderm, F. (1992). Expertise and decision support. Plenum Press.
Yao, G., & Böckenholt, U. (1999). Bayesian estimation
of Thurstonian ranking models based on the Gibbs
sampler. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 52, 79–92.

Appendix: MCMC Details
In the first Gibbs sampling step, we sample a value for
each xi, j conditional on all other variables. Using Bayes
rule and the conditional independencies in the model,
this distribution can be evaluated by
P(xi j |µ j , σi, y i , x i j̄ ) ∝ P(yyi | x i )P(xi, j | µ j , σi)

(1)

where x i j̄ refers to all samples x for individual i except
the sample for the jth item. The distribution P(xi, j |µ j , σi)
is Normally distributed and P(yy i |xxi ) is

1
if y i = f (xxi )
P(yy i | x i ) =
(2)
0
otherwise.

where f (·) is the ranking function. Taken together, the
sampling distribution for xi j conditional on all other variables can be evaluated by:
xi j | µ j , σi , xil , xiu ∼ TNxil ,xiu (µ j , σi ).

(3)

The sampling distribution is the truncated Normal with
the lower and upper bounds determined by xil and xiu respectively. The values xil and xiu are based on the next
smallest and largest values from x i relative to xi j . Specifically, if π( j) denotes the rank given to item j and π−1 ( j)
denotes the item assigned to rank j, l = π(−1) (π( j) − 1),
and u = π(−1) (π( j) + 1). We also define xi,l = −∞ when
π( j) = 1, and xi,u = ∞, when π( j) = N. With these
bounds, it is guaranteed that the samples satisfy Equation (2) and the ordering of samples x i is consistent with
the observed ordering y i for the ith individual.
We update the group means µ using Metropolis Hastings. We sample a new mean µ j from a proposal distribution Q(µ0j | µ j ) and accept the new value with probability
!
P(µ0j | x i· , σ) Q(µ j | µ0j )
min 1,
.
(4)
P(µ j | x i· , σ) Q(µ0j | µ j )
With Bayes rule and a uniform prior on µ j , the first ratio
can be simplified to
P(µ0j |xx· j , σ)
P(xi j |µ0j , σi)
=∏
P(µ j |xx· j , σ)
i P(xi j |µ j , σ j )

(5)

which has a natural expansion in terms of an exponential sum. For the proposal distribution, we use a Normal distribution with mean equal to the current mean,
Q(µ0 j | µ j ) ∼ N(µ j , ζ), where the standard deviation ζ
controls the step size of the adjustments in µ j .
We update the standard deviations for each individual
σi using another Metropolis Hastings step. We sample
a new standard deviation σi from a proposal distribution
Q(σ0i | σi ) and accept the new value with probability


P(σ0i |xxi,·, µ) Q(σi | σ0i )
min 1,
.
(6)
P(σi |xxi,·, µ) Q(σ0i | σi )
Using Bayes rule, the first ratio can be simplified to
P(xi, j |σ0i , µ j)
P(σ0i |xxi· , µ) P(σ0i |λ)
=
∏
P(σi |xxi· , µ) P(σi |λ) i P(xi, j | σi , µ j )

(7)

which also has an exponential sum expansion. We use
a Gamma proposal distribution with a mean set to the
current value of σi , Q(σ0i |σi ) ∼ Gamma(σi ν, 1/ν), and a
precision parameter ν.
For the MCMC sampling procedure, the proposal distribution parameters were ζ = 0.1, ν = 20, to approximately give an acceptance probability of 0.5. We started
each chain with randomly initialized values. In a single
iteration, we used Equations (3), (4), and (6) to sample
new values in the vectors x , µ, and σ respectively. Each
chain was continued for 500 iterations, and samples were
taken after 300 iterations with an interval of 10 iterations.
In total, we ran 8 chains and collected 160 samples.

1309

