UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Non-Phylogenetic Conceptual Network Architecture for Organizing Classes of Material
Artifacts into Cultural Lineages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4sk240hr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gabora, Liane
Leijnen, Stefan
Veloz, Tomas
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Non-Phylogenetic Conceptual Network Architecture for Organizing Classes of
Material Artifacts into Cultural Lineages
Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca), Stefan Leijnen, Tomas Veloz (tomas.veloz@ubc.ca) and
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, Canada

Carl Lipo (clipo@csulb.edu)
Department of Anthropology and IIRMES, California State University, Long Beach
1250 Bellflower Boulevard
Long Beach, CA 90840, USA
Abstract

Phylogenetic Approaches

The application of phylogenetic techniques to the
documentation of cultural history can present a distorted
picture due to horizontal transmission and blending.
Moreover, the units of cultural transmission must be
communicable concepts, rather than conveniently measurable
attributes, and relatedness between elements of culture often
resides at the conceptual level, something not captured by
phylogenetic methods, which focus on measurable attributes.
(For example, mortars and pestles are as related as two
artifacts could be, despite little similarity at the attribute
level.) This paper introduces a new, cognitively inspired
framework for chronicling material cultural history, building
on Lipo’s (2005) network-based computational approach. We
show that by incorporating not just superficial attributes of
artifact samples (e.g. fluting) but also conceptual knowledge
(e.g. information about function), a different pattern of
cultural ancestry emerges.
Keywords: archaeology; artifacts; cladistics; cultural
evolution; material culture; network model; phylogeny

Introduction
The efforts of biologists, phylogeneticists, and others,
have culminated in an impressively detailed understanding
of how the living things of today evolved. We can trace the
ancestral origins of our eyes and fingers, and even certain
behavioral traits such as mating preferences. However, we
lack comprehensive knowledge of patterns of relatedness of
elements of culture, even restricting ourselves just to
material artifacts.
The paper discusses difficulties that have arisen
attempting to chronicle material cultural history using
phylogenetic and network based approaches. We then
describe our new conceptual network approach. The insight
that guides this approach is: since artifacts are the product of
minds that encode representations of them not just at the
attribute level but also at an abstract, conceptual level, to
reconstruct material cultural evolution it is necessary to
incorporate how artifacts are conceived, and how these
conceptions interact in a human mind. We introduce a
computer program that is able to construct such networks
from both attribute data and conceptual information.

Since artifacts undergo ‘descent with modification’, the
theory of natural selection appears to offer a means for
explaining cultural history. Accordingly, phylogenetic
methods such as cladistics are routinely borrowed from
biology and applied in an archaeological context (O’Brien
& Lyman 2003; O’Brien, Darwent & Lyman, 2001). In
cladistic representations of archaeological data, the
measured attributes of a ‘taxon’ of artifact are listed as a
number string. The position in the string is loosely
analogous to the concept of gene, and the number at that
position is loosely analogous to the concept of allele. Thus
if a taxon is represented by 132 then the first attribute is in
state one, the second is in state three, and the third is in state
two. For example, consider the representation of early
projectile points from the Southeastern United States shown
in Figure 1 (O’Brien et al., 2001). The data consist of metric
and morphological measurements with respect to eight
attributes, each of which can take from two to six possible
states. Thus for example if fluting is absent in a particular
artifact it has a 1 in position VII, and if fluting is present it
has a 2. Seventeen ‘taxa’ are identified, and the pattern is
such that one common ancestor (identified as KDR) gave
rise to sequential branchings that culminated in 16 different
taxa. This technique provides an intuitively meaningful
(although potentially misleading) means of capturing
structural change. The ‘root taxon’ at the far left is the most
primitive, and early branch points represent changes that
provided the structural constraints that shaped more recent
changes. For example, much as evolution of the backbone
paved the way for limbs, evolution of containers paved the
way for spouts and handles.
Phylogenetic approaches have also been applied to culture
in more complex ways. For example, relationships amongst
different elements of culture have been analyzed by
comparing their phylogenetic trees (Holden & Mace, 2003).
The procedure involves running a series of forward models,
one in which the phenomena are assumed to evolve
completely independently, another in which one kind of
correlation is assumed (e.g. matriliny with cattle), another in
which a different correlation is assumed (e.g. patriliny with

2923

cattle). These are compared to the language phylogeny,
which is assumed to be the most accurate available cultural
history tree, to determine which gives the best match. This
method can indeed unearth relationships amongst different
elements of culture. It was found, for example, that the
spread of pastoralism in Sub-Saharan Africa is associated
with a shift from matriliny to patriliny. However the method
is ineffective if there is rampant blending of cultural
elements, and it does not generate information about why or
how elements of culture are related.

Figure 1. Phylogenetic representation of PaleoIndian period
projectile points from the Southeastern United States with
17 taxa defined by 18 attributes. From O’Brien et al., 2001.

Shortcomings of Phylogenetic Approaches
Despite the intuitiveness and scientific rigor of
phylogenetic/cladistic approaches, and some apparent
successes applying them to culture, concerns have been
raised about distortions generated by these cultural
applications (Gabora, 2006; Lipo, 2005; Tëmkin &
Eldredge, 2007; Terrell, Hunt, & Gosden, 1997). We now
examine these concerns.
Similarity Need Not Reflect Homology. Phylogenetic
methods assume that similarity reflects homology, i.e. that
two species are similar because they are related.
Specifically, it assumes that, either (1) one is descended
from the other, in which case shared traits were transmitted
vertically, or (2) they are descended from a common
ancestor, which is depicted as a branch point. For example,
common ancestry can occur through fission, in which a

population splits in two, which become increasingly
differentiated.
However, similarity need not reflect homology. Artifacts
may arise independently yet be similar because they are
alternative solutions within similar design constraints.
Convergent evolution occurs in a biological context too.
However, because organisms must solve many problems
(reproduction, locomotion, digestion, etc.) the probability
that a species is mis-categorized on the basis of how it
solves any one problem is low. Artifacts, on the other hand,
are generally constructed with a single use in mind. (Though
artifacts developed for use in one context may be used to
solve other problems, e.g., a screwdriver may be used to
open a can of paint). Therefore, the probability of miscategorization arising through the assumption that similarity
reflects homology is problematic for artifacts.
Blending. Cultural relatedness frequently arises through
not just vertical transmission but horizontal (inter-lineage)
transmission, which can result in the blending of knowledge
from different sources. Since inter-lineage transfer of
information is relatively rare in animals, phylogenetic
methods are ill-equipped to deal with it. Extensive
horizontal transmission gives a bushy, reticulated
appearance to a phylogenetic tree, which is misleading
because it implies not just chronology but ancestry.
Blending is problematic for cladistic methods because it
forces one to parse the data according to predefined
attributes or characters. So one is a priori discouraged from
incorporating data that does not fit into this parsing. In
biology, such parsing arises naturally stemming from how
traits are genetically encoded. The chosen attributes are
characteristic of that species, and the rarity of inter-species
mating ensures that they don’t change drastically. However,
in culture, nothing is a priori prohibited from ‘mating with’
anything else. Those who apply phylogenetics to culture
respond that such problems rarely arise in the study of
prehistory. On the basis of a set of studies of virtually
indistinguishable artifacts, Collard et al. (2006) insinuate
that cultural blending is not widely present. This, however,
reflects their highly limited choice of artifacts; a brief
examination of the contents of any modern house would
lead one to a different conclusion. Moreover, even if one is
more interested in prehistoric culture than contemporary
culture, one seeks not a bag of tricks for assessing
relatedness each of which is applicable to certain data sets,
but an explanatory framework that fits them all.
Lack of Objective Measure of Relatedness. A more
fundamental problem with phylogenetic approaches to
culture is that they assume it is possible to accurately
measure the relatedness of artifacts. Whether or not two
organisms share a common ancestor is clear-cut; they either
are or are not descendents of a particular individual. One
can objectively measure what percentage of the genomes of
two species overlap, and make conclusions about their
degree of genetic relatedness. But in a cultural context,
whether or not two artifacts “share a common ancestor” can

2924

be arbitrary, and moreover, what is measured is not
necessarily what was culturally transmitted.
Predefined Attributes. The data of Figure 1 are typical
of those to which a phylogenetic approach is amenable
because the taxa are very similar to one another. That is,
each taxon has one version or another of the considered
attributes; there are no major modifications in this lineage.
A problem pointed out by Alex Bentley (pers. com.) is that
the units considered are those that are most amenable to
analysis rather than those that were most likely to have been
transmitted from teacher to apprentice. Thus the method
documents readily measurable change, not the actual
cultural ancestry of the artifact.

like them) had not come into existence, stoplights would not
have come into existence. However, the network approach
does not provide a way to document this. Their lack of lowlevel similarity means that this relationship cannot be
reconstructed using this method.

Lipo’s Network (LN) Approach
Network-based methods appear to avert the above
problems by simply ordering data according to similarity
without necessarily implying common ancestry (Lipo,
2005). Analysis of the same data yields quite a different
pattern of evolutionary change. Following O’Brien, samples
that are rated the same with respect to all considered
attributes are categories together as a particular taxon.
Attributes are encoded as a number string. Each position in
the string refers to a particular attribute, and the number at a
position refers to the state of that attribute for the taxon.
This is shown in Figure 2.
Taxa are simply arranged according to the number of
attributes by which they differ. The majority of taxa have
two lines coming from them, one to a taxon that preceded it,
and one to a taxon that followed it; the network does not
specify which is which. Those that have more (e.g.
31222122) reflect the existence of multiple other taxa with
the same number of differences.
Several aspect of the procedure are noteworthy. First, the
network-based approach does not make a priori
assumptions about the sources of diversity. It is
uncommitted with respect to whether differences reflect
branching due to fission or blending due to transmission.
Second, the method is also uncommitted with respect to
chronology. Additional data indicate the directionality of the
evolutionary pathway, as shown in Figure 3.

Limitations of the LN Approach
We believe that in order to avoid the limitations of
phylogenetic methods a move in the direction of network
representations is inevitable. However, this initial
implementation has limitations.
Considers Only Superficial Attributes. This approach is
suitable for artifacts that are highly similar at the superficial
attribute level. However, it cannot to handle artifacts whose
similarity resides at the conceptual level. For example, it
seems reasonable to hypothesize that the stoplight has (at
least) two cultural ancestors—the streetlight and the car--the
first contributing the necessary expertise (mastery over the
technological design space of external lighting), and the
second contributing the necessary motive (control traffic).
The second is as crucial as the first; if cars (or something

Figure 2. Graph produced by linking taxa to their most
similar neighbors. Bold lines represent differences of only
one attribute. Thin solid lines show differences of two
attributes. Dotted lines show differences of three attributes.
The multiple lines connecting taxon 31222122 to other taxa
indicate ambiguity due to equivalent number of differences
between multiple taxa. From Lipo, 2005.
Assumes Single-Attribute Change. The LN architecture
assumes that the evolutionary path cannot be resolved when
there are multiple attribute differences between neighboring
taxa. This is not the case when conceptual structure is taken
into account; multiple differences (or even complete lack of
similarity) at the attribute level may reflect single changes at
the concept level. Moreover, once the conceptual level is
introduced, it is no longer necessary to restrict oneself to
independent attributes. Indeed, dependencies amongst
attributes may indicate the presence of conceptual structure
that may hold the clue to the artifact’s evolutionary story.
Constraints on Attributes. Third, the length of the
number string and the attributes considered are determined a
priori according to certain rules: attributes must be
independent, and there must no significant difference in the
fitness of alternative states, i.e. only neutral variation is
considered. The rationale behind these rules is that they rule
out similarity due to convergence (e.g. structural
constraints). There is also an implied preference for data

2925

with taxa that differ from one another by only one attribute
because in such cases the pattern of ancestry can be resolved
without ambiguity. When there are differences of multiple
attributes between a taxon and its nearest neighbor, the
evolutionary path cannot be resolved (e.g. the transition
from 111 to 122 could occur by way of either 112 or 121).
The underlying assumption is that innovation involves one
superficial attribute at a time, so a lack of single-attribute
change between neighboring classes is assumed to indicate
an incomplete data set. However, this assumption is not
always met. For example, Tëmkin & Eldredge’s (2007)
cornet data exhibits “well-documented temporally spaced
sequences of “missing links” that likely indicate an actual
pattern of ancestry and descent” (p. 150).

Figure 3. Graphical analysis of projectile point data with
temporal information (from Anderson et al., 1996) indicated
by degree of shading of circles. (From Lipo, 2005).
The network method has the limitation that to chronicle
the evolution of a lineage that is increasing in complexity,
one would either have to go backwards and add
placeholders for traits that did not previously exist, or clump
together a great variety of taxa as indistinguishable
instances of the terminus. To document the history of
human material culture, our framework must accommodate,
for example, that this lineage, or one like it, eventually gave
rise to the gun. The gun has few of the attributes considered
thus far in analyses of this lineage such as ‘fluting’ or ‘arcshaped base’. Its similarity, indeed our sense that it belongs
in this lineage, is conceptual; it reflects the way it is
conceived of and used by humans.

In sum, the network method is a sensible, rigorous way of
organizing archaeological data. However, due to its assumed
independence of attributes, consideration of only superficial
attributes, and fixed-length attribute strings, the resulting
framework for cultural evolution is fragmentary, limited in
application to what many would find the least interesting, or
at any rate the least innovative, periods of cultural change.

The Conceptual Network (CN) Approach
The project described here builds on Lipo’s networkbased method but adds conceptual structure. As is
conventional, concepts are indicated with capitals. Thus an
instance of a projectile point is written as ‘projectile point’
but the concept of one is written as PROJECTILE POINT.
The more superficial level of conceptual structure consists
of what Rosch (1976) refers to as basic level concepts such
as PROJECTILE POINT and KNIFE. Basic level concepts
mirror the attributes of objects in the external world. This
basic level is the level at which items are first perceived,
and it is the level at which we generally refer to and interact
with them. In some cases it may be more natural to work at
a finer level of discrimination and thus consider a more
subordinate conceptual level, e.g. BEVELED KNIFE
instead of KNIFE. The important thing is that this
superficial level be rich in attributes. The less superficial,
more abstract level of conceptual structure consists of
superordinate concepts such as WEAPON. Superordinate
concepts often refer to multiple basic level categories (e.g.
PROJECTILE POINT and KNIFE are both instances of
WEAPON), and they are more general than the level at
which we refer to and interact with items (e.g. different
kinds of weapon are interacted with in different ways).
Basic level concepts and superordinate concepts can take us
a long way toward a representation of how objects in the
world and their interrelations are conceptualized.
To organize material culture in a way that allows for
projectile points to evolve into guns, we incorporate a
minimal amount of conceptual structure. The structure of
the concept PROJECTILE POINT may include not just
that it has certain attributes but also that it is an instance of
the concept WEAPON. Sometimes the structure of concepts
derives from their history (how they were conceived in the
past), and sometimes from other sources (e.g. horizontal
transmission or copying error). The cognitive approach uses
networks to represent, not just taxa of artifacts, but
relationships amongst them as they are conceived of in the
mind of a particular population of individuals at a particular
time and place.
The program was developed using the object-oriented
Java platform with extension packages for working with
networks (JUNG) and Excel files (SX). The tool collects
meta-data for a set of known samples by asking the user
questions about their presumed function and use. The
questions are generated using a conceptual network that
determines which questions are relevant for the sample. This
leads to the creation of two networks: an attribute-level only
one, and one that incorporates meta-data. Other software

2926

functions allow the user to export and import data sets for
later use, storing meta-data and networks.

question, ‘Was the sample a projectile point’, and ‘Was the
sample thrown’. Other examples of questions asked include,
‘Was the sample used for cutting’.

Data Samples
Data can be entered into the program either manually,
filling out fields for each sample, or as a batch excel files
that contain all samples to be evaluated. Both import
methods require a series of entry fields to be filled out in
order for the program to query the user in the next stage.
These entries are as follows:
Sample name: Unique name that identifies the sample
Example: “Graham3”
Sample attributes: Features encoded as a numeric string.
Example: “2262233212221”
Generic Type: Group to which this sample belongs
Example: “Graham Cave”
Period: Estimated period of the sample’s original use
Example: “7,000 – 5,500 B.C.”
Location: Describes where the sample has been found
Example: “Cooper Site”
Image: Picture of sample
Example: Figure 4.

Database
Answers given by human experts are stored as meta-data
in the program. Since for large datasets, an expert may not
be able to handle the full set in one session, sets of samples
may be imported from and exported to text format files.

Generation of Lineages
The program analyses the superficial attributes and
abstract (e.g. functional) aspects of samples, and uses this
information to generate networks that arrange the artifacts
according to how similar they are. Thus the network shows
how the artifacts are likely to have evolved chronologically.
Relative distance between two samples x and y in the
original network is determined by the following algorithm:
N(x,y) = H(f(x), f(y))
Where
N is the distance without abstract concepts
H is the Hamming distance between two encodings
f(x) is the attribute encoding of x
For the CN, the algorithm is expanded with a function
over the meta-data:
M(x,y) = N(x,y) + D(a(x),a(y))
Where D is a binary function that indicates whether two
attributes are similar (0) or different, and (1) a(x) is a
conceptual level attribute of x.

Figure 4. Image of Graham3 sample.

Results

Conceptual Networks
The samples are described by a set of superficial
attributes related to their relative sizes and shapes, the
material from which they were constructed, and so forth.
Since the intended function of an artifact does not follow
unambiguously from these attributes, a human expert
capable of deducing function from shape, and who may also
have knowledge concerning their location and period,
provides additional information to aid the computer program
in determining how the samples are related. Following
Dunnell (1978), we define function in terms of the
relationship between an object and its environment,
including both natural and artificial aspects. Variability in
the physical aspects of objects sometimes reflects function.
For example, broad, thick objects have lower performance
values than narrow ones for piercing, and objects that
interact with air at any velocity are shaped by aerodynamics.
Since the number of possible functions that an artifact could
have is potentially infinite, the program asks only those
questions that are relevant for a particular sample based on
assessment of attributes. Since thus far much of the data has
consisted of projectile points, all samples trigger the

Although the approach has not yet been thoroughly
tested, in every test of ten or more samples so far there is at
least one difference in the chronological ordering of
between the CN approach and the original network
approach. For comparative purposes, we began with the
same data that was analyzed using the previously described
approaches. An example of actual output of the program is
given in Figure 5. Since using the entire data set generates
output that is crowded and difficult to parse, the figure just
shows a subset of the data. The output shows both the
original network approach and the CN approach. In the LN
approach, shown to the left, for any sample x, it is possible
that more than one of the other samples is equally similar to
x, i.e. minimizes the Hamming distance (the N function)
with respect to x. Therefore, using attributes only, there is a
large probability of generating the incorrect lineage. If you
look to the samples featured on the upper right, it guessed
that the terminal sample ‘Calfcreek’ is most closely related
to the topmost sample, ‘Graham4’. Indeed based on the
superficial attributes only this was a reasonable guess.

2927

In the CN approach, however, using conceptual
information (the M function) we can distinguish the correct
ordering on the basis of higher-level information. We see
that the LN approach guessed incorrectly, and that
‘Calfcreek’ is actually more closely related to ‘Graham2’,
the one below it, than to ‘Graham4’, the one guessed using
the LN.

Figure 5. Two examples of network output given the
same input data. Circles represent particular samples.
Numbered lines give estimates of relatedness (lower
numbers more closely related). The output on the left makes
use of superficial attributes only. The output on the right
additionally makes use of conceptual meta-data.

Discussion
To reconstruct the history of the objects we build and use
requires us to consider conceptual relationship, indeed to
reconstruct the history of conceptual change in the minds
that created them. The conceptual network approach
introduced here avoids inherent in phylogenetic approaches.
It builds on an earlier network-based model, by adding the
capacity to make use of not just superficial attributes of
artifacts but also abstract, knowledge referred to as metalevel data. Though for this initial analysis for comparative
purposes we stuck with data that had been previously
analyzed using other approaches, the current approach can
readily be applied to chronicling of patterns of
interrelatedness amongst artifacts of different kinds (e.g. one
tool might fall into disuse when a superior tool comes into
existence, or the tool for procuring a certain food might be
expected to appear at the same time and location as the tool
for processing it). The approach is in its infancy; we
continue to improve the program through application of
research from cognitive science on concept combination and
the formation of hierarchical conceptual structure (e.g.
Coley, Hayes, Lawson, & Moloney, 2004; Kemp &
Tenenbaum, 2008). Though preliminary, we believe that the
approach holds promise in the quest to understand the
ancestry of the multitude of artifacts we have created.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge grants to Liane Gabora from
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada and the Concerted Research Program of the Fund
for Scientific Research of Belgium.

References
Anderson, D. G., & Sassaman, K. E. (1996). The
Paleoindian and Early Archaic Southeast. University of
Alabama Press.
Coley, J. D., Hayes, B., Lawson, C., & Moloney, M. (2004).
Knowledge, expectations, and inductive inferences within
conceptual hierarchies. Cognition, 90, 217-253.
Collard, M., Shennan, S. L., Tehrani, J. J. (2006).
Branching, blending, and the evolution of cultural
similarities and differences among human populations.
Evolution and Human Behavior 27, 169−184.
Dunnell, R. C. (1978). Archaeological Potential of
Anthropological and Scientific Models of Function. In R.
C. Dunnell & E. S. Hall (Eds.) Archaeological Essays in
Honor of Irving Benjamin Rouse. The Hague: Mouton
Gabora, L. (2006). The fate of evolutionary archaeology:
Survival or extinction? World Archaeology 38(4),
690−696.
Holden, C. J., Mace, R. (2003). Spread of cattle led to the
loss of matriliny in Africa: a co-evolutionary
analysis. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 270(1532), 2425-2433. ISSN: 0962-8452
Kemp, C., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). The discovery of
structural form. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 105(31), 10687-10692.
Lipo, C. P. (2005). The resolution of cultural phylogenies
using graphs. In Lipo, C. P., O’Brien, M. J., Collard, M.,
& Shena, S. J. (Eds.) Mapping our Ancestors. New
Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
O’Brien, M. J., Darwent, J., & Lyman, R. L. (2001).
Cladistics is useful for reconstructing archaeological
phylogenies: Paleoindian points from the Southeastern
United States. Journal of Archaeological Science 28,
1115-1136.
O’Brien, M. J., Lyman, R. L., Saab, Y., Saab, E., Darwent,
J., & Glover, D. S. (2002). Two issues in archaeological
hylogenetics: Taxon construction and outgroup selection.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 215, 133–150.
Tëmkin, I., & Eldredge, N. (2007). Phylogenetics and
material cultural evolution. Current Anthropology 48,
146−153.
Terrell, J. E., Hunt, T. L., & Gosden, C. (1997). The
dimensions of social life in the Pacific: Human diversity
and the myth of the primitive isolate. Current
Anthropology 38, 155–95.

2928

