UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A one-stage distributed processing account of linguistic negation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mp7x2v4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Huette, Stephanie
Anderson, Sarah
Matlock, Teenie
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A one-stage distributed processing account of linguistic negation
Stephanie Huette (shuette@ucmerced.edu),
Sarah Anderson (sarah.anderson@ucmail.uc.edu),
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45221, USA

Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu),
and Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
School of Social Sciences, Humanities & Arts, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, 95344, USA

Abstract
Linguistic negation can be comprehended with the inclusion
(or absence) of features and categories associated with the
senses in a single step. Under this view, there is no need for
explicit logical operators, as the negating word or phase is
treated no differently than any other word. Negation provides
additional context, whereby visualizing negation as a
trajectory in a distributed, grounded perceptual simulation
space can easily characterize the comprehension of negated
sentences. A mousetracking experiment was conducted to
explore how this kind of process may be enacted in the brain
and to tease apart hypotheses of logical manipulations vs.
analogue signals performing this work.
Keywords: language understanding, neural networks,
situated cognition, mouse-tracking

Introduction
Negation occurs in all languages and is is an important
part of everyday communication. Humans need it to express
situations in which an object, person, state, or event is not
present or even non-existent. Negation can be coded in a
variety of ways.
In some cases, it is expressed
suprasegmentally, for instance, in sarcastic remarks such as
“I sure excelled in that class,” said by a student who just
learned that his course grade was a D. It can also be coded
with affixes, such as the prefix “non-“, as in “The
nonexistence of rules worries me.” It can also be coded
with words such as “not”, “none”, and “without”. Despite
the ubiquity of negation, its processing has perplexed
philosophers for centuries. There is still a relatively poor
understanding of how people contend with the meaning of
simple negated statements such as “The eagle is not in the
sky”.
The processes that underlie the comprehension of a
negated utterance has generated recent interest among
psycholinguists. In pioneering work, Kaup, Yaxley,
Madden, Zwaan, and Lüdtke, (2006) presented participants
with sentences like, “The eagle was not in the sky,” then
presented an accompanying picture. Participants had to
respond whether the content of the picture had been
mentioned in the sentence they had just read. The reasoning
was that if participants perceptually simulate negation in the
same way they simulate affirmative sentences, they should
be quicker to respond “yes” to pictures that match the
sentence (e.g., an eagle with its wings folded). Kaup and
colleagues found that when participants read negated
sentences, response times to a picture that matched the

affirmative version of the proposition (eagle with wings
spread) were faster than to a picture that actually matched
the negated sentence, suggesting that a perceptual
simulation of the affirmative proposition was created in
response to negated sentences. The researchers then
suggested that negation may be handled through a separate,
special process, not through a perceptual simulation.
Thus, the timecourse of understanding a negated sentence
is not well understood. There are three possibilities as to
how a final interpretation of the negation comes to be
activated (Figure 1). The first possibility is a logical process
discretely revises a fully activated affirmative interpretation
(1A). The second scenario predicts a lag in activation of a
negated sentence, simply because negation is more complex
(1B). The third hypothesis is negation produces increased
competition amongst the possible features the negated
meaning could activate, forcing negation to be slower at
first, but once one interpretation begins to form, making
negation much faster compared to the affirmative version
(1C). Note that this last hypothesis predicts only speed
differences, and no spatial differences.

Figure 1: Each hypothesis shows predicted mouse
trajectories on a computer screen.
Each of these panels in Figure 1 can be thought of in
terms of velocity: the speed and direction in which an
interpretation is formed will be shared with motor systems
during a response (Spivey, Grosjean & Knoblich, 2005).
Thus, spatial and velocity metrics of a computer mouse will
reveal which of the aforementioned hypotheses can best
explain how a negated interpretation is formed. In addition,
a proof of concept model was created as a fundamental first

2037

step in providing a groundwork for a one-stage process for
linguistic negation. Although preliminary, proof of learning
and some principles of perceptual simulation are
demonstrated.
Inspired by Elman’s (1990) treatment of simple recurrent
networks that learn linguistic sequences, one can
conceptualize the dynamics of a negated sentence as
forming a trajectory through the state space of the network.
If each neuron is treated as a dimension, then the firing rates
of all the neurons at any given time slice form a set of
coordinates that index a location in the state space.
Therefore, a string of words in a sentence necessarily forms
a string of locations: a trajectory. Importantly, sensorimotor
features can be integrated into a simple recurrent network
(Howell, Jankowicz, & Becker 2005), creating dimensions
that arise from perception and emerge in cognition. Simply
put, the meaning of a word in this network is a distributed
code of features and primitive perceptual categories.
Whereas some previous networks use a single node with a
priori instructions on performing the negation (e.g., Samad,
1988), this network has no special instructions for the word
not. Instead, when the network is presented with the words
The coin is not heads-up, the network sees features on the
last word that are instead associated with features on a tailsup coin. Thus, not becomes a contextual modifier, signaling
that the upcoming word is of an alternative or more diffuse
meaning. More specifically binary-alternative negations can
readily go to the alternative, and multiple-alternative
negations (such as location, in which an object could be in
any number of alternative places) become a blend of
possibilities.
First the network will be laid out and its properties
examined for principles of how perceptual simulation must
function under a framework of embodied semantics. Then, a
mousetracking experiment will demonstrate that a one-stage
process, with increased competition for negated sentences,
best accommodates these and previous findings.

Model
The corpus consists of both affirmative and negated
sentences, in even numbers. Eleven sentences were binaryalternatives (e.g. The coin is [heads-up/tails-up) and 12
sentences were four-alternative (e.g. The child is
[angry/annoyed/calm/content]). Some partial overlap was
built into this corpus (i.e., with two of the binary-alternative
pairs using glass as their noun). It is much less clear how the
network would negate a multiple-alternative set in this case,
and thus their examination is crucial to test the flexibility of
this model. Further, some overlap must realistically be built
in to mimic a realistic scenario. Learning rate was kept
constant at a value of .09 and momentum was set at a value
of .1 for the duration of training.
The target perceptual features were constructed using
binary targets, where the first-author rated each word as
either having a particular feature or not. The features chosen
were visual (33 features), proprioceptive (11 features),
auditory (5 features), emotional (8 features) or related to

olfaction/gustation (6 features). These 63 features targets
were specified a priori but do not imply that these features
are exactly their label, or must be in some predetermined
arrangement. The target layer can be thought of as the
environment and the things that are simply co-present with a
particular word, and the important aspect is on the featurefeature relationships, an not the label itself. The network
was trained such that error consistently ranged from the
minimum error of 1.9 x 10-7 to a maximum of .026. This
was found to be the point at which the error became stable
and could not improve any further.
No error was fed back from the perceptual simulation
layer on the, is and not. The network is doing word
prediction, but it is also seeing and hearing features for the
current word. Thus, the target layer for the input eagle in the
sentence The eagle is flying, the corpus target predicts is and
the perceptual simulation targets are, for example, feathers,
eyes, and blue. Thus, the model is not doing any explicit
prediction in the perceptual simulation layer. Rather, the
most sophisticated assumption is that one needs to have
some feature detectors and a modicum of perception to learn
about words.
Each axis is a particular feature’s activation, chosen
automatically. The x-axis is always the most active noun
feature for that sentence. The y and z-axes are chosen based
on which features are non-overlapping perceptual targets.
However, note that overlap between noun and adjective
features do not always clearly delimit these boundaries. For
example, Figure 2 is an illustrates the way the binary input
string The shoe is (not) [tied/untied] traverses through a
three dimensional coordinate feature space (stable, tough,
moving). The shoe follows the same path for every sentence,
going from stable, to stable and tough, to a location with
partially active stable and moving features. This is already
displaying an emergent property: the model was not told to
activate any features for the, is and not; however, these
words still carry some feature activations. Also note that the
context layer of the network is reinitialized after each
sentence is run through the network, and so activation for
the cannot be due to carry over from the previous sentence.
Due to the pattern of connections, these words cannot help
but carry multifarious meaning.
After is in Figure 2, the trajectories begin to diverge.
Notice that both negated sentences overlap on not and that
this location is approximately equidistant between two
alternative locations. The shoe is tied and The shoe is not
untied both end in a corner with stable being almost entirely
active. The shoe is untied and The shoe is not tied end by
deactivating stable and tough features, and activating
moving features. Thus, when the network hears about a shoe
being untied in either its negated or affirmative versions, it
is able to comprehend a stable tough shoe, and then
correctly simulate something akin to shoelaces moving
around freely as one walks.

2038

Figure 2: Sentence trajectory through feature activation
space. Beginnings of sentence overlap until the noun.
Figure 3 shows some nuance of how negating a sentence
may subtlety change its meaning. The shoe is tied settles
easily into a perceptual attractor, whereas The shoe is not
untied shows a slightly different pattern of activation. The
targets did not expressly tell the network that these two
meanings were different in any way. However, looking at
these trajectories, it appears that the network emergently
decided that this particular negation should not activate the
happy feature that the equivalent affirmative meaning
activates. Thus, this network is capable of negating
sentences and finding a meaning where primary features are
extremely similar in their activations, but other less active
features are susceptible to quirks, resulting in subtle, but
quantifiable, flavoring differences. The tiny activations
surrounding the major primarily activated features create the
majority of flexibility in this system, while the primary
features constrain and ensure similar interpretations for each
sentence.

Figure 4 shows a pair from the negation of the trained
multiple-alternative sentence (The computer is (not) [blue,
green, gray, white]). The network has learned to associate
green primarily with a tangy taste, and blue with quietude.
However, the negations go to 0, because their alternative
meanings are not within this subset of features but would
require plotting alternative feature activations. For this
visualization, their meaning is in the absence of the primary
distinctive features of green and blue. One of the differences
between multiples and binaries lies in this diffusion of
meaning. It will always be more difficult to capture the
meaning of a negation of something like a location, where
the range of alternatives is large or even infinite, or
something like a color, which has finite labels but is a
continuous physical substrate. Therefore, the meaning of not
may actually primarily be a deactivation of the affirmative
version’s primary features and subtle activation of diffuse
alternatives. This makes any multiple-alternative negation
much less stable, which could affect the encoding and
subsequent retrieval accuracy of a negation (Anderson,
Huette, Matlock & Spivey, 2010).

Figure 4: Deactivation in negated meaning

Figure 3: Same sentence as Figure 2 with modified y-axis.
It is much more difficult to see the primary activations of
multiple-alternative negations in just three dimensions.

Even in this extremely small corpus, the network is
capable of doing some degree of generalization, which
previously has been a criticism of the perceptual simulation
framework. For example, the network has never seen the
sentence The egg is clean or The egg is dirty. It has
encountered each one of those words though, and has
associated features. Figure 5 shows appropriate perceptual
features for these two novel affirmative sentences, but some
less appropriate feature activations for the negated versions
of these novel sentences. Though imperfect, the endpoint of
…is not dirty is closer to the endpoint of …is clean, and the
endpoint of …is not clean is close to the endpoint of …is
dirty. As such, the previous graphs of oft-repeated sentences
may be somewhat idealized versions of how a sentence is
negated.

2039

Figure 5: Example generalization in the network

Discussion
To allow for generalization, the meanings of sentences
may be necessarily somewhat distinct between the
affirmative and the (supposedly) equivalent negated form.
Generalization is extremely powerful and indicates that once
a small amount of statistical information is encountered and
learned, almost anything can be negated as effortlessly as
something that has been episodically encountered. When the
network encounters a novel use of a word, it can easily
simulate it, incorporating the surrounding context to create a
brand new meaning. The productivity of language is a
fundamental law in linguistics (REF?), and this model and
framework holds promise for allowing a multitude of
meanings that have never been directly encountered as well
as their negations.

Experiment
Participants. Twenty-four participants were given partial
course credit for their participation and run in accordance
with IRB regulations. All were University of California,
Merced, students, and all were prescreened to ensure normal
or corrected to normal vision and audition. Participants with
dyslexia or other reading disabilities were also excluded.
Only right-handed or ambidextrous native American
English-speakers were included in this study.
Materials. All target sentences were recorded in the negated
form, and all fillers were recorded exclusively in the
affirmative form. In both cases, a male speaker was used.
To construct the affirmative versions, not was spliced out of
the file at zero crossings, ensuring the voice sounded
unaltered and natural. This was done to ensure there were no
effects of priming, due to sentences being presented in both
negated and affirmative forms. All pictures were simple
clipart, modified in Adobe Photoshop to fit the location and
state in which they were described. For example, a folded
newspaper was presented on a rack, paired with the

sentences The newspaper is [not] on the rack or The
newspaper is [not] folded.
Design. To test whether the affirmative state is competing
with or being activated in parallel with the negated state,
participants completed a modified forced-choice
mousetracking task. Twenty-four stimuli pairs were
constructed, where 12 pairs described locations of a noun
(The towel is [not] on the bar/floor) and 12 pairs described
states (The towel is [not] flat/crumpled). Two lists were
constructed, whereby 6 pairs of each type were used as
targets in List A, and the other 6 pairs of each type were
used in List B (12 pairs, or 24 individual stimulus
sentences). The targets consist of both Negated and
Affirmative forms, 2 different states/locations, yielding 48
targets. In addition, filler sentences with a different noun
and location or state were constructed, such that the filler
trials could consist of two choices with no overlapping
information. The pairs not used as targets were used to
construct these, randomly selecting from one of the
state/location sentence endings. For example, a target trial
contained a picture of a newspaper on a rack paired with a
newspaper on a driveway, and the comparable filler trial
paired a sentence describing a newspaper as folded (same
picture of it folded on a rack) with a football on a field.
Thus in list A, the newspaper was always presented as a pair
of pictures for affirmative and negated spoken stimuli about
the location, and the newspaper, described as folded, was
always presented with audio and visual components of The
motorcycle is broken (also a description of it's state). This
kind of pairing was chosen such that the key manipulation
of affirmative and negated was less salient, because
sometimes the disambiguating information is in the noun
(e.g. picture of a football and a newspaper), and at other
times participants had to disambiguate based on the state or
location (e.g. newspaper on driveway or rack).
Procedure. The experiment began with five practice trials.
Participants read instructions that told them to click a small
red box located at the bottom middle of the screen. After
clicking this box, it disappeared and a sentence played over
headphones. After the sentence, two pictures appeared in the
upper right and upper left parts of the screen. The location
of the target picture was pseudo-randomized for each list.
Participants were asked to move their mouse over one of the
pictures to indicate which picture best matched the sentence
(e.g. “The newspaper is on the rack” and a picture of a
newspaper in an open newsrack or with a picture of a
newspaper on a driveway as the response choices). Moving
the cursor to the top right or top left over the picture
constituted a response (no click was required). X,Y screen
coordinates were sampled at approximately 67 Hz using
Psyscope X (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt & Provost, 1993),
along with the items on the screen, reaction times, and the
eventual response. The tracking speed of the mouse was set
to the third lowest setting in the Mac OSX operating system
preferences, and chair height was set to the highest setting.
Both of these constraints ensure motor movements come
from the entire limb and are not localized to small wrist

2040

movements, which could cause asymmetries in leftward and
rightward movements.
Mouse-Tracking Data. Variability in RT led to a different
number of samples on each trial. To cut out this variability,
each trial was time-normalized in increments of 2% of the
total response time by means of linear interpolation (Spivey
et al., 2005). This yielded 51 x,y samples per trial, which
were then translated to a common starting point of (0,0). All
responses to the left side of the screen were mirrored to the
right such that all data could be pooled. To derive maximum
deviations, a straight line from the start (0,0) to the response
(last sample) was computed, and 51 points along that line.
Then, Euclidean distance was found from every point on
that line to every point on the trajectory (51 points on the
line x 51 points on the trajectory equaled 2,601). Because
Euclidean distance is an absolute value, points that deviated
below the straight line were multiplied by -1, ensuring these
points would not be interpreted as deviation toward the
competing response. Then, we computed the minimum
distance for each point and the maximum of those
minimums is found. The resulting point from the trajectory
is the maximum deviation.
Results
Importantly, only correct trials were analyzed. Response
accuracy was high for all participants, but there was a slight
difference in accuracy by condition. For Affirmative trials,
an average of 97% were correct (SD=3.5%), and for
Negated trials, the average was significantly lower at 93%
(SD=6.5%, paired samples t-test: t(23)=3.08, p=.005). As in
previous research, Negated trials exhibited longer reaction
times than Affirmative trials, confirmed by a paired samples
t-test (Negated: M=3179ms, SD= 671ms; Affirmative:
M=2608ms, SD=442ms; t(23)=-7.96, p<.0001). This finding
is in line with previous research, aiding in the validation of
this as a useful and informative design.
The tests designed to address the three hypotheses were as
follows: The proportion of time spent over the midline
(Figure 1A), spatial deviations in the form of maximum
deviation (Figure 1B), and instantaneous velocity, which
should parallel one of the panels in Figure 1. Importantly,
the third hypothesis (Figure 1C) only predicts velocity
differences as a function of negated sentences competing
with an affirmative simulation, but no spatial deviations.
Slight deviations over the midline created a rather high
proportion of total time spent on the side opposite the
response. The proportion of time spent on the incorrect side
of the midline for Negated stimuli was .317 (SD=.09) and
for Affirmative stimuli the proportion was .29 of the toal
time (SD=.1). This difference is non-significant (t(23)=1.307, p>.2). Further, these proportions may seem high, but
to see if these were slight deviations or rather large
attractions over the midline toward the incorrect response, a
threshold of 10 pixels over the midline was used. In this
analysis, the proportion of time spent more than 10 pixels
past the midline in the wrong direction is .15 for both

conditions (Affirmative SD=.12, Negated SD=.1,
t(23)=.117, p=.91). This analysis demonstrates that these are
slight deviations not to be confused with attraction toward a
competing representation.
The next analysis uses the maximum deviation metric to
investigate spatial deviations between conditions. This
measurement is the maximum pixels deviated from a
straight line to the response. (Affirmative trials the mean
was 285 (SD=184) and Negated mean was 299 (SD=189).
This difference was non-significant (t(24)=-.775, p=.446).)
This lack of spatial differences in combination with a lack
of deviation over the midline, though null results, begin to
point toward evidence for a parallel, one-stage process, not a
process of revision.
Instantaneous velocity was computed, shown in Figure 6
by condition. This is simply the distance moved between
one normalized timestep and the next. Therefore, along the
x-axis, the 51 original timestamps become 50 time
difference increments. On Negated trials (dashed lines),
participants ramped up their speed at a slightly slower rate
than on Affirmative trials (thus somewhat slower
acceleration for Negated trials around timesteps 42 through
45). Wojnowicz, Ferguson, Dale, and Spivey (2009)
previously reported this pattern of slower acceleration for
computer-mouse movements in trials that involved
competition between simultaneously activated response
options. Moreover, when they used Usher and McClelland’s
(2003) differential equations to model this dynamic
competition, they found that the slower acceleration during
fierce competition was followed immediately by an abrupt
bifurcation of activation profiles. This bifurcation caused an
increased spike in activation dynamics in the simulation,
and correctly predicted an increased spike in velocity for
computer-mouse movements in the high-competition trials.
Similar to Wojnowicz et al., the greater competition (and
slower acceleration) in Negated trials (Figure 6) is
immediately followed by a spike of greater velocity
(timesteps 46-49). Essentially, when a negated sentence
generates competition between the features of a perceptual
simulation, that competition initially impedes the
acceleration phase of the motor movement, but once the
competition is resolved, the winning response alternative
gathers extra speed in approaching its movement
destination.

2041

Figure 6: Instantaneous velocity by condition

Discussion
A main effect of negation was found where RT is higher
for negated sentences. No differences were found in
maximum deviations, and fine-grained spatial differences
appear to be a function of different velocities. The averaged
velocities exhibit a slowing and then greater acceleration for
negated versions, indicating a hypothesis is being formed
and information about possible alternatives is accumulating.
The acceleration toward the end of the trajectories indicates
that some activation has already accumulated for the
possibilities, and so it is easier to fully activate the winning
possibility faster because it already has some partial
activation. This scenario can also explain previous results,
where subjects respond faster to a picture of an eagle in the
sky when the sentence is "The eagle is not in the sky", sky is
one of the possibilities having partial activation, thus
slightly primes responses to the affirmative version of that
picture. The slowing down of the trajectory during the
middle phase of the trajectory indicates the negating word
acts as a contextual modifier, allowing for integration of
immediate context (i.e. the two picture possibilities in this
experiment), accounting for the longer amount of time it
takes to process a negated sentence. This is also reflected in
the maximum deviations: the fillers adhere closer to a
straight trajectory toward the response, because there is no
partial overlap of information, and thus the participant could
begin moving confidently toward the response once the
noun was heard. The lack of an effect between the
affirmative and negated maximum deviations suggests that
there is no direct competition between those two responses.

General Discussion
Negation may appear to require special mechanisms and
extra explanations to account for its variability. However,
the data presented here suggest that negation needs nothing
more than some eyes and ears to be learned. The
computational model created here demonstrates that
learning negation as a contextual modifier is possible, and
future explorations will aid in experimental validation. The
results of the mousetracking experiment provide additional
evidence that existing theoretical frameworks of incremental
constraint-based processing can easily accommodate
negated, as well as affirmative statements. Further,
preliminary evidence suggests a transient period of
increased competition in processing a negated statement,
accounting for the increase in reaction times. Importantly,
this must be a competition between various features the
negated simulation could be composed of, and is not a
competition
between
affirmative
and
negated
representations.
Occam’s razor dictates the most parsimonious explanation
is the best explanation, which would be a one-stage
processing requiring no additional interfacing processes.
One major issue for future work will be that this has no
predictions the logical model does not also have, thus
leaving only null results as evidence to the contrary.

However, as is common knowledge, null results are not
logically sound to rely upon, and so a defining property of
the one-stage model could be sought after in the
computation realm, to aid in discriminating these
hypotheses.
Many aspects of the current model need to be examined in
greater detail and tested experimentally. For example, the
perceptual simulation in this model is not predictive, but
because of word prediction is mildly emergently predictive.
Because “headsup” is partially activated when “coin” is the
input, “coin” ever so slightly activates some of the features
of headsup. Another example is that this is a contextual
modifier, and thus the negation may modulate a velocity
profile as a function of location in a sentence. Despite the
need for future work, the current research further supports
that comprehending negation can be achieved through
perceptual simulation rather than logical operators.
Linguistic negation is not logical, but rather a process of
integrating context with grounded, distributed meaning.

References
Anderson, S.E., Huette, S., Matlock, T., & Spivey, M.J.
(2010). On the temporal dynamics of negated perceptual
simulations. In F. Parrill, V. Tobin, & M. Turner (Eds.),
Meaning, form, & body, pp. 1-20. Stanford, CSLI.
Cohen, J., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M. & Provost, J. (1993).
PsyScope: An interactive graphic system for designing
and controlling experiments in the psychology laboratory
using Macintosh computers. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 25, 257-271.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Howell, S. R., Jankowicz, D., & Becker, S. (2005). A Model
of Grounded Language Acquisition: Sensorimotor
Features Improve Lexical and Grammatical Learning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 258-276.
Kaup, B., Yaxley, R.H., Madden, C.J., Zwaan, R.A., &
Lüdtke, J. (2006b). Experiential Simulations of Negated
Text Information. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, 976-990.
Samad, T. (1988). Toward connectionist rule-based systems.
IEEE Internation Conference on Neural Networks, 2,
525-532.
Spivey, M., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA, 102, 10393-10398.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J.L. (2003). The time course of
perceptual choice: The leaky, competing accumulator
model. Psychological Review, 108, 550–592.
Wojnowicz, M.T., Ferguson, M.J., Dale, R., & Spivey, M.J.
(2009). The self-organization of explicit attitudes.
Psychological Science, 20, 1428-1435.

2042

