UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ad-hoc scalar implicature in adults and children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05d2f536

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Stiller, Alex
Goodman, Noah
Frank, Michael

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ad-hoc scalar implicature in adults and children
Alex Stiller

Noah D. Goodman

Michael C. Frank

astiller@stanford.edu
Symbolic Systems Program
Stanford University

ngoodman@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University
!

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

!
!
!

Abstract
Linguistic communication relies on pragmatic implicatures
such as the inference that if “some students passed the test,”
not all did. Yet young children perform poorly on tests of
implicature, especially scalar implicatures using “some” and
“all,” until quite late in development. We investigate the origins of scalar implicature using tasks in which the scale arises
from real-world context rather than conventional contrasts between lexical items. Experiment 1 shows that these ad-hoc
implicatures are easy for preschool children, suggesting that
children have an early competence at pragmatic inference, and
that failures in standard scalar implicature tasks are due instead to problems contrasting lexical items. Experiments 2
and 3 compare a Gricean, counterfactual account of implicature with a linguistic alternatives account and find that neither
predicts effects of contextual informativeness. We conclude
that an account of pragmatic implicature must integrate world
knowledge, linguistic structure, and social reasoning.
Keywords: Scalar implicature; pragmatics; language acquisition.

!

!

(%)'!

!
!
$*+#',!
!"#$%&'$()*+*
!

!

!

!

!
$%&'!

"##!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

(%!$*+#',!
!"#$%&'$(),**
-*.(/*0*
!
!

Introduction
Sometimes the absence of a description says just as much as
its presence. A professor who says “some students passed the
test” implies that some students failed—if all had passed, a
cooperative speaker would have made the stronger statement
“all students passed.” Scalar implicature refers to the conversational shorthand of using weak terms to imply the negation
of stronger ones that lie along the same “scale.” In this paper we investigate the origins of scalar implicature, and the
nature of scales, by investigating a spectrum of tasks that are
logically equivalent to conventional scalar implicature but in
which the scale arises (or fails to arise) from the real-world
context rather than the lexical items—ad-hoc implicatures.
Implicatures surface in a variety of contexts beyond
the case of quantifiers, including modal operators such as
“might” and “must” (Noveck, 2001), inclusive and exclusive
disjunction (Braine & Rumain, 1981), and numerals (Barner
& Bachrach, 2010). A wide variety of theoretical frameworks
have been proposed to explain implicature, with the two most
influential being (1) Gricean approaches that we will collectively call the counterfactual theories (Grice, 1975; Levinson,
2000) and (2) views based on grammatically computed linguistic alternatives (Fox, 2007; Chierchia, Fox, & Spector,
2008).
Grice (1975) offers two maxims from which scalar implicatures are meant to follow: make your contribution as
informative as is required, and do not make your contribution more informative than is required. From these it follows that any alternative statement which is more informative
than the spoken statement must be false—because the speaker
could have said that statement had it been true. Under this

Figure 1: Example stimuli from our ad-hoc scalar implicature
task. The utterance “My friend has glasses” receives different
interpretations when the context given to the listener is Row
1 versus Row 2. Each has a similar logical structure to the
conventional some-not-all implicature (top).

analysis, the relevant scale arises from the logical structure
of the possible statements that could have, counterfactually,
been uttered. Although neo-Gricean accounts have modified
some parts of this basic inferential mechanism, the general
predictions remain (Levinson, 2000). In response to apparent over-prediction of implicatures by the counterfactual theory, the linguistic-alternatives theory claims that implicatures
arise by a process in which a statement is strengthened by
negating the alternative statements—where the alternatives,
and hence scales, derive from the lexical and grammatical
structure of language; importantly, more complex statements
are not taken to be alternatives (Fox, 2007; Chierchia et al.,
2008).
Consider the three situations shown schematically in Figure 1. At the top, the word “all” is logically stronger than
the word “some”, though some applies whenever all does.
There is thus a natural scale of informativeness set up by the
conventional semantic content of the words. In contrast, the
feature words “glasses” and “top hat” have no conventional
ordering, but in the context of the three faces in the middle
row (“scales” condition), top hat is similarly stronger than
glasses, though glasses applies to any object that top hat does.
If a speaker says “the one with glasses” we may draw the implicature that she means the middle face (an intuition which
we test in Experiment 1)—the situation itself seems to set up

2134

!

the scale from which we can draw an implicature. However,
this intuition is significantly weaker for the bottom row (“no
scales” condition), despite an identical logical structure (an
intuition we test in Experiment 2).
The acquisition of scalar implicature is late: children fail
overwhelmingly at scalar pragmatic tasks where adults succeed (Papafragou & Musolino, 2003). Smith (1980), in one
of the earliest acquisitional investigations of scalar pragmatic
abilities, found that children with syntactic mastery of quantifiers such as “some” and “none” still failed to make the
some/not-all implicature. Noveck (2001) found that 87% of
children accepted statements such as “Some elephants have
trunks” whereas only 41% of adults did. Huang and Snedeker
(2009) replicated these findings, observing that children between ages five and nine construe weak scalar statements logically, while adults interpret such statements pragmatically.
We use the ad-hoc implicature setting to ask whether developmental delays in success at scalar implicature tasks reflect
inability to draw pragmatic inferences at all, or inability to access the scales inherent in the conventional semantics of some
words.
Thus, the goal of the current experiments was to explore
two related questions. The first was whether children younger
than those tested in standard linguistic scalar implicature
tasks would be able to succeed in ad-hoc implicatures (Experiment 1). The second was to explore the roots of “scales”
in pragmatic inference, and the ability of either simple counterfactual or simple linguistic-alternatives theories to explain
scalar implicature in general (Experiments 2 and 3).
Taken together, the results of our studies suggest that the
inferential mechanisms underlying scalar implicature may be
present earlier in development than previously assumed, and
that the scales involved in implicature derive from worldknowledge, such as the base-rates of different properties,
rather than logical structure of the context or conventional
linguistic knowledge alone. Our data rule out the simplest
version of both the Gricean counterfactual theory and the linguistic alternatives theory. Instead, they point the way towards an account in which linguistic and social factors are
integrated probabilistically with world knowledge.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 compares the performance of adults and children at an ad-hoc implicature task in which a pragmatic inference derives from an explicit context. We constructed a
paradigm in which participants heard a sentence whose literal meaning was ambiguous between two referents. Though
no conventional scale existed among the possible descriptions
of these objects (e.g. “has glasses”, “has top hat”), they varied along a contextually salient scale (Figure 1, middle). If
participants were competent at pragmatic inference we expect them to succeed on this task, even though they may fail
at an equivalent task in which the scale depends on lexical
knowledge.

Methods
Participants Data were collected from 12 3–4 year-olds
(M=3;6) and 12 4–5 year-olds (M = 4;5) at Stanford’s Bing
Nursery School. Twenty-four adult participants were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk web-based crowdsourcing platform.
Stimuli We constructed pictorial stimuli for four trials—
faces, houses, pasta, and beds. For each inference trial, two
properties varied (e.g., presence of glasses and top hat for the
“face” trial). In each trial, three objects were presented—one
with neither feature (Distractor), one with exactly one feature (One-feature), and one with both features (Two-feature).
Positions of the three objects were counterbalanced over six
orders. Example stimuli are shown in Figure 1. Two unambiguous filler trials were constructed: in these, participants
were asked to pick a car of a particular color and a fruit of a
particular type.
Procedures In each trial (inference and filler), preschoolers
were presented with three alternatives shown on laminated
cards; adults performed a parallel task, picking alternatives
by clicking on corresponding radio buttons in a webpage. The
cover story involved a puppet, Furble, who asked the participants to help identify various people and objects. For example, in the “house” trial Furble said “My house has a flower
outside. Can you show me my house?” The adult version
involved the same script, with a picture of Furble substituting for the puppet. On each experimental trial Furble used a
description that could apply to either the One-feature or the
Two-feature object (e.g. “My friend has glasses” in Figure 1,
middle). Adults were informed that the task was designed for
children.

Results and Discussion
All three groups performed above chance, selecting the Onefeature item for which a more informative description was
not available (rather than the Two-feature item, with an alternative, unique description or the Distractor). Means and
confidence intervals are shown in Figure 2. We analyzed
these results using a logistic mixed-effects model (Gelman
& Hill, 2007), predicting correct performance as a function
of age group, with crossed random effects of participant and
item. Coefficient estimates from this model are shown in Table 1. Adults were reliably more accurate than the children,
and there is no difference between three- and four-year-olds.
Note that children never chose the logically incorrect answer
(the Distractor), so we treat chance as 50% rather than 33%.
Previous work has suggested that scalar implicature is difficult for children until quite late in development (Noveck,
2001). Nevertheless three- and four-year-olds performed reliably better than chance in our ad-hoc implicature task which
has a similar logical structure to conventional scalar implicatures (see Figure 1). This result suggests that children’s
difficulties in scalar implicature tasks may not be caused by

2135

Coef.
0.87
0.43
2.41

Std. Error
0.35
0.52
0.65

z
2.50
0.82
3.73

p(|z|)
0.01
0.41
<0.001

40

60

Intercept (3–4 yrs)
4–5 years
Adults

0

20

Percent Correct

80

100

Table 1: Coefficient estimates from a mixed logistic regression model predicting performance by age group. In the
model, 3–4 year-olds are coded as the intercept, thus the coefficients for 4–5 year-olds and adults can be interpreted as tests
of whether there is a significant contrast between groups.

3 years

4 years

adult

Age Group

Figure 2: Mean percent correct performance on inference
trials for all three age groups in Experiment 1. Error bars
show 95% confidence intervals created by a subject-wise nonparametric bootstrap. Dashed line represents chance (50%)
even though there were three items, because no child ever
chose the logically false distractor. All groups are significantly above chance.

set up a context which is logically equivalent to the context
of Experiment 1, but in which the absence of a feature is replaced with an alternate feature (Figure 1, bottom row).
If the inferential effect found in Experiment 1 is derived
entirely by the logical alternatives, then we should find the
same effect in Experiment 2 as we did in Experiment 1. This
would be the prediction from a pure counterfactual theory of
pragmatic inference: if a speaker wanted to talk about the face
with the top hat and glasses, they would have said “top hat”—
that they said “glasses” instead indicates that they must have
been talking about the other face. We do not expect to see
performance above chance, however, if the effect is at least
partially driven by linguistic knowledge (e.g. if one doesn’t
consider alternatives which are more linguistically complex,
and therefore “does not have X” isn’t an alternative to “has
X”).

Methods
inability to draw pragmatic inferences, but instead by issues
with the particular lexical items used in such tasks. This is
consistent with findings that children strengthen their understanding of quantifiers when scalar alternatives are made explicitly available (Barner & Bachrach, 2010; Barner, Bale, &
Brooks, 2010).
Though children succeeded at our task, adults still outperformed children, possibly reflecting growing pragmatic
competence over time. However adults’ performance may
also reflect explicit strategies: seven (29%) of the responses
to our debriefing question “What did you think this study
was about?” mentioned scales or the logical/pragmatic dichotomy. Two typical responses were “[the task is to] logically separate items that have more information than given”
and “the experiment is to see how literal [sic] one takes the
instructions.”

Experiment 2
What leads to a robust implicature in Experiment 1, even
among young children who would fail to draw a conventional
implicature? In Experiment 2 (and later Experiment 3) we ask
whether the scales which lead to implicature in Experiment 1
are given by the immediate context of objects, or involve additional linguistic or world-knowledge. In Experiment 2 we

Participants We posted 28 HITS on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk and included 24 responses from participants that gave
correct answers on the two filler trials. Participants were paid
$0.20 each for completing a HIT.
Stimuli For each of the four trials (faces, houses, pasta, and
beds), four separate stimuli were constructed parallel to those
in Experiment 1, with the addition of two distinct positive
features to replace the absence of features; see Figure 1, bottom row. The stimulus item that previously had no features
thus had two novel features, while the stimulus item that previously had one feature now had the old feature as well as one
new one. The target stimulus and the position of the answer
choices were counterbalanced over six orders.
Procedures Question prompts were identical to those in
Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
In this “no scales” condition, adult participants did not draw
an implicature, performing at chance. Results are compared
with Experiment 1 in Figure 3. We again used mixed logistic
regression to compare adults’ performance in Experiment 1
with the performance of the new group in Experiment 2. Coefficient estimates are given in Table 2. The intercept reflects

2136

40

60

Intercept (E2)
Scales (E1)

Coef.
-0.38
3.53

Std. Error
0.23
0.55

z
-1.69
6.37

p(|z|)
0.09
<0.001

leading to chance performance. In Experiment 3 we further
test this theory by manipulating participants’ world knowledge through changes in the distribution of features like top
hat and glasses.

20

Percent Correct

80

100

Table 2: Coefficient estimates from a mixed logistic regression predicting adult judgment performance by adults in Experiments 1 and 2. Experiment 2 (“no scales”) is coded as the
intercept, while a coefficient is fit for Experiment 1 (“scales”).

0

Experiment 3
no scales

scales

Condition

Figure 3: Mean percent correct performance for Experiment
1 (adults) and Experiment 2. Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals created by a subject-wise non-parametric bootstrap.
Dashed line represents chance (50%).

performance in the “no scales” condition (Experiment 2) and
did not differ significantly from zero (indicating chance level
responding). In contrast, there was a highly significant coefficient for the “scales” condition (Experiment 1).
In contrast with Experiment 1, participants in Experiment
2 seemed unaware that the task had any pragmatic content.
Answers to the debriefing question ranged from “selecting
between two objects of significant similarity” to “It was some
kind of personality study.” Many participants simply stated
that they had no idea what the study was about.
The dramatic difference in performance between these two
experiments suggests that the logical structure of the immediate context is not enough to lead adults to make a pragmatic
inference. Thus, these data cast doubt on a pure counterfactual account of this ad-hoc implicature and suggest that additional knowledge either about the world or about language
must be brought to bear.
The linguistic alternatives theory fares better in explaining
the disparity between Experiments 1 and 2: for the “scales”
condition, the statement “my friend has glasses” is strengthened by negating the alternative “my friend has a top hat”,
however the negation of the alternative “my friend does not
have a top hat” is not included because this is linguistically
more complex. For the “no scales” condition both “my friend
has a top hat” and “my friend has a baseball cap” are negated,

If the linguistic alternatives theory is a complete explanation of the difference between Experiments 1 and 2, then it
should be impossible to make participants succeed in the “no
scales” condition without changing the available descriptions.
In contrast, if a scale derives from informativeness of the possible descriptions then it should be possible to improve performance by providing additional world-knowledge but not
altering possible descriptions.
The simple model described in Frank, Goodman, Lai, and
Tenenbaum (2009) defined informativeness via information
theory: that an informative expression literally conveys more
bits of information about which object is being talked about
within a context. Although we do not expect that this simple
model will capture all the details of Experiments 2 and 3, it
does suggest a manipulation to test the pure linguistic alternatives theory: The rarer a feature is, the more informative it
is to note that an object has this feature. This principle explains why we would never pick out a person by saying “my
friend has legs” (because everyone has legs, so they don’t bear
mention) but might say “my friend has a mohawk” (because
mohawks are rare and hence informative).
This informativeness account can also explain the success
of participants in reasoning about the ad-hoc scale in Experiment 1: in an influential analysis of the Wason selection task,
Oaksford and Chater (1996) argued that people assume features are rare, and the presence of a feature is more informative than its absence (which explained pervasive reasoning
“errors”). The strength of the “scales” inference in Experiment 1 may be due to this rarity assumption setting up a natural informativeness scale.
Experiment 3 tests the hypothesis that manipulating the informativeness of features will allow participants to succeed
in the “no scales” condition. We use a pre-exposure to the
distribution of features like top hat and glasses to parametrically vary their rarity. We predict that if informativeness sets
up orderings (and orderings allow implicature), then as rarity
increases, implicatures should increase correspondingly. Put
another way: If top hats are rare, speakers who want to talk
about people with top hats should mention their hats. Con-

2137

100
20

Participants We posted 344 total HITS to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and received 216 responses (24 per condition)
in which participants successfully answered the manipulation
check trials (described below) and both filler trials. Participants were compensated $0.20 for completing a HIT.

Results and Discussion
There was a strong relationship between the frequency of the
non-target feature (top hat) and the proportion of participants
making implicatures. Results are plotted in Figure 4. We analyzed the data with a mixed linear model, reported in Table
3. The results show that the rarer the omitted portion of an
implicature is, the more informative is its omission.
This finding supports the hypothesis outlined above: that
the rarer a feature is, the more informative it is and hence the
more likely a speaker would be to mention it to pick out a referent. Conversely, when a certain feature is seen as normal,
it no longer needs to be included in an informative description. Thus, a failure to mention a feature like “top hat” in a
world where top hats are rare strongly implies that the speaker
does not want to refer to the face with the top hat. Crucially,
this result rules out a simple linguistic alternatives account
(as described above): In this experiment, neither the available linguistic descriptions nor their complexity changed as
the feature base-rates varied, yet pragmatic inferences varied
strikingly.
Participants seemed somewhat aware of the relevant factors
underlying Experiment 3, with common debriefing responses
taking the form of “you wanted to see if people naturally gravitate to what is most common” and “the object of this study
is to determine whether or not the participant understands the

0

Stimuli The test stimuli were identical to those in Experiment 2. Familiarization sets of 10 images were constructed,
systematically varying the relative frequency of the features.
The frequency distribution of objects in the nine conditions is
shown at the bottom of Figure 4.
Procedures Experiment 3 was identical to Experiment 2,
except that participants viewed a context set that included 10
images immediately before completing each question as in
Experiments 1 and 2. They were told that e.g. “In Furble’s
world there are lots of houses. Here’s a picture of the houses.”
Participants were grouped into distinct between-subjects conditions such that each group saw a different distribution of
objects in the context set. Immediately below each context
set, participants were asked to select the most frequent object in the set to ensure that they attended to this phase. This
question was used as a manipulation check to ensure that participants were paying attention.

40

Percent Correct

Methods

60

80

versely, if only the structure of alternative descriptions matter
(as in the linguistic alternatives account described above for
Experiment 2), then no effect of rarity should be found.

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Frequency of 'Top Hat' During Training
|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

8

7

5

4

3

2

1

1

0

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

0

1

1

2

3

4

5

7

8

Times Seen in Training Phase by Stimulus

Figure 4: Mean percent correct performance on inference trials for Experiment 1; each point represents a separate condition. The horizontal axis shows the relative frequency of
“top hat” (the non-named property) in the context trials; the
diagram below shows the number of each object in the familiarization phase. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals
by bootstrap, dashed line represents chance.

significance of statistics, and whether or not their understanding of statistics affects their answers to the questions.” Nevertheless, it did not seem to be the case that participants were
applying simple heuristics related to the presence or absence
of features or their conjunctions. For example, the condition
with no face with both a top hat and glasses together was no
different than the one that included one example of this pair
(at .1 and .2 on the horizontal axis in Figure 4, respectively),
so the absence of the conjunction did not seem to be critical
in participants’ responses.

General Discussion
In three experiments we have investigate the nature of scalar
implicatures using what we have called ad-hoc scales—scales
constructed from contextual, rather than conventional linguistic factors. In contrast to standard scalar implicatures (which
are difficult for children below the age of 5), even three-yearolds were able to use ad-hoc scales to disambiguate the refer-

2138

Acknowledgments

Table 3: Mixed linear model fitting observations in Experiment 3 to frequency of properties during training.
Intercept
“Top hat” freq.

Coef.
-2.46
-4.42

Std. Error
0.29
0.49

z
-8.73
-9.07

Special thanks to David Barner, Irene Heim, Danny Fox, and
Allison Kraus for valuable discussion. Thanks to the staff,
teachers, and children at Bing Nursery School for help with
Experiment 1.

p(|z|)
<0.001
<0.001

References
ent of a logically ambiguous expression (Experiment 1). This
results suggests that the inferential mechanisms underlying
implicature are present in young children, but, congruent with
previous work, children have difficulty construing quantifiers
as alternatives in a scale (Barner et al., 2010).
Experiments 2 and 3 contrasted two different theories of
the nature of implicature: counterfactual and linguistic alternatives theories. The Gricean, counterfactual theory predicted that ad-hoc scalar implicatures of the sort described in
Experiment 1 would be possible across a range of contexts,
even when a featural contrast replaced a contrast between a
feature and nothing. The linguistic alternatives theory predicted that the negation of a feature (“no top hat”) would be
more complex than an alternative feature (“baseball cap”) and
hence the implicature would be possible in the “scales” condition, but not in the equivalent “no scales” condition. Consistent with the linguistic alternatives theory, participants were
at chance in the “no scales” condition (Experiment 2).
Experiment 3 then tested the linguistic alternatives theory
more stringently. When participants were trained that certain properties were commonplace and others were informative, they drew strong pragmatic inferences, just as in the
“scales” condition. Conversely, when exposed to a distribution in which feature frequencies were flipped, participants
made the reverse inferences, as if they had established a scale
in the opposite direction. Statistical information about properties closed the gap between the “scales” and “no scales”
conditions. These data are inconsistent with a simple linguistic alternatives theory: changing the contextual base rates—
without changing the complexity of linguistic alternatives—
was enough to invert participants’ judgments.
Taken together, these findings support a statistical linguistic account of scalar pragmatics in our ad-hoc task. Adults
and children succeeded at the “scales” condition by relying,
we suspect, on the real-world knowledge that possessing a
feature (e.g. a top hat) is less common than not possessing
that feature. This statistical information about the rarity and
informativeness exemplifies what Sperber and Wilson (1986)
call “shared knowledge” and Clark (1996) calls “common
ground.” A theory of implicature must integrate fine-grained
statistical information about such shared context to capture
the effects reported here.
Pragmatic computations operate over our knowledge about
the world, our knowledge of language, and our knowledge
of other people. The research reported here takes a first step
towards understanding and manipulating the complex dependencies that go into the computation of pragmatic implicatures.

Barner, D., & Bachrach, A. (2010). Inference and exact
numerical representation in early language development.
Cognitive Psychology, 60(1), 40 - 62.
Barner, D., Bale, A., & Brooks, N. (2010). Quantity implicature and access to scalar alternatives in language acquisition.
Braine, D., & Rumain, B. (1981). Development of comprehension of ”or”: Evidence for a sequence of competencies.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 31(1), 46-70.
Chierchia, G., Fox, D., & Spector, B. (2008). The grammatical view of scalar implicatures and the relationship between
semantics and pragmatics. Handbook of Semantics. Mouton de Gruyter, New York, NY.
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Computational Linguistics, 23(4).
Fox, D. (2007). Free choice and the theory of scalar implicatures. Presupposition and implicature in compositional
semantics, 71–120.
Frank, M., Goodman, N., Lai, P., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009).
Informative communication in word production and word
learning.
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2007). Data analysis using regression
and multilevel/hierarchical models (Vol. 625). Cambridge
University Press Cambridge.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3). New York:
Academic Press.
Huang, Y., & Snedeker, J. (2009). Semantic meaning
and pragmatic interpretation in 5-year-olds: Evidence from
real-time spoken language comprehension. Developmental
Psychology, 45(6), 1723-1729.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory
of generalized conversational implicature. Boston: MIT
Press.
Noveck, I. A. (2001). When children are more logical than
adults: experimental investigations of scalar implicature.
Cognition, 78(2), 165 - 188.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1996). Rational explanation of
the selection task.
Papafragou, A., & Musolino, J. (2003). Scalar implicatures:
experiments at the semantics-pragmatics interface. Cognition, 86(3), 253 - 282.
Smith, C. L. (1980). Quantifiers and question answering in
young children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 30(2), 191 - 205.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

2139

