UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adults and school-aged children accurately evaluate sins of omission in pedagogical
contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1mw4z78k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gweon, Hyowon
Pelton, Hannah
Schulz, Laura E.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adults and school-aged children accurately evaluate sins of omission in pedagogical
contexts
Hyowon Gweon (hyora@mit.edu), Hannah Pelton (hannahp@mit.edu), Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract
Recent formal models of pedagogy (Shafto & Goodman,
2008) assume that teachers provide evidence likely to
increase the learner’s belief in a target hypothesis. Thus in
pedagogical contexts, the learner can infer that evidence is not
merely true of the concept but representative of it. If for
instance, a teacher demonstrates a single function of a toy, the
learner should assume that only that function exists. (If there
were more, the teacher should have provided evidence
accordingly). What happens when a teacher violates these
pedagogical sampling assumptions (e.g., showing only one
function of a toy with many functions)? If the learner
discovers that the evidence is incomplete, does the learner
evaluate the teacher accordingly? Here we show that, much as
learners are sensitive to cases when informants are inaccurate
(sins of commission), both adults and children are sensitive to
sins of omission and penalize teachers who provide
information that is accurate but incomplete.
Keywords: cognitive development, pedagogy, Bayesian
model, causal learning, social evaluation, pragmatics

A recent computational approach to understanding human
cognition has formalized pedagogical learning as a set of
paired inferences based on the following assumptions: (1)
that learners rationally update their beliefs given data and
(2) that teachers choose the data most likely to increase the
learners’ belief in the correct hypothesis (Shafto &
Goodman, 2008). This account suggests that in pedagogical
contexts, data provided by a teacher is assumed to be not
only true of a concept but also representative of it. This
assumption constrains the hypothesis space and helps the
learner converge on the correct hypothesis given sparse
data.
Consider, for example, a toy with four different
functions. If a naïve person accidentally discovers one
function of the toy, this provides evidence that the observed
function is true of the toy but little beyond that: the toy
might have just that function, or there might be one, two, or
n, more undiscovered functions. However, when a
knowledgeable, helpful teacher demonstrates one function
of the toy, the learner should infer that the toy has just one
function. This inference is warranted by the assumption that
the evidence was chosen to maximize the learner’s belief in
the correct hypothesis. Thus the learner can infer not only
that the observed function is present but also that other
functions are not. That is, in pedagogical contexts, absence
of evidence for additional functions is evidence for their
absence.

Previous research (Bonawitz, Shafto, Gweon, Goodman,
Spelke, & Schulz, 2010) formalized these intuitions and
found that pedagogical sampling affected children’s
exploration and learning. When preschoolers were given a
pedagogical demonstration of one of four functions of a
novel toy, children constrained their exploration almost
exclusively to the demonstrated function and discovered few
other properties of the toy. When the demonstration was
accidental or when no demonstration was provided, children
explored the toy more broadly and consequently discovered
much more about it.
What happens when teachers provide only partial
information about what is to be learned? If children are in a
position to discover that the teachers’ information was
incomplete, do they recognize that the teachers’ failure to
provide all the relevant evidence was indeed a failure? That
is, do children recognize violations of pedagogical
assumptions as sins of omission?
Previous research suggests that, by the age of four,
children are sensitive to the epistemic status of others and
prefer to learn from teachers who provide accurate rather
than inaccurate information. For instance, Sabbagh &
Baldwin (2001) found that four-year-olds preferentially
learned the meaning of novel words from a speaker who
said she knew the meaning of the words rather than one who
professed ignorance. Furthermore, children treat reliability
as a relatively stable trait, preferring to learn novel words
from teachers who were previously accurate in labeling
familiar objects rather than from teachers who were
previously inaccurate (Koenig & Harris, 2005).
However, previous work on reliability looked at whether
learners are sensitive to informants’ tendency to provide
false information: a sin of commission. To our knowledge,
there have been no studies looking at whether learners are
sensitive to informants’ tendency to provide incomplete
information: a sin of omission.
There is reason to believe that detecting sins of omission
involves a more sophisticated inference than detecting sins
of commission. To detect a sin of commission, the learner
only needs to recognize whether presented information is
true or false. In sins of omission, the information provided
is true but nonetheless increases the learner’s belief in a
false hypothesis (e.g., that the demonstrated function of a
toy is the only function that the toy has). What the teacher
violates is not the learner’s knowledge about the world, but
the learner’s implicit assumptions about what constitutes
helpful teaching; a truly helpful teacher should provide
information that increases the learner’s belief in the correct
hypothesis. Although past research suggests that children

1242

are astute social learners who are sensitive to informants’
reliability with respect to accuracy from very early on, we
do not know when the ability to make these more subtle
social evaluations develops.
Indeed, we do not know to what extent even adults are
sensitive to teachers’ provision of partial information. Such
sins of omission are closely related to the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity: the idea that a speaker should provide all relevant
information in communicative contexts (Grice, 1975). Thus
for instance, a speaker is guilty of violating this maxim if
she (accurately) communicates that she has one sister when
in fact she has two. The computational analysis of pedagogy
can be thought of as providing a formalization of this kind
of pragmatic inference. Although to our knowledge, no
previous research has explicitly linked pedagogy and
pragmatics, there are grounds for believing that adults
should mistrust teachers who omit relevant information in
pedagogical contexts.
Across two experiments, we asked whether both adults
(Experiment 1) and school-aged children (6 – 7 yrs,
Experiment 2) detect sins of omission in pedagogical
contexts. Specifically, we modified the toy-teaching
paradigm from previous work (Bonawitz et al., 2010) and
asked whether (a) learners understand that absence of
evidence for additional functions constitutes evidence for
their absence (consistent with previous research) and (b)
whether they can successfully incorporate this
understanding into their evaluation of how helpful a teacher
is in teaching about a toy.
Previous work established not only that instruction
constrains exploration, but that children make the same
inferences from vicarious instruction that they make from
direct instruction: if children observe another child being
taught a single function of a toy, children who only overhear
the instruction are as likely to infer that the toy has only one
function as children who are taught directly. That is,
although ostensive cues directed to the learner may be
helpful in signaling a situation as pedagogical (Csibra, &
Gergely, 2009), such cues are not necessary for pedagogical
sampling assumptions to obtain. They hold in any situation
where a knowledgeable teacher communicates information
to a presumably naïve (or epistemically comparable) learner
overhearing the communicative exchange (Bonawitz et al.,
2010). In the current study, we exploited this fact to create a
task in which people first explored the toy themselves to
discover different function(s) of the toy, and then observed a
teacher teach a naïve learner about the toy. This design
helped minimize the possibility that people’s interest in
exploring the toy would affect their ratings of the teacher (a
concern particularly for the children).

Experiment 1: Adults
In Experiment 1, adult participants explored one of two
perceptually identical toys that differed only in whether they
had only a single function (Single-Function Toy condition)
or multiple (four) functions (Multi-Function Toy condition).

Figure 1: Stimuli used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Left: the Single-Function Toy and the Multi-Function Toy.
In both conditions, only the wind-up mechanism (yellow
circle) was demonstrated. Right: the Toy Teacher (left), the
Student (right), and the rating scale (front).
They then observed a teacher who demonstrated just one
function to a naïve learner. We measured participants’
ratings of how helpful the teacher was in teaching the
learner and compared the average rating between the two
conditions.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-one college students (mean age (SD): 19.57 (1.4),
range: 18 – 22 years, 10 males) were randomly assigned to
either a Single-Function Toy (N=11) condition or a MultiFunction Toy (N=10) condition. Two participants (one in
each condition) were dropped from analysis because they
did not meet the two inclusion criteria (see Results for
details).
Stimuli
Photos of stimuli actually used in the experiment are shown
in Figure 1. Two similar novel toys were constructed out of
foamboard, wooden sticks, and electronic circuits and parts
taken out from commercially available toys. Both toys were
yellow four-sided pyramids and on the apex was a
transparent plastic globe. Each face of the pyramid
contained one or more potential affordances: a green button,
a yellow button, a purple wooden stick, an orange button,
and a purple and black wind-up knob. On the MultiFunction Toy, all affordances except the purple wooden
stick (which was inert in both toys) were functional. First,
when the wind-up knob was twisted, the part displayed a
flapping motion. When the green button was pressed, a
light-up and spinning mechanism activated inside the
transparent globe. The yellow button played music, and the
orange button activated two LED lights. These effects
continued as long as the button was held down and stopped

1243

when the button was released. On the Single-Function Toy,
the only functional affordance was the wind-up toy.
Three puppets were used as teachers, and one Elmo
puppet on a stand was used as the naïve learner. Each
teacher puppet was assigned a different role: one taught
Elmo about the novel toy (Toy Teacher), one correctly
named familiar objects (Correct Teacher), and one
incorrectly named familiar objects (Incorrect Teacher). A
plastic carrot, a duck, a small stuffed rabbit, and a plastic
corn-on-the-cob were used familiar objects.
A rating scale was constructed with wooden bar and
ceramic knob that sled along the scale. The scale had five
anchor points: a very frowny face, a mildly frowny face, a
neutral face, a mildly smiley face, and a very smiley face,
from left to right of the sliding bar. Between each of the
anchor points were four lines to allow for more accurate
coding, thus the total range of scores was from 1 to 20.
Procedure
Participants were tested alone in a quiet room. The toys,
puppets, and scale were initially put behind the
experimenter covered with a cloth or in a bag.
To begin, the experimenter first explained that the task
was designed to be appropriate for young children, and that
they were going to watch different teachers teaching Elmo.
Elmo was introduced as a “silly monster” who did not know
much about toys. She said that the teachers would teach
Elmo about their toys. They were told that some teachers
might be helpful and good at teaching and that some might
be not helpful and not good at teaching, and that their task
was to rate the teachers’ helpfulness in teaching Elmo.
After this introduction, Elmo was put back under the
table, and the experimenter said “Ok, so before Elmo gets to
see the teacher teach him about the toy, why don’t you see if
you can figure out how it works?” She gave the participants
either the Single-Function Toy or Multi-Function Toy
depending on the condition. Participants were allowed to
explore the toy until they had tried every part of the toy. The
functions (when present) were readily discoverable, thus all
participants entered the study knowing whether there was
only a single function of the toy or four functions of the toy.
Once the participant tried all parts of the toy, the
experimenter placed Elmo on the table and brought out the
Toy Teacher puppet. In both conditions, the Toy Teacher
said, “I am going to teach you how my toy works”, and
demonstrated the wind-up part of the toy by turning on the
knob and showing the flapping motion to the participant.
Then the teacher said “See? This is how my toy works” and
demonstrated the wind-up part again. After the
demonstration, the participants rated the teacher on the
sliding scale. After participants rated Toy Teacher, the
experimenter asked them to show Elmo how the toy works.
Then, participants watched and rated the Correct Teacher
who correctly named two familiar objects (a carrot and a
duck) and finally the Incorrect teacher who named familiar
objects incorrectly (by calling a stuffed rabbit a cow and the
corn a cup). The order of teacher ratings was fixed so that

any effects of anchoring on the rating scale could be held
constant across participants and conditions.
Results and Discussion
We coded the ratings that participants gave to the three
teachers by reading the mark on the sliding scale. One
participant who gave a lower rating for the Correct Teacher
than the Incorrect Teacher was excluded from analysis.
Additionally, one participant who only gave extreme ratings
to all three teachers (either 1 or 20) was excluded to ensure
that only participants who understood the continuous range
of the scale were included.
In the Single-Toy Function condition, the information
provided by the toy teacher is both accurate and complete:
the toy has just one function. However, identical
information provided in the Multi-Function Toy condition is
accurate but incomplete; the toy has three additional
functions. If adults make the inference that the absence of
evidence from a knowledgeable teacher constitutes evidence
for absence, then they should be sensitive to teachers who
commit the sin of omission. That is, those who saw the Toy
Teacher demonstrate a single function on the MultiFunction Toy should rate the teacher lower than those who
see the teacher demonstrate the same function on the SingleFunction-Toy. Therefore, we predicted that the ratings of
the Toy Teacher in the Multi-Function Toy condition should
be relatively worse than the ratings of the Toy Teacher in
the Single-Function Toy condition.
First, we compared participants’ ratings for the two
control teachers. As predicted, adults in both conditions
gave high ratings for the Correct Teacher (Single-Function
Toy: M(SD)=15.55(3.6) vs. Multi-Function Toy: M(SD) =
13.66 (3.3); z = 1.12, p = ns, Mann-Whitney), and low
ratings for the Incorrect Teacher (Single-Function Toy:
M(SD)=3.65(4.3) vs. Multi-Function Toy: M(SD) = 3.61
(3.6); z = -.08, p = ns). Participants in both conditions rated
the Correct Teacher higher than the Incorrect Teacher
(Single-Function Toy: 15.6 (Correct) vs. 3.7 (Incorrect), z =
2.81, p < 0.01, Multi-Function Toy: 13.7 (Correct) vs. 3.6
(Incorrect), z = 2.67, p < 0.01; related-samples Wilcoxon
Signed Rank Test).
We then compared the ratings people gave to the Toy
Teacher1 in the Multi-Function Toy condition and SingleFunction Toy condition. As predicted, the average rating of
the Toy Teacher in the Multi-Function Toy condition (M
(SD) = 6.83 (4.5)) was significantly lower than the rating in
1

The ratings for Toy Teacher and Correct Teacher reported in
Experiment 1 pass the normality test (Kolmogorov-Smirnov,
Shapiro-Wilk tests of normality), but the ratings for the Incorrect
Teacher do not. In Experiment 2, children’s ratings were not
normally distributed in all measures. Therefore, we used
nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U Test for between-subjects
comparisons, and Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test for paired
comparisons) throughout Experiments 1 and 2.

1244

Function Toy condition.(N=20). No children were dropped
due to parental interference or experimental error. We
dropped and replaced four children who did not give a
higher rating to the Correct Teacher than to the Incorrect
Teacher, and an additional ten children who only gave
extreme scores of 1 or 20 to all the teachers (i.e., whose use
of the scale could not be distinguished from merely liking to
slide the knob). This ensured that children who did not yet
possess a good understanding of the task instruction and
rating scales were not included in the final analysis.
Stimuli Stimuli used in Experiment 2 were identical to
those described in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Average ratings for the Toy Teacher in
Experiments 1 and 2.
the Single-Function Toy condition (M (SD) = 14.05(3.9), z
= 2.64, p < 0.005).
Finally, participants in the Multi-Function Toy condition
were much more likely to demonstrate multiple functions of
the toy when they had a chance to teach Elmo rather than
simply a single function (8 out of 9, p < 0.05 by binomial).
Those in the Single-Function Toy condition were equally
likely to show the functioning wind-up part or point out the
non-functioning parts (5 out of 10, p = ns.)
These results suggest that adults indeed expect teachers to
provide not just accurate, but also complete, information
about what is to be learned. When the teacher demonstrated
only one of four functions of a toy, they gave the teacher a
lower rating than if the identical demonstration was
provided for a toy that actually had just one function. In
addition, almost all people in the Multi-Function Toy who
observed a teacher that commits a sin of omission did not
commit such sin themselves when they were given a chance
to teach Elmo.

Experiment 2: Children
The results from Experiment 1 establish that adults are
indeed able to detect “sins of omissions” in pedagogical
contexts and can accurately incorporate such violations into
their evaluations of the teachers. In our second experiment,
we investigated whether 6 and 7-yr-old children exhibit a
similar understanding. We tested children in this age range
because studies of informant reliability with respect to sins
of commission had investigated primarily four and fiveyear-olds (Sabbagh & Baldwin, 2001; Koenig & Harris,
2005). We believed that this task was slightly more difficult
and thus early investigations should begin with slightly
older children. Additionally, because young school-aged
children are just beginning the process of formal pedagogy,
their responses to information provided by teachers’ are of
ecological interest.
Participants Forty-one school-aged children (mean age
(SD): 6.94 (0.63), range: 6.03 – 7.97) were recruited from a
local children’s museum and randomly assigned to either
the Multi-Function Toy condition (N=21) or the Single-

Procedure All children were tested individually in a quiet
room inside the museum. The child sat on a small stool in
front of a round table, across from the experimenter. The
parent was behind the child and out of the child’s line of
sight, and all the sessions were video-recorded.
The procedure was almost identical to that used in
Experiment 1, except that after introducing the teacher
puppets and Elmo (student) to the child, the experimenter
said that the child is going to help them be a good teachers
by playing a “rating game” to show how helpful the teachers
were in teaching Elmo. Second, children were asked to
demonstrate on the rating scale how they would rate a “good
teacher”, “bad teacher”, or “teachers who are just okay”.
All children were able to do this.

Results and Discussion
We first compared children’s ratings for the Correct and
Incorrect Teachers between conditions. Like the adults,
children in both conditions gave high ratings for the Correct
Teacher (Single-Function Toy: M(SD)=14.76(3.5) vs.
Multi-Function Toy: M(SD) = 15.0 (4.6); z = -.19, p = ns),
and low ratings for the Incorrect Teacher (Single-Function
Toy: M(SD)=2.69(2.7) vs. Multi-Function Toy: M(SD) =
4.10 (4.9); z = -.07, p = ns).
In both conditions, children’s average rating for the
Correct Teacher was significantly higher than the average
rating for the Incorrect teacher (Single-Function Toy: 14.8
(Correct) vs. 2.7 (Incorrect), z = 4.02, p < 0.001, MultiFunction Toy: 15.0 (Correct) vs. 4.1 (Incorrect), z =3.93, p
< 0.001; related-samples Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test).
Next, we compared children’s ratings for the Toy Teacher
between the two conditions. As predicted, children in the
Multi-Function Toy condition gave lower ratings to the Toy
Teacher than those in the Single-Function Toy condition
(Single-Function Toy: M(SD) = 17.00 (3.6) vs. MultiFunction Toy: M (SD) = 11.58(6.6), z = 2.64, p < 0.01).
Additionally, given a choice between just imitating the
teacher or demonstrating additional functions, children in
the Multi-Function Toy condition were much more likely to
demonstrate multiple functions of the toy to Elmo than
children in the Single-Function Toy condition (9 of 21
(Single-Function Toy) vs. 18 of 20 (Multi-Function Toy), χ2
(1, N = 41) = 10.12, p < 0.005).

1245

These results suggest that children, like adults, understand
that a teacher who demonstrates one function of a multifunction toy is less helpful than a teacher who demonstrates
the same function on a toy that only has that function.
Despite the fact that the teacher’s demonstration was
identical across conditions, children in the Multi-Function
Toy condition gave lower ratings to the Toy Teacher than
did children in the Single-Function Toy condition. Also,
given an opportunity to teach Elmo themselves, both adults
and children did not commit sins of omission (even when
they had just observed a teacher who did): instead
participants tried to provide complete information to the
learner.
The predicted results in Experiment 2 were comparable to
those from adult participants in Experiment 1. The only
difference between children and adults was that children
were more likely than adults to rate the toy teacher
favorably across the board. (Single-Function Toy condition:
17.00 (Children) vs. 14.05 (Adults) z = 2.19, p < 0.05);
Multi-Function Toy condition (11.57 (Children) vs. 6.83
(Adults) z = 1.84, p = 0.06). Presumably, children were
inclined to rate the teacher positively in part simply because
she introduced a toy (rather than an object label).
Interestingly, the children’s rank order ratings of the three
teachers varied by condition. Relative to the Multi-Function
condition, more children in the Single-Function toy
condition rated the toy teacher the best of the three (SingleFunction Toy condition: 15 of 21 children, Multi-Function
Toy condition: 3 of 20 children, p < 0.001 by Fisher’s
Exact). This result suggests that although children’s ratings
can be affected by factors irrelevant to the quality of the
teaching (e.g., the content taught or the object shown), they
are sensitive to sins of omission and judge teachers
accordingly.

demonstrated more than one function of the toy for the
student.
Taken together, these results suggest that by the age of
six, children make rational inferences about what teachers
intend to communicate, can accurately detect sins of
omission, and can incorporate these inferences into to their
evaluations. To our knowledge, this is the first
demonstration that children and adults can successfully
penalize others for the provision of partial information in
communicative contexts.
Humans have always relied on social transmission of
information to pass on knowledge from one generation to
the next (Vygotsky, 1978; Tomasello, 1999). One factor that
may contribute to the power of human learning is our ability
to infer unseen evidence in pedagogical contexts; in
particular, given pedagogical sampling assumptions,
learners can infer the absence of functions merely from
absence of evidence for them (also see other work on strong
sampling and the ability to infer the extent of concepts from
only positive evidence: Tenenbaum, 1999; Gweon,
Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2010). However, the efficacy of this
powerful mechanism depends on the reliability of the
teacher. If the teacher provides only partial information the
learner might incorrectly infer that what has been provided
is all there is to be learned.
The current research suggests that processes of social
evaluation can act as a check on misleading pedagogy.
Adults, and even children, successfully detect teachers who
provide incomplete evidence in pedagogical contexts. Thus
even in childhood, social evaluations depend not just on
attractive, how friendly, or how powerful other agents are,
but also on a rational analysis of how likely they are to
provide information that supports accurate learning.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion
In the current study, we asked whether adults and schoolaged children in a pedagogical context accurately
distinguish a teacher who provides true but incomplete
information from a teacher who provides both true and
complete information. Our results were consistent with the
rational analysis of pedagogy. Across two experiments, we
showed that adults and children (a) understand that a
knowledgeable and helpful teacher should provide evidence
that increases a learner’s belief in a correct hypothesis, and
(b) incorporate this understanding into their social
evaluation of knowledgeable others. Therefore, a teacher
who taught one function on a four-function toy was rated
lower than a teacher who taught the same function on a toy
where only that function was present.
In addition, we found that learners themselves resist
committing sins of omission: given a chance to teach
someone else, people spontaneously gave information that
was both accurate and complete. Not only adults but also
young children in the Multi-Function Toy condition avoided
imitating the behavior of the Toy Teacher and instead

Thanks to Joseph Kim for help with data collection. This
research was supported by an NSF Faculty Early Career
Development Award, a John Templeton Foundation Award,
and James S. McDonnell Foundation Collaborative
Interdisciplinary Grant on Causal Reasoning to L.S.

References
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N., Spelke,
E., & Schulz, L. (2010). The double-edged sword of
pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and
discovery. Cognition, doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2010.10.
001.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148-153.
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics: Vol. 3, Speech
Acts. New York: Academic Press.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J., & Schulz, L. (2010). Infants
consider both the sample and the sampling process in
inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066 - 9071.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust

1246

ignorant and inaccurate speakers. Child Development,
76(6), 1261-1277.
Sabbagh, M., & Baldwin, D. (2001). Learning words from
knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: Links between
preschoolers' theory of mind and semantic development.
Child Development, 72(4), 1054-1070.
Shafto, P., & Goodman, N.D. (2008). Teaching games:
Statistical sampling assumptions for pedagogical
situations. In Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of
the cognitive science society (pp. 1632–1637).
Stiller, A., Goodman, N. D., & Frank, M. C. (2011). Ad-hoc
scalar implicatures in adults and children. Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). A Bayesian framework for
concept learning. Ph.D. Thesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

1247

