UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Affordances of Simulation-based Science Assessments
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39d2h0n1
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Davenport, Jodi
Quellmalz, Edys
Timms, Michael
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                Affordances of Simulation-based Science Assessments
                                                Jodi Davenport
                                                       WestEd
                                                Edys Quellmalz
                                                       WestEd
                                                Michael Timms
                                                       WestEd
Abstract: What are the affordances of simulation-based assessments for eliciting science inquiry skills? To test the
affordances, WestEd’s SimScientists program created 3 versions (static, active and interactive) of computer-based
Ecosystems assessments. In the static version, students viewed still images on the screen. In the active version,
students viewed animations, but did not conduct active investigations. In the interactive version, students designed
and ran their own experiments. All versions assessed the same science inquiry skills (e.g., making observations,
designing experiments, evaluating predictions etc.). Eight middle-school students completed each assessment version
while thinking aloud. On items that required declarative knowledge, students performed similarly across versions.
However, on items requiring more sophisticated reasoning (e.g., experimental design), students performed better
when generating their own trials in the interactive version, than when recognizing correctly designed trials in the
active and static versions. The results suggest that simulation-based assessments provide more complete measures
of students’ science proficiency.
                                                        2301

