UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Allocation of Attention in Classroom Environments: Consequences for Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15c4w7zg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Allocation of Attention in Classroom Environments:
Consequences for Learning
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
The current study investigates how young children allocate
their attention in learning environments. Prior research has
shown that elementary school students spend between 25%
and 50% of instructional time off-task. However, the
available research has not clearly identified the common
sources of distraction, nor specified the relationship between
the distraction source and learning outcomes. In this study
we examined how visual features of the environment which
are not relevant for on-going instruction (e.g.,
manipulatives, posters, artwork, maps, etc.) affect young
children’s ability to maintain focused attention to the
content of a lesson. We addressed this question by
experimentally manipulating our laboratory classroom
environment (e.g., introducing or removing educational
materials irrelevant to the current lesson). The effects of the
manipulation on children’s off-task behavior and learning
were measured. Results suggested that children in the Low
Visual Distraction condition spent less time off-task and
obtained higher learning scores than children in the High
Visual Distraction condition.
Keywords: Off-Task Behavior.
Classroom Environment.

Learning.

Attention.

Introduction
Off-task behavior is a serious challenge that educational
practitioners face on a daily basis. Indeed prior research has
shown that elementary students spend between 25% and
50% of instructional time off-task (Karweit & Slavin, 1981).
Off-task behavior is believed to be problematic as it
potentially limits students’ learning opportunities by
reducing instructional time (Carroll 1963; Bloom, 1976).
Although previous literature has documented that off-task
behavior is common in educational settings, it remains
unclear what children are doing while off-task as behavior is
often coded as a binary variable (i.e., on-task vs. off-task).
Thus, one of the goals of the present study was to identify
common sources of distraction in kindergarten classroom
environments and to evaluate consequences of off-task
behavior for learning.
There is reason to believe that the ability to maintain
focused attention during on-going instruction is more

difficult for younger children than older children. In
particular, research indicates that children’s susceptibility to
distracters decreases with age while focused attention
improves (Ruff & Rothbart, 1996; Ruff & Capozzoli, 2003).
Furthermore, children’s ability to utilize selective attention
strategies continues to develop throughout middlechildhood (DeMarie-Dreblow & Miler, 1988). Thus, with
age children are increasingly able to efficiently and flexibly
allocate their attentional resources.
Of particular interest for the present study was the role of
the classroom visual environment in attention allocation and
learning. There are two key reasons to examine this factor.
First, the relationship between current practices in the
design of classroom visual environments and student age is
somewhat paradoxical. As stated above, it is welldocumented that distractibility decreases markedly with age
(Ruff & Rothbart, 1996). However, younger learners (e.g.,
kindergarten and elementary school students) are often
presented with learning environments containing greater
amounts of potential sources of visual distraction (e.g., art
work, posters, alphabet charts, etc.; see Figure 1 for an
example) than the learning environments of older students.
Thus, it is an empirical question as to whether educational
materials that are not directly relevant to the ongoing
instruction present a distraction for young learners. And if
so, does off-task behavior related to the classroom visual
environment affect learning outcomes?
The second key reason to focus on the classroom visual
environment is its malleability. If the classroom visual
environment is found to influence allocation of attention and
learning outcomes, then it may be possible to design
classrooms that are optimally suited to promote focused
attention and learning.
Off-Task Behavior
Prior research examining the frequency with which students
engage in off-task behavior have estimated that children
spend between 25% and 50% of their time off-task in
regular education classrooms (Karweit & Slavin, 1981).
Despite the significant amount of time spent off-task, there
is limited research identifying which sources of distraction
pose a heavy burden on young learners’ ability to maintain
focused attention during instruction.

2806

(A)

(B)

Figure 1. Examples of visual classroom environments. Panel A
depicts a kindergarten classroom in Yucaipa, California found
through the Google search engine; Panel B depicts a first grade
classroom found in “Classroom management in photographs” by
Chang (2004).

One of the few studies investigating different types of
off-task behavior was conducted by Rusnock and Brandler
(1979). Rusnock and Brandler observed the frequency with
which high and low ability fourth graders engaged in
different types of off-task behavior across different learning
activities. The authors found no significant group
differences between low and high ability students in the
total amount of time spent off-task: in both groups children
spent approximately 25% of their time off-task. However,
there were significant group differences based on the
specific off-task behavior the students engaged in and the
particular learning activity in which the off-task behavior
was more likely to occur. For example, low ability students
were more likely to be off-task during recitation, and they
were more likely to engage in off-task discussions and other
distractions such as doodling than their high ability peers. In
contrast, high ability students were more likely to engage in
off-task behavior during creative activities. In this study
measures of student learning were not obtained. Therefore,
it is unclear whether off-task behavior negatively impacted
children’s learning.
Off-Task Behavior and Learning
The notion that learning is related to the amount of time one
spends on a particular task is an axiom of conventional
wisdom (Lloyd & Loper, 1986). This view was formalized
by Carroll’s Time-On-Task hypothesis (1963). According to
this hypothesis, longer engagement with learning materials
is one factor that promotes learning (among several other

factors, such as student’s aptitude, perseverance, and quality
of instruction). Accordingly, off-task behavior is
hypothesized to reduce learning outcomes by decreasing the
amount of time on-task.
Carroll’s Time-On-Task hypothesis has stimulated a
great deal of research trying to establish a relationship
between instructional time and learning (See Cobb, 1972;
Lahaderne, 1968; McKinney, Mason, Perkerson, & Clifford,
1975; Samuels & Turnure, 1974). However, many of these
studies have yielded mixed results.
One study to demonstrate a relationship between off-task
behavior and learning was conducted by Karweit and Slavin
(1981). In this study the researchers measured time-on-task
to see if it was a significant predictor of elementary school
children’s achievement scores on the Comprehensive Test
of Basic Skills (CTBS). Karweit and Slavin found mixed
results as a function of age. Time-on-task was found to be a
significant predictor of CTBS scores for second and third
graders; however, total instructional time was not a
significant predictor of CTBS scores. In contrast, for fourth
and fifth graders neither total instructional time nor time-ontask was found to be a significant predictor of CTBS scores.
Karweit and Slavin also looked at potential differences due
to ability level and found that time-on-task was a significant
predictor for low ability students but not for high achieving
students; this was particularly true for fourth and fifth
graders.
In a subsequent study (Lee, Kelly, & Nyre, 1999),
students (kindergarten through twelfth grade) were observed
for 10 minutes while completing independent seatwork. The
duration of time-on-task was calculated as well as work
completion rates and quality. Lee et al. found that 80% of
students’ time was spent on-task. Not surprisingly, students
who completed the assignment tended to spend more timeon-task than their peers who did not complete the
assignment.
Overall, prior research has established a persistent,
albeit sometimes moderate, relationship between time-ontask and learning outcomes, with correlations ranging
between 0.13 and 0.71 (for reviews see Caldwell, Huitt, &
Graeber, 1982; Frederick & Walberg, 1980; Goodman,
1990). However, as Karweit (1984) noted, it is possible that
some other factors covaried with time-on-task but were not
measured, thus making it difficult to establish a causal
relationship between time-on-task and learning.
Classroom Arrangement and Off-Task Behavior
The preponderance of research examining the interaction
between the physical environment and time-on-task has
focused on classroom seating arrangements. For instance,
Krantz and Risley (1972; see also Ahrentzen & Evans,
1984) found that kindergarteners’ ability to maintain
focused attention during a read-aloud was impacted by the
classroom seating arrangement. Kindergartners who sat in
seating arrangements that were more dispersed were found
to be more attentive during read-alouds than when the same
kindergartners crowded around their teacher. These findings

2807

are taken to suggest that the physical arrangement and
classroom setting can have a considerable impact on
children’s on-task behavior; however, the authors did not
measure whether the increased amount of time-on-task
translated into increased learning gains.
Current understanding of the relationship between
classroom design, off-task behavior, and learning remains
limited. The present study was designed to investigate
whether the classroom visual environment has an effect on
attention allocation and learning outcomes in kindergarten
children.

learning scores on assessments (also described below). The
lessons were video taped for coding.

Method
Participants
The participants in this study included the kindergarten class
at a local lab school. The sample size was 19 children and
consisted of 12 females and 7 males (M=5.66 years;
SD=0.28). The children were assigned to one of two groups
(Group1: n=9, Group2: n=10). Stratified random assignment
was used to ensure groups were equivalent on age, gender,
and the number of students who were English Language
Learners (ELL) (Group 1: M=5.68 years, SD= 0.28, 6
females and 3 males, 2 ELL children; Group 2: M=5.65
years, SD=0.29, 6 females and 4 males, 2 ELL children).
Design
This study utilized a within-subject design. The visual
environment was the within-subject factor (e.g. presence or
absence of educational materials irrelevant to the on-going
lesson). There were two conditions: High Visual Distraction
and Low Visual Distraction. In the High visual distraction
(HVD) condition the physical environment of the laboratory
classroom was furnished with potential sources of
distraction commonly found in kindergarten and elementary
school classrooms (e.g. posters, bulletin boards, maps,
artwork, manipulatives, etc.; see Figure 2). All of the
materials used to decorate the lab classroom were purchased
from educational supply stores. In the Low Visual
Distraction (LVD) condition all visual materials not relevant
to the on-going instruction were removed.
Procedure
Both groups began the study by participating in three
familiarization sessions. The familiarization sessions served
to acquaint the children with the teacher, the mock
classroom, and the procedure. There was a moderate amount
of potential sources of distraction present in the mock
classroom during the familiarization sessions. After the
familiarization session, the children began their respective
treatment schedule. The presentation order was alternated
(e.g. HVD–LVD–HVD–LVD) to mitigate temporal
confounds. The groups were randomly assigned to a
presentation order (i.e., HVD first or LVD first). The
within-subject design was employed to control for potential
differences in lesson interest and assessment difficulty. The
dependent variables were the frequency and duration of
different types of off-task behavior (described below) and

Figure 2. Laboratory classroom in the High Visual Distraction
condition.

Seating Arrangement During all lessons, children sat in a
semi-circle facing the teacher. The children’s seating
arrangement was randomly assigned. Animal carpet squares
were utilized as placeholders and helped the children
identify their seat assignment each week.
Lessons The children participated in four mini lessons over
the course of a 5 week period (Approximately 1 lesson per
week). Each lesson lasted between 5 and 7 minutes and
consisted of a short read-aloud which introduced children to
the lesson content. To control for novelty, all of the topics
were approved by the kindergarten teacher to ensure that the
lesson topics had not been covered during the school year.
Although children may have had some exposure to these
topics at home or elsewhere, the children had not received
formal instruction on any of these topics during the current
school year. The lesson topics included: plants and seeds,
stone tools, matter (solids, liquids, and gases), and weather.
All lessons were conducted by the first author of this paper.
Assessments An assessment was administered at the end of
each lesson to measure learning. The assessments consisted
of a short paper-and-pencil task that included recognition
and comprehension questions. For the first two lessons, the
children answered 10 questions (8 recognition questions and
2 comprehension questions). For the last two lessons, the
children answered 12 questions (6 recognition questions and
6 comprehension questions). The children did not have prior
experience with workbooks. Consequently, the first two
lessons determined the number of test questions the children
would be able to complete. Subsequently, the number of
questions was increased from 10 to 12 for the last two
lessons.
For all questions, recognition and comprehension, the
participants were asked to select the correct answer from
four pictorial response options. For the recognition

2808

questions, the children were asked to circle the picture they
saw in the book that the teacher had read during the lesson.
The comprehension questions were intended to be more
difficult than the recognition questions as the correct
response option was represented by a novel picture that the
children had not encountered during the lesson or the
children had to select the correct response from four familiar
pictures (see Figure 3 for an example).

Figure 3. Sample materials from the lesson “Matter”: Panels A-B
present sample content and panel C presents a sample assessment
question. All text was presented verbally by the experimenter.

Operational Definitions For the purposes of this research,
focused attention was conceptualized as a “state in which
attention is directed more or less exclusively to one target or
task” (Ruff & Rothbart, 1996, p.110). Focused attention was
operationalzied as engagement with the teacher or the
learning materials (i.e., the book), and engagement was
determined by direction of children’s gaze. Eye gaze is
commonly used as a measure of visual attention (for
reviews see Henderson & Ferreira, 2004; Just & Carpenter,
1976) and there is evidence that visual attention and
saccadic eye movements rely on the same neural
mechanisms (Corbetta, Akbudak, Conturo, Snyder,
Ollinger, Drury, Linenweber, Petersen, Raichle, Van Essen,
& Shulman, 1998). Furthermore, eye gaze is sometimes
used as a measure of auditory attention (e.g., Spelke, 1976;
Reisberg, 1978; Saffran, Newport, & Aslin, 1996; Thiessen,
2007). As we argue below, we also believe that direction of
eye gaze is a reasonable measure of focused attention in
contexts that involve attending to visually presented
instructional materials.
It could be argued that one can successfully listen to the
teacher while looking elsewhere. However, if visual
materials are used during instruction (e.g., a demo, a movie,
or a book) then attending to instruction auditorily but not
visually would by definition constitute divided attention. In
many cases, divided attention leads to decrements in
performance not observed under the conditions of focused
attention (e.g., Craik, Govoni, Naveh-Benjamin, &
Anderson, 1996; Healey & Miyake, 2009; Navon & Miller,
1987). Therefore, in the context of instruction that involves
visual materials, direction of eye gaze seems to be a
reasonable (albeit imperfect) measure of focused attention
and on-task behavior.

Coding All coders were trained by the first author of this
paper. The training consisted of extensive practice coding
vignettes, video tapes, and live observations. An event
sampling strategy was utilized during observations in the
experiment proper: Coders were first taught to classify the
child’s behavior as on- or off-task based on direction of eye
gaze (e.g. is the child looking at the teacher and/or the
relevant instructional materials?). If the child was classified
as being off-task, the source of distraction was identified
using a coding scheme developed in pilot research. The
possible sources of distraction were categorized as (1) Selfdistraction, (2) Peer distraction, (3) Environmental
distraction, or (4) Other. Self-distraction was defined as
engagement with something on the child’s own body such
as an article of clothing (e.g. shoe, zipper, button, etc.) or an
appendage. Peer distraction was defined as engagement with
another child, including touching, talking, or looking at a
peer. Environmental distractions included any incident in
which the child was looking at anything in the physical
environment such as charts, maps, carpet squares, etc.
Category “Other” was included for observations that did not
clearly align with the three aforementioned categories.
In cases where the child was engaged in several
simultaneous off-task behaviors, the indicated category was
determined by the direction of eye gaze. For example, if the
child was talking to a peer while playing with their button
the child was classified as “off-task – peer distraction” since
the child was looking at their peer.
For each instance of off-task behavior, the coders
marked the timing of its onset and cessation. This procedure
allowed for determining not only the frequency with which
a particular type of off-task behavior occurred, but also the
amount of instructional time lost due to each type of off-task
behavior. Cohen’s (1960) Kappa was calculated for a subset
of the lessons between the first author and a hypothesisblind coder to estimate inter-rater reliability. Kappa was an
acceptable 0.74, a level of reliability in line with past
classroom research coding off-task behavior, and
approaching the 0.75 threshold to which Fleiss (1981) refers
to as “excellent”.

Results
All results and analyses presented below are based on the
coding of the hypothesis-blind coder.
Duration of Time off-Task by Distraction Subtype
Pairwise t-tests were conducted to determine if the duration
of time allocated to each distraction subtype differed as a
function of condition. Children spent significantly more
time attending to the environment in the HVD condition
than in the LVD condition. On average children in the LVD
condition spent only 5% of the instructional time engaged in
environmental distractions, which was significantly lower
than in the HVD condition (21%), t(17) =4.84, p < 0.0001.
In contrast, children in the LVD condition spent
significantly more time attending to all other sources of
distraction, all ts(17) > 2.14 , ps < 0.05 (see Figure 4).

2809

(M=0.64, SD=0.27 and M=0.52, SD=0.29 respectively);
however, this difference also did not reach significance,
paired-sample t(17)=1.37, p=0.19.

Figure 4. Type of off-task activities by experimental condition.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

It may appear from the pattern of results in Figure 4 that
while classroom visual environment may affect attention
allocation in instructional settings, there is merely a tradeoff between the types of off-task behavior that different
environments promote: classrooms filled with materials
irrelevant to the content of the lesson may be more likely to
promote attention to these materials, whereas more
streamlined classrooms may be more likely to promote offtask peer interaction. However, the type of off-task behavior
children are engaged in may have different consequences
for the amount of instructional time lost due to off-task
behavior.
Total Time off-Task
The total proportion of time spent off-task was measured,
and the group means were compared in each condition. The
overall proportion of instructional time spent off-task was
significantly greater in the HVD condition (M=0.34,
SD=0.09) compared to the LVD condition (M=0.28,
SD=0.10), paired-sample t(17)=2.49, p=0.02 (See Figure 5).
Learning Outcomes
Pair-wise comparisons were also conducted to examine
group differences on the learning measures. The analyses
showed that there was a significant difference on children’s
total score as a function of condition. Children in the LVD
condition obtained higher learning scores (M=0.79,
SD=0.11) than children in the HVD condition (M=.70,
SD=0.17), and this difference was statistically significant
(t(17)=2.72, p= 0.01); see Figure 5 above.
Follow-up analyses were conducted to examine
children’s performance on the recognition and
comprehension subscales. Children in the LVD condition
had higher recognition scores (M=0.85, SD=0.14) than
children in the HVD condition (M=0.77, SD=0.21);
however, this difference did not reach statistical
significance, paired-sample t(17)=1.60, p=0.13. Similar
results were found for the comprehension sub score.
Children in the LVD condition achieved higher
comprehension scores than children in the HVD condition

Figure 5. Total proportion of instructional time spent off-task and
accuracy on the assessment questions by experimental condition.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

Discussion
Overall, the present study yielded several novel and
important findings. First, the patterns of attention allocation
in kindergarten children changed as a function of the
classroom visual environment. In the HVD condition
children spent more time attending to the environment, and
in the LVD condition children spent more time attending to
self, peer, and other distracters. Second, these changes in the
patterns of attention allocation led to significant changes in
the proportion of instructional time spent off-task.
Specifically, children spent significantly more instructional
time off-task in the HVD condition than in the LVD
condition. Third, a relationship between the visual
classroom environment and learning was also found.
Overall accuracy on the learning assessments was higher in
the LVD condition than in the HVD condition.
A number of previous studies have established a
relationship between time-on-task and learning outcomes;
however, this study is the first (to our knowledge) to
experimentally induce lower or higher levels of off-task
behavior and observe corresponding changes in learning
outcomes. At the same time, many important questions
remain to be answered. Further research is needed to
examine whether time-off-task mediates learning outcomes,
whether children habituate to static visual environments, and
whether the classroom visual environment in naturalistic
settings pose a challenge to children’s attention allocation and
learning (although this is far from a comprehensive list of
unanswered questions). Nevertheless, the present study
suggests that the classroom visual environment may in
principle play a role in how children allocate their attention
during instruction.
The results from this study provide a foundation to
explore more fully the practical implications of this line of
work as our results point toward the possibility that some of
children’s attention can be redirected to the teacher by
mitigating environmental distractions. The development of

2810

attention regulation in educational settings is an area of
research which warrants further inquiry. This research may
lead to design of learning environments that reduce
attentional burden and promote allocation of attentional
resources toward learning.

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha and Tina Li for help coding video
data. We thank Ryan Baker for his help estimating interrater reliability. We also thank the children, parents,
teachers, and administrators who made this project possible.

References
Ahrentzen, S. & Evans, G.W. 1984. Distraction, Privacy,
and Classroom Design. Environment and Behavior, 16
(4), 437-454.
Bloom B.S. (1976). Human characteristics and school
learning. McGraw-Hill New York.
Caldwell, J.H., Huitt, W.G., & Graeber, A.O. (1982). Time
spent in learning: Implications from research. The
Elementary School Journal, 82, 470-480.
Carroll, J.B. (1963). A model of school learning. Teachers
College Record, 64, 723-733.
Chang, M.L. (2004). Classroom Management In
Photographs. Teaching Resources.
Cobb, J.A. (1972). Relationship of discrete classroom
behavior to fourth-grade academic achievement. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 63, 74-80.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
20, 37–46.
Corbetta, M., Akbudak, E., Conturo, T. E., Snyder, A. Z.,
Ollinger, J. M., Drury, H. A., Linenweber, M. R.,
Petersen, S. E., Raichle, M. E., Van Essen, D. C., &
Shulman, G. L. (1998). A common network of
functional areas for attention and eye movements.
Neuron, 21, 761-773.
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh-Benjamin, M., &
Anderson, N. D. (1996). The effects of divided
attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 125(2),
159 - 180.
DeMarie-Dreblow, D. & Miler, P. H. (1988). The
development of children’s strategies for selective
attention: Evidence for a transitional period. Child
Development, 59, 1504 -1513.
Fleiss, J.L. (1981). Statistical methods for rates and
proportions (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley.
Frederick, W.C., & Walberg, H.J. (1980). Learning as a
function of time. Journal of Educational Research, 73,
183-194.
Goodman, L. (1990). Time and learning in the special
education classroom. SUNY Press.
Healey, M. K. & Miyake, A. (2009). The role of attention
during retrieval in working-memory span: A dual-task
study. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(4), 733-745.

Henderson, J., and Ferreira, F. (2004). In The interface of
language, vision, and action: Eye movements and the
visual world. Taylor & Francis, New York.
Just, M., and Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and
cognitive processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441–480.
Karweit, N. (1984). Time-on-task reconsidered: Synthesis of
research on time and learning. Educational Leadership,
41(8), 32-35. EJ 299-538.
Karweit, N. & Slavin, R. (1981). Measurement and
modeling choices in studies of time and learning.
American Educational Research Journal, 18, 157-171.
Krantz, P. J. & Risley, T. R. (1972). The organization of
group care environments: Behavioral ecology in the
classroom. Paper presented at the annual convention of
the American Psychological Association, Honolulu, HI.
Lahaderne, H.M. (1968). Attitudinal and intellectual
correlates of attention: a study of four sixth-grade
classrooms. Journal of Educational Psychology, 51,
320-324.
Lee, S.W., Kelly, K.E., & Nyre, J.E. (1999). Preliminary
report on the relation of students’ off-task behavior with
completion of school work. Psychological Reports, 84,
267-272.
Lloyd, J.W., & Loper, A.B. (1986). Measurement and
evaluation of task-related Learning behaviors: Attention
to task and metacognition. School Psychology Review,
15, 336-345.
McKinney, J.D., Mason, J., Perkerson, K., & Clifford, M.
(1975). Relationship between classroom behavior and
academic achievement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 67, 198 - 203.
Navon, D., & Miller, J. (1987). The role of outcome conflict
in dual-time interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13,
435-448.
Reisberg, D. (1978). Looking where you listen: visual cues
and auditory attention. Acta Psychologica, 42, 331-341.
Ruff, H. A. & Capozzoli, M. C. (2003). Development of
attention and distractibility in the first 4 years of life.
Developmental Psychology, 39(5), 877 - 890.
Ruff, H. & Rothbart, M. K. (1996). Attention in Early
Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rusnock, M. & Brandler, N. (1979). Time off-task:
Implications for learning. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Fransisco, CA.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science,
274, 1926-1928.
Samuels, S. J. & Turnure, J. E. (1974). Attention and
reading achievement in first-grade boys and girls.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(1), 29 - 32.
Spelke, E. (1976). Infants' intermodal perception of events.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 553-560.
Thiessen, E. D. (2007). The effect of distributional
information on children’s use of phonemic contrasts.
Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 16-34.

2811

