UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An fMRI Study of Zoning Out During Strategic Reading Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d11w2pg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Moss, Jarrod
Schunn, Christian
Schneider, Walter
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An fMRI Study of Zoning Out During Strategic Reading Comprehension
Jarrod Moss (jarrod.moss@msstate.edu)
Department of Psychology, Mississippi State University,
Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA

Christian D. Schunn (schunn@pitt.edu)
Walter Schneider (wws@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamara1@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Abstract
Prior neuroimaging studies of discourse comprehension and
strategic reading comprehension have shown that there are at
least two networks of brain regions that support strategic
discourse comprehension. In particular, strategic reading
comprehension leads to activation of a domain-general
control network as well as a network of regions supporting
coherence-building comprehension processes. The present
study was designed to further examine the neural correlates of
strategic reading comprehension by examining the brain
regions associated with zoning out, or mind wandering, while
performing reading strategies on expository texts and
diagrams. The results show that a region of dorsal prefrontal
cortex was associated with increased frequency of zoning out,
and the results provide an important replication or prior work
by showing a high degree of consistency in the areas that are
active while using reading strategies.
Keywords: Reading Strategies; fMRI; Cognitive Control

Introduction
The comprehension of expository text is a common task in
learning, but the complexity of text comprehension results
in large individual differences in the strategies that students
engage in to understand texts as well as what students
extract from texts (e.g., Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, &
Glaser, 1989; McNamara, 2004). Reading comprehension
strategies improve readers’ comprehension of text. Some
readers use strategies naturally, and others benefit from
being provided with strategy instruction (McNamara, 2007).
Self-explanation is one reading strategy that has been shown
to be effective at improving readers' comprehension when
students are trained or prompted to use it (Chi, Deleeuw,
Chiu, & Lavancher, 1994; McNamara, 2004). While there
have
been
neuroimaging
studies
of
narrative
comprehension, there have been relatively few studies of
expository text comprehension and even fewer that have
examined the differences in brain activity associated with
different reading strategies. Neuroimaging studies of
strategic reading comprehension have the potential to
further develop our existing understanding of strategies
designed to enhance discourse comprehension.

Because instructing readers to self-explain often benefits
readers who are skilled self-explainers more than less
skilled self-explainers (Chi et al., 1994), McNamara (2004)
developed Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT) in
which students are provided with instruction and practice on
using reading strategies while self-explaining texts. This
approach combined the technique of self-explanation with
reading strategies with demonstrated effectiveness. SERT
includes five component reading strategies: comprehension
monitoring, paraphrasing, elaboration, bridging, and
prediction (McNamara, 2004). Comprehension monitoring
is being aware of whether the text is being successfully
understood while reading. Paraphrasing is putting the text
into one's own words. The process of putting text into one's
own words helps to activate relevant semantic knowledge in
long-term memory and prepares the reader to make further
inferences. Inferences are necessary in most text
comprehension situations because most texts do not state all
relevant pieces of information explicitly (Kintsch, 1998).
Elaboration involves making inferences that aid in
understanding the text by using knowledge from memory.
Bridging involves making inferences across sentence
boundaries to aid in understanding the text. Prediction is
making predictions at the end of a sentence or paragraph
about what information will be contained in the next section
of the text. Collectively, these strategies help the reader to
process challenging, unfamiliar material by scaffolding the
comprehension process. The process of self-explaining
externalizes the comprehension process and the reading
strategies help the reader to understand the text (i.e., using
paraphrasing and comprehension monitoring) and go
beyond the text by generating inferences (i.e., using
elaboration, bridging, and prediction).
The results of an initial exploration of the neural
correlates of strategic reading comprehension found that a
combination of cognitive control and discourse
comprehension regions are activated during performance of
effective reading strategies (Moss, Schunn, Schneider,
McNamara, & VanLehn, 2010). This study examined three
reading strategies: rereading, paraphrasing, and self-

1218

explaining. The results of this study support the notion that
effective reading strategies involve a combination of
intentional cognitive control along with engagement of
coherence-building processes. Paraphrasing and selfexplanation were found to engage a network of regions
making up a cognitive control network more than the
rereading strategy did. This domain-general network of
brain areas have been shown to be active in a variety of
tasks involving executive control (Chein & Schneider,
2005). This control network includes dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, pre-supplementary motor
area, dorsal premotor cortex, anterior insular cortex, inferior
frontal junction, and posterior parietal cortex.
In addition to an increase in control network activation, it
was found that a set of areas including bilateral angular gyri,
posterior cingulate cortex, and the right middle temporal
gyrus were more active during self-explanation than during
paraphrasing. These regions have been found to be active
during discourse comprehension processes including
inference processes (e.g., Ferstl, Neumann, Bogler, & von
Cramon, 2008; Xu, Kemeny, Park, Frattali, & Braun, 2005;
Yarkoni, Speer, & Zacks, 2008). These results indicate that
self-explanation, the most effective strategy examined,
further engages coherence-building processes that aid in the
construction of a good situation model of the text's content.
However, many of the brain regions found to be
associated
with
self-explanation
and
discourse
comprehension are also part of the brain's default network
that is active during rest periods in neuroimaging studies
(Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter, 2008). It is likely
that participants engage in daydreaming and other selfreferential thought processes during these rest periods. One
explanation for the partial overlap between the default
network and discourse comprehension regions are that both
activities are making use of inference, memory recall, and
coherence-building processes.
The default network has been shown to be more active
during periods of mind wandering or zoning out while
performing another task (e.g., Christoff, Gordon,
Smallwood, Smith, & Schooler, 2009). Zoning out is used
here to refer to a period of time when a person is engaged in
thought not related to the task he/she is currently supposed
to be performing. Zoning out while reading has been shown
to affect the amount of material remembered (Schooler,
Reichle, & Halpern, 2004). There is also some evidence that
the frequency of zoning out during self-explanation is
related to the effectiveness of self-explanation in promoting
learning from text (Moss, Schunn, VanLehn, Schneider, &
McNamara, 2008). One of the purposes of the present study
was therefore to examine whether there are neural correlates
of mind wandering during strategic reading comprehension.
One possibility is that portions of the default network will
be more active during trials where the frequency of zoning
out is high. This possibility would be consistent with prior
work using much simpler tasks to assess the neural
correlates of zoning out (Christoff et al., 2009). An
additional possibility is that the control network will be less

active during periods of increased zoning out. Such a
finding would also be consistent with results showing that
activity in the default network is anti-correlated with
activity in the control network (Fox et al., 2005).
The present study closely followed the methodology of
earlier work on the neural correlates of strategic reading
comprehension by contrasting three learning strategies—
rereading, paraphrasing, and self-explaining—differing in
complexity and effectiveness (Moss et al., 2010). We sought
to replicate and extend prior work using similar expository
texts about a different topic. One difference from the prior
study was that the texts that participants read included
diagrams along with the text. However, the main difference
from the prior study is that participants were asked to
provide a self-rated frequency of zoning out while reading
and performing the reading strategies. These ratings were
used to examine whether there were brain regions that were
associated with zoning out.

Method
Participants
Fifteen right-handed, native English speakers were recruited
from the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon
University communities (12 female, M age = 20.7; SD =
1.8). None of the participants had taken college physics.

Materials and Design
Three new texts that taught material related to physics were
constructed. Each text consisted of 15 paragraphs, each
containing 2-4 sentences, so that they could be presented
one paragraph at a time. The topics of the texts were DC
circuits, pulley systems, and classical mechanics (forces and
motion of objects). For each text, 13-14 diagrams that
corresponded to individual paragraphs were also
constructed. A set of 15 multiple choice questions that
tested the content of each text were also created. Pilot
studies were used to refine the materials to equate difficulty
for all texts and associated questions.
Each participant performed all three reading strategies:
rereading, paraphrasing, and self-explaining. Each was
instructed to use a given reading strategy to read all of a
given text. The assignment of reading strategies to texts was
counterbalanced across participants. The order in which
participants performed the strategies was randomized.
Each text was broken up into three sections consisting of
five paragraphs each. Each of these five-paragraph sections
was presented in a single data acquisition run. Because
strategies were assigned to texts, participants were always
performing a single strategy during each acquisition run.
Each five-paragraph section for each of the three texts was
presented before the next section for each text. For example,
this organization implies that the first (second) and second
(third) blocks of paragraphs from a particular text were
separated by a block of each of the other two texts (e.g.,
Text1-Block1, Text2-Block1, Text3-Block1, Text1-Block2,

1219

…). The blocks were presented in this fashion so that each
reading strategy would be performed once in each third of
the acquisition session in order to help control for potential
confounding effects (e.g., fatigue).

Procedure
This study took place over two sessions, separated by 2-5
days, with fMRI data collected during the second session.
Session 1 During the first session, participants were given
up to 30 minutes to complete a pretest including all of the
questions for the three texts. Participants then completed a
90-minute iSTART session which provided instruction on
how to self-explain using reading strategies. iSTART,
described in greater detail by McNamara and colleagues
(2004) provides instruction and practice on how to selfexplain texts using the five SERT reading strategies:
comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing, elaboration,
bridging, and prediction.
After iSTART training, the participants were provided
with task practice in an MRI simulator. The MRI simulator
was designed to closely simulate the physical conditions of
the MRI scanner and included a magnetic tracking system to
track and present feedback to the participant regarding head
movement. In the simulator, participants were presented
with 14 paragraphs from two practice texts that were of a
similar expository nature but contained different content
than the texts in the experiment. Instructions on the screen
indicated the reading strategy to use for that block.
The title of the text was centered on the top of the screen
with the paragraph appearing on the center of the screen.
Along the bottom of the screen was a prompt reminding the
participant of the current strategy. Participants were
instructed to read the paragraph aloud once, and then to
press a button on a response glove. Once they did so, the
color of the paragraph’s text changed from black to blue
which served as a cue that they were to perform the given
reading strategy aloud. The participants then reread,
paraphrased, or self-explained the text and pressed a button
to move to a zoneout rating screen. On this screen, the
participant was asked to rate on a scale from 1-5 how
frequently they caught themselves zoning out and thinking
about non-text material. Following the zoneout rating,
participants started to read the next paragraph.
The paraphrasing and self-explanation strategies had been
introduced within iSTART, and thus, participants were
provided only brief instructions on how to either paraphrase
or self-explain out loud each sentence in the text. In the
paraphrase condition, participants were told to put each
sentence in the paragraph into their own words without
using any of the other SERT strategies. In the selfexplanation condition, participants were instructed to selfexplain each paragraph using the reading strategies covered
in iSTART. For the rereading condition, they were told to
read and then reread each paragraph out loud until the
computer indicated it was time to move to the next
paragraph of text. A flashing prompt at the bottom of the
screen instructed the participant to stop rereading. The

rereading condition was designed this way in order to
roughly equate the amount of time spent rereading with the
amount of time spent paraphrasing and self-explaining. The
amount of time allotted for rereading was 45 seconds, which
was determined from a pilot study. Paraphrasing and selfexplanation were self-paced with the constraint that the
participant was prompted to move on using the same
flashing prompt if they reached 60 s.
Session 2 The second session occurred 2-5 days after the
first session in order to reduce the chance that participants
would read the passages with the pretest questions in mind.
This session began with a 30-minute iSTART practice
session for additional practice self-explaining. fMRI data
was collected for the remainder of the session. All tasks
were presented using E-Prime (Schneider et al., 2002). To
verify strategy use within each condition, verbal responses
were collected using an active noise canceling microphone
system (PST, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA).
The first task presented to the participants in the MRI was
the line search task that served as a functional localizer to
localize activity in control areas (Saxe et al., 2006). The task
involved detecting a target line orientation by monitoring
lines of differing orientation in four locations on the screen.
The lines in these four locations changed over time, and the
participants were asked to press a button when one of the
locations matched the target orientation. This task has been
used in prior research on executive control (Cole &
Schneider, 2007). This task was used to functionally
identify the control network in this study. All participants in
the imaging portion of the study performed the line search
task well; d' was greater than 2 for all participants.
Participants then began the strategic reading portion of the
experiment. The only difference from the MRI simulator
procedure was that a 30-second rest period was placed
before and after each block of paragraphs. A fixation cross
was presented in the middle of the screen for this period.
The participants completed a total of 9 fMRI runs with each
run consisting of 5 paragraphs (3 runs while performing
each of the 3 strategies). Following these runs, participants
were presented with a posttest for each text. We do not
examine the posttest imaging data in this paper.
In order to increase statistical power in the pretest/posttest
comparison while constraining the number of fMRI
participants, a second group of 24 behavioral participants
was run using the same reading strategy paradigm..

Data Acquisition and Analysis
Structural and functional images were collected on a
whole body Siemens Trio 3-T scanner at the Magnetic
Resonance Research Center of the University of Pittsburgh
during a 2-hour scanning session. The functional runs were
acquired as 39 oblique-axial slices parallel to the AC-PC
plane using an echo-planar imaging pulse sequence (TE =
25 ms, TR = 2000 ms, FOV = 21, thickness = 3.5 mm with
no gap, flip angle = 76, in-plane resolution = 3.28 mm2).
The raw data were preprocessed and analyzed using the
AFNI software package (Cox, 1996). Preprocessing

1220

included slice scan time correction, three-dimensional
motion correction, and spatial smoothing. All functional
images were realigned to the first image of each run, which
were aligned to the first run of each subject. The signal for
each voxel was spatially smoothed (7 mm FWHM). Each
subject's anatomical images were co-registered to their
functional images and the images were transformed into
canonical Talairach space.
Analyses of the fMRI data used voxel-based statistical
techniques. Unless otherwise specified, all results were
corrected for multiple comparisons using family-wise error
(FWE) cluster size thresholding to an FWE corrected pvalue of less than .05. At the individual subject level,
general linear models were fit to the data using a set of
boxcar functions convolved with a standard hemodynamic
response function. Separate regressors for reading,
rereading, paraphrasing, and self-explaining were included
in the model. Each group-level analysis used a mixed effects
model with subjects treated as a random factor.

Results
Behavioral Results
The proportion correct on the pretest and posttest were used
to calculate a learning gain score adjusting for the fact that
questions already answered correctly on the pretest cannot
be improved upon, gain = (posttest – pretest) / (1 – pretest).
Due to time constraints, two of the fMRI participants did
not complete the posttest. The gain scores for the behavioral
and imaging participants did not differ on any of the three
conditions (for all comparisons, p > .09), so the data for
these two groups were combined. Planned comparisons
showed that rereading gain (M = .30, SD = .23) did not
differ from paraphrasing (M = .35, SD = .24), t < 1. As
expected, self-explanation led to greater learning (M = .41,
SD = .21) than rereading, t(36) = 2.30, p = .028, Cohen's d =
0.38. However, self-explanation learning gains did not differ
from paraphrasing, t(36) = 1.50, p = .14. Prior research has
shown self-explanation to be more effective than
paraphrasing (Moss et al., 2010).
The zoning out ratings were analyzed in a set of planned
comparisons. Frequency of zoning out was rated higher for
rereading (M = 2.49, SD = .97) than for self-explaining (M
= 2.04, SD = .67), t(14) = 2.95, p = .01, and marginally
higher than for paraphrasing, t(14) = 2.05, p = .06. Zoning
out ratings for paraphrasing and self-explaining did not
differ.

Imaging Results
In order to examine differences in activation between the
different strategies, a voxel-wise ANOVA with strategy
(reread, paraphrase, self-explain) as a within-participant
factor was conducted followed by three planned contrasts
(paraphrase – reread, self-explain – reread, and self-explain
– paraphrase). For each of these contrasts, activation in the
line search task was examined to identify clusters of

activation that fell both inside and outside of the control net.
In addition, positively activated areas from these contrasts
were examined to see if the same regions were also active in
a prior study of reading strategies (Moss et al., 2010).
Figures 1 and, 2 show the active areas along with the extent
of overlapping results from the two studies.
The strategy results are very similar to those from our
prior study (Moss et al., 2010). In particular, the control net
was more active for self-explaining and paraphrasing than it
was for rereading, but the control net was equally active for
the self-explanation and paraphrase strategies. The areas in
the contrast between paraphrasing and rereading were a
subset of the areas in the self-explanation and rereading
contrast so only the self-explanation vs. reread contrast is
shown in Figure 1. For the paraphrase vs. reread contrast,
areas outside of the control net included left presupplementary motor area, left inferior frontal gyrus, right
lingual gyrus, right cerebellum, and bilateral areas of the
basal ganglia. In addition to the areas outside of the control
net seen in the paraphrase vs. reread contrast, regions of
activation in the self-explanation vs. reread contrast
included left middle frontal gyrus, left superior frontal
gyrus, left precuneus, left middle temporal gyrus, and the
thalamus. These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that there is engagement of a domain-general control
network with the use of complex reading strategies.

Figure 1: Results of the self-explanation vs. reread
contrast. Overlap with contrast of self-explanation vs. reread
from prior study shown in blue color scale.
The contrast between the self-explanation and paraphrase
conditions shows a different pattern of results as seen in
Figure 2. The only active region is the left angular gyrus,
which is not part of the control network.
Areas related to zoning out ratings were examined by
creating an amplitude modulated regressor for each subject.
The regressor for the analysis was formed by convolving a
boxcar function whose value was determined by the zoneout
rating with a hemodynamic response function. The mean
zoneout rating for each subject was subtracted from the

1221

amplitudes to yield a regressor that was used to identify
brain areas exhibiting a linear relation to zoneout ratings
(e.g., Buchel et al., 1998). As can be seen in Figure 3, one
significant cluster of activation was found including
bilateral medial PFC and right superior frontal gyrus.

Figure 2: Results of the self-explanation vs. paraphrase
contrast. Overlap with contrast of self-explanation vs.
paraphrase from prior study shown in blue color scale.

Figure 3: Regions correlated with mind wandering
frequency ratings.

Discussion
The results of the strategy contrasts show that the pattern of
activation for each of the contrasts largely replicated prior
findings using other expository texts. The main difference
between the prior study of strategic reading comprehension
and this one is that the topic of the expository text was
different and the texts included associated diagrams.
In the SE-RR contrasts shown in Figure 1, the main
location of non-overlapping activation was in the right
middle occipital gyrus and the right fusiform gyrus. These
areas are part of the 'what' visual processing stream, and so
their activation likely reflects additional visual processing
and interpretation of the diagrams included with the texts.
The prior study being replicated did not contain diagrams.
In addition, the extent of activation in left anterior prefrontal
cortex (aPFC) (BA 9/10) was greater in this study than in
the prior study. The peak of activation was the same in both
studies, but more voxels adjacent to the peak were active in
this study employing diagrams. Although the function of
this region of aPFC is not clear, left aPFC has been
associated with memory retrieval and coordination of
attention (Ramnani & Owen, 2004). It is possible that
integrating diagrams with the text places additional load on
this area due to coordinating attention between diagram and

text or due to retrieval of information incorporated in the
diagram.
Unlike the results of the SE-RR contrast, the left angular
gyrus (BA 39; talairach: -46, -58, 29) was the only
significant region in the SE-P contrast completely, and the
active region overlapped with the prior study's contrast of
self-explanation and paraphrasing. This region has been
posited to be involved in processes such as coordinating
representations necessary to construct a scene from text
(Mellet et al., 2002) and maintaining situation models
constructed from narrative texts (Yarkoni et al., 2008).
These functions are consistent with the idea that selfexplanation is enhancing the situation model that the reader
has developed during the initial reading of the text. The fact
that there were not any regions associated with the SE-P
contrast in this study with texts/diagrams that were not
found in the prior study of expository text without diagrams
implies that the processes of producing elaboration and
bridging inferences do not seem to depend on a separate
representation of the diagram.
The zoning out results show that regions of dorsal aPFC
(BA 9/10; talairach: 11, 41, 45) were correlated with the
ratings that participants gave of how often they had been
thinking of other things while performing strategies on the
texts. This region includes dorsomedial prefrontal cortex
(dmPFC) areas found to be active during discourse
comprehension that are thought to be involved with selfreferential processing, inference generation, and other
reasoning processes (e.g., Ferstl & von Cramon, 2002;
Gusnard, Akbudak, Shulman, & Raichle, 2001; Yarkoni et
al., 2008). However, many studies of dmPFC show left
lateralized activity in this region. dmPFC has been shown to
be active during other studies of mind wandering or
stimulus-independent thoughts (e.g., Christoff et al., 2009;
McGuire, Paulesu, Frackowiak, & Frith, 1996). Given that
left dmPFC is active during studies of discourse processing,
it could be that the right lateralized activity seen here is due
to left dmPFC being engaged throughout the task when
engaged with discourse processing or mind wandering, but
that right dmPFC was only engaged during mind wandering
and therefore showed a stronger correlation to the mind
wandering ratings. In any case, it appears that the
processing occurring in this area may be similar for
discourse and self-referential processing during mind
wandering.
No regions were negatively correlated with the zoning out
ratings. At least in this task, there was no evidence that the
control network was less active during periods of zoning
out. There was also no evidence of a decrease of activity in
the discourse comprehension regions or in the regions that
were more active for the processing of diagrams. One
possible explanation for these results is that some cue from
the environment or the text led the participants to start
pursuing self-referential thoughts leading to greater
activation in right dmPFC. In fact, the elaboration strategy
of self-explanation explicitly encourages associating the text
to prior knowledge. The current data do not allow us to

1222

examine the specific time course of zoning out so it is
impossible to determine if other regions may be more or less
active while participants are starting to zone out or when
they catch themselves doing so. Future work should
examine combining the study of strategic reading
comprehension with the methodology employed in studies
of simpler tasks that do allow for a finer grained
examination of zoning out (e.g., Christoff et al., 2009).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by The Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (NBCH090053). The views,
opinions, and/or findings contained in this article are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the official views or policies, either expressed or implied, of
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency or the
Department of Defense.

References
Ainsworth, S., & Loizou, A. T. (2003). The effects of selfexplaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27(4), 669-681.
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L.
(2008). The brain's default network: Anatomy, function,
and relevance to disease. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1124, 1-38.
Chein, J. M., & Schneider, W. (2005). Neuroimaging
studies of practice-related change: fMRI and metaanalytic evidence of a domain-general control network for
learning. Cognitive Brain Research, 25(3), 607-623.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems.
Cognitive Science, 13(2), 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., Deleeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & Lavancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A. M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., &
Schooler, J. W. (2009). Experience sampling during fMRI
reveals default network and executive system
contributions to mind wandering. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106(21), 8719-8724.
Cole, M. W., & Schneider, W. (2007). The cognitive control
network: Integrated cortical regions with dissociable
functions. NeuroImage, 37(1), 343-360.
Ferstl, E. C., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2002). What does the
frontomedian cortex contribute to language processing:
Coherence or theory of tind? NeuroImage, 17, 1599-1612.
Ferstl, E. C., Neumann, J., Bogler, C., & von Cramon, D. Y.
(2008). The extended language network: A meta-analysis
of neuroimaging studies on text comprehension. Human
Brain Mapping, 29(5), 581-593.
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van
Essen, D. C., & Raichle, M. E. (2005). The human brain
is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated
functional networks. Proceedings of the National

Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
102, 9673-9678.
Gusnard, D. A., Akbudak, E., Shulman, G. L., & Raichle,
M. E. (2001). Medial prefrontal cortex and self-referential
mental activity: Relation to a default mode of brain
function. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 4259-4264.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McGuire, P. K., Paulesu, E., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Frith,
C. D. (1996). Brain activity during stimulus independent
thought. NeuroReport, 7, 2095-2099.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38(1), 1-30.
McNamara, D. S. (Ed.). (2007). Reading comprehension
strategies: Theory, interventions, and technologies.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B., & Boonthum, C.
(2004). iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active
reading and thinking. Behavior Research Methods
Instruments & Computers, 36(2), 222-233.
Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Crivello, F., Mazoyer, B., Denis,
M., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2002). Neural basis of
mental scanning of a topographic representation built
from a text. Cerebral Cortex, 12(12), 1322-1330.
Moss, J., Schunn, C. D., Schneider, W., McNamara, D. S.,
& VanLehn, K. (2010). An fMRI study of strategic
reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the Thirtysecond Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1319-1324). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science.
Moss, J., Schunn, C. D., VanLehn, K., Schneider, W., &
McNamara, D. S. (2008). They Were Trained, But They
Did Not All Learn: Individual Differences in Uptake of
Learning Strategy Training. Poster presented at the 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Washington, DC.
Ramnani, N., & Owen, A. M. (2004). Anterior prefrontal
cortex: insights into function from anatomy and
neuroimaging. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 184-194.
Schooler, J. W., Reichle, E. D., & Halpern, D. V. (2004).
Zoning out while reading: Evidence for dissociations
between experience and metaconsciousness. In Thinking
and seeing: Visual metacognition in adults and children
(pp. 203–226).
Xu, J., Kemeny, S., Park, G., Frattali, C., & Braun, A.
(2005). Language in context: emergent features of word,
sentence, and narrative comprehension. NeuroImage,
25(3), 1002–1015.
Yarkoni, T., Speer, N. K., & Zacks, J. M. (2008). Neural
substrates of narrative comprehension and memory.
NeuroImage, 41(4), 1408-1425.

1223

