UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An investigation of search strategies for hypothesis generation using eye movement data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8j26m797

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Matsumuro, Miki
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An investigation of search strategies for hypothesis generation using eye movement
data
Miki Matsumuro (muro@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan
Abstract
The hypothesis generation process is divided into two phases:
the search phase and the decision phase. In the former phase,
many possibilities for the hypotheses are considered; and in
the latter phase a focal rule is decided upon. In the current
study, we investigated the search phase using eye movement
data. We detected two types of search strategy: one strategy
was a spread-attention search in which participants spread their
attention over a broad area in rule space; and the other was
a focused-attention search in which participants concentrate
their attention on a narrow area in rule space. Results of our
experiment showed that the focused-attention search strategy
was more effective for rule discovery than the spread-attention
search strategy.
Keywords: Rule discovery; hypothesis generation; eyetracking; search strategy

Introduction
Various aspects of the processes of reasoning and discovery
have been focused on in a considerable number of studies
(e.g., Klahr, 2000; Mynatt, Doherty, & Tweney, 1977; Qin
& Simon, 1990; Haverty, Kiedinger, Klahr, & Alibali, 2000).
The process of discovery is divided into two phases: hypothesis generation and hypothesis testing. Although there have
been many studies about hypothesis testing, only a few studies have focused on the mechanisms of hypothesis (rule) generation. In this study, we investigate the hypothesis generation process, dividing it into the search phase and the decision
phase. The decision phase is the final part of the hypothesis
generation process. In this phase, participants produce a focal rule by which they predict an instance for verifying the
hypothesized rule. The search phase precedes the decision
phase. In this phase, participants search in rule space checking various possibilities for rules before producing their focal
rule. Almost all studies about hypothesis generation have investigated the focal rule produced in the decision phase. Only
a few studies have examined the search process in the search
phase, due to the difficulties of observing and recording this
process.
One index for observing the search process is participants’
protocols during hypothesis generation (e.g., Mynatt et al.,
1977; Qin & Simon, 1990; Haverty et al., 2000). Verbal
protocols are actually useful for understanding participants’
thoughts during the discovery processes. However such protocol data are very coarse-grained and contain only conscious
thoughts. Participants may say nothing or make long pauses
because they cannot externalize all thoughts while engaging
in a task. In this study, we use eye movements as a way to
record the participant’s search process in the search phase. In
recent studies of category learning or insight problem solving,

researchers have begun to use eye movement data as a useful
index (Knoblich, Ohlsson, & Raney, 2001; Rehder & Hoffman, 2005). We assume that eye movements provide good
information about the participants’ attention during a task.
Compared with other indexes such as verbal protocols, eye
movements give us more fine-grained data about the search
process without hindering the participant’s activity.
We focus on the spread of attention in the search phase.
First, let us consider the relation between the spread of attention and search strategies in the search phase. A rule is generated through a search of rule space that contains all available
rules (Simon & Lea, 1974). These rules are subdivided into
some sets, the members of which are rules that have the same
or similar attributes (Figure 1). In this study, we define each
set as a “hypothesis set.” Similar rules characterized by identical attributes are contained in an identical hypothesis set.
We assume that two search strategies in the search phase
are defined based on to what degree the participants spread
their attention when searching in rule space. One strategy
is the spread-attention search strategy in which the participant’s attention is broadly spread in rule space. Participants
who use this strategy search in more than one hypothesis set
before they finally produce a focal rule (Figure 1(a)). They
search various rules belonging to various hypothesis sets and
then produce a focal rule(s). Another strategy is the focusedattention search strategy in which the participant’s attention
is concentrated on one (or a few) hypothesis set in rule space.
Participants who use this strategy search in only one hypothesis set before they produce a focal rule (Figure 1(b)). They
selectively search similar rules belonging to an identical hypothesis set and then produce a focal rule(s).
Our question is which of these strategies is effective for

(a) spread-attention search

(b) focused-attention search

Figure 1: Concept diagrams of two search strategies
A square is a hypothesis space and each non-filled circle
in a square is a hypothesis set. (a) Participants who use
the spread-attention search strategy search for hypotheses
across multiple hypothesis sets. (b) Participants who use
the focused-attention search strategy search for hypotheses
within one hypothesis set.

3424

select button!

trial starts
consider rule(s)!
express output-rule(s)!
feedback
check target button!
next trial starts!

Figure 2: Example screen shot of task display in this study
The upper panel is the arrow panel, the lower left panel is the compass panel, and the lower right panel is the number panel.
The nine squares with numbers in the center are buttons for prediction. The rule was consistent through the task.
rule discovery. In terms of producing a focal rule in the
decision phase, some studies using Wason’s 2-4-6 task suggested that a variety of generated rules was important for rule
discovery (Gale & Ball, 2009; Vallée-Tourangeau, Austin,
& Rankin, 1995). Generation of a variety of rules means
that the produced focal rules are scattered in a broad area in
rule space. Turning now to the search phase, which strategy
should be used to find the correct rule: the spread-attention or
the focused-attention search?
Two opposite answers are possible. The first answer is
that the spread-attention search will be more effective. Participants who use the spread-attention search will be able
to reach a hypothesis set that contains a correct rule more
quickly because they search a broader area of rule space at a
time. Additionally participants who use the focused-attention
search may fall into an area of restricted interest, searching in
an irrational hypothesis set that involves irrelevant rules. This
possibility will be minimized if participants search more than
one hypothesis set at a time.
In contrast, the alternative answer is that the focusedattention search will be more effective. Participants who use
the focused-attention search can systematically search each
hypothesis set one by one. Furthermore due to the limit of
cognitive resources, even though participants use the spreadattention search, they might not to be able to use all of rich
information drawn from searches in various sets. We refer
again to this point in detail later. To verify which of these
two possibilities is correct, we observe the degree of spread
of participants’ attention using the eye-tracking method and
investigate the relation between the search strategies and possibilities of reaching successful rule discovery.
To investigate the effectiveness of the spread-attention
search, we also analyze the relation between the hypothesis
sets searched in the search phase and the sets containing the
produced focal rule(s) in the decision phase. From a normative point of view, if participants search multiple hypothesis
sets using the spread-attention search, they should produce
various types of focal rules from all of the hypothesis sets
they search. In contrast, if participants search only one hy-

pothesis set using a focused-attention search, they can be expected to produce a single or multiple focal rules from the
one hypothesis set they search.
In summary, we have three main objectives in the current
study. First, by using eye movements as an index for observing the search process of hypothesis generation, we expect to
detect two types of search strategies characterized by the degree to which attention is spread in a rule space search. One
strategy is the spread-attention search in which participants
spread their attention over a broad area in rule space. They
search more than one hypothesis set before they produce a
focal rule. Another strategy is the focused-attention search
in which participants concentrate their attention on a narrow
area in rule space. Typically, they search only one hypothesis set before they produce a focal rule. The second goal is
to examine which strategy is effective for rule discovery. To
do so, we investigate the relation between the search strategy
and successful rule discovery. The third goal is to explain the
effectiveness of the two search strategies based on the relation between the focal rule(s) produced in the decision phase
and the hypothesis sets searched in the search phase.

Task
To observe the spread of attention in the search phase by eyetracking, we developed a new rule discovery task in which the
search in each hypothesis set as a mental process corresponds
to the focusing of eye movements on a local space in the task
display. Figure 2 shows an example screen shot of the task
display in this study. The task display consists of three panels (arrow, compass, and number panels) and nine buttons.
One of the nine buttons is a target button. Which of the nine
buttons is the target button can be correctly inferred from the
objects displayed on one of three panels. The participants are
asked to find a rule, as quickly as possible, which correctly
predicts the target button.
The experimental procedures are as follows. First, the participants predict the target button from the objects on the panels and select one of the nine buttons. Second, as soon as they
select the button, they are prompted to report the rule(s) they

3425

used for their prediction. We refer to this rule as an “outputrule.” Third, after they report their output-rule(s), the correct
target button is presented. At this time, the objects on all panels are erased so that the participants cannot refer to them.
The procedures above constitute one trial in the experiment.
After the participants check the correct target button, the next
trial starts. For the next trial, the objects on each panel are
newly constructed and changed from those of the previous
one. The location of the target button is also changed regardless of the success or failure of the participants’ prediction.
The amount of trials is not controlled. When the participants
make four successive references to the correct rule and correctly predict the target button, the task is terminated. The
participants are given seven minutes to find the rule. The period during which the participants express their output-rule(s)
is eliminated from this time. One block starts when the task
starts and ends when the participants find the rule or seven
minutes elapsed.
The following are example rules that the participants may
infer.
In the number panel, one can predict the target button by
calculating the sum or difference of two numbers selected on
the panel. One example rule in Figure 2 may be: use the
sum of the two numbers shown in upper left and upper right
positions. In this case, the target button is Button 5 because
that is the sum of 3 (upper left) and 2 (upper right).
In the compass panel, one can predict the target button by
combining two directions selected on the panel. Each of Buttons 2, 6, 8, and 4 corresponds to one of four directions, north,
east, south, and west, respectively. An example rule in Figure 2 is: upper right and lower right directions on the panel
predict the target button. The target button is the southeast
(i.e., Button 9) because the upper right and lower right buttons are east and south. On the compass panel, one direction
colored with red sometimes plays a specific role for describing a rule.
In the arrow panel, one can predict the target button by
the transition of a pointer guided by the arrows on the panel.
The pointer starts at the center of the nine buttons as an initial position (i.e., Button 5). One example rule in Figure 2
is: use four arrows in a clockwise direction from the upper
right arrow. In Figure 2, the pointer moves from Button 5 to
Button 6 (by right pointing), stays at Button 6 (by upper right
pointing), moves to Button 4 (by left pointing), and moves
to Button1 (by up pointing). Therefore the target button is
Button 1.
In this study, we assume that each output-rule reflects a focal rule produced in the decision phase and eye movements
before reporting the output-rule(s) reflect the search process
in the search phase. Rules drawn from the objects in an individual panel are characterized by similar attributes and construct a single hypothesis set: i.e., rules in the arrow panel
construct the arrow hypothesis set, the rules in the compass
panel construct the compass hypothesis set, and the rules in
the number panel construct the number hypothesis set in rule

space. Eye movements on a certain panel are interpreted as a
search of the hypothesis set corresponding to that panel.
When the participants use the spread-attention search strategy, they search more than one hypothesis set. In this case,
eye movements focusing on more than one panel are observed
before participants report an output-rule(s). When the participants use the focused-attention search strategy, they search
only one hypothesis set. In this case, eye movements are fixed
on a single panel.

Experiment
Method
Participants Twenty-two undergraduates participated in
the experiment.
Apparatus We presented the task display on a 17 in. monitor with a resolution of 1280 × 1024 pixels. The participants were seated approximately 60 cm away from the monitor. The panels equaled approximately 7.9◦ × 7.9◦ of visual
angle. The center of each panel was set 21.7◦ away. The
participants’ eye movements were recorded using the Tobii
T60 eye tracker. The participants were allowed to move their
heads naturally.
Procedure Before starting the reasoning task, all participants received some basic instructions about the operations
of the experimental system and example rules. They sufficiently learned example rules for complete understanding of
the structures of rules used in the experiment. All participants engaged in a total of five blocks. Table 1 shows the
rules used in the experiment. The easy rules were similar to
the example rules learned in the instruction phase and the difficult rules were relatively different from the example rules
and more complex than the easy rules.
The training phase consisted of three blocks. The rules
used in this phase were three easy rules. Each rule was incorporated into in one of the three hypothesis sets respectively.
After a brief break, the test phase consisting of two blocks
followed. Two rules were selected randomly from the three
difficult rules. In both training and test phases, the order of
the rules and the positions of the panels were decided randomly. Calibration for recording eye movements was conducted before each block started. After each block, we told
the participants the correct rule regardless of whether they
had been able to find the rule or not.

3426

Table 1: The rules used in this study
hypothesis
set
arrow
compass
number

easy

difficult

clockwise from
upper-right arrow
upper-left and
lower-left
difference between
lower-left and lower-right

N shape from
lower-left arrow
red letter
and next to it
sum of upper-left
and lower-right

Table 3: Discovery rate of each group in each phase
spread
focused
all
arrow
0.18 (2)
0.64 (7)
0.41 (9)
training compass 0.36 (4) 0.91 (10) 0.64 (14)
number
0.91 (10) 0.73 (8) 0.82 (18)
all
0.48 (16) 0.76 (25) 0.62 (41)
arrow
0.13 (1)
0.17 (1)
0.14 (2)
test
compass 0.13 (1)
0.63 (5)
0.38 (6)
number
0.83 (5)
0.88 (6) 0.79 (11)
all
0.32 (7) 0.55 (12) 0.43 (19)
overall
0.42 (23) 0.63 (37) 0.56 (60)
We show the number of participants who found the rule in
parentheses. The all number of each block was eleven in
training phase and six or eight in test phase.

Results
Two Strategies in the Search Phase First, we investigated
what strategy participants used in the search phase before
they decided on a focal rule(s), was effective for rule discovery. For categorization of the participants’ search strategies
in the search phase, we defined an index that represented to
what degree the participants spread their attention. We used
eye movement data from each participant for this index. We
used only the data from the beginning of one trial starting after the participants failed to predict the target button through
the point they reported an output-rule(s). When the participants predicted the target button correctly, we excluded the
data from the analysis because after their correct prediction
they did not generate a new rule so that their attention was
fixed to one hypothesis set containing the maintained rule for
verification.
The adjusted entropy was defined as follows where pi (i =
1, 2, and 3) means the proposition of fixation time of eye
movements in each of the three panels.
adjusted − H = −

∑ pi · log pi
log 3

(1)

A large value for the adjusted-H means that the participants
searched multiple panels; in other words, they spread their
attention over a broad area in rule space. A small value for
the adjusted-H means that the participants concentrated their
attention on one panel, i.e., one hypothesis set. The adjustedH increased to the maximum value 1 when the participants
spread their attention equally over three panels. The adjustedH decreased to the minimal value 0 when the participants concentrated their attention on only one panel.
First of all, we verified the consistency of the search strategies used by the participants. Table 2 shows correlations of
the averages of the adjusted-H among five blocks. All values
between any set of two blocks were higher than .5, suggesting that each participant used a consistent strategy throughout
the five blocks. In particular, the correlations among the third
block in the training phase and two blocks in the test phase
exceeded .8, meaning a very strong consistency. Since each
participant seemed to use a consistent strategy, we categorized the participants into two groups using the mean value of
adjusted-H for the two blocks in the test phase.
The criterion for categorization was the median of the
mean values. The median value was 0.216. The focused
group consisted of the participants whose mean adjustedH values were below 0.216; the spread group consisted of
those whose values were above 0.216. The participants in
Table 2: Correlations between the mean of adjusted-H
1
2
3
1
2

training 1 training 2 training 3
1.000
.729∗∗∗
1.000
.838∗∗∗
.661∗∗
1.000
.752∗∗∗
.620∗∗
.889∗∗∗
.636∗∗
.668∗∗
.809∗∗∗
∗∗ : p < .01,∗∗∗ : p < .001

test 1

test 2

1.000
.896∗∗∗

1.000

the focused group tended to use the focused-attention search
strategy; those in the spread group used the spread-attention
search strategy. For confirmation, the mean adjusted-H of
the participants in the spread group was 0.477, significantly
higher than 0.078 in the focused group (t(11) = 6.730, p <
.001).
Discovery Rate The discovery rate means the proportion
of the blocks in which the rules were successfully found (Table 3). The discovery rate through all five blocks was .56.
For each phase, the discovery rate was .62 in the training
phase and .43 in the test phase. The difference between the
two phases revealed marginal significance (χ2 (1) = 3.819,
p = .051). As expected, the proportion of successful rule
discovery in the test phase during which relatively difficult
rules were used, was lower than the proportion in the training
phase. The effect of the rule type also reached significance.
The discovery rate for the number rule was the highest and the
discovery rate for the arrow rule was the lowest in each phase.
The discovery rates for arrow, compass, and number rules in
each phase are as follows respectively; .41, .64, and .82 in the
training phase (χ2 (2) = 18.236, p < .001), .14, .38, and .79 in
the test phase (χ2 (2) = 7.856, p = .020), and .31, .56, and .81
in whole blocks (χ2 (2) = 12.122, p = .002). In particular, the
discovery rate for the arrow rule in the test phase was only
.14, meaning that the rule was extremely difficult.
Table 3 shows the discovery rates for each group. Through
five blocks the participants in the focused group found the
rules more frequently than the participants in the spread group
(χ2 (1) = 7.187, p = .007). The same tendency was observed
in the training phase in which the discovery rate was spread
in the focused group than that in the spread group (χ2 (1) =
5.216, p = .022). However, there was no significant difference between the two groups during the test phase (χ2 (1) =
2.316, p = .128). For a detailed analysis, we compared the
discovery rate for each rule in the test phase. For the compass
rule, the difference between the spread and focused groups
reached marginal significance (p = .059, Fischer’s exact test).
For the arrow and number rules, there was no difference between the two groups (ps > .50). The arrow rule was too difficult; only one participant in each group could find the rule.
On the other hand, the number rule was too easy; five out

3427

Discussion and Conclusion
Search Strategy and Eye Movement
In this study, by using eye-tracking data, we succeeded in
detecting two search strategies during the search phase. We
performed further analysis of eye movement data to obtain
more detailed patterns of each participant’s search process.
The participants in each of the spread and focused groups
could be subdivided into two types based on the transition
pattern of their adjusted-H values. The categorization was
performed based on the degree of variation in the transition of the adjusted-H values. Some of the participants indicated consistent values for the adjusted-H, and others indicated fluctuant values in the transition. For this analysis, we

adjusted-H

adjusted-H

0

(a) spread-consistent
(P13 test 1)

1

0
0

trial
(c) focused-consistent
(P07 test 1)

1

0
0

trial

trial

(b) spread-fluctuant
(P18 test 2)

adjusted-H

Search Strategy and Output-Rule Finally for the third
goal of this study we investigated whether the participants’
focal rules in the decision phase normatively corresponded to
their search in the search phase. The analysis was performed
based only on the data from the test phase because of its good
consistency. The output-rules in each trial were divided into
two types: a single set and multiple sets. Regardless of the
number of the output-rules they produced, when the outputrules in a trial belonged to an identical hypothesis set, they
were categorized as the single set type. When the outputrules in a trial belonged to different hypothesis sets, these
were categorized as the multiple sets type. We grouped the
participants into those who always produced the single set
type output-rules and those who produced the multiple sets
type output-rules.
If their focal rules during the decision phase corresponded
to the searched hypothesis sets in the search phase, then (1)
the participants in the spread group who tended to search
more than one hypothesis set in the search phase would be
categorized as the latter participants, and their focal rules
would be expected to come from the hypothesis sets that they
had searched during the search phase, and (2) the participants
in the focused group who searched only one hypothesis set in
the search phase would be categorized as the former participants whose focal rule corresponded to the one hypothesis set
that they searched in the search phase.
The number of participants who produced the multiple sets
type output-rules was significantly larger in the spread group
than the number in the focused group (5/11 and 0/11; p =
.018, Fischer’s exact test). In the focused group, all participants produced only a single set output-rule(s) in the decision
phase. However, contrary to our expectation, in the spread
group, only half of the participants produced output-rules in
multiple sets.

1

0

adjusted-H

of six participants in the focused group and six out of eight
participants in the spread group found the rule. In summary,
the participants in the focused group were more successful in
finding the rule than those in the spread group, strongly suggesting that the focused-attention search strategy in the search
phase was a more effective strategy for rule discovery than the
spread-attention search strategy.

1

0
0

trial

(d) focused-fluctuate
(P11 test 2)

Figure 3: The transition pattern of adjusted-H
The pattern of spread group is presented in upper row and
focused group is presented in lower row. The consistent type
is presented in left column and the fluctuate type is presented
in right column. Each panel is the actual transition of the
participants who showed most typical pattern. The x and y
axes indicate the trials and the adjusted-H respectively. We
show the ID number of participants and the block number in
parentheses.
used the transition patterns in two blocks in the test phase.
Two participants in the spread group and one in the focused
group were excluded from this analysis because two transition patterns in the two blocks were inconsistent. See Figure 3. Five participants in the spread group were categorized
into the fluctuant subgroup (Figure 3(b)) and four were categorized into the consistent subgroup (Figure 3(a)). The latter four participants seem to have used the spread-attention
search strategy throughout the blocks. Note that four of the
five participants who produced multiple sets type output-rules
were involved in this subgroup. On the other hand, the former
five participants basically used the spread-attention search
strategy but sometimes focused their attention into one or
two target hypothesis sets. In the focused group, seven participants were categorized into the fluctuant subgroup (Figure 3(d)) and three were categorized into the consistent subgroup (Figure 3(c)). The participants’ search strategy in the
search phase in the focused group was basically the focusedattention search. Actually, the latter three participants used
the focused-attention search strategy throughout the blocks.
However the former seven participants searched multiple hypothesis sets in some of trials of each block. By doing so,
they may have been trying to find the next target hypothesis
set for the following trials.
The above analysis using eye movement data promises
high reliability. Analysis based on verbal protocol data has
some limitations. For example, the amount of verbalization
varies among participants, and no verbal data is produced
when participants verbalize nothing. When we try to capture

3428

the individuality of participants in the rule (hypothesis) space
search, these limitations become crucial. We believe that eye
movement analysis will play a central role in the further studies of hypothesis generation.

Search Strategy and Discovery
The results of this study showed that the focused-attention
search strategy in which the participants concentrated their attention on one hypothesis set was more effective for rule discovery than the spread-attention search strategy in which the
participants spread their attention to more than one hypothesis set. The reason for this result may be due to the limitation
of participants’ cognitive resources (Dougherty & Hunter,
2003). The half of the participants who used the spreadattention search strategy did not produce multiple sets type
focal rules from all the hypothesis sets they had searched;
their output focal rules were limited to a part of the multiple
hypothesis sets. This result suggests that their focal rules did
not reflect their search during the search phase. They had to
temporally keep the assumed focal rules and the predictions
from the rules in mind while searching in rule space. Their
cognitive resources were insufficient to conduct such activities simultaneously; therefore the participants could not take
advantage of the spread-attention search strategy. This limitation was also observed in the participants who generated
multiple sets type focal rules belonging to different hypothesis sets. When participants test several rules or hypotheses at
a time, a set of diagnostic hypotheses each of which predicts
a different instance is effective for rule discovery. However,
four of the five participants who expressed the output-rules
from the multiple sets did not generate such hypotheses or
rules. All of the output-rules they expressed in one trial made
one identical prediction, thus saving their cognitive resources.
On the other hand, the participants who used the focusedattention search strategy effectively utilized their search in
forming their focal rule(s). They searched each hypothesis set
individually under the constraint of their cognitive resources.
This systematic search in each hypothesis set allowed them
to find a correct rule more effectively. Note that this result of
our study and the findings of preceding studies are not mutually inconsistent. In preceding studies, the participants had
to generate the focal rules from a broad area in rule space in
the decision phase (Gale & Ball, 2009; Vallée-Tourangeau et
al., 1995). Conversely in our study, the participants had to
concentrate their attention on a narrow area in rule space in
the search phase. Actually, participants could generate the
focal rules spread in a broad area in rule space while accumulating the search results in the search phase by using the
focused-attention search strategy. Through the results of our
experiment, we propose an effective process of rule discovery. In the search phase, participants concentrate their attention on one perspective to search each hypothesis set individually and produce a focal rule(s) and test it in experimentation. Additionally, at an adequate timing, they should also
shift their attention from one hypothesis set to another one
to produce various types of focal rules from a broad area in

rule space. This perspective may be interesting because the
effective strategy is different for each of the two stages of hypothesis generation: the search phase and the decision phase.
Further studies are needed to understand in more detail the
nature of hypothesis search strategies in the two stages.

Limitation and Future of This Study
The task used in this study had several limitations. The most
crucial limitation was that the task was not a discovery task
in which participants had to find out what perspective they
should use to decide what hypothesis set they should search.
The nature of our task was attributed to a search task where
participants were given perspectives to search, and the search
space was initially decided. The participants could, in principle, reach the correct rule by comprehensive search; but this
may be impossible in practice because of the time limitation.
The participants in our experiment completely learned three
sets of hypotheses containing a correct rule. However a post
interview indicated that the participants could not evaluate the
number of rules involved in each hypothesis set. In the future,
we would like to develop a discovery task that can be used under our experimental paradigm to try to understand the nature
of search strategies in hypothesis generation processes using
such an experimental task.

References
Dougherty, M. R. P., & Hunter, J. E. (2003). Hypothesis generation, probability judgment, and individual differences in
working memory capacity. Acta psychologica, 113, 263–
282.
Gale, M., & Ball, L. J. (2009). Exploring the determinants of
dual goal facilitation in a rule discovery task. Thinking and
reasoning, 15(3), 294–315.
Haverty, L. A., Kiedinger, K. R., Klahr, D., & Alibali, M. W.
(2000). Solving inductive reasoning problem in mathematics: not-so-trivial pursuit. Cognitive Science, 24, 249–298.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science. the MIT Press.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory and
cognition, 29(7), 1000–1009.
Mynatt, C. R., Doherty, M. E., & Tweney, R. D. (1977).
Confirmation bias in a simulated research environment: an
experimental study of scientific inference. The quarterly
journal of experimental psychology, 29, 85–95.
Qin, Y., & Simon, H. A. (1990). Laboratory replication of
scientific discovery processes. Cognitive Science, 14, 281–
312.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005). Eyetracking and selective attention in category learning. Cognitive psychology,
51, 1–41.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: a unified view. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge
and cognition.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Austin, N. G., & Rankin, S. (1995).
Inducing a rule in wason’s 2-4-6 task: A test of the
information-quantity and goal-complementarity hypotheses. Thinking and reasoning, 84A, 895–914.

3429

