UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Associative and Categorical Priming in Recognition of Individuals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77t6n1qj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bazzanella, Barbara
Bouquet, Paolo

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Associative and Categorical Priming in Recognition of Individuals
Barbara Bazzanella (barbara.bazzanella@unitn.it)
Department of Cognitive and Education Sciences (Discof), Corso Bettini 31
38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy

Paolo Bouquet (bouquet@disi.unitn.it)
Department of Engineering and Computer Science, via Sommarive 14
38123 Povo (TN), Italy
Abstract

an object category is shown and people are asked to name the
object with the name of the category. In the first case, stored
representations are accessed at the level of unique identity,
in the second case they are accessed at basic or subordinate
level. As yet, very few studies (Engst, Martin-Loeches, &
Sommer, 2006; Gorno-Tempini & Price, 2001) have compared the organization of person-specific knowledge with that
of other entities at the unique level of identity.
The primary rationale of the present research is to provide a
contribution in this regard, comparing person and non-person
entities that can likewise be accessed at the exemplar level in
terms of recognition. More precisely, our aim is to investigate
how our semantic representations of individual things are organized and accessed and how these representations are interlinked with those of other individual things. To this purpose,
we probe the semantic system using a priming experiment.

This paper reports an experiment which explores how our
semantic representations of individual objects are organized
and accessed in memory and how these representations are
inter-linked with those of other individuals. A priming experiment was conducted to investigate the relations between
singular representations of famous individuals from four categories (person, building, artwork and product), contrasting
associative and categorical priming effects in visual recognition. The experiment adopted a familiarity decision task to
compare priming by associates (e.g. Michelle Obama - Barack
Obama; Paris - Eiffel Tower) and priming by non-associates
from the same semantic category (e.g. Angelina Jolie - Johnny
Depp; Golden Gate Bridge -Brooklyn Bridge) against an unrelated prime condition. The results of the experiment showed
that there was a substantial priming effect from associates but
no reliable priming from non-associates of the same semantic
category. We propose that singular representations of unique
individuals are more strongly inter-connected by networks of
horizontal associative links rather than by categories.
Keywords: associative priming; categorical priming; ;singular concepts; entity familiarity decision task

Categorical and associative relatedness between
entities and priming effects

Introduction

How semantic knowledge for individual entities is stored in
long term memory is an open issue. One possible view - categorical view - is that semantic knowledge of individual entities has a categorical structure, as has been demonstrated to
exist for generic objects (Barry et al., 1998; Humphreys, Riddoch, & Quinlan, 1988). The idea is that memory representations of unique entities are interconnected by belonging to
common categories. This view holds that the category “politician”, for example, exists as a node in a network and that
all the exemplars of the category (e.g., Barack Obama, Bill
Clinton, Nicolas Sarcozy) are connected to the corresponding node. The connection with the superordinate category
creates an indirect link between these entities that share the
properties inherited from the category.
An alternative view - associative view - holds that the semantic knowledge for unique entities is not structured according to categories. In this view, relationships between entities
can be represented by networks of associative links but not
by membership of a common category. According to this
view, Barack Obama and Michelle Obama would be linked
in memory because they are inter-connected by a direct associative link (i.e. a partnership relationship). Moreover, it is
assumed that knowledge of entities which are identifiable at
the level of unique identity is individual and attributes cannot
be automatically inferred from category membership.
The two views described above (that are not necessar-

Humans appear to be remarkably capable at storing and retrieving knowledge about unique entities such as people,
places, artworks, pets and other invidual things relevant to
their own existence. The way in which individual-specific
information is structured in semantic memory and accessed
from the perceptual input is a matter of considerable debate in
cognitive research. Many studies in the literature focused on
the problem to understand the organization of (and the access
to) semantic memory for familiar people and several theoretical explanations have been proposed to explain person recognition and naming (Bruce & Young, 1986; Burton, Bruce, &
Johnston, 1990; Bredart, Valentine, Calder, & Gassi, 1995).
However, little attempt has been made to compare the processes involved in person recognition and naming with those
used for other kinds of entities. The few studies (Barry, Johnston, & Scanlan, 1998; Damian & Rahman, 2003) that have
addressed this issue compared famous faces and generic objects studying the recognition process at two different levels
of abstraction. For instance, a common task used in these
studies is the face naming task. In this task, participants are
asked to name a known person by producing her proper name.
To perform such a task, it is necessary to access to the specific
memory representation of that unique person and retrieve the
proper name. In contrast, in the corresponding task used for
objects, namely the object naming task, a generic exemplar of

525

ily mutually exclusive) imply different predictions about the
priming effects that can be observed in experiments of entity recognition and naming. In particular, a clear distinction
should be made between priming based on categorical and
associative relationships. Since in many studies no clear distinction has been made between these two forms of priming,
we first clarify the distinction between categorical and associative priming.
The debate about whether priming effects in individual
recognition and naming are in fact due to associative or categorical relationships has been addressed in face recognition
literature, but the issue has not been fully investigated. Moreover, the two forms of primings are often confounded in this
literature and there is an ambiguity about the locus of the effect. This is due to the fact that in many studies the stimulus
pairs are simultaneously related by categorical and associative relationships and the term “semantic priming” is often
used to include both kinds of relationships (McNeill & Burton, 2002; Carson & Burton, 2001).
In addition, the idea that a certain amount of semantic information must be shared between two associate faces in order to produce a priming effect is implicit in several models
of face recognition. The Burton, Bruce, and Johnston IAC
model of person recognition (Burton et al., 1990) proposes
that when a known face or name is recognized, activation
spreads from the face/name recognition unit (FRU/ NRU) to
the corresponding person identity node (PIN) and then to the
individual-specific semantic information stored in semantic
information units (SIUs). Each SIU is connected to the PINs
of other persons who share the same attribute and, therefore,
when the face or name of a known person is presented, activation should spread to the representations of other persons
sharing the same semantics. Since categorical information
(e.g. occupation) is assumed to be stored in SIUs, this clearly
predicts categorical priming. That is, the presentation of the
face of a known politician (e.g. Barck Obama) should influence the speed of responses to a subsequently presented target
person sharing the same occupational category with the prime
(e.g. Nicolas Sarcozy).
To date, however, empirical evidence for categorical priming of person recognition has been inconclusive.
Bruce (1983), Brennen and Bruce (1991) and Stone and
Valentine (2007) all reported categorical priming in person
recognition as did Carson and Burton (2001), showing that it
was possible to boost semantic priming effects when multiple primes were presented before the target. In some studies (Carson & Burton, 2001; Vitkovitch, Potton, Bakogianni,
& Kinch, 2006) semantic priming effect was found having
similar characteristics to the associative effect and it was
suggested that semantic priming behaves like a weak version of associative priming and it should not be considered
as a different mechanism. However, the idea that associative and semantic priming can be explained by the same underlying mechanism has been recently challenged in a ERP
study by Wiese and Schweinberger (2008) and the effects of

co-occurence and semantic relatedness in face priming have
been recently isolated using a learning paradigm with artificial, computer generated faces (Vladeanu, Lewis, & Ellis,
2006). Finally, other studies that tried to isolate categorical
effects from associative effects within the same experiment,
failed to observe categorical priming of person recognition
(Young, Flude, Hellawell, & Ellis, 1994; Barry et al., 1998).
The latter two papers both noted that the absence of categorical priming, compared with larger and statistically significant associative priming, challenged the Burton et al. (1990)
model of organization of person knowledge.
We believe that one of the main reasons for these inconclusive results is that in face priming studies associated stimuli
share also a lot of categorical information. John Lennon and
Paul McCarty1 are both persons, singers, male, British, as
well closely associated members of the Beatles. It could be
argued that they are indeed categorically related but also share
a significant degree of co-occurrence. If we find a priming effect using this pair, it is difficult to separate the contribution
of categorical relatedness from that of associative relatedness.
Moreover, in contrast to object priming studies, where associated prime-target pairs may belong to very different basic
level categories (e.g. carrot-donkey), in all the face priming
studies cited here, items from the same basic level category
(e.g. two persons) or subordinate category (e.g. two actors)
were used as stimuli. In other words, the only associative connections that have been studied to investigate the organization
of person-specific information are associative links between
entities belonging to the same category.
This is in line with a general view that considers people as “special entities” whose semantic knowledge differs
in structure from that of other objects. This idea is supported, for example, by the results reported by Barry et al.
(1998). The authors found that objects were primed reliably
by both associates and semantically related non-associates.
In contrast, for faces there was a substantial priming effect
for associated but not for semantically related items. The
authors suggested that semantic representations of objects
are inter-connected by abstracted superordinate categories but
that representations of people are interconnected by networks
of inter-personal relatedness rather than by categories. Since
the associative links, as proposed by the authors are “social”
in nature, it seems obvious that they may interconnect only
“social” entities (i.e. persons).
We argue that associative relationships may be established
between entities belonging to different categories. A building, for example, may be strongly associated to the city where
it is placed (e.g Colosseum-Rome ) or an artwork to its author
(e.g. The Pietá-Michelangelo). In this study we will investigate these kinds of associative relationships. The advantage
to extend the definition of associative connections across the
category boundaries is that the semantic relatedness between
the associated entities is kept to a minimum.
These considerations lead us to clarify our use of categor1A

526

prime-target pair used by Barry et al. (1998)

ical and associative relationships between entities. Two entities are said categorically related if they share the same basic level or subordinate level category, whereas two entities
are said to be “associatively” related if the first entity calls to
mind the second entity and/or vice versa. We share with other
authors the view that the primary mechanism for associative
relatedness is that the two entities are routinely experienced
together in the contexts in which they appear. Even though we
acknowledge that a purely associative relation can be induced
by repeated co-occurrence of two entities otherwise unrelated
and become automatically registered in memory (Vladeanu et
al., 2006), we argue that associative connections are in fact
more likely to be determined by co-occurrence of entities related by meaningful horizontal relations (e.g. The President
of).

task. In this task, each name on the list had to be rated on a
4-point scale according to its familiarity to the participant in
order to ensure that the entities selected were really familiar
to participants. In addition participants were asked to write
down as many entities as possible that came spontaneously
to mind when they encounter a particular name. These spontaneously generated names were assumed to be associated to
that particular name on the list. This means that we took an
entity B to be associatively related to an entity A, if B was
produced in response to A by the majority of participants.
The most highly associated pairs were identified and combined into prime-target pairs for use in the following experiment. For each of the second member of these pairs of associates, an entity who was not associated but who was from
the same basic level category as the first was selected. For the
category person, pairs with the same occupational category
were selected. That is, we took an entity B to be categorically
related to an entity A if both entities belong to the same basic
level category and B was not produced in response to A by
any rater in the free association task. Then, an unrelated but
famous entity was chosen for each entity target. To generate
associated pairs whose both members belonged to the person
category, a second group of 15 judges were presented with a
different list of famous person names and they were specifically asked to write down as many other names of famous
persons as possible that came spontaneously to mind when
they encountered the target person name.

The Entity Recognition Experiment
The major purpose of the present study is to contrast categorical and associative priming for entities from different categories (person, artwork, building and product) in a familiarity decision task. Our goal is to investigate whether there
are qualitative differences in semantic and associative priming of individuals, comparing the priming effects for entities
of the person category with those for entities of other three
categories: artwork, building and product. In order to discriminate priming effects due to categorical relatedness from
effects due to associative relatedness, in this study we investigated priming effects in associated pairs whose members
belong to different categories. Since previous studies have
demonstrated the importance of associative relationships between persons, only for this category we decided to compare
the effects of associative priming within and across the person
category. In this way, we explored how memory representations of individual entities are inter-linked with those of other
individual entities of the same or different category and explore whether these connections are qualitative different.
To address these issues we examined associative and categorical priming effects in an entity familiarity decision task,
comparing person recognition with object recognition when
both processes involve individual exemplars of the category.
In the task, people were asked to make a decision about the
familiarity of a target entity. The target entity was preceded
by a stimulus (a written word) that could be differently related (associatively or categorically) to the target or unrelated
to it. Reaction Times were measured as Dependent Variables.

Participants Eighteen participants took part in the experiment (11 female). Mean age was 30.61 years (SD=4.59)
ranging from 23 to 40 years. Each participant was tested individually in a quiet room.
Stimuli and Design For each category of the selected target entities (person, artwork, building and product), the experimental stimuli consisted of 12 pairs of closely associated
famous entities, arranged into three sets of 4 pairs. In these
sets the prime entities belonged to a different category than
target entities. For the person category 12 pairs of closely
associated famous entities from the same category (i.e. associated persons) were also used. In this way, we introduced a
further condition, in which associated, categorical and unrelated primes were selected from the same category (i.e. Person). To distinguish between the two conditions in the person
category, we named Person Across the condition in which associated prime and target were from different categories (e.g.
location: USA - person: Barack Obama) and Person Within
the condition in which prime and target were from the same
category (e.g. person: Monica Lewinsky - person: Bill Clinton). Each participant saw the entities in one set in their closeassociate pairs, the entities in a second set rearranged to form
pairs whose members were from the same category but no
close associated, and in the remaining set rearranged to form
unrelated pairs. The allocation of the sets to the experimental
conditions was counterbalanced across participants. In addition, 60 unfamiliar entities were selected to serve as targets

Method
Stimulus Selection For our experiment a) highly associated
prime-target stimulus pairs, b) non-associated pairs belonging to the same category and c) unrelated pairs were required.
To identify the prime-target pairs for use in the following experiment, we conducted a pilot study (15 participants) with
the aim of identifying an initial set of associated pairs from
which we generated the complete list of experimental stimuli.
To create this set, we compiled a list of famous entity names
(12 entities for each category) to be used in a free association

527

and combined with the same 60 primes. In this way, unfamiliar targets were also preceded by famous names and prime
familiarity would have no predictive value for target familiarity.
The design of the experiment was a 5 (category: person
across, person within, artwork, building and product) × 3
(primes: associative, same category, unrelated) repeated measure factorial design. As a consequence of the adopted design, each prime was presented twice in the course of the
experiment. We note that potential effects of prime repetition would have occurred in all experimental conditions in
a comparable way and therefore cannot explain the differences between conditions. An example of the stimuli used
in the experiment is shown in table 1. Prime stimuli consisted
of written names of entities, whereas targets were gray-scale
pictures (450×600 pixels in size) depicting the target entities.

Table 2: Mean Reaction Times (RT) in milliseconds (and
Standard Errors (SE)) for Conditions.
Category
Person Across
Person Within
Artwork
Building
Product

Prime
Categorical
Nicolas Sarkozy
Johnny Depp
Guernica
Leaning Tower of Pisa
Black Barry

Target
Unrelated
Florence
Bob Marley
Vladimir Putin
Moscow
Martin Scorsese

Associates
937 (25)
919 (21)
954 (35)
998 (42)
961 (23)

Primes
Same-category
1017 (21)
1022 (33)
1055 (42)
1090 (46)
1107 (44)

Unrelated
1082 (32)
1045 (36)
1052 (30)
1098 (40)
1148 (44)

within, artwork, building and product) and prime type (factor
levels: associated, same-category, unrelated) as within subjects factors. The results indicated that only the main effect
of prime type was significant (p < 0.001). Therefore, for each
category we performed a one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with prime type as a within-subjects
factor. Post hoc Tukey honestly significant difference (HSD)
tests examined the differences between the factor levels.
The analysis for the category Person Across resulted in a
significant main effect, F(2, 34)= 11.39, p < 0.001. RTs for
the associated condition (937 ms) were significantly faster
than for the same-category (1017 ms), (q = 4.02 , p < 0.05)
and unrelated conditions (1082 ms), (q = 6.70 , p < 0.001).
However, RTs in the same-category condition were not significantly different from those in the unrelated condition, (q =
2.68 , p = 0.15). The same analysis for the Person Within
category produced the same pattern of results. We found a
significant main effect F(2, 34)= 9.03, p < 0.001 and faster
responses for the associated condition (919 ms) than for the
same-category condition (1022 ms) (q = 5.13 , p < 0.01), but
no significant difference between the same-category (1022
ms) and unrelated conditions (1045 ms; q = 0.16 , p = 0.99).
A significant main effect was also found for the category
Artwork, F(2, 34) = 3.93, p < 0.05. The post hoc analysis showed faster responses for the associated condition (954
ms) than for the same-category condition (1055 ms; q = 3.44 ,
p < 0.05). The comparison between the same-category (1055
ms) and the unrelated conditions ( 1052 ms) did no show significant difference (q = 1.09 , p = 0.72).
The main effect was not significant for the Building category, F = 1.53, p = 0.22, even though it shows a very
similar trend than the other categories as also revealed by a
post hoc analysis by items2 . In contrast, we found a significant main effect for the Product category F(2, 34) = 5.63,
p < 0.01. The post hoc analysis revealed the same pattern
of results found for the other categories (with the exception
of the Building category). In particular, we found a significant difference between associative and same-category conditions with responses that were faster in the associative condition (961 ms) than in the same-category condition (1107
ms), (q = 3.45 , p < 0.05), but no significant difference between same-category (1107 ms) and unrelated (1148 ms) con-

Table 1: An example of the stimuli used in the experiment.
Associate
USA (0.80) *
Angelina Jolie (0.86) **
Louvre (1)
Paris (0.93)
Apple (0.86)
* Person Across
** Person Within

Measure
RT (SE)
RT (SE)
RT (SE)
RT (SE)
RT (SE)

Barack Obama
Brad Pitt
Mona Lisa
Eiffel Tower
Iphone

Numbers in the first column show the degree of association, measured as the proportions of participants
(n=15), who gave the name as the “first that springs to mind” when presented with the target name in
the pilot study.

Procedure Subjects were tested individually in a quiet
room. In each trial, the prime was presented for 1000 ms
followed by a fixation cross (200 ms) and the corresponding
target picture. The target remained on the screen until the
subjects made a manual yes/no response. Each trial was initiated by the response on the previous trial after an inter-trial
interval of 1000 ms.
Participants were instructed to respond only to the target
picture. The task was to decide as fast as possible whether
the entity depicted on the picture was a familiar entity or not.
They were told that although they were not to respond to the
name which preceded the picture, they were to pay attention
to it as “in some trials it may help you to make your familiarity decision”. Response latency was taken as the delay between presentation of the stimulus target and initiation of a
response. Each subject saw 120 experimental trials: 60 positive and 60 negative.

Results
The analysis was based on reaction times (RTs) of correct
positive responses. Latencies over 2.5 s, which is equivalent to approximately 3 standard deviations from the mean
(MRT = 1116 ms, SDRT = 386 ms) were discarded, as were
outliers exceeding the participant mean by 2.5 standard deviations, for any particular condition. Mean RTs for correct
responses are reported in Table 2.
A 5 × 3 repeated-measures ANOVA was performed on
mean RTs with category (factor levels: person across, person

2 To investigate possible differences between the stimuli used in
the experiment, we performed a post hoc analysis by items, comparing the associative and same-category conditions. We found a
significant difference (p < 0.05) in mean between the associative
condition and the same-category condition for 7 of the 12 trials.

528

ditions, (q = 1.09 , p = 0.72).
In order to test whether there are differences in semantic and associative priming for faces and objects, we collapsed person and object classes to form two general domains (i.e. Person and Object, respectively). The comparison between the two general domains was motivated as follows. First of all, we did not find a significant difference
in the pattern of results obtained for the Across Person and
the Within Person conditions. Therefore, the two person categories were collapsed to create a general Person category.
Second, we tested for differences between the three non-face
categories (artwork, building and product). Mean reaction
times were submitted to two-way ANOVA using both variables (category and priming condition) as within-subject factors. The main effect of priming condition was significant,
F(2, 34) = 8.84, p < 0.001). Neither the main effect of category, F(2, 34) = 1.45, p = 0.24), nor the interaction was
significant, F(4, 68) = 0.69, p = 0.60). Due to the lack of
the main effect for category and interaction, the three object categories were collapsed to obtain one individual mean
RTs for the object-domain. As a consequence of the aggregation procedure, we were able to compare semantic and categorical primings for faces and objects, by a two-way (2×3)
analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the mean reaction times,
with the variables of stimulus category (face vs. object) and
priming condition (associate vs. same category vs. unrelated). The analysis was conducted by subjects with both
variable (stimulus category and priming condition) as within
subjects factors. The main effect of stimulus category was
significant, F(1, 17) = 7.81, p < 0.05. A a post hoc onetailed t-test showed that responses to faces were significantly
faster (1004 ms) than those to objects (1060 ms), (p < 0.05).
The main effect of priming condition was also significant,
F(2, 34) = 22.92, p < 0.001. Post hoc Tukey honestly significant difference (HSD) tests revealed that: a) for faces
the associate condition was significantly faster from both the
same-category (q = 5.58 , p < 0.01) and the unrelated condition (q = 7.24 , p < 0.001), but the same-category condition did not differ significantly from the unrelated condition
(q = 1.76 , p = 0.47); b) for objects the same pattern of results
was found, that is the associate condition was significantly
different from the same-category, (q = 4.37 , p < 0.01) and
the unrelated condition ,(q = 4.93 , p < 0.01), but the samecategory condition did not differ significantly from the unrelated condition, (q = 0.60 , p = 0.90). The stimulus category
× priming condition was not significant, F = 0.07, p = 0.93.
These results demonstrated that priming effects for faces were
not significantly different (i.e. faster) from priming effects
for objects. In particular, we found that for both categories,
the associate condition was significantly different from the
other two priming conditions, which did not differ significantly from each other.

tities used in the experiment, with the exception of the Building category, we found that entity familiarity decision times
were reliably primed by the prior presentation of associates.
In contrast, non-associates from the same semantic category
did not produce facilitation effects on familiarity decisions.
This means that the time to recognize a familiar person, an
artwork or a product was significantly and robustly facilitated
by the prior presentation of the name of an associate entity,
but was not reliably facilitated by the name of an entity from
the same category but not associated.
Interestingly, the comparison between face and object categories did not reveal a significant difference between the two
domains in the amount of facilitation in the three conditions
of priming. The only difference between the two domains
was that the responses to faces were significantly faster than
those to objects in all the priming conditions, confirming the
astonishing ability of humans to recognize person identity
from faces.
These results can be compared with those of Barry et al.
(1998). The authors conducted two experiments which examined whether there exist differences in semantic and associative priming for faces and objects. Differently from our
experiment, object stimuli used in their experiments represented generic objects (e.g. a table) which could not be recognized at the unique level of identity, but only as members
of a general category. The authors found that faces were substantially primed by associates but not by non-associates of
the same category. In contrast, they found that objects were
primed reliably by both associates and categorically related
non associates. The results were interpreted as evidence for
a different organization of the semantic knowledge of objects
and people. We argue that to draw the conclusion that different processes underlie the organization and the access to
semantic representation of faces and objects, a comparison
between faces and objects at the same level of identity (i.e. as
semantically unique entities) is required. To the best of our
knowledge, our study is the first that performed this comparison in a priming experiment. Our results confirmed those of
Barry et al. for faces, showing that face familiarity decisions
were significantly facilitated by the prior presentation of associates from both the same and different category, but not
by non-associated stimuli from the same category. However,
contrary to Barry’s et al. results, we found that object familiarity decisions presented the same priming effects as faces
when the stimuli were recognized at the unique level of identity. These findings challenge the conclusion by Barry et al.
about a different organization of semantic representations of
objects and faces and suggest a common mechanism to organize knowledge about individuals from different categories.
Another important result is about the Person category. In
our study we tested for differences between two different
kinds of associative priming: priming Across category and
priming Within category. We found that associated primes
from different categories were as good as associated primes
from the same category to produce priming facilitation, giv-

Discussion and Conclusions
The entity recognition experiment produced a very clear and
homogeneous pattern of results. For all the categories of en-

529

ing evidence in favor of a pure associative facilitation not
overlapped with categorical membership effects. Therefore,
it is clear that priming of entity familiarity decisions is associative but not reliably categorical and, at least for the Person
category, both associated entities within the category and associated entities from different categories may facilitate the
familiarity decision. The failure to consistently observe categorical priming of person recognition is a challenge to the
model of Burton et al. (1990) of face recognition. In this
model a word prime would activate its PIN and corresponding SIUs. As there are proposed excitatory, bi-directional
connections between PINs and SIUs, priming is interpreted
in the terms of feedback activation from SIUs to increase the
activation of PINs which are connected to the same SIUs. As
we found priming effects from close associates but none from
non-associated members of the same occupational category,
then it would appear that only activation from the SIUs of associates feedbacks to the PINs. Therefore, these results raise
some questions about the nature of the elements of stored biographical knowledge and in particular whether it is correct
to propose that these are represented by general categorical
units (SIUs) such as “politician” or “actor” as proposed by
the Burton et al. model. Moreover, the model can not explain
the priming effects from associates belonging to different categories since SIUs are assumed to code only person-specific
knowledge.
Our results are more compatible with a model in which singular representations of entities (i.e. singular concepts) from
different categories can be connected directly through associative links so that the activation of one of this singular concept spreads to all the associated singular concepts without
the mediation of categorical units which are assumed to organize the knowledge of singular conceptual representations.
In terms of priming, this model predicts that we should obtain a priming effect when prime and target entities are associatively related even when they do not share category membership. Contrary to the Barry et al. (1998) model for face
processing, we argue that horizontal links can be established
not only within the person category as a consequence of “social” and “interpersonal” relationships (e.g. who is married
to whom or who works with whom), but also between entities from different categories which are connected by binary
relationships reinforced by co-occurrence.
To conclude, we propose that singular concepts are organized within a network of horizontal associative links that
can be stronger than vertical links with shared higher-level
conceptual representations and this organization mechanism
is not peculiar of singular concepts about people but it is
the common way to connect singular concepts of individuals
from different categories.

Journal of Experimental Psychology, 51A, 853-882.
Bredart, S., Valentine, T., Calder, A., & Gassi, L. (1995).
An interactive activation model of face naming. Quarterly
Journal Of Experimental Psychology Section A, 48, 46686.
Brennen, T., & Bruce, B. (1991). Context effects in the processing of familiar faces. Psychological Research, 53, 296304.
Bruce, V. (1983). Recognizing faces. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 302, 423-436.
Bruce, V., & Young, A. (1986). Understanding face recognition. British Journal of Psychology, 77, 305-327.
Burton, A. M., Bruce, V., & Johnston, R. (1990). Understanding face recognition with an interactive activation model.
British Journal of Psychology, 81, 361-380.
Carson, D., & Burton, A. (2001). Semantic priming of person recognition: Categorial priming may be a weaker form
of the associative priming effect. Quarterly Journal Of Experimental Psychology Section A, 54, 1155-1179.
Damian, M. F., & Rahman, R. A. (2003). Semantic priming
in the name retrieval of objects and famous faces. British
Journal of Psychology, 94, 517-527.
Engst, F. M., Martin-Loeches, M., & Sommer, W. (2006).
Memory systems for structural and semantic knowledge of
faces and building. Brain Research, 1124, 70-80.
Gorno-Tempini, M., & Price, C. (2001). Identification of famous faces and buildings: a functional neuroimaging study
of semantically unique items. Brain, 24, 2087-2097.
Humphreys, G., Riddoch, M., & Quinlan, P. (1988). Cascade processes in picture identification. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 67-103.
McNeill, A., & Burton, A. (2002). The locus of semantic
priming effects in person recognition. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A, 1141-1156.
Stone, A., & Valentine, T. (2007). The categorical structure
of knowledge for famous people (and a novel application
of centre-surround theory). Cognition, 104, 535-564.
Vitkovitch, M., Potton, A., Bakogianni, C., & Kinch, L.
(2006). Will julia roberts harm nicole kidman? semantic
priming effects during face naming. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59, 1134-1152.
Vladeanu, M., Lewis, M., & Ellis, H. (2006). Associative priming in faces: Semantic relatedness or simple cooccurrence? Memory and Cognition, 34, 1091-1101.
Wiese, H., & Schweinberger, S. R. (2008). Event-related potentials indicate different processes to mediate categorical
and associative priming in person recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1246-1263.
Young, A., Flude, B., Hellawell, D., & Ellis, A. (1994). The
nature of semantic priming effects in the recognition of familiar people. British Journal of Psychology, 85, 393-411.

References
Barry, C., Johnston, R. A., & Scanlan, L. C. (1998). Are
faces “special” objects? Associative an d semantic priming
of face and object recognition and naming. The Quarterly

530

