UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Becoming a Gamer: Cognitive Effects of Real-Time Strategy Gaming
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bg2s97h
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Glass, Brian D.
Tomlinson, Marc T.
Maddox, W. Todd
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  Becoming a Gamer: Cognitive Effects of Real-Time Strategy Gaming
                                                    Brian D. Glass
                               Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                 Marc T. Tomlinson
                               Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                  W. Todd Maddox
         Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin Institute for Neuroscience, University of
                                                      Texas at Austin
                                                   Bradley C. Love
                               Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
Abstract: Video games are rich, dynamic, and fast-paced virtual environments that tap a number of cognitive
processes. Prior work reveals that experienced video game players (and novices who become experienced) demonstrate
enhanced cognitive and perceptual performance in a range of tasks. It is not clear why video gaming leads to these
enhancements. To address this, we use real-time strategy games which require dynamic attention and multitasking
skills. We employ a variety of novel methods to capture which game features are associated with various cognitive
enhancements. Specifically, we use model-based analysis of empirical feature selection priorities, tests of generation
via multiple game maps, and a map manipulation of centered versus bimodal attentional load. Novice participants
engaged in 40 hours of game-training, with cognitive testing occurring before, during, and after training. We consider
the plasticity of cognitive abilities over training in light of these well controlled factors.
                                                             2241

