UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Brief Familiarization Primes Covert Imitation in 9-month-old Infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hc4r9v4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bertenthal, Bennett
Boyer, Ty

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Brief Familiarization Primes Covert Imitation in 9-month-old Infants
Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@indiana.edu)
Ty W. Boyer (tywboyer@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
1101 E. Tenth St.
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
Previous research reveals that 9-month-old infants who
passively observe an experimenter search repeatedly for a toy
in the Piagetian A-not-B error task covertly imitate these
actions and manually search incorrectly when the toy is
hidden in the B-location. Two experiments tested whether
infants would also search incorrectly if the experimenter was
replaced by a pair of mechanical claws or if the experimenter
performed less familiar actions. Although infants did not
commit the search error when tested directly without any
familiarization to the novel actions, a significant majority of
infants committed the search error following two minutes of
familiarization with the actions performed on the A trials.
These results converge to suggest that infants’ brief
experiences with observing actions will facilitate the
activation of a corresponding motor representation.
Furthermore, the specific process by which this facilitation
occurs varies with the similarity between the observed action
and its motor representation.
Keywords: Imitation; action observation; infancy; learning;
motor simulation; A-not-B search error.

Introduction
During the first year of life, virtually every situation affords
infants the opportunity to learn something new about
themselves, other people or their surroundings. Much of
this learning occurs through the observation of actions
produced by others as well as the self. There is currently a
range of opinions concerning the extent to which infants’
action representations derive from experience vs. innately
specified core knowledge (Csibra, Gergely, Bíró, Koós, &
Brockbank, 1999; Woodward, 2009).
Nevertheless,
regardless of theoretical perspective, there is general
consensus that infants’ action representations are enriched
and elaborated over the first year.
One intriguing explanation for how infants learn about
goal-directed actions is that the perception and
understanding of these actions is developmentally related to
self-produced experience with these same actions (Rakison
& Woodward, 2008). For example, it is now well
documented that infants interpret actions as goal directed by
five to six months of age, which is roughly the same age at
which they begin to successfully reach for distal objects
(Bertenthal & von Hofsten, 1998). Likewise, 9-month-old
infants who understand the referent of a point are likely to
also be able to point at distal objects (Brune & Woodward,
2007). At 10 months of age, infants who are capable of
pulling a cloth to retrieve a toy are more likely to understand
the means-end structure of a hierarchical action

(Sommerville & Woodward, 2005). In spite of considerable
evidence supporting a developmental relation between the
perception and production of human actions, the vast
majority of studies are correlative, and thus not informative
about the underlying mechanisms.
In order to draw firmer conclusions about the causal
relation between perception and production of goal-directed
actions, it is necessary to experimentally manipulate either
the perceptual experience or the motor experience of infants
and test how this manipulation affects performance in the
other domain. A few recent studies manipulating infants
experience with reaching have now been conducted.
Although 3-month-old infants are not yet capable of
reaching and grasping distal objects, they can learn to
retrieve these objects by swiping at them with ‘sticky’
mittens (Needham, Barret, & Peterman, 2002). When
infants were given practice with these sticky mittens prior to
testing their perception of others’ mittened reaches as goaldirected, they interpreted the reaches as goal directed rather
than as simple movements (Sommerville, Woodward, &
Needham, 2005). By contrast infants given practice
following the test did not interpret the reaches as goal
directed. In a related study, Sommerville, Hidebrand, and
Crane (2008) compared the effects of active vs.
observational experience on 10-month-old infants’ ability to
identify the goal of a novel means-end task and reported that
infants were more likely to understand the means-end task
after receiving active as opposed to observational
experience with the relevant action. These results suggest
that active, but not passive, experience facilitates infants’
learning about goal-directed actions.
It is difficult to know whether the preceding conclusion
generalizes beyond the specific paradigms that were used.
Hofer, Hauf & Aschersleben, (2005) tested 9- and 12month-old infants and reported that they interpret actions
performed by a mechanical claw as goal directed, but the
younger age group was successful only after observing an
experimenter demonstrate the operation of the claws. In this
case, observational learning was sufficient to change
infants’ understanding of whether or not the claws acted in a
goal-directed fashion.
Moreover, Daum, Prinz, and
Ascherleben (2009) report evidence that appears to directly
challenge the findings of Sommerville et al. (2008). – The
ability of infants to perform a hierarchically organized
action was not predictive of their understanding of someone
else performing the same action. These inconsistencies
between studies are quite likely attributable to differences in
the cognitive demands of the task (cf. Daum et al., 2009).

1436

Based on all of the relevant evidence, the most
parsimonious conclusion is that there is a bidirectional
relation between the perception and production of actions
(e.g., Hauf, 2008).
This proposal emerged originally with James’s (1890)
ideomotor theory and was elaborated more recently in
Prinz’s (1997) common coding theory. According to this
theory, the perception and production of actions share
common representational resources, and thus one process
facilitates or interferes with the other when they occur close
together in time (Hommel, Mussler, Aschersleben, & Prinz,
2001). The discovery of mirror neurons in nonhuman
primates and homologous findings in humans showing that
cortical areas active during action observation overlap with
those that are active during execution of the same class of
actions (see Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004 for a review)
offers further support for this theory. Behavioral studies
reveal that action observation facilitates the execution of
similar actions as well as the prediction of the effects or
outcomes of those actions (Bertenthal & Longo, 2008). A
number of authors theorize that a major function of the
‘mirror neuron system’ is to facilitate both imitation and
action understanding (see Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004).
This facilitation is a product of simulating or ‘covertly
imitating’ the observed actions in the motor cortex.
Although there is considerable electrophysiological,
neuroimaging, and behavioral evidence showing that action
observation activates matching motor representations in
adults (see Heyes, in press for a review), the status of an
observation-execution matching system in infants is much
less clear. Some preliminary support for a matching system
in infants is provided by evidence for mu rhythm
desynchronization of infants’ EEG responding to simple
goal-directed actions but not to other movements (e.g.,
Lepage & Theoret, 2007). This desynchronization also
occurs when subjects perform an action, which is why this
response is considered evidence for an observationexecution matching system.
In one of the few behavioral studies relevant to this
question, Longo and Bertenthal (2006) tested whether 9month-old infants would show evidence of covert imitation
following action observation. Recent accounts of the
Piagetian A-not-B error emphasize the role of repeated
reaching to the A location in causing perseverative reaching
on the B trial. If infants simulate observed actions by
activating corresponding motor representations, then they
should show the perseverative search error not only
following their active searching on the A trials, but also
following the observation of someone else searching for the
hidden toy on the A trials. In essence, we predicted that
overt searching on the A trials is not necessary as long as
the motor representation associated with this response is
stimulated sufficiently to result in covert imitation of the
observed search response.
Infants were tested in one of two conditions: (1) they
recovered a toy hidden at location A, or (2) they observed
an experimenter recover the toy. After three or six trials, the

toy was hidden at location B, and infants in both conditions
perseverated in reaching to A, demonstrating that active
search by the infant is not necessary for the A-not-B error.
Interestingly, contralateral reaching (i.e., a reach that crosses
the midline of the body) is not as common as ipsilateral
reaching (i.e., a reach on the same side of the body as the
object) in 9-month-old infants (Bruner, 1969) suggesting
that the corresponding motor representation is not as well
developed. Consistent with this hypothesis, infants showed
an ipsilateral bias when reaching, and only showed a
systematic search error after observing ipsilateral, but not
contralateral, reaching by the experimenter.
Taken together, the results from these experiments
revealed that infants demonstrated (1) covert imitation by
mapping or mirroring the representation of the perceived
action to their motor system (2) if, and only if, the perceived
action overlapped with a sufficiently developed motor
representation. This latter finding was especially significant
because it ruled out the possibility that search errors were
simply a function of passively observing infants directing
their attention primarily to the A location on the A trials,
which subsequently biased them to attend to the same
location on the B trial. Infants who observed either
ipsilateral or contralateral searches by the experimenter
would have still directed the same amount of attention to the
A location on the A trials. Nevertheless, only the infants
who observed the experimenter search with his ipsilateral
hand showed the A-not-B search error.
The current research was designed to further explore
the prerequisite conditions for stimulating covert imitation.
Actions are coded at multiple, hierarchically nested levels of
representation, ranging from activation of specific muscles
to direction of movement to goal completion (Jeannerod,
1997). Both infants and adults are able to imitate actions at
either the level of their movements or goals. Recent
research suggests that observers are more likely to represent
the goals than the movements of perceived actions, but this
bias can be shifted by directing the observer’s attention to
the movements through various priming techniques (Longo,
Kosobud, & Bertenthal, 2008). In the current research, we
conducted two new experiments in which we primed
infants’ motor representations prior to testing them in the Anot-B search paradigm. The priming consisted of isolating
the specific search action that infants would observe during
testing and repeatedly demonstrating this action during a
prior familiarization period. We hypothesized that infants
would be more likely to stimulate their own motor
representation of reaching for the hidden object if their
attention was focused on the specific movements performed
by the agent searching for the object.

Experiment 1: Testing Infants with
Mechanical Claws
The first series of three experiments was conducted
using the same procedure used by Longo and Bertenthal
(2006), except that a pair of mechanical claws hid and
retrieved the toy. The operator of the claws was completely

1437

hhidden behind a screen in Exp
periment 1a an
nd only his han
nds
w
were visible in
n Experiments 1b and 1c. In
n Experiments 1b
aand 1c, infants were briefly familiarized
f
with
w the claws for
f
tw
wo minutes beefore the testin
ng was conduccted (see below
w).
T
Thirty 9-month
h-old infants were
w
tested in each
e
of the thrree
eexperiments.
Although these
t
mechaniccal claws simu
ulated the actio
ons
oof the experim
menter’s hands, it was questtionable wheth
her
innfants would covertly imittate the action
ns of the claw
ws
bbecause it is sometimes claaimed that thee stimulation of
m
motor represen
ntations is limited to the observation of
bbiological motiions. In spite of this assertio
on, recent studies
testing action perception
p
with
h non-biologiccal motions oftten
rreport activatio
on of motor rep
presentations, albeit to a lessser
eextent than with
h biological mo
otions (Heyes, in press).

These oobservers alsoo coded infant’s looking to bboth the Aand B--locations throoughout the exxperiment to eensure that
search performance could not bbe explained by visual
attentioon alone. The results revealeed that visual aattention to
the A and B hidiing locations did not difffer across
experim
ments even though search performaance did.
Accorddingly, visual aattention was not sufficient to explain
the obsserved search pperformance aand will not bee discussed
further..

A
Apparatus an
nd Procedure
During thee experiment infants were seated on th
heir
ccaregiver’s lap and faced a taable supporting
g a cardboard box
b
ccontaining on
ne or two covered hiding
g wells.
The
T
eexperimenter was
w positioned on the other side of the tab
ble
bbut screened fro
om the infant. Two claws were visible belo
ow
a curtain suspeended above th
he cardboard box.
b
The claw
ws
w
were controlled
d by the experiimenter who reemained invisib
ble
thhroughout thee experiment (see
(
Figure 1)). Four trainiing
trrials with a cen
ntral hiding weell were administered followiing
thhe procedures of Longo and
d Bertenthal (2
2006) except th
hat
oonly the clawss were visible to the infantss. After trainiing
w
was completed
d, a new hidin
ng apparatus consisting of tw
wo
ccovered wells located to the left and rightt of midline was
w
pplaced on the table in fron
nt of the infan
nts. They weere
ppresented with six identical trrials in which a toy was hidd
den
inn the same location each timee.
On each triial, the experim
menter extendeed the claws fro
om
bbehind the currtain, grasped the toy locatted between the
t
w
wells, rattled itt, placed it in the
t A well and
d covered it with
w
thhe lid, retracted the clawss, waited threee-seconds, th
hen
rretrieved the to
oy and placed it between thee wells. After the
t
ssix A-trials werre completed, the experimen
nter hid the toy
y in
thhe B location, retracted the claws
c
and waiteed three-second
ds,
thhen slid the ap
pparatus forwarrd using the cllaws and allow
wed
thhe infant to seearch. The exp
perimenter con
nsistently grasp
ped
thhe toy with thee claw operated
d by his right hand
h
and grasp
ped
thhe lid with thee claw operated
d by his left hand; the positiion
oof the A hiding
g location was counterbalanceed across infan
nts.
T
The sessions were
w videotaped
d and coded offfline.

D
Dependent Measures
M
The primaary measure of interest was whether infan
nts
ssearched incorrrectly in the A location or correctly in thee B
loocation on thee final trial wheen the toy wass hidden in thee B
loocation. In orrder to ensure that infants were not biased to
ssearch in the A or B locatio
on because off any attempts to
rreach for the toy on A-triaals, two obseervers coded the
t
nnumber of reacches executed by
b infants on the
t A trials fro
om
thhe videotapess of the sessiions (the averrage number of
rreaches per inffant was well below
b
one acro
oss experimentts).

Figure 1: Photo of an infant obsserving the claaws during
B search error.
testing of the A-not-B

Resultts and Discusssion
In Experiment 11a, only 12 oof the 30 infaants (40%)
searcheed incorrectly on the B triial (see Figurre 2). By
contrasst, Longo andd Bertenthal (2006) reportted that a
significcant majority of infants (70%) comm
mitted the
perseveerative search error after obbserving an exxperimenter
manuallly hide and rettrieve an objecct. Although thhis result is
consisteent with an oobservation-exeecution matchiing system
being llimited to biollogical motions, it is also poossible that
infants did not sufficciently encode the actions off the claws
becausee they were unnfamiliar. As a consequence,, the claws,
themseelves, attractedd either greater attention because they
were noovel or less atttention becausse they createdd anxiety in
some in
infants (Hofer et al., 2005). In order to check this
possibiility, Experimeent 1b began w
with a brief fam
miliarization
phase iin which the eexperimenter pplayed on the floor with
the claaws and other toys for two minutes in frront of the
infants.. This familiaarization period ensured thatt the claws
would be somewhatt more familiiar by the tim
me of the
ment, but the rresults were still no differennt than the
experim
The numberr of infants searching
first eexperiment.
incorreectly on the B trial was onlly 14 of 30 (446.7%; see
Figure 2).
In Experiment 11c, infants weere familiarizedd with the
operatioon of the m
mechanical claw
ws to ensure that they
perceivved them as a m
means to an ennd (i.e., an insstrument or
device to retrieve oother objects) rather than merely as
anotherr object. Durinng a two minuute familiarizatiion period,
the expperimenter dem
monstrated how
w the claws ooperated by

1438

rrolling toys aw
way and then retrieving
r
them
m with the claw
ws.
U
Unlike the resu
ults from the first
fi two experiiments, 20 of the
t
330 infants (66.7
7%) searched incorrectly
i
in the
t A-location on
thhe B trial (see Figure 2). Th
his result is sign
nificantly greaater
thhan chance (p = .05), and thu
us suggests thaat infants coverrtly
im
mitated the acctions of the claws
c
on the A trials. If the
t
rresults of this experiment
e
aree compared to the results fro
om
E
Experiment 1a, the differencce is statistically significant, χ2
((1, 60) = 4.29, p = .04; a com
mparison betw
ween these resu
ults
aand those of Ex
xperiment 1b were
w not signifficant but show
wed
a trend in the saame direction, χ2 (1, 60) = 2.4
44, p = .11.

F
Figure 2. Number
N
of inffants searching correctly and
a
inncorrectly in each of the threee experiments..
Taken togeether, the results from these th
hree experimen
nts
rreveal that in
nfants’ motor representation
ns of anotheer’s
aactions can be primed by ob
bservational leearning. Afterr a
bbrief familiarizzation with the function of th
he claws, infan
nts’
w
were more likeely to activate a motor repreesentation of the
t
cclaws’ actions. If infants on
nly visually enccoded the searrch
bbehaviors of th
he claws during
g the A trials, then
t
there wou
uld
bbe no reason for
f them to commit the errror, because th
his
rresponse is sp
pecifically attrributable to reepeated overt or
ccovert reachin
ng to the sam
me location. Although oth
her
innterpretations for incorrect search
s
behavio
or emphasize the
t
hhistory of the infant’s atten
ntion to the A location or the
t
ppedagogical staance introduceed during the testing
t
(Csibra &
G
Gergely, 2009)), these theoriies cannot adequately explaain
w
why there is a search error following passsive observatio
on.
T
Thus, the mosst likely explaanation for this error is thatt a
m
motor representation is stiimulated duriing the passiive
oobservation of the
t claws searcching for the to
oy.
Interesting
gly, infants’ mapping
m
the observed searrch
is
bbehavior by the claws to their motor representation
r
ssomewhat at odds with previous neu
uroimaging and
a
bbehavioral stu
udies showing
g greater ressponsiveness to
bbiological than
n non-biologiccal movements (Bertenthal &
L
Longo, 2008). It is importan
nt to note, how
wever, that theese
ffindings repressent relative and not absolute differences.
M
Most of the prrevious studiess report that th
he observation of
nnon-biological movements do
oes activate th
he motor systeem,
bbut just not as
a much as the
t
observatio
on of biologiccal
m
movements. In
n other words, the differencee in activation of
thhe motor sysstem as a fun
nction of biollogical vs. no
on-

biologiical movementts is not all-or--none. Moreovver, Ferrari,
Rozzi, and Fogassi (2005) reportt the emergennce of tool
respondding mirror neeurons in nonhhuman primates after two
monthss of observatioonal experiencee with tools (ee.g., a stick
or plieers). These findings sugggest that the matching
mechannism can reachh a considerabble degree of abstraction
with ssufficient expperience.
Itt is hypothesized that
contexttual and kineematic similariities between the goaldirectedd actions of thhe hand and thhe tool contribbute to the
developpment of thesse neurons thhrough the processes of
associaative learning aand generalizattion.
Al so, as discusssed previouslly, Hofer et al. (2005)
reporteed that 12-monnth-old infants interpreted thhe behavior
of mecchanical claw
ws as goal dirrected and 9--month-old
infants interpreted these claws similarly foollowing a
demonsstration of thheir operationn. This latter finding
suggestts that 9-monnth-old infantss may have been in a
transitioonal state withh regard to thee mapping of tthe actions
of the cclaws to their oown motor reprresentations. IIt also begs
the quuestion as to whether the main reasonn that the
familiaarization phasee primed infannts’ responsess to the A
locationn was because the claws werre initially unfaamiliar and
perceivved as mere objjects rather thaan as effectorss that could
serve aas means to an end. Once inffants perceivedd the claws
as effecctors and focussed on their speecific movemeents as well
as goalls, they were m
more likely too map these acctions to a
(meanss-ends) motorr representatioon consistingg of both
movem
ments and goalss that increasedd in strength oover the six
A trialss.

Experimen
nt 2: Testin
ng infants wiith
Conttralateral R
Reaching
In order to asssess whether priming infannts’ motor
represeentations was specific to leaarning the funnction (i.e.,
the meeans-ends relaations) of thee claws durinng a brief
familiaarization, we conducted a second series of
ments
to
infantss’ motor
experim
assess
wheether
represeentations of coontralateral reaaches could bee strengthened w
with a familiarrization period.. Recall that Longo and
Bertentthal (2006) repported that thhe search errorr on the B
trial waas observed onnly after the expperimenter seaarched with
an ipsiilateral reach on the A trrials because the motor
represeentation for a ccontralateral reeach was not ssufficiently
developped by 9 monnths of age. Inn Experiment 2a, infants
observeed the experrimenter reachh exclusively with his
contralaateral hand dduring a twoo minute fam
miliarization
period. In Experimeent 2b, infants observed onlyy ipsilateral
reachinng during the fa
familiarization period. If onee or both of
these ffamiliarization experiences iincreased the ssalience of
the conntralateral hannd reaching, w
we hypothesizeed that the
repeateed observation of the experim
menter searchinng on the A
trials w
would result inn a stronger m
motor represenntation and
bias inffants to search incorrectly onn the B trial.

Proced
dure
Exxperiments 2a and 2b each iincluded 30 9--month-old
infants.. The testing of the A-not--B search erroor followed

1439

thhe same proceedure used in Experiment 1, except that the
t
eexperimenter was
w visible an
nd always hid
d the object and
a
ssearched for it with his contrralateral hand. The two minu
ute
ffamiliarization period in Ex
xperiment 2a was
w designed to
inncrease the salience
s
of contralateral
c
reaching
r
by the
t
eexperimenter. Infants were seated
s
on the floor
f
opposite the
t
eexperimenter who repeated
dly reached only with his
h
ccontralateral haand for toys located in one of two piles to his
h
left or right. In
I Experimentt 2b, infants were
w
familiarizzed
w
with the experrimenter reach
hing repeatedly with only his
h
ippsilateral hand
d. This maniipulation was designed to test
w
whether primin
ng the motor reepresentation of
o a contralateeral
rreach was speecific to infantts observing the
t experimen
nter
rreach consisten
ntly with his contralateral
c
haand or was mo
ore
ggenerally a fun
nction of infan
nts observing the
t experimen
nter
rreach repeatedlly in a goal-directed fashion.

R
Results and Discussion
D
Longo and
d Bertenthal (2
2006) reported
d previously th
hat
aapproximately 50% of 9-month-old infants searrch
inncorrectly afteer observing an
n experimenterr search with his
h
ccontralateral haand on the A trrials. By contrrast, 20 of the 30
innfants (66.7%)) searched inco
orrectly in the A-location
A
on the
t
B trial in Exp
periment 2a (ssee Figure 3).. This result is
ssignificantly grreater than chance (p < .05, Binomial tesst),
aand suggests th
hat infants not only visually encoded that the
t
eexperimenter reached with his
h contralateraal hand, but th
hey
aalso covertly imitated this behavior
b
by acctivating a mottor
rrepresentation.
In Experim
ment 2b, the results revealled that infan
nts’
ssearch perform
mance was no different
d
than chance
c
(16 of 30
innfants searcheed incorrectly; see Figure 3)). Thus, there is
ccurrently no ev
vidence to sugg
gest that simply
y priming infan
nts
w
with repeated reaching
r
is suffficient to specifically stimulaate
a motor represeentation of a co
ontralateral reaach.

F
Figure 3. Number
N
of inffants searching correctly and
a
inncorrectly in each of the two experiments.

Generall Discussion
n
The resultss from these ex
xperiments con
nverge to suggest
thhat infants’ brief
b
experiencces observing actions will be
rrepresented no
ot only by their visual systeem, but by th
heir

motor ssystem as welll. These repreesentations beccome more
accessib
ible when preeceded by thee observation of a very
salient demonstrationn of the action,, which appearrs to prime
the mootor representaation. Little iss currently knnown about
the tim
me course of thiis priming or how it contributtes to more
permannent learning, bbut it is a subjject of ongoingg research.
Likewiise, the necesssary similarityy between thee observed
action and its mootor representtation remains unclear,
althouggh the currentt research sugggests that thee matching
processs is modulated by the task.
Thhe results from Experiment 1 suggest that thhe mapping
processs between ann action perception and its motor
represeentation is more abstrract than sometimes
acknow
wledged by theeorists advocaating for a mirrror neuron
system. We conjectuure that infantss learned very quickly to
generallize goal-direccted reaching aactions to the claws, and
thus maapped the observed actions of the claws too the same
correspponding motoor representaations associaated with
reachinng. As previoously mentioneed, this generaalization is
also hyypothesized too occur in thhe development of tool
respondding mirror neeurons in maccaques. One significant
differennce between thhe two species is that this genneralization
requirees two monthss of experiencce in macaquees while it
occurs after only tw
wo minutes oof experience in human
infants.. This differrence suggestss that human infants are
much bbetter preparedd for this experrience either bbecause the
mappinng mechanism
m between thee visual descrription and
motor rrepresentation of the action is already moore abstract
or a diffferent mechannism is availablle in humans.
Unnlike the resullts from Experriment 1 sugggesting that
the m
matching mechhanism generralized acrosss different
movem
ments, Experim
ment 2 suggestts a mapping m
mechanism
that is less abstract aand tuned to sppecific movem
ments. One
hypotheesis for this ddifference is tthat infants m
mapped the
observeed reaching byy the experimeenter to a speccific motor
represeentation describbing either a ccontralateral orr ipsilateral
reach. The representtation for the ccontralateral reeach is less
developped and thus ddoes not elicit ssufficient coverrt imitation
unless it is primed during the ppreceding fam
miliarization
period.
Onne caveat conccerning the prreceding interppretation is
that peerseverative reaaching on the B trial is only a proxy for
covert imitation, butt this measuree is at best aan indirect
assessm
ment of the m
motor representtation. More cconvincing
evidencce for this hhypothesis must await a m
more direct
assessm
ment of the chaange in the mootor representaation. One
possibiility would bee to measure m
mu desynchronnization in
the EEG
G response of infants during the administraation of the
A-not-B
B error task.
Altthough it is prremature to reaach any firm cconclusions
regardiing the meechanisms reesponsible foor greater
perseveeration follow
wing the fam
miliarization pperiod, the
evidencce from the tw
wo experiments is consistennt with the
hypotheesis that the brief demonstrations prior to testing
focusedd infants’ attenntion on the speecific movemeents as well
as goalls of the agentts in these expperiments. Thiis focus on
the meeans-ends rellations no dooubt benefits from the

1440

experimenter’s repertoire of social cues directing the infant
to attend to the relevant goal-directed action (Corkum &
Moore, 1995). We conjecture that the demonstrations were
effective specifically because the experimenter assumed a
pedagogical stance that exploited ostensive communicative
cues, such as direct eye contact, infant-directed speech, and
contingent reactivity to the infant. According to Csibra &
Gergely (2009), natural pedagogy represents a special type
of social learning that facilitates learning by directing the
observer’s attention to the important action elements. In the
current experiments, the demonstrations during the
familiarization phase were designed to specifically focus
attention on the repeatable goal-directed actions, and were
apparently successful in that infants were more likely to
search incorrectly on the B trial following the demonstration
of the relevant action.
Although we hypothesize that these demonstrations
were successful because they embodied the key features of
natural pedagogy, the relevance of this form of learning
remains an empirical question that must also await further
testing. Conceivably, a demonstration without the ostensive
communicative cues or perhaps even without a social agent
would suffice for priming infants to activate their motor
representations for reaching. Regardless of the specific
process responsible for priming infants’ motor representations, it is important to consider that the focusing of infants’
attention on the specific movements of an action modulates
how the action is represented by the motor system.

References
Bertenthal, B.I., & Hofsten, C. von (1998). Development of
eye, head, and trunk control as prerequisites for
reaching. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 22,
515-526.
Bertenthal, B. I., & Longo, M. R. (2008). Motor knowledge
and action understanding: A developmental perspective.
In R. Klatzky, M. Behrmann, & B. MacWhinney
(Eds.), Embodiment, ego-space, and action: 34th
Carnegie symposium on cognition (pp. 323-368).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brune, C. W., & Woodward, A. L. (2007). Social cognition
and social responsiveness in 10-month-old infants.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 8, 133-158.
Bruner, J. S. (1969). Eye, hand, and mind. In D. Elkind & J.
H. Flavell (Eds.), Studies in cognitive development:
Essays in honor of Jean Piaget (pp. 223-235). Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Clearfield, M. W., Dineva, E., Smith, L. B., Diedrich, F. J.,
& Thelen, E. (2009). Cue salience and infant
perseverative reaching: Tests of the dynamic field
theory. Developmental Science, 12, 26-40.
Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint
visual attention in infants. In C. Moore & P.J. Dunham
(Eds.), Joint attention:
its origins and role in
development (pp. 61-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 148-153.

Csibra, G., Gergely, G., Bíró, S., Koós, O., & Brockbank,
M. (1999). Goal attribution without agency cues: The
perception of ‘pure reason’ in infancy. Cognition, 72,
237-267.
Daum, M. M., & Prinz, W. (2009). Means-end behavior in
young infants: The interplay of action perception and
action production. Infancy, 14, 613-640.
Hauf, P. (2007). Infants’ perception and production of
intentional actions. In C. von Hofsten & K. Rosander
(Eds.), Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 164, 285-301.
Heyes, C. (in press). Automatic imitation. Psychol. Bulletin.
Hofer, T., Hauf, P., & Aschersleben, G. (2005). Infant’s
perception of goal-directed actions performed by a
mechanical device. Infant Behavior and Development,
28, 466-480.
Hommel, B., Mussler, J., Aschersleben, G. & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding: a framework for
perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-937.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychololgy, vol 2.
New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Lepage, J-F. & Théoret, H. (2007). The mirror neuron
system: Grasping others’ actions from birth?
Developmental Science, 10, 513-529.
Longo, M. R. & Bertenthal, B. I. (2006). Common coding
of observation and execution of action in 9-month-old
infants. Infancy, 10, 43-59.
Longo, M. R., Kosobud, A., & Bertenthal, B. I. (2008).
Automatic imitation of biomechanically impossible
actions: Effects of priming movements vs. goals.
Journal of Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34, 489-501.
Needham, A., Barret, T., & Peterman, K. (2002). A pickme-up for infants’ exploratory skills. Infant Behavior
and Development, 25, 279-295.
Prinz, W. (1997). Perception and action planning. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 9, 129-154.
Rakison, D. H., & Woodward, A. L. (2008). New
perspectives on the effects of action on perceptual and
cognitive development. Developmental Psychology, 44,
1209-1213.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169-192.
Sommerville, J. A., Hildebrand, E. A., & Crane, C. C.
(2008). Experience matters: The impact of doing versus
watching on infants’ subsequent perception of tool-use
events. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1249-1256.
Sommerville, J. A., & Woodward, A. L. (2005). Pulling out
the intentional structure of action: The relation between
action processing and action production in infancy.
Cognition, 95, 1-30.
Sommerville, J. A., Woodward, A. L., & Needham, A.
(2005). Action experience alters 3-month-old infants’
perception of others’ actions. Cognition, 96, B1-B11.
Woodward, A. L. (2009). Infants’ grasp of others’
intentions. Current Direction in Psychological Science,
18, 53-57.

1441

