UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Canonical views of scenes depend on the shape of the space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6358m5j2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ehinger, Krista A.
Oliva, Aude

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Canonical views of scenes depend on the shape of the space
Krista A. Ehinger (kehinger@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Aude Oliva (oliva@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract
When recognizing or depicting objects, people show a
preference for particular “canonical” views. Are there
similar preferences for particular views of scenes? We
investigated this question using panoramic images, which
show a 360-degree view of a location. Observers used an
interactive viewer to explore the scene and select the best
view. We found that agreement between observers on the
“best” view of each scene was generally high. We attempted
to predict the selected views using a model based on the
shape of the space around the camera location and on the
navigational constraints of the scene. The model
performance suggests that observers select views which
capture as much of the surrounding space as possible, but do
not consider navigational constraints when selecting views.
These results seem analogous to findings with objects,
which suggest that canonical views maximize the visible
surfaces of an object, but are not necessarily functional
views.
Keywords: canonical view; scene perception; panoramic
scenes.

Introduction
Although people can recognize familiar objects in any
orientation, there seem to be preferred or standard views for
recognizing and depicting objects. These preferred views,
called “canonical” views, are the views that observers select
as best when they are shown various views of an object, and
these are the views that people usually produce when they
are asked to photograph or form a mental image an object
(Palmer, Rosch, & Chase, 1981).
In general, the canonical view of an object is a view
which maximizes the amount of visible object surface. The
canonical view varies across objects and seems to depend
largely on the shape of the object. For most threedimensional objects (e.g., a shoe or an airplane), observers
prefer a three-quarters view which shows three sides of the
object (such as the front, top, and side). However, straighton views may be preferred for flatter objects like forks,
clocks, and saws, presumably because the front of the object
contains the most surface area and conveys the most
information about object identity (Verfaillie & Boutsen,
1995). In addition, observers avoid views in which an object
is partly occluded by its parts, and they avoid accidental

views which make parts of the object difficult to see (Blanz,
Tarr, & Bülthoff, 1999).
Canonical views of objects may also reflect the ways
people interact with objects. People show some preferences
for elevated views of smaller objects, but ground-level
views of larger objects (Verfaillie & Boutsen, 1995). The
ground-level views show less of the object (because they
omit the top plane), but seem to be more canonical for large
objects such as trucks or trains because these objects are
rarely seen from above. However, these sorts of preferences
may be due to greater familiarity with certain views, not
functional constraints per se. Observers do not consistently
select views in which an object is oriented for grasping
(e.g., a teapot with the handle towards the viewer), and
when subjects do choose these views, they don’t match the
handle’s left/right orientation to their dominant hand (Blanz,
Tarr, & Bülthoff, 1999).
Scenes and places, like objects, are three-dimensional
entities that are experienced and recognized from a variety
of angles. Therefore, it seems reasonable to expect that
certain views of a scene are more informative and would be
preferred over others. However, this has not been well
studied. Studies using artificial scenes (a collection of
objects on a surface) have shown that scene learning is
viewpoint dependent, but recognition is fastest not just for
learned views, but also for standardized or interpolated
versions of the learned views (Diwadkar & McNamara,
1997; Waller, 2006; Waller, et al., 2009). For example, after
learning an off-center view of a scene, viewers recognize
the centered view of the scene about as quickly as the
learned view.
There is also some evidence that there are “best” views of
real-world places. Studies of large photo databases have
shown that different photographers tend to select the same
views when taking photos in the same location, suggesting
that there is good agreement on the “best” views of these
scenes (Simon, Snavely, and Seitz, 2007). Clustering
analyses of the photographs can produce a set of
representative views which are highly characteristic and
recognizable, but it is not clear that these are the “canonical”
views in the sense of Palmer, Rosch, and Chase (1981). For
example, the most commonly photographed view in a
particular cathedral could be a close-up view of a famous
statue in the cathedral – but this view would probably not be
considered the “best” view of the cathedral, nor would it be

2114

the view people produced if they were told to imagine the
cathedral.
Determining the canonical view of a scene is more
complicated than finding the canonical view of an object –
in addition to rotating the view at a particular location (by
turning the head), an observer can walk around within the
space, obtaining different views from different locations.
The current study looks at only the first part of the problem:
what is the canonical view of a scene from a fixed location
within that scene? To investigate this question, we use 360degree panoramic images such as the one shown in Figure
1. These images are taken with a lens attached to a bellshaped mirror, which captures all of the views available
from a particular location.

Method

Figure 1: An example of a panoramic image used in the
experiment. The smaller window shows a portion of the
scene as it appeared in the interactive viewer during the
experiment (the view shown here is the average “best view”
chosen by participants).

Materials
The stimuli were 624 panoramic images taken in various
indoor and outdoor locations (classroom, lobby, chapel,
parking lot, garden, athletic field, etc.). Each image was
3200 by 960 pixels, corresponding to 360° horizontal visual
angle and about 110° degrees vertical visual angle.

Participants
195 people participated in the experiment through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, an online service where
workers are paid to complete short computational tasks
(HITs) for small amounts of money. All of the workers in
this task were located in the United States and had a good
track record with the Mechanical Turk service (at least 100
HITs completed with an acceptance rate of 95% or better).
Workers were paid $0.01 per trial.

Design
Each image was seen by 10 different workers. On average, a
single worker performed 32 trials (median 9 trials).

Procedure
On each trial, participants saw one panoramic image in an
interactive viewing window (this window was 550 by 400
pixels, corresponding to about 60° by 45° visual angle).
Observers could change the view shown in the window by
clicking and dragging the image with the mouse; this gave
the effect of turning and looking around in the scene. The
initial view of the scene was chosen randomly at the start of
each trial.
There were two tasks on each trial: first, type a name for
the location shown in the panoramic image (e.g. “kitchen”);
and second, manipulate the viewer window to get the best
possible view of the location. Specifically, participants were
told to imagine that they were photographers trying to take
the best possible snapshot of the scene.

Model
When choosing which is the “best” view of a scene, people
may attempt to maximize the amount of space visible within
the view, analogous to choosing a view of an object which
shows as much of the object’s surface as possible. In
addition, people may consider the functional constraints of
the scene, and choose views which reflect how they would
move in the space shown. These navigational views may be
preferred because they are functional or because they are
familiar: they are the types of views which people
experience most often as they move through the
environment.
To characterize the shape of the space around the camera
in the panoramic scene, we marked the edges of the ground
plane in each image (see Figure 2a). These edges were
defined by the boundaries of the scene (walls, fences, sides
of buildings) and ignored small obstructions like furniture,
cars, and trees. By measuring the height of this edge in each
image, were able to estimate the shape of the visible space
around the camera, as shown in Figure 2b. (This field of
visible space around a camera location is called the “isovist”
in architectural research (Benedikt, 1979).) This allowed us
to calculate the distance to the wall in any direction around
the camera (“visible depth”), the total volume of space
around the camera location, and, for any particular camera
view, what percentage of the total space was captured
within that view. This percentage, calculated for the full 360
degrees of possible views around the camera, is the “volume
map” shown in Figure 2c.
To characterize the navigational affordances of the scene,
we marked the walking paths in each image using an online
task on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. Workers participating
in this task saw an unwrapped panoramic image (as in
Figure 1) and were asked place arrows on each of the paths,
which included sidewalks, hallways, staircases, and
navigable spaces between furniture or other obstacles. Since
some images did not contain clearly defined walking paths
(for example, a large, open field may not contain any

2115

Figure 2: (a) A panoramic image with the ground line outlined in white and arrows marking the navigational
paths (black arrowheads represent “best” views of this scene chosen by participants). (b) An overhead view
of the same location (the grey region represents the portion of the space captured within a single camera
view). (c) The volume and navigational maps for this scene.
marked paths – it is possible to walk in any direction),
workers were given the option to mark a checkbox (“this is
a large, open space”) in addition to marking any paths that
they did see in the image. Along with instructions, workers
were given several examples of correctly- and incorrectlymarked images, followed by a test in which they were
required to correctly mark a set of example images. Three
different workers marked the paths in each image; each
received $0.03 per image. None of the workers in this pathmarking task had participated in the experiment.
A Gaussian distribution was centered on each of the
marker locations in the image and the responses from the
three workers were summed to create the “navigational
map” shown in Figure 2c. This map gives an estimate of the
navigability of all possible views around the camera
location.

Results
Experiment results
Trials were excluded if the worker did not name the location
shown in the image (1% of trials) or did not use the viewer
to explore the scene and simply submitted the initial view as
the best view (3% of trials). 251 out of 6240 trials were
excluded under these criteria.
In general, agreement on the “best view” of a scene was
high: the average circular standard error of the angles
selected by observers was 12.7 degrees. Significance was
measured using Rayleigh’s test of nonuniformity, which
tests the significance of a mean angle in a circular
distribution by comparing it to the mean angle that would be
expected from a distribution of random angles. This test
returned p < .01 for 389 scenes (62% of the image set), and
p < .05 for 466 scenes (75% of the image set)). This may be
a conservative estimate of agreement, since Rayleigh’s test

does not distinguish between random distributions of views
and some types of multimodal distributions (such as views
clustered around two angles 180 degrees apart). Examples
of scenes with high, moderate, and low agreement are
shown in Figure 3.
Agreement (measured as the standard error in the views
selected by participants) was correlated with some aspects
of the scene layout. Specifically, standard error in views was
correlated with the overall volume of space around the
camera location, as calculated from the volume map (r =
0.30). Similarly, standard error in views was correlated with
the percent of subjects who marked the scene as a “large,
open space” during the path-marking task (r = 0.22). These
correlations indicate that agreement on the “best” view was
higher in small spaces, and lower in spaces that were large
and open. Agreement was also related to the range of
distances visible from the camera location. The standard
error in views was negatively correlated with the standard
deviation of visible depths (r = -0.40). In other words,
agreement on the “best” view was higher in scenes that
showed a variety of closer and farther views than in scenes
where all views were about equally distant.
Agreement was significantly higher in indoor than in
outdoor scenes (t(246.8) = 5.81, p < .001). This is likely due
to differences in the spatial envelope of these spaces (Oliva
& Torralba, 2001): outdoor scenes tend to be much larger
and more open than indoor scenes, and indoor scenes are
more likely to have complex shapes offering a range of
closer and farther views.
There was also a relationship between view agreement
and name agreement from the naming portion of the task.
The standard error of the angles chosen by observers was
negatively correlated with the percent of people giving the
dominant name for the scene (r = -0.44). This means that
when observers agreed on the identity of the scene, they also

2116

Figure 3: Example scenes; black arrowheads represent views chosen by participants. The top row are the three scenes with highest agreement, followed by scenes
at the 75th, 50th, and 25th percentile of agreement. The bottom row shows the three scenes with lowest agreement.

2117

tended to agree on the “best” view of the scene, but when
observers disagreed on a scene’s identity, they were also
likely to choose different “best” views of the scene.

Model performance
One image was dropped from the modeling because it was a
very small space with no visible floor, so its volume map
was undefined Volume and navigation maps were calculated
for the remaining 623 images as described in the previous
section. We then tested how well each of these maps could
predict the “best” views selected by observers.
Model performance was assessed using ROC curves
(Figure 4). ROC curves show the detection rate of a model
relative to its false alarm rate. In this case, the ROC curves
show the proportion of human observers’ “best” views
which can be predicted by each map when it is threshold at
a range of values. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) can
be used as a measure of a model’s overall performance. A
model performing at chance produces an ROC curve that is
a diagonal line with an AUC of 0.5. AUC values closer to 1
indicate better model performance.
The volume model gives the best prediction of the views
selected by observers (AUC = 0.75), but the navigational
model also performs above chance (AUC = 0.62). The
performance of the navigational model does not change
when very open scenes (which may not have clear paths) are
excluded from the analysis. On 426 “closed” scenes (scenes
that were never marked as “open space” during the parkmarking task), the navigational model’s AUC was 0.61; on
the remaining “open” scenes the AUC was 0.62. On the

other hand, the volume model does show better performance
in closed than in open scenes (AUC = 0.78 and 0.74,
respectively). Figure 5 shows examples of high and low
performance from the volume and navigational models.
We also tested a combined model, which attempted to
predict selected views using both a weighted sum of the
volume and navigational maps. However, this model
performed worse than the volume map alone, and gave
better performances as the weight of the navigational map
approached zero. This suggests that the navigational model
does not add any indpendent predictive power; it performs
above chance because it tends to select the same regions as
the volume map (in scenes, a view that shows a large
volume usually also affords navigation).

Conclusion
Just as people show clear preferences for certain views of
objects, there seem to be agreed-upon “best” views of
scenes. This is not surprising, given previous findings in
scene research, for example, the fact that people tend to use
similar viewpoints when photographing famous locations.
Overall, it seems that the way people choose a canonical
view of a scene may be very similar to the way they select
the canonical view of an object. Choosing the “best” view
of an object or a scene poses essentially the same problem:
how to compress as much 3D visual information as possible

Figure 5: Example of a scene in which both models
performed very well (top) and an example of a scene in
which both models performed poorly (bottom). Arrowheads
mark the “best” views chosen by observers.

Figure 4: ROC curves for the volume and navigational
models. The gray line represents chance performance
(chance AUC = 0.5).

2118

into a necessarily limited 2D view.
When selecting canonical views of objects, people seem
to be trying to maximize the amount of visible surface: they
select views which show at least two sides of the object, and
avoid occlusions and accidental views. Similar constraints
seem to apply in scenes. The canonical view from a
particular location is dependent on the shape of the space
around that location: people show preferences for views that
shows as much of the surrounding space as possible. It’s not
clear whether people choose these large-volume views
because they wish to capture the space itself, or because
they wish to capture the things that fill that space (objects,
textures, etc.). Further work will be required to distinguish
between these two possibilities.
There is also some evidence that the canonical view of an
object reflects the way people usually see the object, or the
way they interact with the object. However, our results
suggest that the canonical view of a scene is not based on
functional constraints. Although the canonical view of a
scene is often a navigationally-relevant view (a walkway, a
corridor), our modeling results suggest that these views are
selected because they show a large amount of the
surrounding space, not because they afford navigation.
It may be the case that the canonical view of a scene is
not the functional view. There is some evidence that people
do not have a specific functional view in mind when they
choose canonical views of objects (for example, Blanz, Tarr,
and Bülthoff (1999) showed that people do not prefer views
of objects oriented for grasping). On the other hand, people
may consider functional constraints other than navigation
when choosing a canonical view of a scene. Navigation is a
very general function of scenes; most scenes also afford
more specific functions (sitting in a theater, shopping in a
store, etc.). If canonical views of scenes do reflect
functional constraints, it seems quite likely that they would
reflect these more specific functions rather than a general
function like navigation. Further work will be needed to
quantify these specific functional constraints and determine
how they affect view selection in scenes.
It should also be noted that there are many other factors
that could affect choice of view in addition to the two
factors modeled here. As noted above, people may prefer
views of an environment which show a large number or
large variety of the objects within that environment, and this
may explain the preference for views which show a large
amount of the surrounding space. People may also prefer
views which show specific objects, such as ones which are
central to the function or identity of a place (such as cars in
a parking lot, or the stage in a theater). Aesthetics may also
play a role in the selection of a “best” view of a place:
people may be biased towards views which have high
symmetry or are otherwise aesthetically pleasing. Many of
these factors can be quantified and should be included in a
full model of view preference in scenes.
Identifying the canonical views of scenes may help in
understanding how scenes are represented in memory and
perceptual processes. The existence of canonical views of

objects has been used to argue for a viewpoint-dependent
theory of object recognition, in which objects are stored in
memory as a collection of typical or informative views, and
recognition involves matching incoming visual information
to these stored views (Edelman & Bülthoff, 1992; Cutzu &
Edelman, 1994). The existence of canonical views of scenes
could suggest a similar view-based representation for
memory and perception of scenes.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Ken M. Haggerty for his
work preparing stimuli for this project. K.A.E. is funded by
an NSF graduate research fellowship. This research was
partly funded by an NSF Career award (0546262), NSF
grants (0705677 and 1016862) and a NEI grant (EY02484)
to A.O.

References
Blanz, V., Tarr, M. J., & Bülthoff, H. H. (1999). What
object attributes determine canonical views? Perception,
28, 575-599.
Benedikt, M. L. (1979). To take hold of space: Isovists and
isovist fields. Environment and Planning B, 6, 47–65.
Cutzu F., & Edelman S. (1994). Canonical views in object
representation and recognition. Vision Research, 34,
3037-3056.
Diwadkar, V. A., & McNamara, T. P. (1997). Viewpoint
dependence in scene recognition. Psychological Science,
8, 302–307.
Edelman S., & Bülthoff, H. H. (1992). Orientation
dependence in the recognition of familiar and novel views
of three-dimensional objects. Vision Research, 32, 23852400.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the shape of the
scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope.
International Journal in Computer Vision, 42, 145-175.
Palmer, S., Rosch, E., Chase, P., (1981). Canonical
perspective and the perception of 40 objects. In Attention
and Performance IX, Ed. J. Long, A. Baddeley (Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum), pp. 135-151.
Simon, I., Snavely, N., Seitz, S. M. (2007). Scene
Summarization for Online Image Collections. In Proc. Of
the 11th International Conference on Computer Vision.
Verfaillie, K. & Boutsen, L. (1995). A corpus of 714 fullcolor images of depth-rotated objects. Perception &
Psychophysics, 57, 925-961.
Waller, D. (2006). Egocentric and nonegocentric coding in
memory for spatial layout: Evidence from scene
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 34, 491 - 504.
Waller, D., Friedman, A., Hodgson, E. & Greenauer, N.
(2009). Learning scenes from multiple views: Novel
views can be recognized more efficiently than learned
views. Memory & Cognition, 37, 90 - 99.

2119

