UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Category Learning From Alignable Examples: An Application to Structural Geology
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2hz841hm
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Jee, Benjamin D.
Desharnais, Chad
Staley, Joanna V.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

      Category Learning From Alignable Examples: An Application to
                                            Structural Geology
                                                Benjamin D. Jee
                                               College of the Holy Cross
                                                Chad Desharnais
                                               College of the Holy Cross
                                                Joanna V. Staley
                                               College of the Holy Cross
Abstract: Geological forces shape the earth’s crust. Normal faults, for example, form when extensional forces pull
blocks of rock apart along a plane, whereas reverse faults are formed by compressional forces. Geologists classify faults
to retrace the forces that have acted on an area; however, normal and reverse faults often look similar. In this study
we investigated whether viewing superficially similar (highly alignable) images of a normal and reverse fault would
help people learn to distinguish the two categories. Highly alignable examples highlight alignable differences—in this
case, spatial relations that distinguish normal from reverse faults (e.g., Gentner & Markman, 1994). Participants
were presented with two fault images—one normal, and one reverse—embedded in a text about faults. The images
were either high or low in alignability. Participants then completed a 22-item fault classification test. Consistent
with our predictions, participants who initially saw highly alignable images classified faults more accurately.
                                                           3498

