UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children’s Encoding and Solving of Mathematical Equations
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/29m610d3
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Crooks, Noelle M.
Aibali, Martha W.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

         Children’s Encoding and Solving of Mathematical Equations
                                                 Noelle M. Crooks
                                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
                                                Martha W. Alibali
                                          University of Wisconsin - Madison
Abstract: Elementary school children often fail to correctly solve equivalence problems (e.g., 3+4+5=3+ ). This
study investigated whether children’s difficulties are due, in part, to incorrectly encoding (internally representing) the
equivalence problems and tested whether improvements in encoding would lead to improvements in problem solving.
To address these issues, we developed a new measure of problem encoding that used a change detection paradigm,
and we also utilized more traditional reconstruction and recognition measures. Children completed measures of
encoding and problem solving before and after a brief lesson designed to improve their encoding. Change detection
performance was significantly correlated with performance on the traditional encoding measures. Moreover, all three
encoding measures were related to children’s pretest problem-solving performance. Finally, pre- to posttest changes
in children’s encoding appeared to be related to changes in children’s problem-solving performance. These findings
suggest that improving problem encoding should be a target of instruction about equations.
                                                           2069

