UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Classifying patients and controls using multi-dimensional scaling and exploring the
metric of semantic space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wt921x0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Chance, Steven
James, Anthony
Peet, Rebecca
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Classifying patients and controls using multi-dimensional scaling and exploring the
metric of semantic space
Steven Andrew Chance (steven.chance@clneuro.ox.ac.uk)
Neuroanatomy& Cognition Group (University of Oxford),Neuropathology,
Level 1, West Wing, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK

Anthony C.D. James (tony.james@obmh.nhs.uk)
Highfield family and adolescent unit, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, UK

Rebecca Peet (rebecca.peet@hertford.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Geoffrey Nicholls (nicholls@stats.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Abstract
Multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) has been used to
visualize the organization of semantic memory in
normal control subjects and in psychiatric conditions
such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease.
However, the potential for such techniques to classify
subjects into diagnostic groups has not been realized.
This study attempted to tackle this by developing
classification statistics and by exploring the
dimensional organization of semantic space using
models with different underlying metrics. The test data
were from controls and patients with early onset
schizophrenia. The results indicated subtly altered
semantic organization in schizophrenia, sufficient for
novel classification statistics to correctly classify
subjects as either patient or control with >80%
accuracy.
Keywords: language; semantics; schizophrenia; verbal
fluency; multi-dimensional-scaling; classification.

Introduction
Certain conditions, such as schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s
disease, are associated with disordered semantic memory
(Huff et al, 1986; Phillips et al, 2004). The underlying
alterations in memory organisation can be investigated
using word generation tasks. Deficits include slower,
disorganized generation of fewer exemplars from a semantic
category. This data can then be analyzed with
multidimensional scaling (MDS) methods (Rips et al, 1973)
to visualize semantic networks and assess differences
between patients and healthy control subjects (Chan et al,
1993). However, the refinement of these methods and
application of additional data classification tools have not
been sufficiently explored.
The present study emulates previous studies (Chan et al,
1993; Prescott et al, 2006) by analysing animal category
fluency lists from schizophrenia patients and controls. We
used MDS to identify axes in the data which represent the

characteristics, or dimensions, people use to categorise
animals (Chan et al, 1993). Typically, the two dominant
dimensions characterizing semantic space for animals have
been labeled as “size” and “domesticity” (a third dimension
labeled “danger” may also be useful). A goal of this study
was to identify aspects of the data which could be used to
classify the individual as a patient or control.
A further issue to explore with MDS analysis is a possible
diagnostic difference in the underlying metric of semantic
space. Different metrics can be employed in MDS, probing
differences in conceptual organisation (Shepard, 1987,
Gardenfors, 2000). For example, various psychological
spaces are usually better represented by the ‘city-block’
metric (Shepard, 1987) rather than the familiar Euclidean
metric that has been used typically in MDS analyses (eg.
Paulsen et al 1996). This is illustrated by a normal
developmental shift. Older children and adults perceive
dimensions such as high and tall, or big and bright, to be
separable, whereas young children tend to confuse these
concepts (Carey, 1978). This is seen as a developmental
shift from a more Euclidean cognitive metric to the rigidly
grid-like, separated dimensions of the city-block metric
(Gardenfors, 2000). Such a shift may be disrupted in
developmental disorders, particularly in early onset
schizophrenia. The evidence that category boundaries are
less clear in schizophrenia (beginning with Cameron, 1938)
raises the prospect that the city-block metric may not
provide a better fit for patients.
Semantic memory abnormalities appear to be worse in
patients who had an earlier onset of illness (Paulsen et al,
1996) but adolescent patients with the early form of illness
have not been adequately studied. The present study
considers a group of adolescent subjects who have
reductions in semantic fluency (as reported in Phillips et al,
2004). It was hypothesized that schizophrenia patients
would exhibit differences in network organization and word

list generation that would enable statistical classification of
subjects as either patient or control, based on their word list
alone. Furthermore, a comparison of the metrics would
show that control subjects use a city-block metric in the
organisation of semantic space, whereas patients do not use
such separable dimensions and therefore a Euclidean metric
would be sufficient.

Methods
Subjects
The schizophrenia subjects were 36 patients with adolescent
onset of illness between 12 and 18 diagnosed with DSM-IV
criteria. Most patients had experienced only one psychotic
episode. A further 31 non-psychiatric comparison subjects
matched for age and education were recruited, with suitable
exclusion criteria for both groups. Written informed consent
was obtained from the subjects and their parents. Of the
patients, 21 exhibited some negative symptoms and 6 were
thought disordered.

Metric scaling was applied using automated routines in the
“R” statistics software package. The selection of the number
of dimensions in which to represent semantic space is
governed by a measure of the stress value, which reflects the
degree to which the resulting word map is a good summary
of the actual distance data. 5% stress = a good fit, 10%
stress = fair, 20% = poor. Low dimensional (2D) fits were
used as is standard practice for visualisation, although a 4D
fit was the best and this was used for the more subtle
comparison of different metrics.

Roughness Statistic
The dissimilarities between animals were used to condense
the information contained in word lists down to a single
value representing the ‘roughness’ of an individual list. In
order for the statistic to be comparable between patients and
controls, the dissimilarites used were those calculated for
controls. The ‘roughness’ statistic, r, for a list is defined to
be the average dissimilarity between adjacent items in the
list. For a list of length n it is calculated as follows:

Procedure
As reported previously for these patients (see Phillips et al,
2004 for more details on procedure) all subjects were
examined with either the full version of the Wechsler
Intelligence Test for children – III-R or, if older than 16
years, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Test – Revised. The
animal fluency test analysed here was administered by a
neuropsychologist. Subjects were asked to name as many
animals, excluding fish and birds, as possible in a period of
60 seconds. Any repetitions and non-animals were removed
from the lists. The fifteen most common words across both
groups were used to generate semantic network
representations using multidimensional scaling (MDS).
Timing data was not available.

Data Analysis

Where ai is the animal in position i of the list, and D is the
MCF dissimilarity measure.

Variability statistic
Another statistic formulated using the dissimilarities
calculated for controls is the ‘variability’ in the ‘roughness’
of each list. The ‘variability’ statistic, v, for a list is defined
to be the sample variance of the dissimilarity between
adjacent items in the list. For a list of length n it is
calculated as follows:

MultiDimensional Scaling: MDS embeds data on the
differences between objects in a mathematical space with a
number of dimensions determined by the user. The result is
a map of the objects whose positions reflect their statistical
difference (similar objects are close together). The objects in
this case are words, whose differences are calculated from
their distance apart in the lists of animals generated by each
subject. For example, in the list: “dog, cat, elephant, tiger..”,
cat is 1 place from dog and 2 places from tiger.

Linear Discriminant Analysis

The “Fluent” software was used to create a dissimilarity
matrix for each diagnostic group based on the word list
distances. The software controls for differences in list length
by the mean cumulative frequency (MCF) method described
in Prescott et al (2006). The resulting dissimilarity matrix
for controls and the matrix for patients were used for MDS
analysis.

Alternative metrics

Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is a statistical
classification tool. LDA was applied to the data in order to
predict the diagnosis, patient or control, of an individual
based upon their animal word list. LDA was applied to the
data with roughness and variability as the observable
variables.

An alternative metric scaling solution was calculated using
non-Euclidean, City-Block MDS. Most published analyses
of clinical samples assume that the semantic space
underlying the solution is Euclidean. However, as described
above, psychological space is often better represented by a
non-Euclidean metric such as the ‘city-block’ metric

(Arabie, 1991). The metric is so-called because the distance
between concepts is measured as if restricted to a grid-like
system of roads (hence ‘city-block’ or ‘Manhattan’ metric)
rather than “as the crow flies” in Euclidean space. The
apparent suitability of this metric is due to the psychological
tendency to make categorical decisions based on orthogonal
conceptual dimensions (such as height and width) which are
not arbitrary and interchangeable.

map, large farm animals (horse, cow) to the upper center,
and African/zoo animals on the left. For patients, the
groupings were also logical although zebra overlapped with
the farm animals and monkey was in a relatively extreme
position. Overall, the patient semantic map did not differ
markedly from that of controls, although it did have a
slightly more idiosyncratic organization.

Consequently, following an established approach
(Gardenfors, 2000;Johannesson, 1996), the stress values of
the solutions were compared to determine the better fit
using two different metrics with increasing numbers of
dimensions up to the most desirable 4D fit. Optimization
was performed by starting the procedure from multiple
(hundreds of thousands) of initial configurations.

Results
The usual conceptual dimensions of animal “size” and
“domesticity” did not form clear orthogonal axes for either
word map (see Figures 1 and 2). However, the different
dimensions, size, domesticity, and “danger” appeared much
more correlated for patients than for controls (see metric
comparisons and separability of dimensions, below).The
word maps illustrated show the estimated binary transition
line between one side of a conceptual dimension, and the
other, for each of three dimensions (size, domesticity, and
danger).

Figure 2: MDS for schizophrenia patients (squares, circles
and triangles differentiate boundary lines in gray scale
image and do not represent data points)
MDS enables wordlists to be shown visually. Wordlists for
patients and controls are shown in Figure 3 using the points
given by the MDS mapping for controls, to allow direct
comparison.

Figure 1: MDS for controls (squares, circles, and triangles
simply differentiate boundary lines in gray scale image)
Controls represented size on a diagonal from bottom right to
upper left. No consistent representation of the size
dimension could be discerned in the patient map. However,
there were interpretable groupings in both maps. For
controls – household pets were on the lower right side of the

Figure 3: Animal wordlists plotted as networks on the MDS
mapping for controls. Details are not visible, but the matrix
is shown to enable the reader to visualise the method.
Wordlists are displayed in order of decreasing list length.
Light gray indicates that the list belongs to the controls.
Dark gray indicates that the list belongs to the patients.
An important observation is that, although wordlist routes
through semantic space for controls tended to appear more
disorganised than for patients, this was not the case. The
‘messy’ appearance of control lists was generally caused by
the fact that controls are more inclined than patients to
exhaust a particular category of animals, such as small,
domestic, safe animals, before branching out into another
category.

list length largely superceded the variability statistic.
Meanwhile the roughness statistic continued to provide
useful additional classification information.
This LOO-CV could be improved for our particular
application if, when removing control points from the LDA,
we also removed the control's word list, recomputed the
dissimilarities for controls and hence adapted the roughness
and variability scores. However, this would be
computationally expensive, and the difference in the
estimate of the number of correctly classified individuals
would be small. Therefore, for our purpose, the simpler
version of LOO-CV was applied.

Figure 4: Roughness scores
Figure 4 shows the roughness scores for schizophrenia
patients and controls. The roughness scores for patients
appear to have a greater spread than those for controls. This
suggests that the two sets of roughness scores follow
different distributions for the different groups. A two
sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for this gives a p-value of
0.0017, confirming the observation. This makes roughness
an appropriate variable for use with classification tools.

Figure 5: LDA using roughness and variability to predict
patient/control status

Metric comparison
Generating distance measures with a city-block metric,
using automated routines, resulted in an improved fit of the
scaling solution for control subjects. However, in
schizophrenia, the improvement was reduced when the
number of dimensions increased to 4 dimensions.

Classification
Leave-One-Out Cross-Validation was used to assess the
quality of the classification procedure, the result being that
this procedure classified 81% of individuals correctly (see
Figure 5).
As observed already, the typical patient list length is shorter
than controls and, as might be expected, the incorporation of
list length assists classification. The emphasis of the present
study was to attempt to identify components of semantic
organization itself that could be used to classify subjects,
regardless of list length. However, it may be noted that
further classification testing indicated that the inclusion of

The stress value of the Euclidean scaling solution for
controls at 4-D was 10.3% (R2= 0.97) (borderline
“poor”/”fair”), for patients it was 9.7% (R2= 0.98) (“fair”).
The Euclidean solutions for patients and controls were not
improved with further optimisation, but the fully optimized
city-block stress was lower for both diagnoses (control
stress = 7%, patient stress = 7.6%). Overall, the Euclidean
solution was better for patients than for controls, and the
patients benefited less from the city-block solution than
controls. However, comparing optimization between metrics
is challenging since the process of optimization is
technically easier for city-block than Euclidean.

Discussion
Previous MDS studies have tended to assess older patients
with chronic schizophrenia (eg. Chen et al, 2000) or
dementia (Chan et al, 1993), concluding that the deficit is
due to semantic store degradation. The present study found
reduced fluency but fairly mild abnormality of semantic
organisation early in the illness. It may be argued that as
these patients represent an early onset group with recent
diagnosis, anomalies of semantic organisation in these cases
are unlikely to be due to the progressive degradation of
memory storage caused by long illness duration and
medication. However, adolescent patients generally
represent a more severe form of illness with worse outcome
and less exposure to medication. A solution to the apparent
contradiction is that reduced fluency causes the appearance
of a bigger difference in semantic organisation due to
shorter word list length. Unlike several other studies
(seeStorms et al, 2003) our stress values for patients
indicated a better Euclidean fit for the MDS solutions than
controls. We suggest this is, at least partly, due to the
Prescott et al (2006) list length correction.
Further analysis using linear discriminant analysis
illustrated that two novel statistical derivations from the
word lists: “roughness” and “variability”, are useful for
classification of subjects into controls or patients with >80%
accuracy. The addition of list length to classification
algorithms renders the inclusion of the variability statistic
largely redundant. However, the roughness statistic appear
to provide significant additional information enabling
correct classification. For further contrasts between
diagnoses a qualitative semantic network assessment
revealed that although wordlists for controls tend to appear
more disorganised than those for patients, this is not the
case. The ‘messy’ appearance is because controls are more
inclined than patients to exhaust a particular category of
animals, such as small, domestic, safe animals, before
branching out into another category.
The nature of further abnormal organization in
schizophrenia may be interpreted by the difference in the
metric of semantic space. The present results demonstrate
that semantic space is similar to various psychological
spaces that are normally better represented by the ‘cityblock’ metric than the commonly used Euclidean metric
(Arabie, 1991). The sharp-cornered form of the city-block
metric better models the natural tendency to discriminatory
learning in which the orthogonal axes reflect the way
conceptual dimensions (such as width and height, or
domesticity and size) are not arbitrary and interchangeable
as they are in the Euclidean metric. While we found that the
city-block metric was always best for control subjects, the
results were more ambiguous for patients suggesting less
separated conceptual dimensions in schizophrenia.
These results suggest that the developmental shift (see
Gardenfors, 2000), from a Euclidean cognitive metric to the

more separable dimensions of the city-block metric, has not
completed
successfully
in
early
onset
schizophrenia.Goldstone and Barsalou (1998) have
described the development of reasoning about dimensions:
“evidence suggests that dimensions that are easily separated
by adults, such as the brightness and size of a square, are
treated as fused together for children… [they] have
difficulty identifying whether two objects differ on their
brightness or size even though they can easily see that they
differ in some way. Both differentiation and
dimensionalization occur throughout one’s lifetime.”
In conclusion, the alteration of semantic networks in
schizophrenia appears to be more subtle than that indicated
by some previous studies (Paulsen et al, 1996). The results
are consistent with the suggestion that larger differences
identified in previous studies are partly due to statistical
confounds such as differences in list length (Prescott et al,
2006) and sub-optimal solutions. However, using the
additional innovative techniques for data exploration and
classification shown here, fitting a low dimensional (2-D)
Euclidean word map to the data reveals differences in
semantic organisationbetween patients and controls. The
passage through semantic space revealed by MDS
visualization of control word lists appears “messy” because
controls are more inclined than patients to exhaust a
particular category grouping of animals (eg. small,
domestic), before exploring another sub-cluster. Although
list length differentiates controls from patients, two
alternative statistical derivations from the word lists:
“roughness” and “variability”, can be used to classify
subjects into controls or patients with >80% accuracy. A
further novel finding is the indication of less separated
conceptual dimensions in schizophrenia compared to
controls.

References
Arabie, P. (1991). Was Euclid an unnecessarily
sophisticated psychologist? Psychometrika, 56, 567-87.
Cameron, N. (1938). Reasoning, regression and
communication
in
schizophrenics.Psychological
Monographs, 50(1), 1–33.
Carey, S. (1978). The child as a word learner.In M. Halle, J.
Bresnan& Miller G. (Eds.),Linguistic theory and
psychological
reality.
MIT
press,
Cambridge,
Massachusetts
Chan, A.S., Butter, N., Salmon, D. P. &McGuire, K.A.
(1993).Dimensionality and clustering in the semantic
network of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.Psychology
and Aging, 3, 411-419.
Chen, R. Y. L., Chen, E. Y. H., Chan, C. K. Y., Lam, L. C.
W. &Lieh-Mak, F. (2000). Verbal fluency in
schizophrenia: reduction in semantic store. Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 34, 43-48.
Gardenfors, P. (2000).Conceptual spaces: the geometry of
thought. MIT press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Goldstone, R. L. &Barsalou, L.W. (1998).Reuniting
perception and conception.Cognition, 65, 231-262.
Huff, F. J., Corkin, S. &Growdon, J. H. (1986). Semantic
Impairment and Anomia in Alzheimer’s Disease. Brain
and Language, 28 (2), 235-249.
Johannesson,
M.
(1996).Obtaining
psychologically
motivated spaces with MDS. Lund: Lund University
Cognitive Studies, 45.
Paulsen, J. S., Romero, R., Chan, A., Davis, A. V., Heaton,
R. K. &Jeste, D. V. (1996).Impairment in the semantic
network in schizophrenia.Psychiatry Research, 63, 109121.
Phillips, T.J., James, A.C., Crow, T. J. &Collinson, S.L.
(2004). Semantic fluency is impaired but phonemic and
design fluency are preserved in early-onset schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 70, 215-22.
Prescott, T.J., Newton, L.D., Mir, N.U., Woodruff, P.W. R.
& Parks, R.W. (2006). A new dissimilarity measure for
finding semantic structure in category fluency data with
implications for understanding memory organization in
schizophrenia.Neuropsychology, 20(6), 685-699.
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J. & Smith, E. E. (1973) Semantic
Distance
and
the
Verification
of
Semantic
Relations.Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behaviour, 12, 1-20.
Shepard, R.N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science.Science, 237,
1317-23.
Storms, F., Dirikx, T., Saerens, J., Verstraeten, S.& De
Deyn P.P. (2003).On the use of scaling and clustering in
the study of semantic deficits.Neuropsychology, 17, 289301.

