UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comics on the Brain: Structure and Meaning in Sequential Image Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92b9p0n3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Cohn, Neil
Paczynski, Martin
Holcomb, Phil
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comics on the Brain: Structure and Meaning in Sequential Image Comprehension
Neil Cohn (neil.cohn@tufts.edu), Martin Paczynski, Phil Holcomb
Department of Psychology, 490 Boston Ave
Medford, MA 02155 USA

Ray Jackendoff
Center for Cognitive Studies, Miner Hall
Medford, MA 02155 USA

Gina Kuperberg
Department of Psychiatry and Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging
Massachusetts General Hospital, Bldg 149, 13th Street
Charlestown, MA 02129 USA

Abstract

Background
Research on language comprehension has long
drawn a distinction between meaning and
structure. Most theoretical work pertaining to this
separation has been at the level of the single
sentence (Chomsky, 1965). However, this general
divide is also relevant our understanding of how
we make sense of text and discourse, beyond the
single sentence.
Much work on text and discourse has
emphasized the local relationships which draw
together related concepts into common semantic
fields (Halliday & Hasan, 1985; van Dijk, 1977)
or through the establishment of coherence
relationships
across
individual
sentences
(Halliday & Hasan, 1976; Zwaan & Radvansky,
1998). Theories of narrative with a more global
scope have also been articulated in “story
grammars” (e.g. Mandler & Johnson, 1977;
Rumelhart, 1975; Thorndyke, 1977), which base
individual narrative categories around characters’
goals. These categories were organized within a
formalistic generative grammar which imposed a
global structure for understanding how characters
navigated through events.
Similar to verbal discourse, most theories
describing sequential image structure have also
focused on linear semantic relationships between
individual images (McCloud, 1993). Recently
though, Cohn (2003, In prep) has proposed a
theoretical model for the structure of graphic
narratives. Like story grammars’ treatment of

Just as syntax differentiates coherent sentences from
scrambled word strings, sequential images must also use a
cognitive system to distinguish coherent narratives from
random strings of images. We conducted experiments
analogous to two classic psycholinguistic studies to examine
structure and semantics in sequential images. We compared
Normal comic strips with both structure and meaning to
sequences with Semantics Only, Structure Only, or randomly
Scrambled panels. Experiment 1 used a target-monitoring
paradigm, and found that RTs were slowest to target panels in
Scrambled sequences, intermediate in Structural Only and
Semantic Only sequences, and fastest in Normal sequences.
Experiment 2 measured ERPs to the same strips. The largest
N400 appeared in Scrambled and Structural Only sequences,
intermediate in Semantic Only sequences and smallest in
Normal sequences. Together, these findings suggest that
sequential image comprehension is guided by an interaction
between a structure and meaning, broadly analogous to syntax
and semantics in language.
Keywords: Narrative; Comics; Visual Language; Discourse;
ERPs; N400

Introduction
Drawings have been conveying narratives through
sequences of images for millennia, whether
painted on cave walls, carved into reliefs, hung on
medieval tapestries, or, in their modern context,
appearing in comic books (McCloud, 1993).
Compared to research on the structure and
comprehension of verbal narrative, however, few
studies have examined the driving forces behind
understanding this visual language: what are the
representations and mechanisms engaged during
sequential image comprehension? And how is the
meaning integrated with structure across a
sequence of images?

3122

sentences, this model describes panels as playing
narrative roles in relation to a global sequence of
images (although there are several important
differences to story grammars and indeed, the
model could potentially extend to describe the
structure of verbal discourse, as an alternative
approach).
Figure 1 illustrates the narrative structure for a
6-panel Peanuts comic strip. This sequence shows
a baseball game in which Lucy hits the ball so that
Charlie Brown can run home and score while
escaping getting tagged out by Schroeder. It
begins with a clause of two panels in which the
Initial shows the start of Lucy’s actions (tossing a
ball) that she then hits in the Peak. The second
clause progresses from the set-up of Schroeder
waiting for the ball — nothing happens here
except for the expectation that something may
eventually occur (Establisher). The second panel
Initiates that event, but the penultimate Peak panel
then climaxes as the event of catching the ball is
interrupted with Charlie sliding into the base.
Finally, the last panel features the resolution of
this interaction (Release). This first clause (Lucy
hitting the ball) facilitates the second (Charlie
scoring) and thus becomes an Initial at a higher
level of processing, motivated the Peak inside it.
Set up by the Initial of the first clause, the second
clause itself is a Peak, again motivated by its
Peak. Thus, the narrative structure operates on
both the panel level and the level of whole
constituencies.

comprehension of sequential images? Can
narrative structure be detected independently of
semantic associations?
We conducted two experiments to examine the
effects of narrative structure in processing
sequential images.
Experiment 1: Target Monitoring
In a classic study of sentence comprehension,
Marslen-Wilson and Tyler (1975) asked
participants to monitor for target words (e.g.
“ideas”) in normal prose (e.g. “The boy’s ideas
formed silently”), syntactic-but-not-semantic
prose (“Colorless green ideas sleep furiously”),
and randomly scrambled sentences (“Picnic strike
ideas quiet launched”). They showed that reaction
times to target words increased across these three
sentence types. These data suggested that
syntactic structure offered a processing advantage
beyond lexico-semantics.
Experiment 1 used an analogous “panelmonitoring” paradigm that measured reaction
times as readers monitored for target panels in
each of four types of comic panel sequences that
independently manipulated narrative structure and
semantic association.
Methods
Participants

54 experienced comic readers (30 male, 24
female), recruited from the Tufts University
undergraduate population, with a mean age of
20.4 (SD=1.68), were paid for participation.
Based on their answers to a pre-experiment
questionnaire asking about their comic reading
and drawing experience as an adult and a child, a
measure of participants’ comic reading fluency
was calculated.
Stimuli

Figure 1: Narrative Structure in a Comic Strip.

While several experiments have looked at the
processing of verbal discourse, fundamental
questions remain about the online comprehension
of sequential images: Is it possible to detect
narrative structure during online image-by-image

Four types of novel 6-frame long comic strips
were created (160 sets) using individual panels
culled from several volumes of Charles Schulz’s
Peanuts (see Figure 2): 1) Normal sequences with
both narrative structure and semantic relationships
between panels, 2) Semantic Only sequences with
semantically related panels but no narrative
structure (such as panels sharing semantic

3123

in the Structural Only sequences were also shorter
than in the Scrambled sequences. There was,
however, no significant difference in RTs to
targets in the Structural Only and Semantic Only
sequences.
685	

Reaction times (ms)	


associations, like baseball, snow, flying kites,
etc.), 3) Structural Only sequences featuring a
narrative structure but no semantic relationships
between panels (maintaining the same narrative
categories as in the normal sequences), 4)
Scrambled sequences of randomly-ordered panels.
Structure in the strips were formalized using
Cohn’s (2007, In prep) model of visual narrative.
The target panels appeared from the second to
sixth panel positions, with equal numbers of
targets at each position.
1) Normal

675	

665	

655	

645	

635	

625	


2) Semantic Only

Normal	


Semantic
Only	


Structural
Only	


Scrambled	


Figure 3: Reaction Times for Sequence Types.

3) Structural Only

Discussion

4) Scrambled

As predicted, RTs on target panels in the Normal
sequences were fastest while those in Scrambled
sequences were the slowest. RTs to target panels
in both Semantic Only and Structural Only
sequences fell directly in between the RTs in the
Normal and Scrambled sequence types and did
not significantly differ from one another. These
results suggest that both semantics and structure
offer advantages to sequential image processing.

Figure 2: Example Stimuli.
Procedure

At a computer screen, participants monitored
target panels as each sequence was presented one
frame at a time (1500msec presentation, 300ms
ISI).
Results

An overall 4 (Sequence Type) x 5 (Position)
repeated-measures ANOVA showed a main effect
of Sequence Type, F(3, 153)=7.29, p<.001, a
main effect of Position, F(4, 204)=36.76, p<.001,
and a significant interaction between Sequence
Type and Position, F(12, 612)=2.19, p<.05.
RTs to monitor target panels were slowest in
Scrambled sequences, intermediate in both
Structural Only and Semantic Only sequences,
and fastest in Normal sequences, as depicted in
Figure 3. RTs to panels in the Normal strips were
shorter to panels in all other sequence types. RTs
to targets in the Semantic Only sequences were
shorter than in the Scrambled sequences, and RTs

Experiment 2: Event-Related Potentials
One of the most studied ERP components in both
the verbal and visual domains is the “N400,”
which has been associated with semantic
processing (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980; McPherson
& Holcomb, 1999). In an ERP study using similar
stimuli to the Marslen-Wilson and Tyler study,
Van Petten and Kutas (1991) found that the
amplitude of the N400 was larger to targets in
scrambled and syntactic-only sentences than in
normal sentences. These findings suggested that,
in the absence of semantics, syntactic structure
did not facilitate semantic processing, as reflected
by the N400. Additionally, the amplitude of the
N400 was found to decrease across ordinal
position in normal sentences.

3124

Syntactic operations in ERPs have been tied to
both the “P600” (Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992)
and the “left-anterior negativity” (LAN) (Neville,
Nicol, Barss, Forster, & Garrett, 1991). However,
the P600 only appears in the presence of some
semantic information, while the LAN has been
observed to violations in the structure of sentences
without semantics but still have syntax (e.g.
Münte, Matzke, & Johannes, 1997).
The first study to examine the comprehension of
sequential images came from West and Holcomb
(2002) who asked participants to distinguish
congruous from incongruous final panels in image
sequences. The authors observed a larger
anteriorly-distributed N400 to sequences with
incongruous
(versus
congruous)
endings,
indicating that semantic processing of the final
image was facilitated when its preceding visual
narrative was semantically consistent.
Analogous to the study by Van Petten and
Kutas, Experiment 2 examined the ERPs to the
same set of stimuli from Experiment 1.
Methods
Participants

24 Tufts University undergraduates (12 female, 12
male, mean age = 19.4) participated in the study
for compensation. All participants completed the
comic fluency questionnaire (described under
Experiment 1).

sequences, intermediate in Semantic Only
sequences and smallest in Normal sequences.
Consistent with previous studies of image
processing (West & Holcomb, 2002), this N400
effect had an anterior scalp distribution.

Figure 4: ERPs to different Sequence Types.

While large contrasts appeared for other
comparisons between waveforms, the differences
between the N400 for Structural Only and
Scrambled sequences was small and appeared
only at left anterior sites in the medial and lateral
columns (F3, FC5, FC1, C3), as depicted in
Figure 5.

Stimuli

The same stimuli were used in Experiment 2 as in
Experiment 1.
Procedure

Participants viewed each sequence one panel at a
time on a computer screen while ERPs were
measured to all panels. After each sequence,
participants judged whether or not the sequence
made sense.
Results

Repeated-measures ANOVAs revealed significant
main effects of Sequence Type (all F>48.5, all
p<.05) and/or interactions between AP
distribution and Sequence Type at all columns (all
F>10.25, all p<.05). The N400 was largest to
panels in both Scrambled and Structural Only

Figure 5: Amplitudes across the scalp for the difference
between Structural Only and Scrambled sequence types.

3125

Panels at each sequence position were averaged
at the six select electrode sites that showed the
largest N400 amplitudes (F3, Fz, F4, FC1, FC2,
Cz). A 4 (Sequence Type) x 6 (Position) ANOVA
found significant main effects for Sequence Type
(all F>42.0, all p<.001), and a significant
interaction between Sequence Type and Position
was found for all components (all F>3.1, all
p<.001).
As depicted in Figure 6, significant linear trends
appeared across ordinal position in the Normal
sequences, reflecting a decrease in the amplitude
of the N400 across panel position. No significant
effects of Position were seen for the Semantics
Only sequences, but panels in both Structural
Only and Scrambled sequence types evoked small
but significant increases in amplitude with
increasing ordinal position.

Figure 6: N400 Amplitude for Sequence Types across
Sequence Position.

Additionally, significant correlations were
observed between participants’ scores of Comic
Reading Fluency and the magnitude of the
differences for the N400 between Structural Only
and Scrambled sequences. Greater fluency was
associated with a larger difference between these
waveforms for this contrast. No other contrasts
yielded significant correlations with fluency.
Discussion

The amplitude of the N400 was smallest to panels
in the Normal sequences, larger in the Semantics

Only sequences, and largest in sequences without
any semantic association (the Scrambled and
Structural Only sequences). These results suggest
that the processing advantage offered by structure,
in the absence of semantics, had little impact on
reducing the N400 — a waveform sensitive to
semantic processing.
No P600 effect appeared to panels in any of the
sequence types, consistent with the ERPs reported
for sentences in Van Petten and Kutas’ (1991).
The P600 has primarily appeared to structural
anomalies that accompany semantic violations
(Münte, et al., 1997). In this experiment, structure
was not violated; sequences either were
structurally well-formed (albeit possibly without
semantics) or fully lacking structure altogether.
Thus, given these manipulations, no P600 effect
would be expected to these stimuli.
The left-lateralized scalp distribution to the
difference in ERPs between Structural Only and
Scrambled sequences appeared somewhat distinct
from that which has been associated with the
N400 in image processing studies. One possibility
is that it reflects a partially distinct ERP
component such as a left-anterior negativity
(LAN), which appears in the same time window
but is associated with syntactic processing. One
avenue of future research is to determine whether
experiments can evoke a LAN more distinctly, as
well as elicitation of a P600…
Finally, a decrease in amplitude of the N400
appeared across ordinal position only for Normal
sequences. This indicates that the build-up of
context created through a combination of
narrative structure and semantic theme facilitated
the semantic processing of each successive panel.
General Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that the
semantic relationships across individual panels
and overall narrative structure across panels each
offer advantages to sequential image processing.
Experiment 2 further suggests that a combination
of narrative structure and semantic relationships
facilitate semantic processing of upcoming
images, as reflected by the N400. However,
structure, in the absence of semantics, had little

3126

impact on the N400, suggesting that it acts
independently of semantic association.
Taken together, these findings suggest that
sequential image comprehension uses a global
narrative structure that extends beyond semantic
associations between individual frames. We
suggest that the comprehension of graphic
narrative is guided by an interaction between
structure and meaning, analagous to that between
syntax and semantics in language.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIMH (R01
MH071635) and NARSAD (with the Sidney Baer
Trust), as well as funding from the Tufts Center
for Cognitive Studies. Martina Santarsieri, Lauren
Rose, Adrienne Ing, and especially Natalie
Buzzeo aided greatly in the creation of stimuli and
gathering of data.
References
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohn, N. (2003). Early Writings on Visual Language.
Carlsbad, CA: Emaki Productions.
Cohn, N. (2007). Foundations for a Natural Visual
Language Grammar. Paper presented at the Visual
and Iconic Languages Conference.
Cohn, N. (In prep). The Structure of Visual Narrative.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in
English. London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1985). Language, Context,
and Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-Semiotic
Perspective. Victoria: Deakin University Press.
Kuperberg, G. (2007). Neural mechanisms of language
comprehension: Challenges to syntax. Cognitive
Brain Research, 1146, 23-49.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading senseless
sentences: Brain potential reflect semantic
incongruity. Science, 207, 203-205.
Mandler, J. M., & Johnson, N. S. (1977). Remembrance of
Things Parsed: Story Structure and Recall.
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 111-151.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Tyler, L. K. (1975). Processing
structure of sentence perception. Nature, 257, 784785.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
McPherson, W. B., & Holcomb, P. J. (1999). An
electrophysiological investigation of semantic
priming with pictures of real objects.
Psychophysiology, 36(1), 53-65.

Münte, T. F., Matzke, M., & Johannes, S. (1997). Brain
activity associated with syntactic incongruencies in
words and psuedo-words. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 9, 318-329.
Neville, H. J., Nicol, J. L., Barss, A., Forster, K. I., &
Garrett, M. F. (1991). Syntactically Based
Sentence Processing Classes: Evidence from
Event-Related Brain Potentials. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 3(2), 151-165.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P. (1992). Event-related
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 758-806.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1975). Notes on a schema for stories. In
D. Bobrow & A. Collins (Eds.), Representation
and understanding (Vol. 211-236). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Thorndyke, P. (1977). Cognitive structures in
comprehension and memory of narrative discourse.
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 77-110.
van Dijk, T. (1977). Text and Context. London: Longman.
Van Petten, C., & Kutas, M. (1991). Influences of semantic
and syntactic context on open- and closed-class
words. Memory and Cognition, 19, 95-112.
West, W. C., & Holcomb, P. (2002). Event-related
potentials
during
discourse-level
semantic
integration of complex pictures. Cognitive Brain
Research, 13, 363-375.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models
in language comprehension and memory.
Psychological Bulletin, 123(2), 162-185.

3127

