UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Competitive Mate Choice: How Need for Speed Beats Quests for Quality and Harmony

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40f6h515

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Neth, Hansjorg
Schachtele, Simeon
Duwal, Sulav
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Competitive Mate Choice:
How Need for Speed Beats Quests for Quality and Harmony
Hansjörg Neth, Simeon Schächtele, Sulav Duwal
{neth,schaecht,duwal}@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany

Peter M. Todd
pmtodd@indiana.edu
Departments of Cognitive Science, Informatics, and Psychology
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA
Abstract

In this paper we explore how well different mate search
strategies work in the context of competing strategies, judging them on the criteria of speed, partner quality, and match
harmony. This extends previous work that considered the performance of single strategies in isolation on one dimension at
a time (e.g., Todd & Miller, 1999) or compared strategies with
unrealistic time horizons (e.g., McNamara & Collins, 1990)
or unrealistic knowledge about the distribution of available
mates (e.g., Johnstone, 1997). By letting multiple strategies
compete against each other within one population and evaluating their success on three criteria, we show that simple
strategies that maximize speed are more successful than more
complex strategies under most combinations of the criteria.
This happens because simple strategies almost always find
a mate and simultaneously exploit the qualities provided by
more demanding strategies.

The choice of a mate is made complicated by the need to
search for partners at the same time others are searching. What
decision strategies will outcompete others in a population of
searchers? We extend previous approaches using computer
simulations to study mate search strategies by allowing direct
competition between multiple strategies, evaluating success on
multiple criteria. In a mixed social environment of searchers of
different types, simple strategies can exploit more demanding
strategies in unexpected ways. We find that simple strategies
that only aim for speed can beat more selective strategies that
aim to maximize the quality or harmony of mated pairs.
Keywords: Mate choice, sequential search, simple heuristics,
strategy competition, agent-based modeling, social simulation.

Introduction
Imagine being a single individual searching for a mate. Because choosing a mate is one of the most important decisions
of your life, you want your choice to be as good as possible on
certain criteria. Apart from living ‘happily ever after’, three
a priori plausible criteria concern the speed with which you
make your choice, the quality of your chosen partner, and the
harmony of your match with that partner — all of which have
been discussed as important aspects of human mate search
(e.g., Kalick & Hamilton, 1986).
But beware: Your competitors are searching the same pool
of candidates at the same time. As you are in a race against
rivals, any strategy that you use could be outperformed or exploited. For instance, the myopic strategy to accept the first
willing candidate that is at least 21 years old may yield satisfactory results under some conditions, but would fail to find
a mate if everyone else in the population accepted anyone at
age 20. Similarly, having high quality and harmony demands
may be respectable goals, but could prolong your search and
increase the risk of staying single forever.
Because mate search is a competition in a social environment, it is impossible to judge the quality of a strategy by
itself — its success or failure always depends on its rivals.
For instance, the strategy “Find someone better than yourself” may work for an individual, but would utterly fail for
an entire population, as nobody would ever mate if everyone
used it. Thus, to evaluate different mate search strategies we
must consider aggregate effects that only emerge on the population level.

Previous Mate Search Models
Human mate search shares many features with other search
tasks studied by biologists, statisticians, and economists, but
presents a number of challenges (Dudey & Todd, 2001). It
is typically sequential, with prospective partners being encountered and evaluated over a stretch of time rather than all
at once. It is uncertain, with little knowledge of the qualities of partners one may encounter in the future, and possibly little chance of returning to people met in the past. It is
costly, in terms of both time and resources that may need to be
spent to interest a potential partner. And this last type of cost
reflects another constraint: Human mate search—at least in
modern Western societies—is also typically mutual. In contrast to choosing a car, a relationship requires both choosing
and being chosen by one’s partner. All of these constraints
have important implications for the success of strategies in
mate search scenarios. For instance, rather than identifying
the very best partner on some criterion (e.g., attractiveness),
a searcher may have to consider her own attributes and the
degree of match between a potential mate and herself.
Todd and Miller (1999) simulated populations of various simple mate search heuristics, including fixed and learnable aspiration satisficing rules that made offers to anyone
above a particular threshold, and compared their success with
optimal solutions from the serial search literature. They

699

found that simple rules that adjusted thresholds based on initial experience—upwards after receiving unexpected interest
from a potential partner, and downwards after receiving unexpected rejection—learned a searchers relative place in the
mating market quite quickly. Guided by this knowledge, the
simulated searchers could then make appropriate offers to potential partners, and succeeded in finding mates after little
search. These simple rules performed well in terms of three
criteria: (a) the percentage of mated individuals, (b) the mean
mate value of mated pairs, and (c) the mean within-pair difference in mate values. In an earlier simulation, Kalick and
Hamilton (1986) investigated the effect of quality-based preferences versus similarity-based ones (our harmony measure),
and found both could create well-matched couples, with the
latter faster than the former.
However, these approaches of considering mate search
strategies in isolation tell us little about how they would fare
in the natural situation where different individuals could follow different rules for finding a mate (also important for
exploring rule evolution). Furthermore, assessing the performance of rules separately on multiple dimensions creates
problems when strategies involve trade-offs between different
criteria. For instance, maximizing the percentage of mated
individuals (a) can easily be achieved when completely ignoring criteria (b) and (c). Similarly, any demands regarding
a partner’s quality (b) and the similarity within a pair (c) will
inevitably decrease the likelihood of finding a suitable partner
(a). Hence, any sensible judgment of a strategy’s potential
requires integrating different dimensions or simultaneously
comparing performance on multiple criteria.
We next present our methods for overcoming these restrictions, through multi-strategy competitive simulations and
strategies on the spectrum of all possible combinations of a
set of performance criteria. To show the interplay of strategies and emergent phenomena on the aggregate level we focus on a small range of relatively simple search strategies and
measure how each fares against the others.

Method
Overview We modified the basic simulation setup of Todd
and Miller (1999) as follows. Our MatlabTM simulation contains a population of N=100 male and 100 female agents who
are characterized by a unique, objective, and perceptible mate
value (from Vmin = 1 to Vmax = 100 within each gender), meet
each other in iterative encounters that are governed by a dating protocol, and pursue a specific mate search strategy.
Criteria The success of a mated pair is evaluated on three
criteria based on a time value tmatch indicating when a
matched pair was formed, a quality value (operationalized
as the average mate value of both partners), and a harmony
value (operationalized as the similarity in mate values of both
partners). All three measures are normalized to a value range
from 0 to 1 (see Table 1 for definitions).
As the primary objective of any mate search strategy is to
find a mate, any individual who fails to mate by the end of

Table 1: Definitions of evaluation criteria.
Criterion:
Speed score s:
Quality score q:
Harmony score h:

Definition:
tmax −tmatch
(tmax −1)
(Vown −1)+(Vpartner −1)
2·(Vmax −1)
1− f (|Vown −Vpartner |)
Vmax −1

Note. All measures are normalized to a [0;1] value range. As the
mean harmony value for a randomly paired population would be
.33 a parabolic function f (x) is used to transform values to the [0;1]
range with a mean of .50.

the simulation is assigned the lowest possible value of 0 on
all criteria. The performance of a strategy is evaluated as the
average performance of all individuals with that strategy.
Strategies A goal of this paper is to assess the interplay of
multiple strategies and their effects on multiple criteria. Consequently, we model three qualitatively different mate choice
strategies, each of which targets one of our evaluation criteria:
1. Speed strategy: Our simplest strategy merely considers
search time and aims to minimize it. The fastest way of
finding a mate is to be entirely indiscriminate about its
qualities and make an offer on every date. This naı̈ve and
extremely myopic strategy can be modeled by setting the
probability of making an offer to p(offer) = 1.
2. Quality strategy: A slightly more complex strategy takes
into account a potential partner’s mate value (Vpartner ) and
sets itself a minimum aspiration level Q. For instance, an
individual with V = 50 makes an offer to any individual
that meets or exceeds this criterion (Vpartner ≥ Q) but refuses to mate with anyone less attractive. Using such an
aspiration level strategy conforms to Simon’s (1956) notion
of satisficing, which uses a threshold that allows a boundedly rational organism to stop search as soon as an acceptable alternative is encountered.
3. Harmony strategy: Our most complex strategy focuses on
the similarity of a potential match. To do so, it needs to
know its own mate value (Vown ) and compare it to a potential partner’s value (Vpartner ). Rather than forcing our
agent to first learn its own mate value (see Todd & Miller,
1999, for simple learning algorithms) we assume that it has
some vague notion of it and implement this vagueness by
0
perturbing its perceived mate value Vown
with a slight er0
ror signal Vown = Vown ± ε, ε ≤ 10, reflecting the intuition
that the attractiveness of others is perceptible with slightly
higher precision than our own. To achieve harmony, the
strategy sets a lower-bound aspiration level H for the max0
imally allowed difference between Vown
and Vpartner and
0 | ≤ H.
only makes an offer to a partner when |Vpartner −Vown
For instance, an individual with a perceived mate value of
0 = 50 and H = 10 would only make an offer to partners
Vown
with 40 ≤ Vpartner ≤ 60.

700

The demands of each of these strategies are regulated by
one parameter, p(offer), Q, and H, respectively. Choosing
extreme values for each parameter will lead to entirely indiscriminate choices. For instance, settings of p(offer) = 1,
V > 0, and H > 100 all entail universal acceptance, and settings of p(offer) = 0, V > 100, and H < 0 all entail universal
rejection of all available candidates. But whereas this equivalence of strategies holds in their extremes, they yield very
different patterns of behavior in intermediate ranges.
Although each strategy is implemented with one parameter, they vary in the complexity of their assumed information
processing capacities. As the speed strategy does not use any
information about its partner or itself it is the simplest strategy. The quality strategy is not quite as myopic and considers
the attractiveness of a potential mate before making a choice.
By contrast, the harmony strategy must compare its own with
its partner’s value and is the most complex of our strategies.
If ‘need for speed’ was the only objective of an organism,
it could never outperform a speed strategy with its parameter
set to p(offer) = 1. As a modeling strategy, we will compare
this extreme setting with parameterized versions of the other
two strategies.

Table 2: Average simulation results for each of the three
strategies, with parameters p(offer) = 1, Q = 20, H = 15.
Criterion:

Speed
Quality Harmony
p(offer)=1: Q=20: H=15: Mean:

Population share:
Percent mated:

33.4%
99.2%

33.2%
92.1%

33.5%
93.6%

33.3%
95.0%

Speed score s:
Quality score q:
Harmony score h:

.989
.479
.600

.915
.516
.585

.918
.463
.810

.941
.486
.665

contain manipulation checks: As individuals get randomly
assigned one of three strategies their mean population share
of 33.3% provides an indicator that our average results are
relatively stable. Similarly, a mean percentage of mated individuals of 95.0% warrants our intuition that all three initial strategies have relatively low demands. Whereas this was
to be expected for the entirely indiscriminate speed strategy
(with a share of 99.2% of individuals finding a mate), our “lenient” parameter settings of the quality and harmony strategies are also confirmed by their overwhelming majority of
successfully finding a mate (92.1% and 93.6%, respectively).
The average results of our three main performance criteria are contained in the bottom three rows of Table 2. The
fact that individuals of all three strategies achieved average
speed scores s exceeding .900 means that they typically found
a partner in less than 10% of the available time (of tmax = 200
rounds), again confirming that all strategies had very low aspirations. Not surprisingly, the indiscriminate speed strategy
achieved the highest s (of .989). With respect to quality, all
average scores are substantially lower, but we have to bear
in mind that the expected value of a random pairing of an
entire population would be .500, as only one pair (with both
partners having a mate value of 100) can achieve the maximum score of 1.0. Whereas the absolute values carry little meaning, the fact that the quality strategy achieved the
highest mean quality score q (of .516) shows that—despite
its moderate demands—it achieves its goal to maximize quality to a greater extent than the two rival strategies that were
aiming for speed and harmony. Similarly, the harmony strategy yields the highest mean harmony score h (of .810).
The fact that each strategy wins on the criterion that it was
designed to maximize is a reassuring manipulation check.
But as we initially characterized the mate search scenario as a
‘competition’ between multiple strategies a legitimate question is: Which strategy wins overall? The correct, though
somewhat unsatisfying answer is: It depends on the evaluation criterion that is being used. A standard solution to this
dilemma would be to define a fitness function that somehow
integrates all criteria that are deemed to be relevant, e.g., by
computing a weighted average of a strategy’s speed, quality,
and harmony scores: f f itness (s, q, h) = ws · s + wq · q + wh · h,
with ws + wq + wh = 1 and 0 ≤ ws , wq , wh ≤ 1. In the absence

Procedure Before the start of the simulation, strategies are
randomly assigned to individuals, i.e., each of n different
strategies is represented by a proportion of approximately 1/n
individuals of either gender. Individuals’ strategies and mate
values are independent of each other.
The simulation then proceeds in up to tmax = 200 iterative
rounds. In each round t, every male individual has a date
with a random female individual, sampled without replacement. On every date, both individuals evaluate each other on
the basis of their mate values and the details of their strategies. If both partners decide to make an offer they are mated
by mutual consent and the newly-formed pair is scored and
removed from the population. This process continues until no
unmated individuals remain (in round tend ) or the maximum
number of rounds (tmax ) has elapsed.
To obtain stable results we average over 1,000 simulations
for each parameter configuration of interest.

Results
We will first present the results of a specific strategy configuration (i.e., with one particular set of parameters) before
generalizing to other parameter ranges.
Maximum speed vs. low quality vs. low harmony Our
initial competition is between the naı̈ve maximum speed
strategy (p(offer) = 1) and relatively lenient versions of the
two other strategies. A quality strategy with Q = 20 makes
an offer to anyone with a mate value in the top 80% of the
population; a harmony strategy with H = 15 makes an offer
to anyone within a range of 30% of one’s own mate value.
Table 2 shows the basic results of this competition on a variety of dependent measures. The first two lines essentially

701

Figure 1: Ternary plot evaluating the speed strategy on every
possible combination of three criteria.

Figure 2: Best strategy plot showing the strategy with the best
performance for every possible combination of three criteria.

of strong reasons for a specific choice of weights, we suggest
a methodological alternative that has the benefit of allowing
simultaneous evaluation of a strategy on all possible combinations of the criteria.
Figure 1 illustrates a so-called ternary plot that evaluates the speed strategy on all possible combinations of the
three criterion dimensions (labeled as Quality, Harmony, and
Speed). Any point on the horizontal baseline (labeled Quality) corresponds to a harmony weight wh = 0 (note the scale
on the right) and the top corner of the triangle corresponds
to wh = 1. For any point x on the triangular plane a horizontal projection to the Harmony scale running in parallel to the
baseline indicates its wh value. Weights for the quality and
speed dimensions can be found in an analog fashion. The
color-coded values form a 3D-landscape over the triangular
plane that shows results for all possible combinations of three
dimensions, each ranging from a minimum weight of 0 to a
maximum weight of 1. Figure 1 shows that the speed strategy
indeed performs best when speed is valued highly (in the bottom left corner), and worst when quality is weighted highly
(bottom right corner).
Analog plots can be drawn for the two other strategies in
the population, each plot summarizing the performance of all
(mated and unmated) individuals that share a strategy. We
now can answer the question “Which strategy wins?” by asking: Which of the three plots shows the maximum value for
each point on the triangular plane? A best strategy plot (see
Figure 2) shows which strategy wins this competition for every possible parameter combination, i.e. effectively classifies
the winning strategy for each point on the triangle and thus
enables us to answer the question: “Which strategy wins?”
for every possible combination of criteria. Perhaps not surprisingly, each strategy performs best when its respective criterion is highly weighted. Overall, the harmony strategy wins
most often (covering 67.6% of the triangular area), followed
by the speed strategy (22.9%), whereas the quality strategy
rarely wins (9.5%) in this particular competition.

Maximum speed vs. increasing demands on quality and
harmony The comparison between multiple ternary plots
and its representation as a best strategy plot provides us with
an objective and transparent way to assess the relative success
of every strategy on flexible combinations of multiple criteria.
Within this framework, we can address the question: What
happens when the demands for quality and harmony increase
within a population of searchers?
Intuitively, one may hypothesize that the reason for the
poor performance of the quality strategy—relative to both its
rivals in the population—may be due to its very moderate demands. But although raising one’s aspirations with respect to
the quality of a match will undoubtedly increase the quality
score of anyone who finds a mate by using this strategy, it simultaneously will affect the performance of other strategies.
Thus, it is far from clear how shifts in individuals’ strategies
will affect performance on an aggregate level.
To test the effects of increasing aspirations on quality and harmony we conducted 12 separate simulations
in which strategies with four different quality parameters
(Q = 20, 40, 60, 80) and three different harmony parameters
(H = 5, 10, 15) competed against the same speed strategy
(p(offer) = 1). Figure 3 shows the resulting best strategy
plots. Overall, the harmony strategy still dominates in the
majority of cases. In contrast to our previous intuition, increasing demands of the quality strategy (from left to right in
Figure 3) does not in-, but decrease its performance relative to
its competitors. Similarly, increasing aspirations of the harmony strategy (from bottom to top in Figure 3) harms its performance on the population level. Curiously, the naı̈ve speed
strategy eventually outperforms its competitors on almost all
possible combinations of criteria as they get sufficiently demanding.
The top-right triangle of Figure 3 summarizes the result of
a competition between strategies with parameters p(offer) =
1, Q = 80, and H = 5. Whereas the harmony strategy still
wins when harmony is weighted highly and speed is weighted

702

Figure 3: Best strategy plots showing the winning strategy for any combination of 3 criteria for 12 simulations. The x-axis
varies 4 quality parameters (Q = 20, 40, 60, 80, from left to right); the y-axis varies 3 harmony parameters (H = 5, 10, 15, from
top to bottom). The speed strategy was left constant at p(offer) = 1. Thus, the bottom-left plot repeats the previously discussed
baseline condition (Figure 2), whereas plots towards the right show the effects of increasing demands of the quality strategy
and plots towards the top show the effects of increasing demands of the harmony strategy.
poorly (i.e., in the top corner of the triangle), the speed strategy wins for all other combinations of criteria, including the
situation in which all criteria are weighted equally (at the center of the triangle). Overall, the speed strategy covers 65.5%
of the triangular area, the harmony strategy wins in 34.5% of
possible weightings, and the quality strategy is beaten by its
competitors in every possible case.
To explain this finding, Table 3 shows the quantitative results for this final simulation, but separately lists the average

scores for the entire population (3a) vs. only the mated individuals (3b). As 99% of the individuals with the speed strategy manage to find a mate, the values in both parts of the table hardly differ. As before (see Table 2), the strategy scores
highest on the speed criterion s. By contrast, only 32% of individuals with the demanding quality strategy manage to find
a mate. Although the successful ones achieve a high average
quality score q of .820 (and good scores on both other criteria)
the large share of unmated individuals lowers the scores of
the strategy as a whole. The results for the harmony strategy
show a similar pattern, but the differences are not as dramatic
as 86% of individuals still find a mate.

Table 3: Average simulation results for individuals for each of
three strategies, with parameters p(offer) = 1, Q = 80, H = 5.
Criterion:

Note that the share of 32% mated individuals with a quality
strategy with an aspiration level of Q = 80 is still higher than
what would be possible in a uniform environment, as only
20% of the population could find a suitable partner if everyone wanted to find one in the top 20%. This suggests a more
subtle reason for the fact that the simple speed strategy eventually outperforms the more demanding ones: Not only will it
almost always find a partner, as it gets mated as soon as it encounters an individual with the same strategy, in which case
its scores will approximate the expected values for a random
pairing. In addition, individuals with this strategy can also
mate with any competitor who pursues a more demanding
strategy. If such a competitor makes an offer, the speed strategy will accept—as it always does—but benefit from the fact
that the other partner has assured a high quality or harmony
for the pairing. In our final simulation, 11.7% of the individuals willing to accept any offer eventually mate with a part-

Speed
Quality Harmony
p(offer)=1: Q=80:
H=5: Mean:

Population share:
Percent mated:

33.4%
99.1%

33.4%
32.0%

33.3%
85.7%

33.3%
72.3%

.973
.475
.610

.305
.262
.236

.737
.432
.781

.672
.390
.542

.953
.820
.736

.860
.504
.912

.932
.601
.755

(a) All individuals:
Speed score s:
Quality score q:
Harmony score h:

(b) Mated individuals:
Speed score s:
Quality score q:
Harmony score h:

.982
.479
.616

703

Conclusions

ner pursuing the most demanding quality strategy and 18.3%
mate with a partner pursuing the most demanding harmony
strategy. Thus, the surprising success of the speed strategy is
partly due to its status as a free-rider on the aspirations of its
rivals. Instead of calling it ‘naı̈ve’ we may also applaud it for
exploiting its social environment in a simple and smart way.

Competitive mate search is challenging to study: The interplay of many individual goals, strategies, and constraints affects the aggregate results at the population level, as well as
how each strategy performs relative to each other on multiple
criteria. Simulation models coupled with appropriate analytic
techniques help us understand the interplay between strategies and various parameters. The surprising result revealed
here is that simply accepting any encountered partner can beat
highly selective strategies that aim for superior partner quality
or similarity. As its competitors become increasingly selective a simple and entirely indiscriminate speed strategy dominates and exploits the higher demands of the other strategies,
letting them do the work of ensuring some measure of quality
or harmony in the partnership.
People tend to believe that poor search results on the mating market can be improved by increasing the effort invested
in the search. Indeed, some popular online dating sites entice
customers with the promise of finding an optimal match by
using sophisticated search algorithms coupled with detailed
psychological profiles. Contrary to this, our results illustrate
that increasing the demands of search criteria can have negative consequences at the aggregate level. This does not mean
that quality or harmony are not important aspects of a relationship. However, achieving high values on those dimensions does not necessarily require demanding high values.
Although a small proportion of individuals who can afford to
have high aspirations can achieve high-quality matches, even
indiscriminate searchers can achieve satisfying results by exploiting their social environment.

Discussion
Through a series of competitive mate search simulations, we
found that strategies with high demands do not necessarily
yield higher outcomes in terms of multiple performance criteria. Instead, we have shown that a very simple strategy that
is maximally flexible can exploit those high-demand strategies. This suggests that in some settings, it may be smarter
for searchers to put lower bounds on their aspirations (as in
Simon’s (1956) notion of satisficing) than to increase their
demands (maximize desired criteria).
The benefactor of the clash of demands in this search setting was the seemingly naı̈ve speed strategy, which is arguably one of the simplest possible mate choice heuristics. It
appears to win out over its more complex competitor strategies because it can exploit the efforts of the others, relying
on its selected partner (following another strategy) to ensure
a high level of quality or harmony.
To test the generality of our findings, we conducted simulations with a relative quality strategy that defines its demands on a partner’s value in relation to its perceived own
0 , choosing potential partners with some distance
value Vown
to itself. We also explored a harmony-seeking strategy with
0
fully accurate knowledge of Vown
(i.e., ε = 0) and populations with normally distributed mate values (with a mean of
Vown = 50 and SD = 20). All variations produced the same
basic pattern of results, again demonstrating the robust advantage of the simple speed strategy.
Removing the assumption of known mate values (and requiring to learn this value instead) would only make the quality and harmony strategies do worse. Similarly, slowing down
the speed strategy (by using p(offer) < 1) would allow other
strategies to win more often, but would not change the basic
relationship we found. Interesting directions in which we are
extending this work include:

Acknowledgments
Tobias Gerstenberg and Björn Meder provided valuable inputs to earlier versions of the simulation.

References
Dudey, T., & Todd, P. M. (2001). Making good decisions with
minimal information: Simultaneous and sequential choice.
Journal of Bioeconomics, 3(2), 195–215.
Johnstone, R. A. (1997). The tactics of mutual mate choice
and competitive search. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 40(1), 51–59.
Kalick, S. M., & Hamilton, T. E. (1986). The matching
hypothesis reexamined. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51(4), 673.
McNamara, J. M., & Collins, E. J. (1990). The job search
problem as an employer-candidate game. Journal of Applied Probability, 27(4), 815–827.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of the
environment. Psychological Review, 63(2), 129–138.
Todd, P. M., & Miller, G. F. (1999). From pride and prejudice
to persuasion: Satisficing in mate search. In G. Gigerenzer,
P. M. Todd, & the ABC research group, Simple heuristics
that make us smart (pp. 286–308). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.

• Expanding the set of competing strategies to include
threshold-learning mechanisms that perform initial exploration of the range of potential mates before making offers.
• Letting individual agents switch strategies, e.g., when no
mate has been found after some time of search.
• Allowing the possibility of separation (divorce), rather than
assuming permanent matches. This may dampen the role
of the time factor, as mates of different mate values may
become available at various times.
• Adding multiple dimensions on which mate choices are
based, rather than just a single value. More complex strategies with thresholds on multiple criteria would lead to more
unpredictable outcomes at the population level, further necessitating a simulation approach.

704

