UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparisons in Category Learning: How Best to Compare For What

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7zz764kx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Higgins, Erin
Ross, Brian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparisons in Category Learning: How Best to Compare for What
Erin Jones Higgins (eljones3@illinois.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel St.
Champaign, IL, 61820 USA

Brian H. Ross (bhross@illinois.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel St.
Champaign, IL, 61820 USA
Abstract
Learners frequently compare across examples of categories in
order to learn more about them. Surprisingly little work has
been done looking at how the type of comparison one engages
in during learning affects what information is eventually
learned. Across three experiments we show that the type of
comparison, either within-category or between-category,
affects what conceptual information is acquired and the
benefits of each type of comparison change depending on the
type of category one is learning.
Keywords: comparisons, category learning, problem solving

Introduction
Category knowledge is used in a variety of ways and there is
evidence that the way categories are learned affects how
they are represented (Markman & Ross, 2003).
Specifically, the particulars of the learning task are critical
for determining what information a learner acquires (e.g.
Jones & Ross, in press). This view of the learner as actively
processing items suggests the potential importance of other
kinds of active processing. Comparison of examples has
often been suggested as important for category learning (e.g.
Spalding & Ross, 1994), but the various possibilities for
comparisons have not been adequately explored. A better
understanding of learning requires a better understanding of
comparison effects. In this paper, we suggest that the type of
comparison affects later performance, but its effect is
modulated by type of category.
Most comparisons research examines how comparisons
enable better analogical transfer. In these experiments the
focus is on how comparing across examples benefits
analogical reasoning contrasted with not comparing at all,
rather than focusing on different types of comparisons.
When learners are told to compare across examples,
successful transfer to novel problems is higher than when
comparisons are not part of learning (e.g. Gentner,
Lowenstein, & Thompson, 2003).
It is not the case that any comparison will benefit
learning. Rittle-Johnson and Star (2009) demonstrated that
the type of information being compared when solving math
problems affects what is learned. Learners who compared
different solution methods to the same problem showed
greater conceptual knowledge and flexibility than learners
who compared different problem types.
These results suggest that the type of comparison matters
for learning tasks that rely on comparisons. It is clear that

comparisons are critical to category learning, so the type of
comparison could also be important to consider. It is
possible that between- and within-category comparisons
provide the learner with very different information about the
category or categories being learned, and one or the other
could be beneficial depending on the goals of the task and
what information the learner needs to take away from the
comparison. This observation has yet to be addressed in the
category learning literature.
Gentner’s (1983) structure-mapping theory proposes that
people reason through analogies by noticing common
relational structures of the two instances being compared
(abstracted from the surface features of the examples). In
addition, it is easier to notice differences between two
examples when they are highly similar compared to when
they are not similar because highly similar examples share
many alignable differences (Markman & Wisniewski, 1997;
Gentner & Markman, 1997). How this theory plays out in
category learning is not yet clear. On the one hand,
structure-mapping theory might predict that within-category
comparisons are more beneficial than between-category
comparisons because items from the same category will be
more similar to each other and have more alignable
differences. On the other hand, if the categories being
compared have many alignable differences, then betweencategory comparison could also be helpful for learning the
feature values for each category. Additionally, there are
categories whose relational structure is not difficult to
acquire. For these types of categories, between-category
comparisons may also be more helpful if learning to
distinguish between categories is critical.
There is some evidence suggesting that between-category
comparison is more beneficial for category learning.
Kornell and Bjork (2008) had participants learn categories
of paintings. When examples from one category were
spaced between examples from other categories, learners
were better able to classify novel items from those
categories at test compared with novel items from categories
whose instances were massed together during learning. The
examples were presented one at a time, so participants were
never told to make comparisons, however, the benefit for
spaced items suggests that they did benefit from having
examples from multiple categories in mind.
There are reasons that within- and between-category
comparisons could be helpful, though it seems that the
impact of each comparison type could be modulated by

1388

various learning conditions. It is critical to gain a better
understanding of when each comparison type is helpful and
why. One possibility is that the type of category that needs
to be learned could determine the benefit of one comparison
type over another.
We begin with one explanation
regarding why category type would matter, but we
acknowledge that there may well be other explanations that
make similar specific predictions.
If the relational structure of the items is difficult to learn
or requires abstraction away from the surface properties of
an example, then it is critical to focus on what each category
is like before attempting to discern the properties that
distinguish one category from another. Comparing withincategory would be more effective for allowing the learner to
notice the common relational structure of category
members. On the other hand, if the category structure is
closely tied to the surface or perceptual features of the
category then it may be easy enough to learn the relational
structure regardless of comparison type. Consequently the
learner will benefit from between-category more than
within-category
comparisons,
as
between-category
comparisons highlight how one category differs from others.
There are two goal of the present study. One, to
demonstrate that the type of comparison (within-category or
between-category) affects what category knowledge is
acquired. Two, to see if the type of category being learned
determines which comparison type is most beneficial.
In the first experiment, we test the idea that categories
whose structures are closely tied to their perceptual features
will benefit more from between-category comparison than
within-category comparison. Finding that they do, we
attempt to replicate the finding in a second experiment using
real world materials and a different learning task. In the
third experiment, we examine our other claim, that
categories whose structure requires abstraction away from
the surface properties of an example will benefit more from
within-category comparison, by teaching learners two
different categories of math problems through either withincategory or between-category comparison.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we investigated whether categories whose
structure is tied to the perceptual properties of the exemplars
would be better learned through between- or withincategory comparison. Learners were taught categories that
are commonly used in category learning research—two
categories of artificial aliens, Deegers and Koozles.
Participants either learned the categories by comparing two
exemplars from the same category or one exemplar from
each category. After learning, participants performed a
classification test that included old and new items.

Method
Design Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
between-subjects conditions: between-category comparison
learning or within-category comparison learning. Two

different combinations of features were used and were
counterbalanced across participants.
Participants Participants were 43 undergraduates from the
University of Illinois who participated for course credit.
Three participants did not follow instructions, so only 40
participants are considered in the analyses below.
Materials Stimuli for both the learning and test phases were
two types of fictitious aliens, called Deegers and Koozles,
which varied along six binary features: arms, tail, antennae,
legs, eyes, and mouth (See Figure 1). For each feature,
there was a prototypical Deeger value and a prototypical
Koozle value. The structure of the categories was family
resemblance. Items shown during learning always had five
out of six features in common with the category prototype
and one feature in common with the other category’s
prototype to reflect variation among members. Four of the
features were diagnostic of category membership, meaning
one value appeared 75% of the time in items in one category
and only 25% of the time in items in the other category,
while the two remaining features were consistently the same
value across both categories’ items. This resulted in 4 items
per category.
The diagnosticity of features was
counterbalanced across participants, as noted above.

Figure 1: Example alien prototype stimuli for one subject
On each trial, two items were compared. There were 12
unique comparisons for the within-category condition and
16 unique comparisons for the between-category condition.
The two features that did not vary during learning (legs
and tails in Figure 1 prototypes) were varied at test to
generate additional exemplars. The prototypes were also
shown. This resulted in 32 exemplars (16 per category) at
test. Of the 32 exemplars, 8 were old and 24 were new.
Procedure After giving informed consent, participants were
told that they would be learning about two different
categories of aliens, Deegers and Koozles, and would later
be tested on what they had learned.
On each trial during the learning phase, participants were
shown two items with their category labels. At the top of
the screen, the between-category comparison learners saw
the prompt: “List how this Deeger [Koozle] and this Koozle
[Deeger] are the same and different.” The within-category
comparison learners saw the prompt: “List how these
Deegers [Koozles] are the same and different.” To make the
category labels salient, “Koozle” was always presented in
red and “Deeger” was always presented in blue.
Participants typed their response and then clicked on a box

1389

to submit the response and move to the next trial. There
were 24 trials. Pairs of items were presented in a random
order for each participant.
After the learning phase, participants were given
instructions about the test phase. On each trial, they saw
one alien and two category labels. Their job was to choose
the correct category label for the alien using the mouse.
After making a selection, the next trial appeared 500 ms
later. There were 32 trials. Items were presented in a
random order for each participant. Finally, participants
were debriefed and thanked for their time.

Results & Discussion
As predicted, learners who engaged in between-category
comparison during learning had higher overall classification
accuracy (M = 0.70, SD = 0.16) than learners who engaged
in within-category comparison (M = 0.60, SD = 0.16), t (38)
= 2.16, p < 0.05. The same results were also obtained for
only old items (M = 0.69, SD = 0.18 for between-category
comparison learners; M = 0.58, SD = 0.18 for withincategory comparison learners), t (38) = 2.05, p < 0.05.
There was a marginal effect of comparison type for only
new items (M = 0.71, SD = 0.17 for between-category
comparison learners; M = 0.60, SD = 0.17 for withincategory comparison learners), t (38) = 1.94, p = 0.06.
For categories whose structure is salient in the perceptual
features of its members, between-category comparison is
more beneficial for learning to classify category members.
These results are consistent with Kornell and Bjork’s (2008)
finding that categories whose members are spaced between
other category’s members during learning are learned better
than categories whose members are massed together.

Experiment 2
It was critical to replicate the results of Experiment 1 using
a different set of materials. If we want to make the claim
that between-category comparison is more beneficial for
categories whose structure is salient in the perceptual
features of its members then we need to be able to
demonstrate the effect across a wide range of perceptual
stimuli. Here we chose to use a real world set of categories
whose perceptual properties are critical to category
membership—birds. One critical difference between the
bird categories and the artificial stimuli used in Experiment
1 is that the birds have more feature variation and
complexity, making hypothesis testing more difficult.
In Experiment 1, participants were explicitly told to
compare across items. When learning in the real world, a
learner is not always prompted to compare examples. One
question that arises is whether comparison, and more
specifically the type of comparison, matters when it is
incidental to the task and no specific analysis of similarities
and differences is required. To address these issues, we had
participants do a modified same/different judgment task
while learning about real-world categories of birds.
Participants were presented with a bird picture and its label
and then asked to choose the label for another bird picture.

The two label choices were one that was the same as the
first bird’s label and one that was different. Comparison was
not required for this task, though it was extremely helpful.
Finally, we wanted to see if comparison only occurs if
items are presented at the same time. To test this, we
manipulated whether items appeared simultaneously or
sequentially.
Participants learned about six different categories of
birds: three in a way that encouraged between-category
comparison and three in a way that encouraged withincategory comparison. They either learned about the bird
categories by viewing two exemplars simultaneously or
sequentially. To determine whether one comparison type
was more beneficial, as well as whether comparison benefits
only arise when items are side-by-side, all participants
performed a novel classification test after learning. Novel
classification is a typical means of assessing category
knowledge, as it addresses the degree to which participants
are able to generalize what they had learned 1.

Method
Design Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
two between-subjects conditions: either all bird exemplars
were presented on the screen in pairs (Pairs condition) or
they were all presented one at a time (Singles condition).
In addition, there was a within-subject manipulation
across all participants: out of six bird categories participants
had to learn, three were learned in a way that encouraged
between-category comparison and three were learned in a
way that encouraged within-category comparison.
Participants Participants were 48 undergraduates from the
University of Illinois who participated for course credit.
Materials Stimuli for the learning and test phases were
color images of birds from six families in the Passeriformes
order, compiled by Jacoby, Wahlheim, and Coane (2010)
from www.whatbird.com. The six bird families were
finches, flycatchers, swallows, thrushes, vireos, and
warblers (See Figure 2). For each family, 12 exemplars
were used in the experiment: six were used in the study
phase and six were used for the novel classification test.

Figure 2: Example bird stimuli
Procedure After giving informed consent, participants were
told that they would be learning about six different
1

We would like to thank Larry Jacoby and Chris Wahlheim for
their helpful suggestions for this experiment.

1390

categories of birds and would later be tested on what they
had learned.
On each trial during the learning phase, participants in the
pairs condition were presented with two birds. Below the
bird on the left side of the screen was its label (e.g. “This is
a Finch”) and below the bird on the right side was a prompt
(e.g. “Is this a Finch or a Warbler?”). The participant’s job
was to determine which of two labels went with the bird
picture on the right side of the screen and click on that label.
One option was always the same label as the left-side bird’s
label. Essentially participants were making a same/different
judgment, only they chose either the same or a different
category label instead. Participants were never told that
they should use the other bird or compare across instances.
For categories of birds in the within-category comparison
condition, the correct answer to the prompt was always the
same label as the label for the bird on the left. For
categories of birds in the between-category comparison
condition, the correct answer to the prompt was always the
label that did not match the label for the bird on the left.
The list orders were created such that the correct answer
was not predictable by the response that preceded it.
After making a response, the participant received
feedback in the form of “Correct!” or “Incorrect”.
Regardless of the correctness of the participant’s response,
the two bird pictures along with their correct labels and the
corrective feedback remained on the screen for 12 seconds.
The only major difference for the singles condition was
that the bird pictures were presented one at a time. First,
participants viewed a bird and its label (e.g. “This is a
Finch”) for eight seconds. Next, participants viewed a
different bird and a prompt (e.g. “Is this a Finch or a
Warbler?”). The participant had to determine which of two
labels went with the bird, and one option was always the
same label as the preceding bird’s label. Feedback was
similar to feedback in the pairs condition, except that only
one bird was shown with its label and the feedback
remained on the screen for six seconds. As in the pairs
condition, participants were never told that they should use
the other bird or compare across instances.
There were 36 learning trials. For between-category
comparison bird categories, an exemplar from each category
appeared equally often with each of the other betweencategory comparison categories.
After learning, participants made family level categorylearning judgments for novel exemplars. Participants used a
number pad and indicated on a scale of 16% (chance) to
100% how well they had learned that family of birds. Next,
they participated in a novel classification test. On each trial,
participants were given an exemplar and asked to choose
one of the six family labels presented on the screen using
the mouse. After choosing a label, participants indicated
how confident they were in their selection on a scale
between 16% (chance) and 100%. (No differences were
found between conditions for confidence ratings, so they are
not discussed further.) There were 36 trials, presented in a

different random order for each participant. Finally,
participants were debriefed and thanked for their time.

Results & Discussion
Learning Performance Learning performance was
calculated as the proportion of correct responses across all
learning trials, with chance being 0.05. 2x2 mixed factorial
ANOVA showed an interaction between presentation type
and comparison type, F (1, 46) = 4.13, p < 0.05, so follow
up paired t-tests were run. For singles learners, betweencategory comparison trials were marginally more accurate
(M = 0.73, SD = 0.14) than within-category comparison
trials (M = 0.67, SD = 0.10), t (23) = 1.73, p = 0.10. For
pairs learners, there was no difference between comparison
types, t (23) = 1.00, p > 0.05.
Overall learning accuracy was marginally higher for pairs
learners (M = 0.75, SD = 0.10) than singles learners (M =
0.70, SD = 0.08), F (1, 46) = 3.51, p = 0.07. There was no
main effect of comparison type on learning accuracy
(between-category items: M = 0.73, SD = 0.13 and withincategory items: M = 0.71, SD = 0.12), F (1, 46) = 0.758, p
> 0.05. The main learning finding is that when items are
presented simultaneously, learning accuracy is marginally
better than when they are presented sequentially (singles);
however, comparison type did not affect learning accuracy
across either presentation type.
Test Performance The main goal of this study was to see if
between-category comparison was more beneficial for
category learning even when it was incidental to the task. In
addition we wanted to know if the method of presentation—
pairs or singles—affected the degree to which participants
benefited from comparisons at test. Test performance was
calculated as the proportion of correct responses across
trials, with chance being 0.167 (participants had to choose
between 6 possible category labels). A mixed factorial
ANOVA showed a main effect of comparison type.
Classification accuracy for novel items in categories that
were learned through between-category comparisons (M =
0.42, SD = 0.18) was higher than items in categories learned
through within-category comparisons (M = 0.36, SD =
0.19), F (1, 46) = 4.88, p < 0.05. There was a marginal
main effect of presentation type. Pairs learners were
marginally more accurate (M = 0.43, SD = 0.16) than
singles learners (M = 0.35, SD = 0.16), F (1, 46) = 2.83, p =
0.10. There was no interaction between presentation type
and comparison type, F (1, 46) = 0.70, p > 0.05, suggesting
that learners benefit from between-category comparisons
regardless of whether they view the items simultaneously or
sequentially (See Table 1).
Table 1: Classification accuracy (and s.d.) broken down by
presentation type and comparison type
Pairs condition
Singles condition

1391

Between-category
0.46 (0.19)
0.37 (0.16)

Within-category
0.39 (0.17)
0.32 (0.21)

In a task where comparisons were incidental to the
learning task and specific analyses of similarities and
differences across items were not required, the type of
comparison was still critical for learning. Bird families that
were learned in a situation that encouraged betweencategory comparison were learned better than families
learned in a situation that encouraged within-category
comparison. These results replicate the findings from
Experiment 1 using a very different learning task and
materials set, suggesting that between-category comparisons
are beneficial for categories whose structure is salient in the
perceptual features of their members.

Experiment 3
We have now demonstrated that the type of comparison
matters when learning about categories. The second goal of
our study was to determine if different types of categories
benefit from different types of comparisons. There are
reasons to think that within-category comparisons are more
helpful when the structure of the category is abstract and
difficult to learn. For these categories, learners must go
beyond the surface or perceptual features of the category
members to acquire the relational structure. According to
structural alignment, alignable differences between
instances are helpful for seeing the relational structure that
is common across items. If there are more alignable
differences between items within the same category, then
within-category comparisons should be more beneficial. To
test this explanation, we turned to an abstract problemsolving domain—mathematics.
In this experiment we taught learners about two different
mathematical concepts, permutations and combinations.
Participants either compared within-category (two
permutations
problems)
or
between-category
(a
permutations problem and a combinations problem). At test
we had learners classify novel problems by determining
which formula was appropriate. For other novel problems,
we gave the formula and the learners had to apply it and
solve the problem. We predicted that within-category
comparisons would be more beneficial than betweencategory comparisons, as evidenced by higher classification
and problem solving accuracy.

Method
Design Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
two
between-subjects
conditions:
within-category
comparison learning or between-category comparison
learning.
Participants Participants were 12 undergraduates from the
University of Illinois who participated for course credit.
Materials Four problems, two permutation and two
combination, were written for the learning phase (see Ross,
1984, Appendix 2 for examples of similar problems).
Within each problem type, one problem referred to animate
objects while the other referred to inanimate objects.

Regardless of the between-subjects manipulation, an
animate object problem was always paired with an
inanimate object problem for a comparison.
Four problems, two of each type, were written for the
classification test. Another four, two of each type, were
written for the problem-solving test. An equal number of
animate and inanimate object problems were written for
each type and each test.
Procedure After giving informed consent, participants were
told that they would be learning about two different
categories of math problems and would later be tested on
what they had learned. They were given a packet that
included 7 pages and a cover sheet. On the first page after
the cover sheet was a sheet that detailed how to solve a
particular class of problems (e.g. permutations). On the
second page was a problem of that type. Participants had to
identify the variables and apply the formula, but did not
have to solve the arithmetic. Once satisfied, they could turn
the page and see the solution. This process repeated either
for a problem of the same type, if the participant was in the
within-category comparison condition, or for a problem of a
different type (e.g. a combinations problem) if the
participant was in the between-category comparison
condition. After completing the second problem, the last
page had the following prompt: “List the similarities and
differences between the problems and their solutions.”
Participants could write as much or as little as they wanted
and take as long as they needed to get through the entire
packet. When finished, the participant turned in the packet
and received a second packet, which was in the same
format. Across the two packets there were a total of four
problems, which resulted in two comparisons (one per
packet).
After learning, participants were given another packet that
included both tests. The first test was the classification test.
Participants were shown four novel problems one at a time
and had to circle which of the two formulas (permutations
or combinations) was the correct one. The formulas were
appropriately marked with a P or a C, so even if the
participant had not memorized the formulas, he or she
should have been able to recognize which was which. The
second test was the problem-solving test. Participants were
shown four novel problems one at a time along with the
appropriate formula. Their task was to solve the problem
with the exception of doing the arithmetic. They could take
as much time as they needed. Finally, participants were
debriefed and thanked for their time.

Results & Discussion
Learners who were given within-category comparisons
during learning had higher classification accuracy at test (M
= 0.83, SD = 0.13) than learners who were given betweencategory comparisons (M = 0.54, SD = 0.25), t (10) = 2.57,
p < 0.05. This finding suggests that when learning about
categories requires learners to abstract away from the
surface features of the examples, within-category

1392

comparisons are more beneficial for acquiring conceptual
knowledge.
Within-category comparison learners showed better,
(though not reliably better) problem solving ability (M =
0.91, SD = 0.13) than between-category comparison
learners (M = 0.75, SD = 0.27), t (10) = 1.35, p > 0.05.
Although the difference was not statistically significant, this
may be due to ceiling performance by some participants in
both groups.
The findings from this experiment suggest that withincategory comparisons are beneficial for learning about
categories that require abstraction away from the surface
features of the items. In some recent work not reported
here, we find similar results using very different materials
that also require abstraction away from the surface features
of the items (see Erickson, Chin-Parker, & Ross, 2005 for
example materials).

General Discussion
Across three experiments we have shown that the type of
comparison used during learning affects what is learned
about categories. We showed this across a variety of
different categories as well as different learning tasks.
Additionally, the benefits of each type of comparison are
modulated by the type of category being learned.
If the relational structure of the items is not evident in the
items’ surface features, then comparing within-category
leads to better learning. This explanation fits within the
structural alignment view (Gentner, 1983), which argues
that examples sharing more alignable differences will be
more effectively compared. If two examples are from
different categories and share fewer alignable differences
then within-category comparisons will be more effective.
On the other hand, when the structure of the category is
based on the perceptual or surface level features of its
members, as in the bird categories and artificial alien
categories used in the present experiments, then it is
relatively easy to determine without needing to compare
within-category. For these categories, between-category
comparisons will be more beneficial, assuming the goal is to
learn what distinguishes different categories, because the
distinguishing information is more salient when comparing
across multiple categories.
This is a first step toward understanding when and why
certain types of comparisons are more beneficial than
others.
We proposed one explanation here, but we
acknowledge that there are other factors that could affect
how comparison type influences learning. For instance, the
degree to which the categories being learned are similar to
each other may play a role in determining which comparison
type is useful. If two categories are similar then they will
share many alignable differences potentially making
between-category comparisons effective for learning.
In addition, when learning about categories, the goal is
not always just to classify. Future work should address how
comparison type affects other measures of learning, for
instance inference ability and explanation generation.

Additionally, more work needs to be done to determine
other factors beyond category type that determine which
kinds of comparisons are beneficial.

References
Erickson, J.E., Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B.H. (2005).
Inference and classification learning of abstract coherent
categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 86-99.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science,7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., Lowenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393408.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Jacoby, L. L., Wahlheim, C. N., & Coane, J. H. (2010).
Retrieval practice enhances natural category learning:
Effects on accuracy and on metacognition at the levels of
items and categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 36, 1441–
1451.
Jones, E.L. & Ross, B.H. (in press). Classification versus
inference contrasted with real world categories. Memory
& Cognition.
Kornell, N. & Bjork, R.A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: Is spacing the "enemy of induction"?
Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Markman, A.B. & Ross, B.H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592-613.
Markman, A.B. & Wisniewski, E.J. (1997). Similar and
different: The differentiation of basic-level categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 23, 54-70.
Rittle-Johnson, B. & Star, J.R. (2009). Compared to what?
The effects of different comparisons on conceptual
knowledge and procedural flexibility for equation solving.
Journal of Educational Psychology,101, 529-544.
Ross, B.H. (1984). Remindings and their effects in learning
a cognitive skill. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 371-416.
Spalding, T. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Comparison-based
learning: Effects of comparing instances during category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1251-1263.

1393

