UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conscious Intentions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1334j8wt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Dardis, Anthony

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conscious Intentions
Anthony Dardis
Philosophy Department, 104 Heger Hall
115 Hofstra University
Hempstead, NY 11549-1150 USA
Anthony.Dardis@hofstra.edu

Abstract

pirical reason to think that the consciousness of action plays
no causal role in the production of action.
In Dardis (2008) I argue for an account of causation, laws
and properties that permits mental causation. If my argument
succeeds, then relatively a priori challenges to the causal efficacy of the mental (Kim, 2005) do not work. My book offers arguments for the Davidson-style causal account of action sketched above; I will assume that account of action here.
I will also assume without argument that the folk psychological concepts are not hopelessly flawed.
I take the Wegner/Libet arguments very seriously. My arguments show that mental causation is metaphysically or conceptually possible. But they certainly do not show that it is
actual. The arguments that it is not actual are many and varied
and I cannot do them any kind of justice here. I do, however,
think that they do not succeed; see for instance Bogen (2004)
and Hardcastle (2004).
This paper responds to a contemporary, empirically informed, philosophical account of consciousness (Prinz,
2007). According to Prinz, all consciousness is perceptual,
including all consciousness involved in action. If this is right,
or so I argue below, then one claim that the folk psychological theory of action makes turns out to be false, namely, the
claim that one’s intentions as one acts can be conscious. In
turn, if one’s intentions as one acts are never conscious, then
one’s consciousness isn’t causally involved in one’s actions
in the way that folk psychology takes it to be. When we act—
or so folk psychology suggests—at least sometimes we consciously decide and intend to act, and it is those conscious decisions and intentions that make the action happen. If Prinz’s
theory is right, this turns out to be incorrect. In what follows,
I argue, on conceptual grounds, that Prinz’s theory cannot be
right. At the end I discuss the philosophical and empirical
implications of my argument.

It has recently been widely argued that all consciousness is
perceptual, including the conscious experience of action. This
paper argues that there can be a conscious component of the
experience of action that is not perceptual. The argument is
based on Searle’s concept of “direction of fit” and the conditions of satisfaction of an intention. The conditions of satisfaction of an intention differ from those of a perception. If
the intention involved in action is conscious, that conscious
mental state cannot be exclusively perceptual. Hence not all
consciousness is perceptual.
Keywords: consciousness; agency; action; experience; intentionality

“Folk” psychology and scientific psychology
The concepts of belief, desire, intention, meaning and
consciousness are ubiquitous in “ordinary” (that is, nonscientific) explanations of human behavior. The following
all come from the NY Times: “just 43 percent of Americans believe that Mr. Trump was definitely born in the United
States” (April 26, 2011); doctors “want a life” (April 2); “Justice John Paul Stevens had announced his intention to retire
from the Supreme Court” (April 20); “Or they could black
out—a condition in which they’re conscious but not storing
memories” (April 24); “Some activists are calling the planned
demonstrations ‘Azadi Friday’—Azadi meaning freedom in
Kurdish” (April 28).
According to one philosophical account (Davidson,
1980a), ordinary or folk psychology puts these concepts together in the following ways to explain actions. People want
various things, and they have beliefs about how to get them.
When they act on a desire, they form an intention to do something that they think will get them what they want. A bodily
movement counts as doing that thing provided it is caused by
that intention. While one’s intentions and beliefs and desires
are sometimes conscious as one acts, or as one deliberates
about acting, often they are not. One’s reasons tend more to
be conscious the more difficult the decision is, for instance in
terms of thinking through what and how to act, or in terms of
the costs and benefits of acting.
Challenges to “folk psychology” come from a variety of directions. Eliminativists (Churchland, 1981) argue that these
“folk psychological” concepts are so flawed that they have no
explanatory use. Noncausalists (Wittgenstein, 1958; Wilson,
1989) argue that the explanation of action isn’t causal explanation; some alternative conceptions are that it is teleological
explanation or that it is a kind of explanation that fits an action
into a pattern. Libet (2004) and Wegner (2002) provide em-

Prinz: all consciousness is perceptual
Prinz (2007) argues that all consciousness is perceptual. A
perceptually conscious mental state, according to Prinz, is
one that is “couched in a perceptual format” (336), a format
proprietary to one of the senses. Sensory systems are understood as input systems (338). Mental states that are “couched
in a perceptual format” will thus have the character of states
arising in the sensory systems. Prinz does not assume that
perceptually conscious mental states have to come from the
senses; indeed, his account of the consciousness of action has
it that those perceptually conscious mental states originate in
the motor control systems.

156

Since action and perception appear to be diametrically opposite aspects of the mind, consciousness of action appears
to be a counterexample to the thesis that all consciousness
is perceptual. Prinz uses current neurobiological theories of
motor control, for example, (Frith et al., 2000), to explain
how consciousness of action is perceptual. (I will call these
“comparator-based theories”.) Normally when we act, a goal
is sent to a motor control system. The motor control system issues two kinds of representations: inverse models that
specify motor commands to make the body move so as to satisfy the goal, and forward models that (inter alia) represent
predicted sensory consequences of the movement. When a
comparator signals that sensory consequences of the movement match those predicted by the forward model, the agent
has the experience of agency. If the sensory experience of
the match exhausts the consciousness of action, then all consciousness of action is perceptual.
I am going to argue that Prinz’ account of the consciousness of action cannot be correct. The next two sections of the
paper lay out the conceptual materials required to make the
argument: the descriptive/directive distinction and the idea of
direction of fit, and the distinction between “intentional” and
“possessive” readings of the expression “conscious of”. With
these conceptual materials laid out I go on to argue that the
perceptual account of consciousness has no place for a conscious intention in action: a “directive” mental state that has
the “world-to-mind” direction of fit, which is itself conscious,
where our consciousness of it is “possessive” rather than “intentional”.

open the door isn’t satisfied if you open the door for me or if
somehow by accident I cause it to open, and so the CS for my
intention are that this very intention should cause the door to
open.
Searle, Davidson (1980a) and others have argued that if a
bodily movement is an action, then it must be caused by an
intention. Searle distinguishes between prior intentions and
intentions in action. A verbal expression of the experience of
the intention in action is “I am doing A” (Searle, 1983, 84).
The conscious experience of action must therefore be related
in some way to the intention in action that causes the action.
If that intention in action is itself conscious, then the conscious experience of action involves a conscious experience
of that intention.
“Deviant causal chains” show that conscious experience of
agency must (somehow) include the CS of the intention in
action. Davidson’s famous example (Davidson, 1980b, 79)
slightly modified goes like this: a climber wishes “to rid himself of the weight and danger” of his fellow climber on a rope.
This might “so unnerve him as to cause him to loosen his
hold” yet he does not do so intentionally. So the agent’s intention causes what it is the intention to do, yet the agent doesn’t
do it intentionally, since the causal chain is “deviant”. Now
suppose that I am trying to raise my arm. Let a tricky neuroscientist detect activity in my motor control systems, and intervene, so that (a) my arm does go up, but (b) efferent signals
from my motor control systems are not the cause, rather the
neuroscientist’s intervention is what triggers the activity. The
causation is “deviant” relative to the causally self-referential
CS of the experience. Hence my experience of raising my arm
is illusory: the arm’s going up isn’t my action, even though
my motor control systems were involved in making it happen.
(Bayne (2010) gives essentially the same argument to show
that the experience of agency is non-veridical when the neuroscientist intervenes.) My experience of action can therefore
be illusory, and in rather subtle ways, with respect to what
the intention in action specifies. The puzzle, to be discussed
below, is how to locate the causally self-referential CS of the
intention in action with respect to our consciousness of action.

Direction of fit and causal self reference
Searle (1983), following Anscombe (1957), argues for a distinction between two kinds of “direction of fit” intentional
states may have (see Burge (1991); Bayne (2007, 2010) for
critical discussion of Searle’s view). Perceptions and beliefs
have the “mind-to-world” direction of fit, since they are satisfied (i.e., true) when they agree with how the world actually
is. Desires and intentions have the “world-to-mind” direction of fit, since they are satisfied when the world agrees with
them. A performative utterance—for example, “I promise
to do the laundry”—has both directions of fit: it both describes something I am doing, and makes it so that I have done
that very thing, that is, promised to do the laundry. Millikan
(1995) also following Anscombe (1957) uses the terms “descriptive” and “directive” for the distinction, and argues that
there is a very wide class of representations—she calls them
“pushmi-pullyu” representations—that are both descriptive
and directive. (Bayne, 2010) uses the terms “thetic” and
“telic” for the distinction.
Perceptions and intentions (unlike beliefs and desires) have
causally self-referential conditions of satisfaction (CS). My
visual perception of a hummingbird would be incorrect if the
hummingbird did not, in fact, cause the perception. Thus the
CS of this perception are that there is a hummingbird near
me and that it causes this very perception. My intention to

“Consciousness of”
I am going to argue that the conscious experience of the intention in action is not perceptual. Before I get to the argument I
want to dwell for a moment on an ambiguity in the expression
“conscious of”.
Bayne (2010) distinguishes between the “intentional” and
“possessive” senses of the expression “conscious of”. Suppose I am looking at an apple, that I am conscious, and that
my awareness of the apple is conscious. We might say that I
am conscious of seeing the apple. On the “intentional” sense
of the expression, the seeing, and the consciousness of the
seeing, are two distinct things: the latter is an intentional state
that is about the former, an intentional state which is about the
apple. On the “possessive” sense of the expression, if we say

157

that I am conscious of seeing the apple, we are saying that the
intentional state which is about the apple is itself conscious
(“has/possesses consciousness”). The “of” in “consciousness
of” fairly strongly implies something like intentionality (reference, aboutness): when I am conscious of the apple in front
of me, my consciousness is one thing and what it’s about is
another. But we also use the expression “conscious of” to report a fact about the mental state itself, regardless of what it
is about: “I am conscious of seeing the apple” just means that
my seeing the apple is a conscious seeing.1
Given a state of affairs reported as “consciousness of M”,
where ‘M’ denotes an intentional state, if the expression
“consciousness of” is understood in the intentional sense,
then the state of affairs involves (at least) two distinct intentional states, M, and the intentional state that is about it (the
consciousness of it). If the expression is understood in the
possessive sense, then the state of affairs may involve only a
single intentional state, M, which is conscious. (Assuming
that M itself has or possesses consciousness, there can also
be another conscious mental state M0 about M: in virtue of
possessing M0 the agent is conscious of M in the intentional
sense. The point of the intentional/possessive distinction is
that there need not be another mental state M0 if the agent is
conscious of M.)
Suppose I raise my arm, and do so intentionally. And suppose I am conscious of raising my arm. I am, then, “conscious
of intentionally doing something.” On the “intentional” understanding of this expression, this consciousness is a conscious intentional state that is directed at or about my raising
my arm. This intentional state is about my doing something,
and so it is about the intention in action that causes the action.
Hence it is something distinct from the intention in action. On
the “possessive” understanding of the expression, the part of
my action that consists of my intentional states (for example:
the intention in action that causes the action) is itself conscious. Again, on the intentional understanding, there are (at
least) two intentional states: the intention in action, and the
intentional state that is about it (and the rest of the action). On
the possessive understanding, there may be one fewer: the in-

tention in action itself is conscious.
For the discussion that follows, it is worth noting that if we
treat the phrase “consciousness of action” as expressing the
intentional understanding of “consciousness of,” it is very—
perhaps overwhelmingly—natural to think of the consciousness involved in intentional action as having the mind-toworld or descriptive direction of fit. On this understanding
the action and the intention that causes it are distinct from the
consciousness of that action and intention, and the consciousness of (or experience of) agency is about them.
By contrast, if we treat the phrase “consciousness of action” as expressing the possessive understanding of “consciousness of,” then it is natural to think of the consciousness
of action in terms of the intentional states involved in action—
particularly the intention in action—themselves having (possessing) consciousness. Such a view leaves open the possibility that there are in addition various intentional mental states
involved with action that are about it: that consciousness of
action is both possessive and intentional. That is the view I
for which I am about to argue.

Consciousness of the intention in action
Prinz argues that all experience of action is perceptual. For
Prinz, being perceptual means having a sensory format. Having a sensory format in turn means having the mind-to-world
direction of fit. Now, it certainly is correct that some aspects
of the experience of action do have the mind-to-world direction of fit. For example, typically (although not always)
agents have sensory experience of what their bodies are doing as they act.
But there is more to the experience of action than sensing that something has happened. The action must be caused
by an intention in action. The experience must be an experience that one has done something, and so must somehow
be an experience of the intention in action. If the intention
in action itself is conscious (in the possessive sense), then
the conscious experience of the action cannot be exclusively
perceptual. If it were, all its intentionality would have the descriptive, mind-to-world direction of fit, and there would be
nothing in the experience that has the kind of CS possessed
by intentions.
Thus a dilemma for the perceptual theory of consciousess:
either the intention in action is itself conscious, and its consciousness cannot be exclusively perceptual, or else the intention in action is not conscious. Since I think the intention in
action can be conscious, I conclude that the perceptual theory
cannot be the whole truth.
There are various ways to think about the collection of
mental states involved in the experience of action. I will lay
out some of the more plausible candidates and show that they
are all impaled on the horns of this dilemma.
Could the conscious mental states involved in the conscious experience of action have both kinds of direction
of fit—perhaps something along the lines of Millikan’s
“pushmi-pullyu” representations? Certainly; but this sugges-

1 I suspect much philosophical mischief is made by the fact that
“conscious of” can be used in both ways. For example, it is part of
what drives higher-order thought accounts of consciousness (Rosenthal, 2006): if my seeing the apple is conscious, then I’m conscious of my seeing the apple, and so (it is argued) it must be
that the consciousness of my seeing is constituted by an intentional
state directed at the seeing. In this paper I remain entirely neutral
on the higher-order thought account of consciousness. The intentional/possessive distinction I am making is unrelated to the higherorder thought theory. To illustrate: suppose I am conscious of seeing
the apple, and I’m using that expression in the intentional sense, so
that the mental state I’m reporting is about the seeing. The intentional/possessive distinction isn’t itself any kind of theory of consciousness, so nothing is entailed by that distinction about what explains the consciousness of any of these mental states. It could be
a higher-order thought explanation. It need not be. It could be that
the consciousness of the seeing is conscious in virtue of some intrinsic feature it has. Moreover, it could also be that the seeing itself
is conscious (that is, I’m “conscious of it” in the possessive sense)
in virtue of some intrinsic feature it has (that is: not in virtue of the
presence of the consciousness of it (in the intentional sense)).

158

tion is inconsistent with the claim that these mental states are
(exclusively) perceptual. Adding directive, world-to-mind intentionality to such states would precisely make them not
completely perceptual.
Prinz argues that experience of action is the experience of
the comparator signal. The comparator signal, however, does
not have the right CS for the intention in action. The signal
records a match between a forward model and sensory input.
A verbal expression of its content might be “what my body
has done matches what I predicted it would do”. So it has the
descriptive, mind-to-world direction of fit, and correspondingly the world-to-mind direction of causation: the match is
supposed to cause the experience.
The representational components of the comparator system
also lack the right sort of CS for the intention in action. The
sensory input to the comparator is a perception: it represents,
and is supposed to be caused by, how the body is moving.
The forward model is like a prediction and hence has the
descriptive, mind-to-world direction of fit: “this is how the
body is going to move”. (It also functions to make various
things happen (Frith et al., 2000, 1772): dampen the experience of sensory input that matches predicted input, issue simulations of predicted sensory input to coordinate fast accurate
performance, and others. These contents don’t match those of
the intention in action, though: the intention represents that
it makes the action happen, not these motor control system
events.)
The inverse model is a better candidate to ground the
conscious experience of the intention in action, since it has
intention-like CS: it specifies how the body is to move, and
its function is to move the body in that way. But since the inverse model has the world-to-mind direction of fit, conscious
experience of it (in the possessive sense) could not be purely
perceptual.
So the perceptual consciousness of the action cannot itself
be, or have as a part, the intention in action. What if the perceptual consciousness of action is distinct from the intention
in action? Prinz’s perceptual consciousness view treats the
consciousness of action as a kind of (possibly illusory) sensation of what one is doing. This is the “intentional” understanding of “consciousness of”: the conscious representation
is one thing, and what it’s about is another. So when I am conscious of acting, I’m having a sensory experience, the content
of which can be expressed this way: “I am doing A”. The doing, and the intention, are therefore what is represented by
the experience. The experience is not the conscious intention
in action itself. The conscious experience represents agency;
it is not itself a conscious intention. Hence the perceptually
conscious experience has the “mind-to-world” direction of fit,
and the intention itself has the “world-to-mind” direction of
fit.
But if the intention in action is conscious, but distinct from
the conscious experience of action, then its consciousness
isn’t explained by the conscious experience of the action.
And, again, since it is an intention, however its consciousness

is to be explained, it can’t be a perceptual sort of consciousness.
Finally, what if the intention in action just isn’t conscious
at all? The conscious experience of action then could have
the following components: sensory consciousness of bodily
movement; sensory consciousness of a match between bodily movement and action plans; and some kind of conscious
awareness that the movement was intentional, that is, that
among its causes is an intention in action. That is a coherent position. Its cost is the denial that our intentions are ever
conscious (that we are ever conscious of them, in the “possessive” sense). This seems like a very high price to pay.
A plausible way to avoid that price is to say that the conscious experience of action can involve as a component an
intention in action, which has the world-to-mind direction of
fit and the mind-to-world direction of causation, and that that
intention is conscious. In such a case, part of what we are reporting is the existence of this non-perceptual state, and saying that it is conscious, in the “possessive” sense. (Since the
expression “conscious of” is ambiguous, saying that someone
is conscious of her action does not entail that the agent has a
conscious intention in action. Someone could be conscious of
doing something, in the “intentional” sense of having perceptual consciousness of her action, yet still lack a conscious intention in action. Much ordinary “unreflective” action would
be like this.)

Illusions of agency
I will wrap up by redrawing the contrast between Prinz’ view
and my view of consciousness of action in terms of illusions
of agency (Wegner, 2004, 650-1). We are confronted with
a choice between two ways to model the relation between
consciousness and the intention in action.
• On Prinz’ view, sometimes when we act we have an
episode of perceptual consciousness of the action. It is
consciousness of (in the intentional sense) the action having occurred, including consciousness that it was an action.
The intention in action, which has directive, world-to-mind
CS, is not conscious; rather, it is the mental state that the
consciousness is about.
Now consider two types of illusions of agency:
– illusion of doing: suppose I have the experience of
agency, but I am wrong—for example, I wave my
arm and the automatic door opens. The causally selfreferential CS of the intention in action are not satisfied:
my intention did not make this happen. There are two
mental states that are erroneous or illusory. The intention in action isn’t satisfied. And the experience that the
door opening was something that I did is an illusion.
– illusion of not doing: suppose I experience alien hand
syndrome (example: my left hand makes a move in
checkers that I do not wish to make). I have the intention to move my hand, and my hand moves (caused to

159

do so in the right way by my intention), but my perceptual consciousness as it were reports to me that I did not
do this: it incorrectly reports that there was no satisfied
intention in action.

empirical theories of consciousness: they must explain how
nonperceptual consciousness occurs.

• On the view presented in this paper, sometimes when we
act we have a conscious intention in action, the CS of
which have the directive, world-to-mind direction of fit;
its consciousness is therefore not exclusively perceptual.
Again consider the two types of illusions of agency:

Anscombe, G. (1957). Intention. Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, NY, second edition.
Bayne, T. (2007). The phenomenology of agency. Philosophy
Compass, 3:1–21.
Bayne, T. (2010). The sense of agency. In McPherson, F.,
editor, The Senses. Oxford University Press, New York.
Bogen, J. E. (2004). The experience of will: Affective or
cognitive? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27(5):660–661.
Burge, T. (1991). Vision and intentional content. In LePore,
E. and Gulick, R. V., editors, John Searle and his Critics.
Basil Blackwell.
Churchland, P. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the
propositional attitudes. Journal of Philosophy, 78(2):67–
90.
Dardis, A. (2008). Mental Causation: The Mind-Body Problem. Columbia University Press, New York.
Davidson, D. (1980a). Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Davidson, D. (1980b). Freedom to act. In Davidson (1980a).
Frith, C. D., Blakemore, S.-J., and Wolpert, D. M. (2000).
Abnormalities in the awareness and control of action.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B, 355:1771–1788.
Hardcastle, V. G. (2004). The elusive illusion of sensation.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27(5):662–663.
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism, or Something Near Enough.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Libet, B. (2004). Mind Time : The Temporal Factor in Consciousness. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Millikan, R. G. (1995). Pushmi-pullyu representations.
Philosophical Perspectives, 9:185–200. AI, Connectionism, and Philosophical Psychology.
Prinz, J. (2007). All consciousness is perceptual. In
McLaughlin, B. and Cohen, J., editors, Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind, pages 335–357. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Rosenthal, D. (2006). Consciousness and Mind. Oxford University Press, New York.
Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The Illusion of Conscious Will. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wegner, D. M. (2004). Précis of The illusion of conscious
will. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27:649–692.
Wilson, G. M. (1989). The Intentionality of Human Action.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). The Blue and Brown Books. Harper
& Brothers, New York.

References

– illusion of doing: my conscious intention to open the
door occurs, but its CS is not satisfied. I don’t realize
this, so I take it that I opened the door.
– illusion of not doing: in this case my intention in action
to move the checkers piece is not conscious (otherwise
I would have the experience of moving it). I do have
the intention, and its CS are satisfied, but I do not have
conscious access to it. Rather, my conscious experience
is of my arm moving, with no accompanying experience
of the intention.

Discussion
I have argued that the perceptual consciousness account of the
experience of action is impaled on a dilemma: either it must
admit conscious intentions in actions, the consciousness of
which is not exclusively perceptual, or else it must deny that
intentions in action are ever conscious. Since that denial is
implausible, I conclude that not all consciousness of action
is perceptual. I want to underscore that much, indeed a very
great deal, of consciousness of action is perceptual. Much of
our experience of action has the mind-to-world direction of
fit. But, if I am right, not all of our experience of action is
like that.
The argument of this paper has both philosophical and empirical implications. Prinz’s theory has the consequence that
the folk psychological account of action is in a crucial respect
wrong: folk psychology is wrong that intentions in action are
conscious. If I’m right, at least to that extent the folk psychological account is vindicated. Prinz’s theory has the empirical consequence that however consciousness is realized
in the brain, it is not “hooked up” to action in the way suggested by folk psychology: all of the consciousness involved
in action, according to Prinz, is “descriptive” or “thetic,” and
it does not cause the action. If I’m right, a full account of
consciousness must reveal how intentions in action are sometimes conscious.
There is one other consequence that is both philosophically
and empirically significant. While much of the consciousness
involved with action is perceptual—it as it were presents to
you what you are doing—the argument of the present paper
is that some of the consciousness can be nonperceptual. This
can seem philosophically surprising on a theory of the mind
like that of the classical empiricists like Locke and Hume,
where the contents of the mind are the same sort of thing as
sensations. If there is, as I’ve argued, such a thing as nonperceptual consciousness, then there is also a constraint on

160

