UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Controlling Stable and Unstable Dynamic Decision Making Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0zm6b87b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Osman, Magda
Speekenbrink, Maarten

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Controlling Stable and Unstable Dynamic Decision Making Environments
Magda Osman (m.osman@qmul.ac.uk)
Centre for Experimental and Biological Psychology, Queen Mary University of London,
London, E1 4NS UK

Maarten Speekenbrink (m.speekenbrink@ucl.ac.uk)
Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London
London, WCIE 6BT, UK

using a laboratory simulated complex dynamic task
environment.
Uncertain Dynamic Environments: Often when
determining the outcome in complex dynamic environments
a series of inter-related decisions are made (Brehmer, 1992).
That is, a future decision builds on the outcome of a
previous decision and so on in order to work towards a goal.
For instance, if we decide to take a couple of aspirin when
we have a headache, we know that there is a variable delay
in taking effect, and that the intensity of headaches changes
over time. If after some period the headache persists, we
may decide to take more aspirin, but without being sure that
it will take effect, and if so, when it will do so. In this case,
our decision making requires a series of choices to act
towards achieving a specific goal (alleviating the headache),
but there is uncertainty attached to our choice of actions
(when to take aspirin, and what dosage), because we cannot
be sure we will reliably produce the desired effect.
Typically, people are required to interact with an
environment by deciding from various cues (e.g., Drug A,
Drug B, Drug C) actions that are relevant (e.g., selecting
Drug A at dosage X) to changing the outcome (e.g., reduce
the spread of disease). To introduce complexity into the task
environment, the cue-outcome associations are probabilistic,
and the environment dynamic, which ensures that from trial
to trial the effects on the outcome will change. Moreover, it
encourages people to adapt their decision making in order to
Many have used complex dynamic control tasks (CDC)
as a way to examine the effects of varying the specificity of
the goal under which the individual is instructed to learn
about a complex environment (Burns & Vollmeyer, 2002;
Geddes & Stevenson, 1997; Miller, Lehman & Koedinger,
1999; Osman, 2008; Vollmeyer, Burns & Holyoak, 1996).
In this way, it is possible to examine the best conditions
under which to learn to control an uncertain dynamic
environment. Much of the evidence suggests that people are
able to control complex systems successfully after sufficient
opportunity to explore the environment first. However,
training them to learn to control the system to a specific
criterion can impair their ability to successfully develop
flexible knowledge of the system that they can transfer to a
different goal structures (Burns & Vollmeyer, 2002; Osman,
2008; Osman, 2010a).

Abstract
In the present study we ask: Are people sensitive to the
stability of a dynamic environment under short exposure to it?
To examine this we investigate people’s cue manipulation and
strategy application when instructed to learn to control an
outcome in a dynamic system by intervening on three cues.
The system was designed in such a ways that in the Stable
condition participants controlled an outcome that fluctuated
steadily overall 40 trials, and in the Unstable condition the
outcome fluctuated erratically over 40 trials. In the present
study we show that people tended to intervene more frequently
on all three cues when the system was Unstable compared to
the when the system was Stable. Overall, the evidence from
this study supports the general prediction made from the
Monitoring and Control framework (Osman, 2010a, 2010b). It
claims that people are sensitive to the underlying stability of
dynamic environments in which they are required to control
the outcome, but are insensitive to autonomous characteristics
of the system.
Keywords: Dynamic; Control; Prediction; Decision making

Introduction
Complex dynamic environments come in many flavors
(Cohen, Freeman, & Wolf, 1996; Klein, 1997; Lipshitz,
Klein, Orasanu, & Salas, 2001; Lipshitz & Strauss, 1997),
such as economic (e.g. stock exchange), industrial (e.g.,
chemical waste disposal), critical safety (e.g., automatedpilot systems) and biological (e.g., eco-systems). These
situations differ from each other for a host of reasons, but
crucially they share two fundamental features: they are
dynamic and they are autonomous. That is, the outcome
(e.g., state of the environment) fluctuates over time, whether
rapidly (e.g., a sudden down pour of rain in an otherwise
sunny day) or relatively slowly (e.g., steady increase in
temperature over the spring months). Additionally, in both
cases, changes in the outcome can occur independently of
direct interventions made by decision makers. Given the
probabilistic properties of these environments, an action
may not reliably produce the same outcome each time,
which raises the question: What are the differences in
learning behaviors when attempting to control a highly
noisy environment as compared with attempting to control a
less noisy one? The aim of this study is to address this
question in detail by examining control-based behaviors

778

system in which the context, structure and instructions were
identical. The critical difference was that in one condition
the system was stable and in the other condition the system
was unstable. In so doing we aim to replicate and extend
Osman and Speekenbrink’s (2011) findings.
Thus, in our system (Unstable, Stable) there were three
cues which could be manipulated. One had a positive effect
on the outcome, one had a negative effect on the outcome,
and the third was a null cue, which had no effect on the
outcome. When the null cue was manipulated the observed
changes to the outcome in the system simply reflected the
perturbation inherent in the system which would either
make the outcome fluctuate in an unstable way (i.e.
Unstable system), or in a stable way (i.e. Stable system).
Thus of critical interest would be whether participants
would be sensitive to the null cue with little exposure to the
task environment. That is, unlike Osman and Speekenbrink
(2011), we are concerned with whether people establish the
same pattern of behavior under limited exposure to the
environment and extensive exposure to the environment.
For this reason we present people with only 40 trials in
order to learn to control a Stable or Unstable CDC task.
We base our predictions on Osman’s (Osman, 2010a,
2010b; Osman & Speekenbrink, 2011) Monitoring and
Control framework (hereafter MC framework). The MC
framework proposes that dynamic and autonomous
properties in a system contribute to it being subjectively
experienced as uncertain. In uncertain dynamic control
environments, when learning to control outcomes, people
judge the success of their performance according to the
discrepancy between the achieved and target outcome. Thus,
under conditions in which there are endogenous as well as
exogenous influences (i.e. direct changes to the outcome
through cue manipulation) on the outcome, the relation
between achieved and target outcome is difficult to interpret
because of the source of change to the outcome is not only
self initiated. There are two different types of influences on
the outcome, those that are initiated by the decision maker,
and those that are independent of the actions of the decision
maker.
Osman (2010b) also proposes that the greater the
flexibility and range of outcomes generated by the control
system, the greater its instability, and the greater the
demands it places on exerting control on the system.
Therefore, by increasing the endogenous influences on the
outcome (i.e., increase instability), it is expected that the
cue-outcome associations will be harder to detect, and
therefore cue-outcome knowledge will be less accurate and
will in turn impair control performance. To complement
this, studies of motor control propose that learning cueoutcome relations in dynamic tasks is based on the
congruency between one’s own actions and the observed
effects on the system. Therefore to increase one’s control in
a system that appears to be unstable, people will increase
their interventions on it in order to establish a closer
association between their actions and the outcomes in the
system.

Present Study
CDC tasks come in many varieties (for review see, Osman,
2010a, 2010b), but crucially, they tend to fall into two
categories of systems, namely those that are dynamic, by
which we refer to Funke’s (1993) definition “An
endogenous variable [that] at time t has an effect of its own
state at time t+1 independent of exogenous influences that
might add to the effect”, and those that are static; in which
the state of the system between t and t+1 is only dependent
on exogenous influences on the system. Studies using CDC
tasks with actual dynamic systems have thus far not
systematically examined the effects of varying the
endogenous variables on control performance. In other
words, there has been no direct comparison of the effects of
instability – in which the fluctuations in state as a result of
the influence of the endogenous variable are high, and
stability – in which the fluctuations in state as a result of the
influence of the endogenous variable are low, on generating
specific outcomes reliably in uncertain dynamic
environments.
Until now, there has only been one previous comparison
of the effects on cue utilization when controlling a system to
a specific criterion under conditions in which the system is
either stable or unstable (Osman & Speekenbrink, 2011). In
their study they examined the influence of instability on cue
utilization in a complex dynamic control task. Their
participants received extensive training (200 trials) to one of
two types of environments (Unstable, Stable), from which
they were required to learn to control the system. Osman
and Speekenbrink (2011) reported that people behaved
differently according to the stability of the environment.
Here stability was manipulated according to the level of
noise (probabilistic relationship between cues and
outcomes) in the system. The critical difference between the
Stable and Unstable groups concerned the frequency of cue
interventions and the range of cue values that were chosen
in order to bring the outcome value in line with the criterion.
Those in the Stable environment made conservative changes
to the cue value and tended to change one cue at a time,
whereas in the Unstable environment people tended to
intervene on all three cues across most of the training trials,
while also making full use of the range of the cue values.
Thus, the pattern of behavior suggests that both groups
adapted their decision making to the dynamic properties of
the environment based on exogenous changes to the system.
However, they failed to detect the endogenous feature of the
system. One of the cues (Null cue) did not have any impact
on the outcome value and when manipulated the outcome
would simply reflect the internal perturbation in the system.
Neither group was sensitive to the fact that changes to the
outcome when manipulating the Null cue reflected an
autonomous change in the system.
Given the limited research on the effects of the stability
of the CDC task environment on knowledge acquisition, the
present study aims to further explore decision making
behavior in detail by measuring control performance, cue
utilization and strategy application in the same control

779

outcome fluctuates, the subject will be able to identify the
corresponding intervention on the cue necessary to bring it
closer to target. E.g., if the outcome increases, then the
subject needs to intervene on the negative cue on the next
trial to bring the outcome value down towards the target
value.

Method
Participants
Thirty (12 Male) graduate and undergraduate students from
University College London and University of Surrey
volunteered to participate in the experiment for
reimbursement of £6. The assignment of participants to the
two groups was randomized with 15 participants in the
Unstable Condition and 15 participants in the Stable
Condition. Each participant was tested individually.

The visual layout of the screen, cover story, and the main
instructions were identical for all four groups. Participants
were presented with a summarized report of an article
appearing in a medical journal.

Materials and Design

It has recently been reported in The Lancet
(##/##/##) “Patients under stress” (pp23-29) Special
issue, that the Neurotransmitter (N) is released when
patients are experiencing intense stress-related
symptoms that slow down recovery. In addition, the
research reported that three different naturally
occurring hormones A, B, C also affect the release of
the same neurotransmitter N. The basis of the research
that you will be taking part in is to look at the
relationship between the three different hormones A, B,
C and their affects on the neurotransmitter N.

The study included one between subject variable which
compared the effects of the stability of the system that
participants were required to control (Unstable, Stable).
With the exception of stability, the interface, cover story,
and goals of the system were identical for both conditions.
The design of the environment involved four continuous
variables, three of which were cues and one of which was
the outcome (see Figure 1).
The cues varied in their relation to the outcome in the
following ways: one was positively associated, the other
negatively associated, and a third was unrelated to the
outcome (null).

Participants were informed that as part of a medical
research team they would be conducting tests in which they
would inject a patient with either one, or any combination of
the three hormones, with the aim of maintaining a specific
safe level of neurotransmitter release. The system was
operated by varying the cue values (hormones A, B and C)
that would affect the level of neurotransmitter release. The
screen included the three labeled cues, and the outcome
which was presented in two ways, as a value presented at
the top right of the screen, and also in a small progress
screen in which a short trial history (5 trials long) of
outcome values was presented. The progress screen
included a bar which highlighted the target value to which
the outcome needed to be maintained. Thus, for each
training trial participants received feedback concerning the
current level of the neurotransmitter (i.e. achieved outcome)
and the target value.

Structure of System: y(t) = y(t-1) + b1 x1(t) + b2 x2(t) + et
Note that the Positive cue = x1, Effect of positive cue = b1 =
0.65, Negative cue = x2, Effect of negative cue = b2 = -0.65.
Random perturbation = et, (the random perturbation
component, is normally distributed, with a mean of 0),
Outcome value = y(t), Previous outcome value = y(t-1).

Procedure: The task included a total of 40 trials.
Participants were presented with a computer display with
three cues (hormones A, B, C) and the outcome
(neurotransmitter). Each trial consisted of participants
interacting with the system by changing cue values using a
slider corresponding to each cue with a scale that ranged
from 0-100. On the start trial, the cue values were set to ‘0’
and the outcome value was 178. This means that for each
trial people had to remember the interventions they made,
but the effects of their interventions were presented
graphically on screen in a small window (see Figure 1).
Participants were instructed to maintain the outcome within
a safe range (+/-10) of the target value, which was set at 62
throughout. After making their decisions, participants
clicked a button labeled ‘Submit’ which made the cues

Figure 1: Screen Shot of Dynamic Control Task
To vary the stability of the system for the Random
perturbation component we used a standard deviation of 16
(Stable condition) and to make it unstable we doubled the
standard deviation to 32 (Unstable condition).
Successful control of the system: To learn to effectively
control both stable and unstable versions of the system the
endogenous influences on the outcome need to be
distinguished from the exogenous influences on the
outcome. To achieve this, the fewer and the more systematic
the interventions made, the easier the cue-outcome
associations are to learn for both versions of the system.
Having accurate knowledge of the cue-outcome associations
will in turn lead to successful control because as the

780

inactive, and revealed on the progress screen the effects of
their decisions on the outcome. The effects on the outcome
value were cumulative from one trial to the next, and so
while the cue values were returned to ‘0’ on the next trial,
the outcome value was retained from the previous trial. The
cumulative effects on the outcome value were presented as a
trial history on screen which contained the outcome values
of the last five trials. When participants were ready to start
the next trial, they clicked a button labeled ‘Continue’, after
which the cues became active and were reset to ‘0’. After
they completed the learning phase, participants then
proceeded to the test phase.

for both conditions performance increased as familiarity
with the system increased, confirmed by a main effect of
Block, F(3, 84) = 9.02, p < .0005. There was a main effect
of Stability on error scores F(1, 37) = 10.42, p < .005.
Overall control performance was poorer in the Unstable
condition compared with the Stable condition. A Block x
Stability interaction, F(3, 84) = 6.49, p < .0005, was
investigated further and was located in the first two blocks
of the task, thereafter there was no difference in control
performance between conditions (F<1).
Cue Manipulation: To examine the general patterns in the
way people in Stable and Unstable conditions manipulated
the three cues (positive, negative, null) we conducted a
coarse analysis simply based on the proportion of
manipulations made collapsed across blocks (See Figure 3).

Scoring: The training trials of the two different conditions
were scored according to three different criteria (control
performance, cue utilization, and strategy application).
Control performance was based on error scores calculated as
the absolute difference between the achieved and desired
outcome value on each trial for each participant. Cue
Utilization was scored in two ways: Cue manipulation and
Parameter setting. For each participant, Cue manipulation
was based on calculating the proportion of occasions that
each of the three cues was manipulated. Second, Parameter
setting was calculated based on the mean cue value that
participants chose for each of the three cues. The strategies
were based on calculating for participant the proportion of
trials across blocks of training in which no cue was changed
(No-intervention strategy), one cue was changed (One-cuestrategy), two cues were changed (Two-Cue-strategy), and
all three cues were changed (All-Cue-strategy).

Figure 3: Mean SE (+/-) Cue Manipulation by Cue by
Condition
A 3x2 ANOVA was conducted on the mean proportion of
changes to cues across the all 40 trials. We use Cue
(Positive, Negative, Null) as the within subject factor, and
Stability (Unstable, Stable) as the between subject factor.
There was no main effect of Cue, F(2, 56) = 1.03, p = .37,
implying that the occasions on which the three different
cues were intervened upon was equally distributed across
the 40 trials. As indicated in Figure 3, there appeared to be
an influence of stability on cue manipulation, which was
confirmed, F(1, 28) = 7.47, p < .01. Thus, when the
environment was Stable the three cues were manipulated
less frequently than in the Unstable condition.

Results
The 40 control trials were divided in four blocks of 10 trials
each and control error scores were averaged across each
block for each participant. The following analyses were
based on the mean error scores by block presented in Figure
2 for control error scores.

Parameter Setting: As a further method of examining
people’s sensitivity to the underlying stability of the system,
we examined the range of values selected for each of the
three cues. Figure 4 suggests that the overall values for the
three cues appear to be lower in the Stable condition as
compared with the Unstable condition.
Confirming this trend, a 3x2 ANOVA on mean values for
the cues with Cue (Positive, Negative, Null) as within
subject factor and Stability (Unstable, Stable) as the
between subject factor, revealed a significant main effect of
Stability, F(1, 28) = 14.44, p < .0001. No other effects were
significant.

Figure 2: Mean SE (+/-) Control Performance by Condition
Control performance: The following analysis compared
control performance by perturbation level (i.e. Stable vs.
Unstable). A 4x2 ANOVA was conducted on control
performance scores using Block (Learning Block 1, 2, 3, 4)
as within subject factor, and Stability (Unstable, Stable) as
between subject factor. As indicted in Figure 2, generally,

781

either easy or difficult to control. This was achieved by
keeping all other properties of the system the same but
manipulating the endogenous properties of the system so
that it was either experienced as Unstable or Stable. Overall,
the evidence replicates and extends the findings reported by
Osman and Speekenbrink (2011). The findings also supports
the general prediction made from the MC framework
(Osman, 2010a, 2010b), suggesting that people are sensitive
to the stability of the environment, and that while people
learnt to control an unstable as well as a stable condition,
instability in the system is a source of uncertainty for people
as indexed by the poorer control performance of the
Unstable condition.
Differences between Unstable and Stable Conditions:
The principle objective of this study was to examine if
people were sensitive to both their effects on the outcome as
well as the internal changes that could occur without their
intervention (i.e. exogenous and endogenous influences on
the outcome). We predicted that it would be harder to detect
the endogenous effects on the outcome in the Unstable
condition. The study found that even with such short
exposure to the task environment, as compared with 200
trials that were used by Osman and Speekenbrink (2011)
people increased their cue utilization as compared with the
Stable condition. Second, the pattern of behavior for
parameter setting of the three cues suggested that the values
chosen for all three cues were consistently greater in the
Unstable condition compared with the Stable condition. It
appears that the fluctuations in the outcome value lead those
in the Unstable condition to select more extreme cue values
in an attempt to reduce the discrepancy between achieved
outcome and target outcome from trial to trial. In turn this
would also facilitate learning cue-outcome relations because
by selecting extreme cue values that were easier to
remember participants could have observed the effects of
their interventions more clearly. Third, by intervening on
the system more often there was less opportunity for people
in the Unstable condition to uncover the dynamic and
autonomous properties of the system, resulting in less
accurate cue-outcome knowledge which impaired control
ability. Fourth, the main difference between the types of
strategies implemented between the two conditions was
specific to the No-Intervention-Strategy, that is, those in the
Stable condition employed this strategy more than the
Unstable condition. In an earlier study (Osman and
Speekenbrink, 2011), we found that the popular strategy
used to control the Unstable condition involved varying all
three cues, whereas in the Stable condition people
experienced more trials in which the outcome of the system
changed on it’s own. People in the Stable condition made
fewer but more systematic interventions, by varying one cue
at a time. Crucially though, the main difference between that
study and the current one is the number of trials that
participants experienced (i.e. 40 vs. 200). Given the limited
training it is likely that different patterns of behavior are
revealed which then are likely to change with extensive
exposure to the same environment. It appears that the

Figure 4: Mean SE (+/-) Cue Value By Cue By Condition
Strategy application: The following set of analyses
examines patterns in the application of strategies in Stable
and Unstable conditions. The first set of analyses is a coarse
analysis of the general patterns across all 40 trials as shown
in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Mean SE (+/-) Proportion of the Four Strategies
Employed by Condition The second set of analyses
considers the profile of strategy development across blocks
of control trials. To begin, a 4x2 ANOVA was conducted on
the proportion of trials in which cues were varied using
Strategy (No-Intervention-Strategy, One-Cue-Strategy,
Two-Cue-Strategy, All-Cue-Strategy) as a within subject
factor, and Stability (Unstable, Stable) and as the between
subject factor. The analysis revealed a main effect of
Strategy, F(3,84) = 9.50, p < .0005, suggesting that there
were differences in the types of strategies favored overall, as
indicated in Figure 5. There was also a main effect of
Stability, F(1, 30) = 18.85, p < .001, and a significant
Strategy x Stability interaction F(3,84) =3.36, p < .05. To
locate the source of the Strategy x Stability interaction,
univariate analyses revealed that the Stable condition used
the No-Intervention-Strategy more often than the Unstable
condition, F(1, 28) =5.71, p < .05. No other effects were
significant.

General Discussion
The objective of this study was to examine in detail how
people utilize information and develop strategies in a
control system under conditions in which the outcome is

782

default strategies that people employ are changing one cue
at a time. Previous findings also suggest that varying one
cue at a time is a more successful strategy to controlling a
system as compared with varying all cues at the same time
(Tschirgi, 1980; Vollmeyer, Burns, & Holyoak, 1996).
However, this clearly changes when people have extended
exposure to the environment, which implies that people
adapt their strategies over time as they gain experience with
a complex dynamic environment.
Similarities between Stable and Unstable conditions:
The general pattern of cue utilization and strategy
application differentiated people in the Unstable condition
from the Stable condition. Consistent with Osman and
Speekenbrink’s (2011) findings regardless of the stability of
the system, people utilized all three cues equally, and the
range of values that were set for each cue was
approximately the same.
Thus, in agreement with previous evidence, people in
stable and unstable conditions are sensitive to exogenous
influences on a dynamic environment but have difficulty
detecting endogenous changes in the environment. As
mentioned previously the null cue had no effect on the
outcome, and simply reflected the random perturbation
component of the system. However this would be hard to
discover unless people reliably selected extreme values for
this cues over a series of consecutive trials. In this way it
would be easier to detect the dissociation between actions
and effects.

References
Brehmer, B. (1992). Dynamic decision making: Human
control of complex systems. Acta Psychologica, 81, 211241.
Burns, B. D., & Vollmeyer, R. (2002). Goal specificity
effects on hypothesis testing in problem solving.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 241261.
Cohen, M. S., Freeman, J. T., & Wolf, S. (1996). Metacognition in time stressed decision making: recognizing,
critiquing and correcting. Human Factors, 38, 206-219.
Funke, J. (1993). Microworlds based on linear equation
systems: A new approach to complex problem solving
and experimental results. In G. Strube & K.-F. Wender
(Eds.), The cognitive psychology of knowledge (pp.
313–330). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Geddes, B. W., & Stevenson, R. J. (1997). Explicit learning
of a dynamic system with a non-salient pattern.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 50A,
742-765.
Klein, G. (1997). Developing expertise in decision making.
Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 337-352.
Lipshitz, R., & Strauss, O. (1997). Coping with uncertainty:
A naturalistic decision-making analysis. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 69, 149–163.
Lipshitz, R., Klein, G., Orasanu, J., & Salas, E. (2001).
Taking stock of naturalistic decision making. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making,14, 332–351.
Osman, M. (2008). Observation can be as effective as action
in problem solving. Cognitive Science, 32, 162-183.
Osman, M. (2010a). Controlling Uncertainty: A Review of
Human Behavior in Complex Dynamic Environments.
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 65-86.
Osman, M. (2010b). Controlling Uncertainty: Learning and
Decision Making in complex worlds. Wiley-Blackwell
Publishers, Oxford.
Osman, M., & Speekenbrink (2011). Information sampling
and strategy development in complex dynamic control
environments. Cognitive Systems Research, 355-364.
Tschirgi, J.E. (1980). Sensible reasoning: A hypothesis
about hypotheses. Child Development, 51, 1-10.
Vollmeyer, R., Burns, B. D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). The
impact of goal specificity and systematicity of strategies
on the acquisition of problem structure. Cognitive
Science, 20, 75–100.

Did both conditions fail to detect the endogenous
property of the system for the same reasons?
It may be the case that while both groups failed to detect
the null cue, the reasons for this are different. In the Stable
condition people tended to manipulate one cue at a time, but
were conservative with the cue values they chose which is
possibly why they failed to detect the null cue. In contrast,
even though the Unstable condition tended to pick extreme
values for the cues, they also manipulated all the cues at
once most of the time, which again would have made the
null cue hard to detect. Thus, while stability influenced
control performance, cue utilization, and strategy
application, it did not affect ability to detect the null cue. In
general, it may be the case that because people do not
expect there to be erroneous cue information, they would
operate a system assuming that each cue had an effect on the
outcome. Moreover, they may also make the assumption
that their actions will reliably generate changes in the
system, because this is an obvious bias which is maintained
in control task situations (Osman, 2010b).

Acknowledgments
Preparation for this research project was supported by
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, EPSRC
grant - EP/F069421/1 (MO) and the ESRC RES-062-23-1511
(MS).

783

