UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context and Causal Structure Enhance Memory for Clinical Details

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6036f9pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Devantier, Sarah L.
Minda, John Paul
Goldszmidt, Mark
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context and Causal Structure Enhance Memory for Clinical Details
Sarah L. Devantier (sdevanti@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2

John Paul Minda (jpminda@uwo.ca)
Department of Psychology
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5C2

Mark Goldszmidt (Mark.Goldszmidt@schulich.uwo.ca)
Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry,
The University of Western Ontario
London, ON N6A 5A5

Aimee L. Skye (SkyeA2@macewan.ca)
Department of Psychology
Grant McEwan University
Edmonton, AB T5J 4S2

Nicole N. Woods (nikki.woods@utoronto.ca)
Wilson Centre
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C4
Abstract

Researchers in cognition have shown that a sensitivity to
causal information is beneficial when learning new information, and this seems to be true across many domains. For
example, researchers have noted that clinical psychologists
are likely to weight and subsequently recall perceived causal
symptoms more heavily during a diagnosis (Kim & Ahn,
2001, 2002) or in a categorization task (Ahn & Luhmann,
2005) than features that are not perceived as causal. Similarly, causal features are considered to be more central and
more important than non-causal features when categorizing
novel stimuli or making inductions about a category (Ahn,
1998; Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Sloman, Love, & Ahn, 1998); this is particularly true for the
initial feature in a causal chain (Rehder & Kim, 2006).

Current research suggests a facilitatory role for basic biomedical knowledge in learning and retaining concepts related to
medical diagnosis. But learning and performance may be influenced by other knowledge as well. Accordingly, we examined
the effects of foundational knowledge beyond basic biomedical
science on the learning and retention of medical information.
Subjects were asked to study a handout detailing a percussive
chest exam and several respiratory disorders. One group was
presented with the information in a standard “textbook” format
and the other group was presented with foundational knowledge about how sound travels though solids and liquids. The
foundational knowledge group outperformed the control group
in a memory task. We suggest that these subjects were able to
create causal links between the information to be learned and
the foundational knowledge which made the critical information more memorable.
Keywords

The role of background and causal knowledge in medical
reasoning is also well established. For example, Patel and
collogues (Patel & Groen, 1986) suggest that physicians who
arrive a correct diagnosis are more likely to have done so
via causal chains and forward reasoning. Other work has
examined the relative differences between medical education programs that either emphasized foundational learning
or problem-based learning. Patel and collogues found support for better performance by students in what they termed
“Conventional Curriculum” programs that emphasize the acquisition of biomedical knowledge (Patel, Groen, & Norman,
1991) than those in a “Problem-based Curriculum,” though all
students studied did seem to rely on foundational, biomedical
knowledge.

Medical Reasoning, Memory, Foundational Knowledge,
Causal Knowledge

Learning to perform a clinical exam or to make a diagnosis
takes many years of training and practical experience. As
students progress through medical school, they acquire skills
first through formal classroom experience and later via direct
clinical experience. In either case, acquiring new information can benefit from a rich knowledge base, especially to the
extent that the knowledge base allows the learner to create
causal links among the various features of new information
(Murphy & Medin, 1985).

997

While Patel’s work is informative, it is largely descriptive;
reachers have recently turned to more tightly-controlled psychological investigations. For example, Woods, Brooks, and
Norman (2005) compared diagnostic performance when subjects (psychology undergraduate students) learned the probabilities of features given a disorder presented in tabular format with performance when subjects learned the same information in the context of biomedical causal knowledge. Subjects were asked to learn a set of diagnostic materials and
were tested twice. On immediate testing, subjects in both
the probability and biomedical knowledge conditions learned
the material equally well, however when tested again one
week later, the probability learners’ scores had significantly
decreased while causal knowledge learners’ scores remained
the same (Woods et al., 2005). The authors concluded that
while probability information helped participants learn information in the short-term, it was not as successful a strategy
for memory retention as causal biomedical knowledge. However, other research (Norman, Eva, Brooks, & Hamstra, 2006)
suggests that during diagnosis novices rely mainly on causal
knowledge (the basic mechanisms of disease) while experts
rely more on inferences drawn from causal knowledge. This
prompts the question: Is biomedical knowledge only useful
to novices?

trol group when time was limited and were better able to recognize encapsulated and novel consistent words. More recently, Woods, Brooks and Norman (2007) tested the retention of diagnostic information and the amount of reliance on
causal information. Subjects learned artificial diseases, with
or without a causal explanation for each symptom. Subjects
who received causal biomedical knowledge performed better on a delayed test than subjects who studied only a list
of features for each disease. In a second experiment, subjects again learned four artificial diseases, each with three
non-causal features and one causal chain. When tested immediately, subjects assigned equal weighting to causal and
non-causal alternatives, but began to consider the causal alternative as more likely on the delayed test. In other words,
with a delay, subjects relied on the causal alternative as the
most probable, because its causality made it the most memorable. In terms of the encapsulation theory, symptoms linked
by causal explanations were encapsulated while non-causal
symptoms were not.
Rikers and colleagues (Rikers, Loyens, Winkel, Schmidt,
& Sins, 2005; Rikers, Schmidt, & Moulaert, 2005) agree that
biomedical knowledge becomes encapsulated within clinical
knowledge through applying such knowledge during patient
interactions. They suggest that while expert doctors may not
explicitly state biomedical knowledge when diagnosing a patient, such knowledge supports diagnostic decisions. Rikers
et al. demonstrated this using a priming paradigm. Subjects first read a short description of a hypothetical patient,
followed by a mask and a target word. In one experiment
(Rikers, Loyens, et al., 2005) the word was either a diagnostic or biomedical term, or a non-word, and subjects simply
had to determine if the target was a word or non-word as
quickly as possible. In a second experiment (Rikers, Schmidt,
& Moulaert, 2005), subjects were shown a diagnostic or
biomedical term and they had to indicate whether the item
was related or unrelated to the previously read case. The results of both experiments indicated (through faster reaction
times) that biomedical as well as diagnostic information was
active for experienced doctors when reading a patient profile.

Further research examined whether experts use biomedical knowledge at all, and if so, precisely when they do so.
One suggestion is that doctors move through three types of
mental representations as they progress from novices to experts: from (1) biomedical information alone; to (2) illness
scripts; and finally to (3) exemplars from their own experience (Norman, 2005; Schmidt, Norman, & Boshuizen, 1990;
Schmidt & Boshuizen, 1993). These studies do indicate,
however, that while biomedical information becomes encapsulated into higher-level causal models, all layers of information are always available, and biomedical knowledge can
be accessed when higher-level concepts cannot solve a given
problem (Schmidt & Boshuizen, 1993; Verkoeijen, Rikers,
Schmidt, van de Wiel, & Kooman, 2004). Expert clinicians
may have superior knowledge of basic science concepts, but
only use it explicitly in difficult or complex cases (Norman,
2005). When asked to diagnose or describe patients, experts
tend to provide course, diagnosis, frequency and treatment information, whereas novices tend to mostly provide biomedical information (Custers, Boshuizen, & Schmidt, 1998).
When reaching a correct diagnosis in a complex case or in
an area they are not proficient in, however, experts are more
likely to explicitly use knowledge of disease mechanisms, or
biomedical knowledge, to reason their way through the symptoms. In other words, when experience is insufficient, experts
will use biomedical knowledge as a fall back (Regehr, Cline,
Norman, & Brooks, 1994).

The results of all of these studies suggest a prominent role
for biomedical knowledge as a facilitator in creating causal
links between features and concepts. However, experienced
physicians (and successful students) likely rely on foundational knowledge outside of the purely biomedical field. For
example, when learning about a percussive chest exam, students are likely to be taught about the technique for doing
the exams, the variety of outcomes from the exam, and the
associated diseases and conditions that underlie these different sounds. But another way to think about the exam is in
the context of the acoustical properties of sound traveling
through solids, liquids or gas. In some cases, the sound can
be muted by the presence of liquid in the lung space, just
as sound might be muted when travelling through any liquid medium. Students with foundational knowledge in basic
acoustics and physics might learn the percussive chest exam

With this in mind, Woods and colleagues (2006) examined the relationship between time constraints and reliance
on biomedical knowledge. They found that subjects who
learned via causal explanations performed better than a con-

998

more readily than students whose foundational knowledge is
purely biomedical in nature.

sound in a patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Subjects in both groups were given information
about the disease, and the symptoms, and were told what examination outcomes would be indicative of COPD. However,
subjects in the FK group were also told to “imagine tapping
in the same way on a drum. If it was a good drum, you would
get a nice hollow or hyperresonant sound. This is like what
happens in COPD with emphysema; a lot of the normal lung
tissues are destroyed and so the sound is not dampened much
at all.”
Subjects’ retention was measured via two multiple choice
quizzes that were administered immediately after study and
one week later. We included fifteen critical test items and ten
multiple choice control items. Test items were questions that
required the participant to make a diagnosis based on exam
results, or to predict a symptom given a diagnosis. As such,
we expected that performance on these items would be aided
by the foundational knowledge presented in the last section
of the treatment group’s information booklet. The ten control
items tested knowledge learned from the information booklet
that was not aided by the presence of foundational knowledge. For instance, control items include “Which is NOT a
usual factor that places a person at higher risk for pneumonia?” and “The separation between the two outside layers of
the lung is referred to as:” where answering correctly to either question is not helped by knowing the physics information presented to the FK group. The only differences between
the immediate test and the delayed test were question order,
answer order, and patient names in the case studies.

Experiment 1A
We designed an experiment to test this prediction. We examined the ability of two groups of subjects to learn material
related the percussive chest exam and several related diseases
of the lung. One group, the Foundational Knowledge (FK)
group, learned the material in the context of acoustical knowledge. The other group, the No Foundational Knowledge
(NFK) group, served as the control group and was given the
information without the acoustic information as they would
typically learn it in a class in medical school. Both groups
then completed a set of test items (immediately and after a
one week delay). We predicted that the FK group would perform better than the NFK Group on test items that were directly related to the chest exam.

Method
Subjects Subjects were recruited from the Undergraduate
Psychology Research Pool at the University of Western Ontario and awarded course credit for their participation. Additional subjects were recruited from the undergraduate population at Grant McEwan College. A total of 88 subjects, 63
females and 25 males, aged 18-40 (M = 20.4, SD = 5.55)
were tested. Subjects were randomly assigned into the one of
the two learning groups. All of our subjects were collected
from a first year psychology class and were not expected to
have any previous medical knowledge that would help them
on any of the tests. Twenty-two subjects were removed from
the final analysis: Sixteen subjects (5 from the NFK group
and 11 from the FK group) were removed from the final analysis for failing to return for the second test, and 5 subjects (4
from the NFK group and 1 from the FK group) were removed
because they had an average score of less than .40 on the immediate test. One subject was removed from the NFK group
because he had a background in university-level physics.

Procedure Subjects were tested in small groups of up to
six individuals in two sessions each in a quiet laboratory setting. During the first session, informed consent was obtained
from each subject, and information on subjects’ English proficiency was also collected to control for possible differences in
language ability and understanding. Subjects were then asked
to read and study the paper information booklet. Specifically,
they were instructed to study the booklet to the best of their
ability because the information would not be presented again
before any of the following tests and they were told to give
back the booklet to the experimenter only after they felt confident they knew the information. There was no time limit on
how long subjects could study the booklet or on either test;
however, most took between 20 to 30 minutes to study the
material and 7 to 15 minutes to do each test. The time it took
each subject to get through each session was recorded to look
for outliers or individuals who were having a harder time with
the information; however, no outliers were observed. After a subject returned the information booklet to the experimenter, the immediate test was administered. The items were
presented via an online survey application created in one of
the author’s lab (Minda). After completing the test, subject
booked their second session for exactly one week later. During the second session, subjects were given only the computerized test without being presented with the information
booklet. After completing the experiment, subjects were de-

Materials Subjects in the No Foundational Knowledge
group were given an information booklet titled “An Introduction to Diseases Involving the Lung.” The information in the
booklet was designed by one of the authors (Goldszmidt) and
involved the explanations for the causes and symptoms of
three lung diseases (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
pneumonia and pleural effusion) as well as a description on
how to do a basic physical exam of the lungs by listening
to breath sounds, percussing the lung and feeling for tactile
fremitus. The Foundational Knowledge group had an extra
section in their booklet titled “The Basic Physics of Lung
Sounds” that was not included in the control group booklet.
This extra section provided the foundational knowledge that
was expected to make the earlier information presented more
coherent and potentially more memorable. The information
included physics rules and explanations for the results of each
of the three parts to the physical exam of the lung. For example, all subjects read about the exam and how it would

999

1.0

B. Performance On Test Items Experiment 1A

1.0

A. Performance On Control Items Experiment 1A

0.6
0.0

0.2

0.4

Proportion Correct

0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Proportion Correct

0.8

Foundational
No Foundational

0.8

Foundational
No Foundtational

1

2

1

Test

D. Performance on Test Items Experiment 1B
1.0

1.0

C. Performance on Control Items Experiment 1B

0.4

0.6

0.8

Foundational
No Foundational

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Proportion Correct

0.8

Foundational
No Foundational

0.2

Proportion Correct

2
Test

1

2
Test

1

2
Test

Figure 1: Panel A shows performance on control items when tested
immediately and 1-week-later in experiment 1A. No significant difference was observed. Panel B shows the performance on test items:
as expected, the FK group performed significantly better at Time 1,
and showed a similar trend at Time 2. Panels C and D show the
same information for experiment 1B. Again, there was no significant
difference on control items, while the FK group performed better than
the NFK group at both Time 1 and Time 2. Note: error bars denote
SEM.

briefed. The average running time for completing the first
session was 42 minutes and the average running time for completing the second session was 10 minutes.

Results
Learning Analysis Each item was scored, and we calculated a proportion correct for each subject overall, as well as
for control items and test items separately. Prior to conducting the main analysis, we conducted an item analysis. For
each item, we calculated the correlation between subjects’ responses to that item and subjects’ overall performance. Our
average correlation between item and performance was .34 (a
range from 0.02 to .54), indicating that most of our individual
items tracked overall competence in a reliable way.
We then averaged across subjects to obtain the average proportion correct for subjects in the Foundational Knowledge
(FK) and the No Foundational Knowledge (NFK) groups on
Test 1 and Test 2. The resulting averages are displayed in
Figure 1.
As can been seen in the top panel of Figure 1, there was
no almost difference between the two groups on the con-

trol items. We entered the scores into a mixed factorial
ANOVA with Condition (FK/NFK) as a between subjects
factor and Test (Test 1 / Test 2) as a within subjects factor. We failed to find any significant differences between the
conditions F(1, 126) = 0.1062, p = .75, indicating that the
control items were not affected by the addition of foundational knowledge and that both groups learned the information equally. As well, memory of the control items did not
decrease with time and there was no significant difference
between the immediate and delayed control item test scores,
F(1, 126) = 0.8484, p = .36.
In accordance with our hypothesis, panel B in Figure 1
shows an advantage for the FK group over the NFK group
on the test items. We entered the scores into a mixed factorial ANOVA with Condition (FK/NFK) as a between subjects
factor and Test (Test 1 / Test 2) as a within subjects factor.
We found a significant main effect of condition (performance
was better for the Foundational Knowledge group) on the test
items, F(1, 126) = 8.2056, p = .005. There was also an effect of Test (performance on Test 1 was better than on Test 2)
F(1, 126) = 4.3883, p = .038; however, there was no interaction F(1, 126) = 0.1256, p = .72.
Planned comparison t-tests (using a one-tailed two-sample
t-test) on Test items indicated a significant difference at Time
1 (t(64) = 2.4045, p = .0096), and a trend towards a difference at Time 2 (t(64) = 1.6246, p = .055). In both cases, as
expected, the FK group outperformed the NFK group.

Experiment 1B
Experiment 1B was a direct replication of 1A. While considering the results of the first study there was a suggestion that
the FK group received information that was more imagable
(using the metaphor of a drum to describe the lungs), and
therefore the FK group could be utilizing dual coding while
the NFK could use only verbal coding (see, for example,
Clark & Paivio, 1991). This prompted us to examine our testing materials for differences, and a single reference to the
lungs as a “drum” was removed from the NFK information
package.

Method
Subjects Seventeen subjects (8 females) aged 18-21 (M =
20.5, SD = 1.68) were recruited from the University of Western Ontario. One subject from the NFK group was removed
because they had an average score of less than .40 on the immediate test.
Materials and Procedure The same test items and testing
procedures were used, except that all data were collected in
paper and pencil format, rather than online, and as mentioned
above, a single reference to the lungs as a drum was removed
from the NFK information package.

Results
As can be seen in Figure 1, Panel C, both groups had good
performance on the control items and there were no differ-

1000

ences in performance by either group F(1, 26) = 2.592, p =
.120, indicating that the control items were not affected by
the addition of causal knowledge. As well, memory of the
control items did not decrease with time and there was no significant difference between the immediate and delayed control item test scores, F(1, 26) = 0.0006, p = .980. With regards to the test items (Figure 1, Panel D), a significant main
effect of condition (performance was better for the Foundational Knowledge group) on the test items was found,
F(1, 26) = 32.193, p < .0001. There was no main effect of
Test, F(1, 126)1.433, p = .242, and no interaction was found
F(1, 126) = 2.756, p = .109. Planned comparison t-tests on
Test items indicated a significantly superior performance of
the FK group at both Time 1 (t(14)3.498, p = .006), and Time
2 (t(14) = 4.341, p = .002).

Discussion
The results of this study suggest that our subjects were able
to utilize foundational knowledge when learning new information. The primary evidence for this was the superior performance by the FK group on the critical test items. We suggest that the foundational physics knowledge (the tutorial on
acoustics) allowed for the creation of a causal chain to guide
the new knowledge acquisition. For example, students in both
the FK and NFK groups know that a normal lung sounds hollow (when tapped from the back), and dull if the patient has
pneumonia. However, students in the FK condition can create
the causal chain: A drum filled with water sounds dull; when
a person has pneumonia their lungs are filled with fluid; therefore, when a person has pneumonia, percussing their lungs
must result in a dull noise. In other words, they now know
why the exam produced the sound that it does. And this additional, causal knowledge resulted in better performance on
items that were related to the exam itself. This additional
knowledge did not relate (causally or otherwise) to the control items and so there was no advantage by the FK group.
While our results were generally in line with our hypothesis, we also expected the FK advantage to persist, and possibly increase over time as has been shown in other research
(Woods et al., 2005, 2007). The FK advantage seemed to persist in Study 1A, though the p value was not quite significant
at the .05 level at the second test. However, the FK advantage
was very strong in both the first and second tests in Study 1B,
and we did not find any evidence of an interaction between
condition and time, suggesting that our results were robust to
the one week delay. Study 1B thus replicated our main finding and clarified Study 1As marginal effect of knowledge on
the second test.
This study has two main implications. Firstly, if replicated
in a larger sample with first year medical students, it would
suggest that the standard physical exam textbooks should include this type of information for all students. Secondly, similar to prior work, it would suggest that one of the criteria for
choosing to integrate a basic science topic into the curriculum should relate to the extent to which the topic supports the

development in students of causal explanations for clinical
findings. This is particularly salient with regards to this study
because, unlike the prior studies, this is the first of its kind to
consider physics (acoustics) as a basic science relevant to the
teaching of medicine. Moreover, supporting causal knowledge does not appear to have been a criterion considered in
either the Carnegie report on the future of medical education
nor in a recent study related to the role of the basic sciences
in medical education (Finnerty et al., 2010; Irby, Cooke, &
O’Brien, 2010). In the latter study (Finnerty et al., 2010),
the value and role of the sciences was felt to relate to having
a fundamental knowledge of the human body and for developing effective thinking skills but not for developing what
Murphy and Medin (1985) would have called conceptual coherence (i.e. causal knowledge).
The only difference methodologically between experiments 1A and 1B was a reference to the lungs as a drum.
While we believe the major contribution of this study is the
usefulness of foundational knowledge outside of biomedical
information when teaching medical students, this does raise
the possibility that imagery or dual coding did play a role in
how memorable the information was. Further studies will be
required to fully expolore this idea.
In any case, these data do support the general claim that
foundational knowledge (even outside of basic biomedical
science) can and does help with the learning and retention
of diagnostic information.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Research Developments
Initiative Grant from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada to the second author.
Correspondence should be addressed to John Paul Minda
at the Department of Psychology, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C2, CANADA, by email at
jpminda@uwo.ca, or at http://www.mindalab.com/.

References
Ahn, W.-K. (1998). Why are different features central for
natural kinds and artifacts?: The role of causal status in
determining feature centrality. Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W.-K., & Luhmann, C. C. (2005). Demystifying theorybased categorization. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. Rakison (Eds.), Building object categories in developmental
time. Carnegie Mellon symposia on cognition (p. 277-300).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clark, J. M., & Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory and
education. Educational Psychology Review, 3(3), 149-210.
Custers, E. J. F. M., Boshuizen, H. P. A., & Schmidt, K. G.
(1998). The role of illness scripts in the development of
medical diagnostic expertse: Results from an interview
study. Cognition and Instruction, 16(4), 367-398.
Finnerty, E. P., Chauvin, S., Bonaminio, G., Andrews, M.,
Carroll, R. G., & Pangaro, L. N. (2010). Flexner revisted:
The role and value of the basic sciences in medical education. Academic Medicine, 85(2), 349-355.

1001

Irby, D. M., Cooke, M., & O’Brien, B. C. (2010). Calls for
reform of medical education by the Carnegie Foundation
for the advancement of teaching: 1910 and 2010. Academic
Medicine, 85(2), 220-227.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W.-K. (2001). Theory-based reasoning in
clinical psychologists. In Proceedings of the twenty-third
annual meeting of the cognitive science society. Edinburgh,
Scotland: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W.-K. (2002). The influence of naive
causal theories on lay concepts of mental illness. American
Journal of Psychology, 115, 33-65.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in
conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289-316.
Norman, G. R. (2005). Research in clinical reasoning: Past
history and current trends. Medical Education, 39(4), 418427.
Norman, G. R., Eva, K. W., Brooks, L. R., & Hamstra, S.
(2006). Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness, R. R. Hoffman, & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.),
The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance (p. 339-353). Cambridge (U.K.): Cambridge University Press.
Patel, V. L., & Groen, G. J. (1986). Knowledge-based solution strategies in medical reasoning. Cognitive Science, 10,
91-116.
Patel, V. L., Groen, G. J., & Norman, G. R. (1991). Effects of conventional and problem-based medical curricula
on problem solving. Academic Medicine, 66, 380-389.
Regehr, G., Cline, J., Norman, G. R., & Brooks, L. R. (1994).
Effect of processing strategy on diagnostic skiill in dermatology. Academic Medicine, 69(10), S34-S36.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization, induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(3), 323-360.
Rehder, B., & Kim, S. (2006). How causal knowledge affects
classification: A generative theory of categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 32(4), 659-683.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Loyens, S., Winkel, W., Schmidt, H. G., &
Sins, P. H. M. (2005). The role of biomedical knowledge
in clinical reasoning: A lexical decision study. Academic
Medicine, 80(10), 945-949.
Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., & Moulaert, V. (2005).
Biomedical knowledge: Encapsulated or two worlds apart?
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 223-231.
Schmidt, H. G., & Boshuizen, H. P. A. (1993). On acquiring expertise in medicine. Educational Psychology Review,
5(3), 205-221.
Schmidt, H. G., Norman, G. R., & Boshuizen, H. P. A.
(1990). A cognitive perspective on medical expertise: Theory and implications. Academic Medicine, 65(10), 611621.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W.-K. (1998). Feature centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Sci-

ence, 22(2), 189-228.
Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., Rikers, R. M. J. P., Schmidt, H. G., van
de Wiel, M. W. J., & Kooman, J. P. (2004). Case representation by medical experts, intermediates and novices for
laboratory data presented with or without a clinical context.
Medical Education, 38, 617-627.
Woods, N. N., Brooks, L. R., & Norman, G. R. (2005). The
value of basic science in clinical diagnosis: Creating coherence among signs and symptoms. Medical Education, 40,
973-979.
Woods, N. N., Brooks, L. R., & Norman, G. R. (2007). The
role of biomedical knowledge in diagnosis of difficult clinical cases. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 12(4),
417-426.
Woods, N. N., Howey, E. H. A., Brooks, L. R., & Norman,
G. R. (2006). Speed kills? Speed, accuracy, encapsulations
and causal understanding. Medical Education, 40, 107112.

1002

