UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contrast in natural language concepts: An exemplar-based approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5r09n83p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Voorspoels, Wouter
Storms, Gert
Vanpaemel, Wolf

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contrast in natural language concepts: An exemplar-based approach
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms(gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Wolf Vanpaemel (wolf.vanpaemel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract

insects all are animal categories and clearly are more interrelated than the categories mammals and doorknobs.
The interrelatedness of natural language categories elicits
the following intriguing question: Is the internal membership
structure of a category determined solely by characteristics
internal to the category, or do other, related categories influence the category structure? In other words, is the the platypus an atypical member of mammals because of its apparent
dissimilarity towards other mammals, or does its similarity
towards other animal categories, such as birds and reptiles,
contribute to its atypicality? The present paper is concerned
with exactly this question and attempts to answer it using successful exemplar models that have their roots in artificial category learning research.

We examine the influence of contrast categories on the internal
graded membership structure of natural language categories.
To this end we contrast two exemplar models in their account
of typicality: According to the GCM, typicality is the summed
similarity towards all category members. According to the SDGCM, typicality is determined by both the summed similarity
towards all category members and the summed dissimilarity
towards members of contrast categories. For five animal categories, we contrast the SD-GCM and the GCM in their account of typicality. Results indicate that the internal category
structure can indeed be co-determined by dissimilarity towards
potential contrast categories.
Keywords: concepts; categories; typicality; contrast categories; computational models

Introduction
The platypus is a mammal. It can, however, hardly be called
a ”good” mammal: It has webbed feet and a beak resembling
that of a duck, it is venomous like insects and reptiles, it lays
eggs as do birds and fish, and it is semi-aquatic, reminding
one of amphibians. A cow, on the other hand, is a good,
a more representative example of a mammal. Previous research suggests that people are in general agreement as to
what are representative, good examples of a certain category
and which members are bad examples. The graded membership structure, or typicality gradient, can be observed in
a broad range of everyday natural language categories (e.g.,
Hampton & Gardiner, 1983; Rosch & Mervis, 1975).
Traditionally, typicality is defined as similarity towards a
category representation: A member of a category is typical
to the extent that it is similar to the category representation.
Different views exist on what the category representation consists of. The two most dominant computational theories of
category representation propose that a category is represented
by a prototype (prototype models; e.g., Hampton, 1993), or
the set of previously encountered members (exemplar models; e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978 ). In general, it is found
across an impressive array of conditions, both in artifical category learning experiments and natural language categories
that exemplar representations provide the best description of
human categorization. For present purposes we will therefore
focus on exemplar models.
While the graded membership obviously reflects the internal structure of a category, natural language categories are
not isolated entities, but generally reside in rich semantic domains. Categories vary along a continuum of interrelatedness (Goldstone, 1996). For example, mammals, birds and

Contrast category effects
The most likely candidates to exert influence on the internal
structure of other categories, are contrast categories. Contrast
categories are considered to be at the same level of abstraction, belonging to the same immediate superordinate as the
target category. Further, they are contrastive or incompatible in the sense that one and only one word is applicable to
any member of the category (Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976).
For example, mammals and birds are contrast categories, both
belonging to the same immediate superordinate category and
they are mutually exclusive (an animal cannot be a bird and a
mammal at the same time). We use the term contrast category
effect for manifestations of influence of contrast categories on
category based tasks.
The notion of contrast category has a long history in natural language concept representation literature. For example, in their influential family resemblance model, Rosch and
Mervis (1975) assume that typicality of a category member
is its similarity to other category members and its dissimilarity to members of contrast categories. Despite the theoretical
importance attributed to contrast categories, little effort has
been invested in demonstrating the independent role of contrast categories in natural language categories, and evidence
is ambiguous. In a thorough test of the independent contribution of feature overlap with the target category and feature
overlap with contrast categories, using both typicality ratings and classification response times, Verbeemen, Vanoverberghe, Storms, and Ruts (2001) found no evidence for contrast effects. In sharp contrast with the findings of Verbeemen
et al., using a geometric prototype model of concept repre-

531

sentation, Ameel and Storms (2006) found evidence that prototypes of interrelated categories tend to move away from the
central tendency, in a direction opposite of the contrast categories. This finding constitutes evidence in favor of contrast effects, since the prototype, i.e., the representation of a
category, is under influence of other categories. In sum, the
debate on the role of contrast categories in natural language
categories is far from settled, and in need of further thorough
and systematic examination.
In artificial category learning, empirical demonstrations of
contrast category effects are more established (e.g., Davis &
Love, 2010; Goldstone, Steyvers, & Rogosky, 2003; Palmeri
& Nosofsky, 2001; Stewart & Brown, 2005) . For example,
Palmeri and Nosofsky (2001) demonstrated that items residing at the target’s category boundary most remote from other
categories, were classified most accurately. In other words,
clear category members were both high in similarity towards
the target category and low in similarity towards other relevant categories. Goldstone et al. (2003) manipulated the interrelatedness of categories, and demonstrated a clear contrast
category effect when categories are interrelated.
Interestingly, Stewart and Brown (2005) proposed and
tested an exemplar model, the similarity-dissimilarity generalized context model (SD-GCM), that explicitly implements
dissimilarity towards contrast categories as a component that
co-determines category membership together with similarity
to the target category. The SD-GCM is based on the generalized context model (GCM; Nosofsky, 1986), arguably the
most influential exemplar model, but differs from the GCM
in that the GCM only considers the similarity towards stored
category members.

exemplars are generally assumed to be defined at the nearest subordinate member level (e.g., Komatsu, 1992). For
example, the exemplars of the category mammals are ’dog’,
’camel’, ’beaver’, etc.

The generalized context model
The GCM (Nosofsky, 1986) is one of the most influential
exemplar models in categorization research. Originally, the
model was developed to account for categorization decisions,
but it has successfully been adapted for typicality judgments
(Nosofsky, 1988). Typicality of an exemplar i for category A
is calculated by summing the similarity of that exemplar to
all other exemplars in the category:
tiA =

∑ si j

(1)

j∈A

where si j is the similarity of exemplar i to exemplar j. The
similarity between two exemplars is a function of the distance
of the exemplars in an M-dimensional psychological space.
Formally, the scaled psychological distance is given by:
M

∑ wk xik − x jk

di j =

k=1

!1
r

r

(2)

where xik and x jk are the coordinates of exemplars i and j on
dimension k, and wk is the dimension weight for dimension
k. We relied on Euclidean distances (r=2), which are generally accepted to be more appropriate for integral dimensions
(Shepard, 1987). Similarity between i and j is derived from
the weighted distance:
si j = exp (−cdi j )

Outline

(3)

where c is the sensitivity parameter. The free parameters in
the GCM consist of M-1 dimension weights and the sensitivity parameter.

The present study examines the role of contrast categories in
the representation of natural language categories. We compare two computational exemplar models developed in artificial category learning – the GCM and the SD-GCM –, in their
account of the typicality gradient of five animal categories.
The two models both provide a different account of the typicality gradient of a category: According to the GCM, the
typicality of a member should depend solely on the summed
similarity towards other category members. According to the
SD-GCM on the other hand, typicality of a category depends
on both similarity towards category members and dissimilarity towards contrast categories. To evaluate whether contrast
categories play a role in the animal categories, we will therefore compare the two models on their ability to account for
the observed typicality gradient in the animal categories.

The Similarity-Dissimilarity GCM
The SD-GCM (Stewart & Brown, 2005) is an extension of
the GCM, making the same assumptions concerning underlying representation and similarity (i.e., Equations (2) and (3)
still apply). However, whereas the GCM defines typicality of
item i towards category A as the sum of the similarity towards
members of that category, the SD-GCM also takes into account the dissimilarity of i towards alternative categories in
the same representational space. Formally, the typicality of
exemplar i to category A then is given by:
tiA =

∑ si j + ∑ (1 − sil )

j∈A

Models

(4)

l ∈A
/

where si j and sil are similarities between exemplar i and j and
i and l respectively, with j being an element of category A, and
l belonging to an alternate category. Typicality to a category
is thus defined by the sum of the similarity towards members of the category plus the summed dissimilarity towards
the other elements in the representational space. It is possible

We will give a brief overview of both the standard GCM
and the SD-GCM, adapted to account for typicality in natural language categories. Both models are exemplar-based,
which means that they rely on stored exemplars to account
for category-based decision. For natural language categories,

532

to restrict the set of contrast categories, such that only a subset of exemplars in the representational space are included.
For example, in accounting for the typicality of members of
the category mammals, we might choose to restrict the set
of contrast exemplars to birds and fish, leaving out the other
potential contrast categories insects and reptiles.

To arrive at a pairwise similarity measure for each pair of
animals, we summed the feature-by-exemplar matrices across
the 4 participants and then correlated the summed feature vectors of all possible exemplar pairs within a domain.

Data

Both models operate on an underlying geometric similarity
representation, in which exemplars are represented as points
in an M-dimensional space and the distance between two
points in the space is inversely related to the similarity of
the exemplars. After describing how the representations were
derived, we will examine how many, and which, contrast categories are best used for each of the target categories. To
answer the question whether a category’s internal membership structure can be influenced by contrast categories, we
will compare the SD-GCM with the standard GCM, both in
terms of optimal data fit and generalizability of the models.

Results

To compare the models, we chose categories in the animal domain, that more or less exhaustively cover the whole domain.
In this way, no potential contrast category was accidentally
missed: Each of the categories can be a contrast category for
all other categories, and for each category all possible contrast
categories are included. Moreover, the animal categories perfectly adhere to the definition of contrast categories, belonging to the same immediate superordinate category (animals)
and being mutually exclusive.
Data were taken from a recent norm study of De Deyne et
al. (2008). The set contains five animal categories (birds, fish,
insects, mammals and reptiles), in total containing 129 exemplars. Every category consists of 20 to 33 exemplars. We
used goodness-of-example ratings as a measure of typicality
and a derived similarity measure of categories to construct an
underlying stimulus representation.

Similarity representation
To investigate whether it makes sense to derive a geometric representation for the present stimuli, the percentage of
triplets in the similarity matrix that violate the triangle inequality was calculated. Its very low value (.13 %) indicates that the stimuli can in principle be represented spatially.
To generate the geometric similarity representation, the pairwise similarity measure for each pair of the 129 ANIMAL
exemplars was used as input in a SAS non-metric MDSanalysis (SAS, V9). We considered representations in 2 to 6
dimensions. The appropriateness of the geometric representation was evaluated using stress as a badness-of-fit measure
(Kruskal & Wish, 1978) for the MDS-solutions.

Typicality
Goodness-of-example ratings taken from De Deyne et al.
(2008). The exemplars of each category were rated by 28
participants for goodness-of-example for the category they
belonged to on a Likert-rating scale ranging from 1 for very
bad examples to 20 for very good examples. The reliability
of the judgments for each category was evaluated by means
of split-half correlations corrected with the Spearman-brown
formula. The estimated reliability ranged from .91 to .98 . In
the present study the typicality ratings are averaged across
participants, resulting in a single typicality score for each
member of a category.

Table 1: Percentage of triplets violating the triangle inequality (TIV), and stress-values for the MDS-solutions.
TIV

Pairwise similarity

0.13%

To allow the SD-GCM to test for potential contrast effects, it
is imperative that the exemplars of all five categories are in
the same similarity representation. This requires a measure
of pairwise similarity between all exemplars in the ANIMAL
domain. To this end we derived a pairwise similarity measure
for all pairs of 129 exemplars in the ANIMAL set. De Deyne
et al. (2008) reports an exemplar by feature matrix containing
all exemplars of the animal domain and all features generated for its exemplars. The animal domain matrix contains
129 exemplars and 765 features. The features were generated
by 1003 participants for the exemplars of the animal domain
and span a broad range of characteristics (e.g., ’has an external skeleton’, ’is a carnivore’, ’runs fast’). Four participants
judged the applicability of each feature for each exemplar (1
referring to applicable, 0 referring to not applicable). The estimated reliability of these judgments was .83 (see De Deyne
et al., 2008, p. 1042).

2D
.18

Stress-values
3D 4D 5D
.12 .07 .06

6D
.04

The stress-values in Table 1 suggest the appropriateness of
the MDS-solutions. Following Kruskal & Wish, 1978, solutions with stress-values exceeding .10 are not considered for
further analyses, leaving representations with Dimensionality
from 4 to 6 for further analysis.

Identifying contrast categories
The notion of contrast categories refers to categories that are
mutually exclusive and organized under the same superordinate term. Thus, for the animal categories, each category
can have all other animal categories as potential contrast categories. Before comparing the SD-GCM to the GCM, we will
therefore examine for each concept which are the appropriate
contrast categories, and how many contrast categories should
be included in the SD-GCM. For example, for the category

533

Goodness of fit. Results of the model fit analyses are presented in Figure 1(a). For each of the five animal categories,
we calculated the optimal correlation between observed typicality ratings of a category’s members and the model-based
typicality scores of the members, derived from the GCM and
the SD-GCM. For the SD-GCM, we included the most appropriate set of contrast categories for each target category,
following the findings of the previous analyses. The optimal
correlations are presented as a function of the dimensionality
of the underlying stimulus representation.
The SD-GCM captures the observed typicality gradient of
the categories very well, with optimal correlations between
observed and model-based typicality scores rising well above
.8 for stimulus representations of Dimensionality 6 (.88 averaged across categories). For insects in Dimensionalities 4 and
5, and reptiles in Dimensionality 4, the optimal correlation is
just under .8. In contrast, the standard GCM has more difficulty in providing a good account of the typicality ratings.
While for birds and fish the optimal correlations are good, rising above .7 and .8 respectively, the model has difficulty in the
categories insects and reptiles, optimal performance dropping
below .7 and in mammals, optimal performance dropping below .6.
In sum, the SD-GCM seems to be able to account for the
typicality gradient of the animal categories. Moreover, the
model provides equally good or better optimal fits to the observed typicality ratings than does the standard GCM. While
providing an acceptable optimal fit is a necessary condition
for a model to be taken seriously, deciding which model captured the data best cannot rely solely on goodness of fit, since
inherent complexity differences between the models will bias
the conclusion. Rather, model comparison should depend on
a measure of generalizability (Myung, 2000), which balances
the complexity in the models with their ability to fit the empirical data. 3 We relied on marginal likelihood as a measure
of generalizability, which considers the averaged rather than
optimal fit (Kass & Raftery, 1995).

mammals the contrast category can be birds, fish, insects or
mammals, or any combination of these four categories.
To identify the appropriate set of contrast categories, we
optimized the correlation of the observed typicality ratings
with the SD-GCM-based typicality ratings for the category
members, varying the contrast categories included in the
model. We first optimized the SD-GCM’s typicality predictions using only one contrast category. For mammals, the best
contrast category was birds. We then allowed two contrast
categories, birds being one of the two, the second category
being the second best contrast category of step one.1 . This
procedure was repeated until all four contrast categories were
included. Analyses2 were performed for all five target categories and the results are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Optimal correlations between observed typicality
ratings and the SD-GCM-based typicality ratings.
category
mammals
birds
fish
insects
reptiles

n of contrast categories
1
2
3
4
.80 .81 .87
.83
.88 .88 .89
.89
.84 .83 .83
.83
.74 .49 .68
.66
.75 .65 .64
.65

Table 2 reveals the importance of selecting an appropriate
contrast category set. For mammals, best results were found
when including three contrast categories: birds, insects and
reptiles. For birds, including all other animal categories in
the SD-GCM prediction produced the best result. For the
three remaining categories, best results were found when including only one contrast category. For fish, the appropriate
contrast category was mammals. For insects and reptiles, the
appropriate contrast category was fish.
In sum, the best results were found including a particular
set of contrast categories. For the following analyses, the we
will always include the appropriate set of contrast categories
as found in these analyses.

Generalizability. Results of the generalizability analyses
are presented in terms of model weights. The model weight
reflects the relative evidence in favor of a particular model,
given a set of models (Lee, 2004). The evidence for a model
is quantified through marginal likelihood. To estimate the
marginal likelihood, we rely on standard non-informative priors for the parameters. For the dimensional weights in both
the GCM and SD-GCM, a uniform prior in the interval [0,1]
is used, adding the restriction that the dimensional weights
have to sum to 1. For the sensitivity parameter the choice of
prior is less straightforward. We therefore ran the analyses
using different priors: A Uniform distribution and an approximation to the Gamma(0,0) distribution (Lunn, Thomas, Best,
& Spiegelhalter, 2000). All results were qualitatively nearly

Comparing the SD-GCM to the GCM
To evaluate the performance of the SD-GCM in its account
of typicality of the five animal categories, we will compare
the model to the GCM, i.e. an exemplar model that does not
include contrast information in its account of typicality. We
first consider the goodness of fit of both models. In these
analyses we establish whether both models are sufficiently
able to capture the typicality gradient by optimizing the correlation across exemplars between observed and model-based
typicality.
1 Note that, unlike in e.g., regression analyses, adding a contrast
category does not necessarily produce better results. This depends
on the structure of the underlying similarity representation.
2 For these analyses, the dimensionality of the underlying representation was fixed at 4

3 While the models that are compared in the present study are
very similar in terms of number of free parameters and the nature of
the parameters, differences in complexity can still arise from differences in functional form of the models

534

mammals
1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4
4d

mammals

5d

6d

4d

fish

birds

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4
4d

5d

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

6d

4d

insects

5d

6d

4d

5d

5d

6d

0

4d

fish
model weight

optimal correlation

birds
1

6d

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

4d

reptiles

5d

5d

6d

insects

6d

0

4d

5d

6d

reptiles

1
1

0.8

SD−GCM
GCM

0.6

SD−GCM
GCM

0.5

0.4
4d

5d

0

6d

(a) goodness of fit

4d

5d

6d

(b) generalizability

Figure 1: Optimal correlations between observed and model-based typicality scores (panel a) and model weights (panel b) for
the GCM and the SD-GCM.
identical, regardless of the exact choice of the prior. We report the results of the Gamma prior with upper bound set at
10. The SD-GCM makes use of the same contrast sets for
each target category as in the goodness of fit analyses.
Figure 1(b) confirms the results of previous analyses: For
all categories tested, the SD-GCM clearly has better model
weights, which indicates that the SD-GCM provides a more
likely account of the data than does the GCM, also when
considering potential differences in complexity between the
models. This strongly suggests that indeed dissimilarity to
exemplars from (a subset of) contrasting categories considerably improves the account of the typicality gradient of these
categories.

more that member will be typical of the category.
We found strong evidence for all categories tested, that
dissimilarity towards the members of contrast categories improved the exemplar based account of typicality of the target
categories. Interestingly, the SD-GCM performed best when
we included a subset of the available contrast categories. For
three categories – fish, insects and reptiles –, one contrast category was found to be optimal. For mammals, three contrast
categories optimized the account of typicality and for birds
all other animal categories were added as contrast categories.
In sum, to return to our starting example, the present study
provides clear-cut evidence that the platypus is considered to
be an atypical member of the mammal category, not only because it is not very similar to the members of mammals, but
also because it is similar to members of birds, insects and
reptiles.
While the present results are in line with a number of findings in artificial category learning experiments (e.g., Davis &
Love, 2010; Palmeri & Nosofsky, 2001), they directly contradict those of Verbeemen et al. (2001), who found no evidence
for contrast category effects in typicality judgments. The difference in approach most likely can explain this difference.
Verbeemen et al. (2001) used a family resemblance approach
and regression analyses to evaluate the role of contrast categories. In the present study, we applied computational models
that operate on geometric similarity representations and that
are potentially better at accounting for typicality. This is reflected in the overall better quality of the optimal correlations
in the present study as compared to Verbeemen et al. However, it must also be noted that the set of categories tested in
the present study was rather small, and restricted to a single

General Discussion
In the present study we have tackled the controversial question whether contrast categories co-determine the internal
graded structure of natural language categories, using computational models that have their roots in artificial category
learning tradition. For five animal categories, we contrasted
two exemplar models, the standard GCM and the SD-GCM
in their account of typicality. According the standard GCM,
typicality of an exemplar to a category is the summed similarity to all category members: The more a member is similar
to many other members, the more typical it is of the category.
According to the SD-GCM on the other hand, typicality of an
exemplar derives from both the summed similarity towards
all category members and the summed dissimilarity towards
members of contrast categories: The more a member is similar to other members and in the meantime is dissimilar to
the members of (a set of appropriate) contrast categories, the

535

semantic domain. Although our approach has proven to be
sensitive to contrast effects, including more categories, from
different semantic domains, in the analyses is imperative to
make more general statements regarding the role of contrast
information.
The choice for the domain of animals was motivated by
the clear hierarchical structure, mutual exclusivity of the categories, and the complete coverage of the domain, in that all
possible contrast categories could be added (if we restrict ourselves to the animal domain, following the definition of contrast categories). As such, the animal domain was a perfect
arena to test for contrast effects. The present methodology
can, however, be applied to other semantic domains. Obvious candidates are categories that are traditionally considered contrast categories, e.g., fruits and vegetables or carnivores and herbivores. Another interesting candidate domain
is artifacts, yet a number of difficulties arise. For one, some
members of the artifact domain can be classified in multiple
categories (e.g., a knife can be a kitchen utensil, but also a
weapon, or even a tool). Moreover, it is less clear how far the
artifact domain extends: Are vehicles artifacts? Or clothes?
Given that including appropriate contrast categories is essential, the extension of a domain requires careful consideration.
In a broader perspective, the present findings highlight the
caution that needs to be undertaken when transposing models
from artificial category learning to natural language category
research. While in the former field a number of excellent
models has been developed that carefully implement different views on category representation, these models might not
always capture all aspects that are relevant in natural language
categories. For example, the GCM is one of the most influential and most successful categorization models, but in its account of typicality (Nosofsky, 1988; Voorspoels, Vanpaemel,
& Storms, 2008) it does not take into account the richness of
the semantic domain in which a natural language category is
embedded.

Goldstone, R., Steyvers, M., & Rogosky, B. (2003). Conceptual interrelatedness and caricatures. Memory & Cognition
2003, 31 (2), 169180, 31(2), 169-180.
Hampton, J. (1993). Categories and concepts: Theoretical
views and inductive data analysis. In I. Van Mechelen,
J. Hampton, R. Michalski, & P. Theuns (Eds.), (pp. 67–95).
Academic Press.
Hampton, J., & Gardiner, M. M. (1983). Measures of internal
category structure: A correlational analysis of normative
data. British Journal of Psychology, 74, 491-516.
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 90, 773-795.
Komatsu, L. K. (1992). Recent views of conceptual structure.
Psychonomic Bulletin, 112, 500-526.
Kruskal, J., & Wish, M. (1978). Multidimensional scaling
(E. M. Uslaner, Ed.). SAGE publications, inc.
Lee, M. (2004). A Bayesian analysis of retention functions.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 48, 310–321.
Lunn, D. J., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter, D. (2000).
WinBUGS: A Bayesian modelling framework: Concepts,
structure, and extensibility. Statistics and Computing, 10,
325-337.
Medin, D., & Schaffer, M. (1978). Context theory of classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207–238.
Miller, G., & Johnson-Laird, P. (1976). Language and perception. Harvard University Press.
Myung, I. J. (2000). The importance of complexity in model
selection. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 44, 190204.
Nosofsky, R.
(1986).
Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39–57.
Nosofsky, R. (1988). Similarity, frequency, and category representations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 54–65.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. (2001). Central tendencies,
extreme points, and prototype enhancement effects in illdefined perceptual categorization. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 54A, 197-235.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. (1975). Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573–605.
Shepard, R. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization
for psychological science. Science, 237, 1317–1323.
Stewart, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2005). Similarity and dissimilarity as evidence in perceptual categorization. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 49, 403-409.
Verbeemen, T., Vanoverberghe, V., Storms, G., & Ruts, W.
(2001). The role of contrast categories in natural language
concepts. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 618-643.
Voorspoels, W., Vanpaemel, W., & Storms, G. (2008). Exemplars and prototypes in natural language concepts: a
typicality-based evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 630–637.

Acknowledgments
The Research in this article is part of research project
G.0281.06, Belgian National Science Foundation Flanders.
Thanks to Tom Waits for inspiration and musical company.

References
Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2006). From prototypes to caricatures: Geometrical models for concept typicality. Journal
of Memory & Language, 55, 402-421.
Davis, T., & Love, B. C. (2010). Memory for category information is idealized through contrast with competing options. Psychological Science, 21, 234-242.
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W., Dry,
M. J., Voorspoels, W., et al. (2008). Exemplar by feature
applicability matrices and other dutch normative data for
semantic concepts. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 10301048.
Goldstone, R. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 608-628.

536

