UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Core phonology: Evidence from grammatical universals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rn53226

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Berent, Iris

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Core phonology: Evidence from grammatical universals
Iris Berent (i.berent@neu.edu)

Northeastern University, Department of Psychology,
125 Nightingale Hall, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, MA 02115
The human capacity for language is one of the most
contentious topics in cognitive science. While some
researchers attribute language to domain-general
mechanisms, others postulate a specialized language system.
When it comes to the phonological component, however,
even proponents of domain-specificity concede that
specialization is unlikely (Fitch et al., 2005). Phonological
competence, in this view, is the product of experience,
auditory perception, and motor control. And indeed,
phonological systems are intimately grounded in phonetics.
But while the domain-general perspective can account for
this fact, it offers no explanation for several key features of
language. It fails to explain why all languages—signed and
spoken—have a phonological system, why phonological
systems emerge spontaneously, in the absence of a model
(Sandler et al., in press), and why the cultural invention of
reading and writing invariably recapitulates phonological
principles. Such observations, however, are readily
explained by the view of phonology as a core knowledge
system (Berent, in press).
Core knowledge systems are specialized, early knowledge
frameworks and scaffolds for subsequent learning (Carey &
Spelke, 1996). Crucially, core systems manifest a unique,
universal design—it is the argument from design that
presents the strongest test for specialization. Applying this
test to phonology, one would expect that, if phonology is a
specialized core-knowledge system, then all grammars
should exhibit universal principles that are largely invariant
across
individuals.
Like
other
species-specific
communication systems (e.g., birdsong; Fehér et al., 2009),
universal phonological principles could be triggered by
experience, but they are unattainable by learning (e.g. by
statistical learning, induction, etc., Samuels, 2004).
Optimality Theory (Prince & Smolensky, 1993/2004)
offers specific, amply testable hypotheses concerning those
principles. In this account, all grammars include a common
set of markedness constraints that express (dis)preferences
for certain linguistic structures (e.g., structure A≻B). These
constraints form part of the grammars of all speakers,
irrespective of whether the structures under consideration
(e.g., A, B) are present in one’s language or absent.
In this talk, I summarize the results of an experimental
research program that tests of this hypothesis. I proceed in
two steps. First, I demonstrate that individual speakers’
preferences mirror the language typology. I next gauge the
source of these preferences by pitting universal-grammatical
explanations against various extra-grammatical alternatives.
My specific case study concerns the sonority-related
restrictions on onset structure (e.g., bl in block). Across
languages, onsets such as bl are preferred (e.g., they are

more frequent) relative to onsets like bdif, which, in turn,
are preferred to lbif. Figure 1 illustrates this regularity in a
representative sample of 90 diverse languages (data from
Greenberg, 1978).
These systematic distributional regularities are attributed
to sonority (s)—a scalar phonological property that
correlates with intensity: liquids (e.g., l) are more sonorous
(s=3) than nasals (n,m; s=2), which in turn, are more
sonorous than stops (e.g., b,p; s=1). Accordingly, onsets
such as bl manifest a large cline in sonority (∆s=3), bn has a
smaller cline (∆s=3), bd manifests a sonority plateau,
whereas lb exhibits a sonority fall. (∆s=-3). The typological
preference (e.g., blif≻bnif≻bdif≻lbif) is thus captured by
grammatical constraints that favor onsets of large sonority
clines—the larger the cline, the less marked the onset
(Clements, 1990). Of interest is whether those constraints
are universally active in the grammars of individual
speakers.
To address this question, I examine whether people favor
onsets of large sonority clines over smaller clines even when
such onsets are unattested in their language. Participants’
preferences, in turn, are gauged from their capacity to
accurately identify these onsets. Past research has shown
that speakers systematically misidentify ill-formed onsets
that are unattested in their language (e.g., tlatәla; Pitt,
1998). Grammatical ill-formedness presents one explanation
for this phenomenon (Anttila, 1997). In this account, the
markedness of ill-formed onsets prevents their faithful
encoding by the grammar, and consequently, such onsets
must be systematically recoded as better-formed structures
(e.g., as tela). To the extent small sonority clines are illformed, then onsets with small sonority clines (e.g., lb)
should be recoded, hence, more likely to be misidentified
than better-formed onsets (e.g., bd).

1489

Figure 1: The link between sonority cline of onsets, their
frequency across languages and their identification by
English and Korean speakers in syllable count and AX
identity tasks (Berent et al., 2007; 2008).

Results from numerous experiments show that the
identification of marked onsets is linked to their sonority
profile (see Figure 1). For example, English speakers—both
adults (Berent & Lennertz, 2007; Berent et al., 2007;
Berent, 2008; 2009; 2010a) and young children (Berent et
al., 2010b)—are more likely to misidentify the ill-formed
lbif compared to the better-formed bdif: they are more likely
to incorrectly identify lbif as disyllabic, and they
erroneously judge it as identical to lәbif. Crucially, this
systematic misidentification of marked onsets compared to
unmarked ones obtains despite no experience with either
Misidentification, of course, could also occur for
numerous reasons unrelated to sonority. English speakers,
for example, could conceivably misidentify lbif because it is
dissimilar to attested English onsets, because the acoustic
properties of lbif are ambiguous, or because its phonetic
form is difficult to encode. But auxiliary analyses
demonstrate that the perceptual illusions of English speakers
are not due to artifacts of the auditory stimuli (Russian
speakers identify the same stimuli accurately, e.g., Berent et
al., 2007) or an inability to encode their phonetic form.
Indeed, English speakers identify the same aural stimuli
adequately once they attend to their phonetic forms (e.g.,
Berent et al., 2011), but when phonological encoding is
required, misidentification are found even with printed
materials, Berent et al., 2009; Berent & Lennertz, 2010).
The superior identification of unmarked onsets also does not
result from their resemblance to attested English onsets
(e.g., to bl). In fact, similar findings obtain in Korean—a
language that arguably lacks onset clusters altogether
(Berent et al., 2008; see Figure 1).
By elimination, then, I conclude that the misidentification
of marked onsets reflects broad grammatical constraints that
re-emerge consistently, perhaps universally, despite
substantial variation in linguistic experience. The unique,
shared design of phonological grammars, on the one hand,
and the intimate link between phonological competence and
reading (a cultural invention) on the other, are consistent
with the view of the phonological grammar as a specialized
system of core knowledge.

References
Anttila, A. (1997). Deriving variation from grammar. In F.
Hinskens, R. van Hout & L. Wetzels (Eds.), Variation,
Change and Phonological Theory (pp. 35-68).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Berent, I., & Lennertz, T. (2007). What we know about
what we have never heard before: Beyond phonetics.
Cognition, 104, 638-643.
Berent, I., Steriade, D., Lennertz, T., & Vaknin, V. (2007).
What we know about what we have never heard:
Evidence from perceptual illusions. Cognition, 104, 591630.
Berent, I. (2008). Are phonological representations of
printed and spoken language isomorphic? Evidence from
the restrictions on unattested onsets. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 34, 1288-1304.

Berent, I., Lennertz, T., Jun, J., Moreno, M. A., &
Smolensky, P. (2008). Language universals in human
brains. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105, 5321-5325.
Berent, I., Lennertz, T., Smolensky, P., & VakninNusbaum, V. (2009). Listeners’ knowledge of
phonological universals: Evidence from nasal clusters.
Phonology 26, 75-108.
Berent, I., Balaban, E., Lennertz, T., & Vaknin-Nusbaum,
V. (2010a). Phonological universals constrain the
processing of nonspeech. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 139, 418-435.
Berent, I., Harder, K., & Lennertz, T. (2010b). Phonological
universals in early childhood: Evidence from sonority
restrictions., Boston University Conference on Language
Development. Boston, MA.
Berent, I., & Lennertz, T. (2010). Universal constraints on
the sound structure of language:
Phonological or
acoustic? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 36, 212-223.
Berent, I., Lennertz, T., & Smolensky, P. (2011).
Markedness and misperception: It’s a two-way street. In
C. E. Cairns & E. Raimy (Eds.), Handbook of the Syllable
(pp. 373-394): Brill.
Berent, I. (in press). The phonological mind. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1996). Science and core
knowledge. Philosophy of Science, 63, 515-533.
Clements, G. N. (1990). The role of the sonority cycle in
core syllabification. In J. Kingston & M. Beckman (Eds.),
Papers in laboratory phonology I: Between the grammar
and physics of speech (pp. 282-333). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fehér, O., Wang, H., Saar, S., Mitra, P. P., &
Tchernichovski, O. (2009). De novo establishment of
wild-type song culture in the zebra finch. Nature, 459,
564-568.
Fitch, W. T., Hauser, M. D., & Chomsky, N. (2005). The
evolution of the language faculty: clarifications and
implications. Cognition, 97, 179-210; discussion 211-125.
Greenberg, J., H. (1978). Some generalizations concerning
initial and final consonant clusters. In J.H. Greenberg,
C.A. Ferguson & E.A. Moravcsik (Eds.), Universals of
Human Language (Vol. 2, pp. 243-279). Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Pitt, M. A. (1998). Phonological processes and the
perception of phonotactically illegal consonant clusters.
Perception & Psychophysics, 60, 941-951.
Prince, A., & Smolensky, P. (1993/2004). Optimality
theory: Constraint interaction in generative grammar.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub.
Samuels, R. (2004). Innateness in cognitive science. Trends
Cognitive Sciences, 8, 136-141.
Sandler, W., Aronoff, M., Meir, I., & Padden, C. (in press).
The gradual emergence of phonological form in a new
language. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory.

1490

