UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Credibility of Stories about Design History

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9ts6t0qf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Chaigneau, Sergio
Coo, Cristian
Soto, Vicente

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Credibility of Stories about Design History
Sergio E. Chaigneau (sergio.chaigneau@uai.cl)
Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Diagonal Las Torres 2640
Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile

Cristián Coo (cristian.coo2005@alumnos.uai.cl )
Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Diagonal Las Torres 2640
Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile

Vicente Soto (vicente.soto2005@alumnos.uai.cl)
Escuela de Psicología, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Diagonal Las Torres 2640
Peñalolén, Santiago, Chile

thinking about animals (i.e., a belief that they were made for
something).
Similarly to what happens for natural kinds, for design
history to have an effect on artifact concepts,
conceptualizers need to believe it. It is easy to overlook the
fact that knowledge about design history is generally
learned from an indirect source. People that know a
telephone is used to communicate with other people over
long distances, know this because they can experience it in
the present. People that know the story about how Bell
invented the telephone, know this because they learned it
from somebody else, and not because they directly
perceived it. In this sense, artifacts are no different from
natural kinds created by a supernatural being. For design
history to have a conceptual effect, people need to judge it is
credible.
Many factors could enter into credibility judgments.
Among other factors, a conceptualizer could judge
credibility according to the source’s trustworthiness,
according the status of the putative designer, or according to
whether the known object affordances are coherent with the
putative design history (cf., Thagard, 2005). Of the factors
just mentioned, coherence is the one that has received the
most attention in cognitive psychology (e.g., McNamara,
Kintsh, Songer, & Kintsh, 1996; Murphy & Medin, 1985;
Rehder & Kim, 2006). According to a coherentist view,
people have a preference for good or coherent explanations
because they approximate truth (see Thagard, 1992, 2007).
Therefore, a design history should be credible to the extent
that it is coherent (see Thagard, 1989, 2005). In fact,
experiments with artifact categories offer confirming
evidence. A design history story becomes conceptually
central if it offers a plausible explanation for the artifact’s
properties and function. More specifically, when children
receive artifacts with salient properties that are not coherent
with the object’s putative design history, then that design
history does not have conceptual effects (Kemler Nelson,
Frankenfield, Morris & Blair, 2000, Exp. 1) and promotes
more inquiries signaling conceptual dissatisfaction (Asher &
Kemler Nelson, 2008). Because prior work on this topic
was done with artificial stimuli in the laboratory, a
remaining issue is whether coherence effects on credibility

Abstract
There is evidence that a story about design history is credible
to the extent that it coheres with object affordances. Results
that support this theory were generally obtained with artificial
materials learned in laboratory experiments. In the current
experiment, we extend these findings to real artifacts that
occur naturally outside the laboratory.
We presented
participants of different levels of expertise, with real artifacts
that cohered to different degrees with a proposed design
history, and participants rated either the artifacts’ efficiency
for the proposed design history function, or the credibility of
the received story about their design history. Our results
showed that coherent design histories are more credible, that
expertise increases the ability to judge efficiency (not
surprisingly), but that expertise does not affect the ability to
judge credibility to the same extent that it affects efficiency.
A post hoc explanation is offered for this interaction.
Keywords: Artifact kinds; design history; explanation;
coherence.

Introduction
Knowledge about how objects were created has an
important effect on how those objects are conceptualized.
For artifact kinds, objects’ design histories can become
conceptually central. Children and adults prefer to assign
artifacts their function according to their design history
rather than according to an alternative afforded function
(Kelemen, 1999; Rips, 1989), use design history to guide
naming (Jaswal, 2006; Matan & Carey, 2001), and can be
primed with it during problem solving (Defeyter & German,
2003). The conceptual relevance of design history extends
to natural kinds, provided conceptualizers believe these
kinds were created by a supernatural being. In one study
(Evans, 2001), children’s belief in God as the creator of
categories was found to correlate with their tendency to
reason essentialistically about the nature of animals (i.e., an
endorsement of stable category membership). In another
study (Diesendruck & Haber, 2009), where children of
religious and non-religious environments were compared, it
was found that belief in God as creator correlated with an
essentialist mode of thinking about social categories (e.g.,
race, gender, ethnicity), and with a teleological mode of

620

extend to naturally occurring artifact categories. In the
current experiment we tested this hypothesis using real
objects that people learned about in their everyday dealings
(i.e., not in the laboratory).
Another issue that has not been explored up to date is
whether expertise has an effect on the credibility of stories
about design history. There are reasons to think it could. In
the limiting case of a person who knows close to nothing
about a given category, then she may be willing to accept a
wide range of design histories. Provided these stories are
not incoherent with other things she knows, the design
history story may only need a loose connection with what
she knows about the category to be accepted as credible. A
child learning about computers is a case in point. In the
opposite limiting case of someone who is an expert in a
given domain, a purported design history may need a greater
amount of detail to be accepted as coherent.
An
archeologist examining ancient artifacts is a case in point.
This is an important question because if a small amount of
knowledge is sufficient to lend credibility to a design
history story, then a child or a novice learning a new
category may use the design history story to guide the new
category’s construction.

fuller and more detailed models of the situations referred to
by our texts and photographs (cf., Groen & Patel, 1988), and
because of this we predicted that experts would have more
differentiated efficiency judgments than novices.
Note that in this design, efficiency necessarily covaries
with coherence (i.e., efficiency was our proxy for
coherence). Because the design history story was fixed (i.e.,
the same for the four objects), less efficiency for the stated
historical function implies that the design history is also less
coherent (i.e., it is unlikely that a designer will create an
artifact to function with low efficiency for its purported
function). Thus, coherence predicts that credibility ratings
should pattern similarly to efficiency ratings. (A different
way to manipulate coherence is to directly provide
participants with knowledge varying in coherence.
However, this is possible only when materials are
completely artificial, and not when real objects are used.)
Finally, our experiment also informed us of effects of
expertise on credibility. Differences between experts and
novices would tell us if the amount of knowledge possessed
by the conceptualizer affects the credibility of a design
history story.

Method

Experiment’s Overview
We presented participants with photographs of four real
objects (climbing gear) that they were acquainted with
(participants practiced rock climbing), along with a putative
design history story that specified ideal conditions of use
(always the same for all four objects). Thus, the design
history provided an ideal, relative to which the four objects’
efficiencies could be ordered. Participants were of different
levels of expertise (novice and expert climbers). The four
objects were selected by the experimenters so that they
could be ordered in decreasing efficiency (three objects
were efficient to different degrees, and one was inefficient).
Participants were then asked to rate (between participants)
either whether they agreed that the artifact was efficient for
the stated function (efficiency rating), or whether they
believed the artifact’s design history story was true
(credibility rating).

Design and Participants
Participants were 42 vertical rock climbing practitioners
who volunteered to participate by login into the experiment
through a link placed in various sport related websites. The
experiment used a 2 (rating: efficiency, credibility) x 3
(object kind: pulley, ascender, belay) x 4 (object efficiency
level) mixed design, with repeated measures on the last
factor. The link randomly directed participants to one of the
2 x 3 = 6 between participants cells of the design. Before
beginning the experiment, participants informed the
difficulty level of their last successful climb. Most
participants informed difficulty by using the Yosemite
Decimal System (YDS). When a different system was used
(British, French), the score was transformed to YDS using a
conventional conversion table. The median YDS score was
used to divide participants in two expertise levels. This
allowed one additional between participants factor in the
design (expertise: novice, expert). Because of the online
nature of the procedure, we continued collecting data until
we had a sufficient number of participants in each level of
the rating factor (21 for efficiency, 21 for credibility), and
about an equal number of participants in each cell of the
design (efficiency: 12 novices and 9 experts; credibility: 11
novices and 10 experts). Data from 7 participants were
discarded because they did not finish the experiment.

Predictions
We used three kinds of climbing gear: pulleys, ascenders
and belays. Though these are relatively simple mechanical
devices, understanding their functions requires experience
with the objects themselves and with the conditions in
which they can be used. For example, two of our pulleys
look very similar to each other, and can be distinguished
only based on technical criteria such as weight and ease of
use, while a third pulley looks different but can be made to
work provided the necessary experience. To understand an
object’s function, requires knowing not only the object’s
physical structure, but also the actions that the object
affords, the setting in which it operates, and the outcomes
that can be expected to occur (cf., Chaigneau, Barsalou &
Zamani, 2009). It is likely that our experts would have

Materials and Procedures
We selected three kinds of climbing gear: pulleys, ascenders
and belays. For each kind, three photographs were selected
from the Petzl® company website (see Figure 1). Each triad
was selected spanning a wide range of efficiencies. To
define efficiency, we imagined a novice climber, so that the

621

38) = 8.47, MSe = 1.88, p < .01, R2 = .18, power = .81).
Level 3 produced significantly greater ratings than level 4
(F(1, 38) = 27.55, MSe = 7.03, p < .001, R2 = .42, power =
1).

most efficient object of each kind would be the one that was
easiest to use and offered the greatest safety. For example,
the a priori most efficient belay for a novice had an assisted
breaking mechanism, while the other two belays required
increasingly good rope handling. To each triad, an object
from a different kind was added to have an inefficient fourth
object (e.g., the fourth object for the belay group was really
an emergency ascender). Object selection and efficiency
estimates were performed by the second and third authors,
who practice rock climbing regularly. For each group of
four objects, a fictitious design history story was created,
stating that each object was designed to be used by novice
climbers in some specific situation (see Figure 1 for an
example). (Note that we are not tapping here on objective
efficiencies, because these artifacts are efficient only
relative to conditions of use such that, e.g., a climber that
privileges object weight and multifunctionality would
probably give a different efficiency ordering.)
Participants started the experiment by clicking on a link
that randomly directed them to one of six versions of the
experiment, which resulted from combining the 3 kinds of
climbing gear with the 2 levels of the rating factor. Thus,
each participant rated only one set of four objects with
different efficiencies, either in the efficiency rating or in the
credibility rating condition (for examples of questions, see
Figure 1). For each group of four objects, we created a
different pseudo-random sequence of levels of efficiency,
taking care that the four objects never appeared in
continuous decreasing or increasing efficiency order.
Ratings were collected on a 7-point likert scale. Participants
could abandon the experiment at any point.

Category name
Object efficency

BELAY
Level 2
Level 3

Level 1

Level 4

Design History This object was designed by a mountain sports equipment
company, to be used by novice climbers, specifically
while doing vertical climbing on rock, with the possibility
of many unexpected falls.
Efficiency Do you agree that this object is adequate to be used as a
Question belay as described?
Believability Do you believe it's true that this object was designed to be
Question used as a belay as described?

Figure 1: Four objects from the belay category, ordered in a
priori decreasing efficiency levels. Participants, however,
never received objects in this or in the inverse order.
Participants saw objects (color photographs from the Petzl ®
company website) one at a time, each time with the same
proposed design history. For each object, participants
answered either the efficiency or the credibility question,
using a 7-point likert rating scale.

Results

7

Data were submitted to a 2 (expertise: novice, expert) x 2
(rating: credibility, efficiency) x 4 (object efficiency) mixed
ANOVA, with repeated measures on the last factor. (Object
kind was treated as a control variable, and was not included
as a factor in the analyses.) The overall ANOVA showed a
main effect of object efficiency (F(3, 114) = 40.89, MSe =
3.47, p < .001, R2 = .52, power = 1), no effect of expertise
(F(1, 38) = 2.80, MSe = 1.66, p < .25, R2 = .07, power =
.37), and no effect of rating (F<1). The only significant
two-way interaction was rating by expertise (F(1, 38) =
4.19, MSe = 1.66, p < .05, R2 = .10, power = .51), but there
was no object efficiency by rating interaction (F(3, 114) =
1.96, MSe = 3.47, p < .25, R2 = .05, power = .40), and no
efficiency by expertise interaction (F(3, 114) = 2.0, MSe =
3.47, p < .25, R2 = .05, power = .42). Finally, there was a
significant three way interaction between expertise, rating
and object efficiency (F(3, 114) = 4.42, MSe = 3.47, p < .05,
R2 = .10, power = .77).
As Figure 2 illustrates, contrasts on the repeated measures
object efficiency main effect showed ratings decreased
linearly along a priori object efficiency levels. Level 1
produced significantly greater ratings than level 2 (F(1, 38)
= 10.02, MSe = 3.07, p < .01, R2 = .21, power = .87). Level
2 produced significantly greater ratings than level 3 (F(1,

Mean Ratings

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1

2

3

4

Object Efficiency

Figure 2: Mean ratings across rating type and object kind.
Values in the X axis represent increasingly inefficient
artifacts.
All differences among adjacent means are
significant. Error bars are standard errors.
The significant three-way interaction was explored by
simple contrasts between experts and novices for efficiency
and credibility ratings, at each level of the object efficiency
factor. As Figure 3a shows, efficiency ratings were greater
for experts than novices, at all levels of object efficiency

622

except for the inefficient object. At the first, second, and
third levels of object efficiency, efficiency ratings were
greater for experts than for novices (respectively, F(1, 38) =
11.46, MSe = 2.93, p < .01; F(1, 38) = 6.51, MSe = 3.86, p
< .05; F(1, 38) = 5.46, MSe = 4.66, p < .05). At the last
level of object efficiency, efficiency ratings for experts were
not significantly different from those of novices (F(1, 38) =
1.89, MSe = 2.61, p < .25). In contrast, as Figure 3b shows,
when credibility ratings were considered, none of the
comparisons between experts and novices at levels of object
efficiency were significant (for all levels, F < 1).

effect of the object efficiency factor, suggest this was a
powerful source of information in the experiment.
Recall (from the Predictions section) that in our design,
object efficiency correlates with design history’s coherence,
and that therefore coherence predicts credibility ratings
would pattern similarly to efficiency ratings. As Figure 3
shows, credibility ratings for experts and novices show a
similar linear trend to efficiency ratings. In fact, we found
no interaction of a priori object efficiency with rating or
with expertise.
The simple contrasts showed that, as predicted, expertise
affected efficiency ratings. Novices gave lower ratings
overall, and were less able to discriminate efficiencies,
offering ratings close to the middle of the scale (see Figure
3a). However, expertise did not affect credibility ratings.
Novices judged credibility almost identical to experts, both
in pattern and slope (see Figure 3b). We think this is not an
issue of lack of power or of the particular materials we used,
because our design was sensitive enough to detect
differences between novices and experts’ efficiency ratings,
and yet did not detect differences between novices and
experts’ credibility ratings.
Regarding things that were created (natural or artificial),
our results provide support for the theory that design history
is conceptually central if it coheres with objects’
affordances. The better an object affords its purported
historical function, the more credible its design history story
is. Our results extend this theory by showing that the
phenomenon happens not only in laboratory experiments,
but also in naturally occurring artifact categories.
Our results also draw attention to an interesting difference
between the relation of expertise to efficiency, and of
expertise to credibility. Though experts and novices
differed in their efficiency ratings, with the former
providing overall higher and better differentiated ratings,
they did not differ in their credibility ratings (at least with
our materials and in the range of differences we studied).
We acknowledge there are many interpretations for our
three-way interaction, buy we nonetheless want to offer one
that seems particularly interesting for setting up more
precise experiments. An interpretation for this pattern of
results regarding expertise is that the credibility of a design
history depends on information that overlaps with
information used to compute efficiency but is distinct from
it. An example will help to illustrate what we think is
happening. Imagine someone who is learning about the
bread knife category. This category is characterized by two
properties: the blade of bread knifes is long and serrated.
Imagine, furthermore, that because this individual’s
experience with bread is limited, she knows about long
blades but not about serrated blades. Now, if presented with
a set of knifes having different combinations of long or
short and straight or serrated blades, and asked to judge
their relative efficiencies, she will probably group them in
fewer groups and be less discriminating (equivalent to
novices in our experiment) than someone with more

(a)

Mean Efficiency Ratings

7
6

5
4
3
2
1

0
1

2

3

4

Object Efficiency
Novices

(b)

Experts

MeanCredibility Ratings

7
6
5
4

3
2
1
0

1

2

3

4

Object Efficiency
Novice

Expert

Figure 3: In Panel (a), mean efficiency ratings comparing
experts and novices. In Panel (b), mean credibility ratings
also comparing experts and novices. The graphs show a
three-way interaction between expertise, rating type and
object efficiency. Error bars are standard errors.

Discussion
As Figure 2 shows, we successfully graduated levels of
efficiency. Our participants rated efficiencies consistently
with our a priori judgment, with the four levels showing an
almost linear trend of decreasing efficiency. The main

623

experience who knows about the two properties (equivalent
to experts in our experiment).
However, the question of design history credibility may
be solved by appeal to other types of information. Imagine
that our subject is told that bread knifes were made to
prevent people from crushing slices when cutting a loaf of
bread, and then asked to judge if that story about design is
credible for each knife in the set. Of course, the knifes’
relative efficiencies are still relevant to decide if the design
history is coherent and credible (i.e., designers don’t create
inefficient artifacts), but other types of information may also
be useful. The availability of contrast categories that could
achieve the same function may be one of them. If our
subject can’t think of a different category of utensils that
can be used to cut bread with similar efficiency than bread
knifes, then that may increase the coherence of the story
about design history (i.e., artifacts are created to achieve a
goal that is typically no achievable as efficiently by other
means).
Under this interpretation, our results may show that
though novices had less detailed information about the
affordances of pulleys, ascenders and belays, they shared
with experts other types of information that were relevant
for their credibility judgments. Perhaps it was this shared
information that made novice’s and expert’s credibility
judgments less distinguishable than their efficiency
judgments.

expertise. In M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, and M. J. Farr
(Eds.) The Nature of Expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Evans, M. E. (2001). Cognitive and contextual factors in the
emergence of diverse belief systems: creation versus
evolution. Cognitive Psychology, 42, 217–266.
Jaswal, V. K. (2006). Preschoolers favor the creator’s label
when reasoning about an artifact’s function. Cognition,
99, B83–B92.
Kelemen, D. (1999). The scope of teleological thinking in
preschool children. Cognition, 70, 241–272.
Kemler Nelson, D. G., Frankenfield, A., Morris, C., & Blair,
E. (2000). Young children’s use of functional information
to categorize artifacts: Three factors that matter.
Cognition, 77, 133–68.
Matan, A., & Carey, S. (2001). Developmental changes
within the core of artifact concepts. Cognition, 78, 1–26.
McNamara, D.S., Kintsh, E., Songer, N., & Kintsh, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of text
coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14(1), 1–43.
Murphy, G.L., & Medin, D.L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92(3),
289–316
Rehder, B. & Kim, S. (2006). How causal knowledge
affects classification: A generative theory of
categorization. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 659–683.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory Coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12, 435–502.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual Revolutions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Thagard, P. (2005). Testimony, credibility, and explanatory
coherence. Erkenntnis, 63, 295–316.
Thagard, P. (2007). Coherence, truth, and the development
of scientific knowledge. Philosophy of Science,74, 28–47.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for comments provided by three anonymous
reviewers, which contributed to increase this manuscript’s
coherence. This work was supported by FONDECYT grant
1100426 to the first author.

References
Asher, Y. M., & Kemler Nelson, D. G. (2008). Was it
designed to do that? Children's focus on intended function
in their conceptualization of artifacts. Cognition, 106(1),
474–483.
Chaigneau, S. E., Barsalou, L. W., & Zamani, M. (2009).
Situational
information
contributes
to
object
categorization and inference. Acta Psychologica, 130(1),
81–94.
Chaigneau, S. E., Castillo, R. D. & Martínez, L. (2008).
Creators’ intentions bias judgments of
function
independently from causal inferences. Cognition, 109,
123–132.
Defeyter, M. A., & German, T. P. (2003). Acquiring an
understanding of design: evidence from children's insight
problem solving. Cognition, 89(2), 133–155.
Diesendruck, G., & Haber, L. (2009). God’s categories: the
effect of religiosity on children’s teleological and
essentialist beliefs about categories. Cognition, 110, 100–
114.
Groen, G. J., & Patel, V. L. (1988). The relationship
between comprehension and reasoning in medical

624

