UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross Cultural Comparative Effects of an Early Science and Measurement Learning Study on
4th grade children’s achievement
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sn927fm
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Stein, Nancy L.
Tzeng, Yuhtsuen
Hernandez, Marc W.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

          Cross Cultural Comparative Effects of an Early Science and
    Measurement Learning Study on 4th grade children’s achievement
                                                 Nancy L. Stein
                                           University of Chicago and NORC
                                                Yuhtsuen Tzeng
                                  National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
                                              Marc W. Hernandez
                                            NORC, University of Chicago
Abstract: Two science-learning studies were carried out in the U. S. and Taiwan, to examine whether 4th grade
children could benefit from a causally coherent presentation of core concepts explaining molecules and the role that
heat energy plays in controlling state of matter. The first study varied the inclusion/exclusion of static versus
dynamic graphic presentations that accompanied learning modules. The second varied whether concepts of measure
were explicitly taught before science learning. Children in both countries performed exceeding well on concepts
thought to be difficult in learning about the speed and movement of molecules. Taiwanese children received far
more rigorous training on measurement concepts than U.S. students. If measurement concepts were not taught
explicitly, U.S. children lost ground rapidly. With explicit instruction, U.S, students improved but did not quite
equal Taiwanese students. The role of time on task and diversity of problem presentations are discussed.
                                                          2316

