UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-dimensional Mappings in Sound Symbolic Foreign Words
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9t88501j
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Tzeng, Chrsitina Y.
Nygaard, Lynne C.
Namy, Laura L.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

        Cross-dimensional Mappings in Sound Symbolic Foreign Words
                                                 Christina Y. Tzeng
                                                      Emory University
                                                 Lynne C. Nygaard
                                                      Emory University
                                                    Laura L. Namy
                                                      Emory University
Abstract: Sound symbolism– non-arbitrary correspondences between the sound of a word and its meaning– exists
cross-linguistically and facilitates listeners’ ability to infer the meaning of foreign words. However, the specificity
of these mappings remains unclear. The present study investigated whether sound symbolic properties correspond
only to a specific meaning domain or to other semantic dimensions as well. Native English-speaking adults heard
sound symbolic foreign translations of eight dimensional adjectives (big, small, round, pointy, fast, slow, moving,
still), and for each word (e.g., ”bamba” meaning ’big’), chose a correct translation from two English antonym pairs
(one matched and one mismatched with word dimension, e.g. big, small, fast, slow). Listeners selected meanings
within the matched choice dimension more often than the mismatched choice dimension, suggesting that although
sound symbolic properties facilitate foreign word interpretation across a range of meanings, this facilitative effect is
greatest for mappings within a specific meaning domain.
                                                             2149

