UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Designing learning materials to foster transfer of principles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92r2306z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schalk, Lennart
Saalbach, Henrik
Stern, Elsbeth

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Designing learning materials to foster transfer of principles
Lennart Schalk (schalk@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich,
Universitaetsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Henrik Saalbach (saalbach@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich,
Universitaetsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

Elsbeth Stern (stern@ifv.gess.ethz.ch)
Institute for Behavioral Sciences, ETH Zurich,
Universitaetsstrasse 41, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland

principles. However, the approaches have rarely been tested
competitively and the conclusions derived from different
lines of research are difficult to compare. Difficulties arise
due to differences in conceptualizing and measuring transfer
(Barnett & Ceci, 2002). The present research aims at
evaluating the different approaches to foster transfer of
principles in one research program by teaching participants
the principles of propositional logic (i.e. the interpretation of
propositions connected by the logic operators negation,
conjunction, disjunction, conditional, and biconditional).
Transfer of principles can be conceptualized as analogical
reasoning (e.g., Goldstone & Son, 2005). Principles are
relational structures that capture the interdependencies
between various variables and are highly flexible in
meaning. Theories of analogical reasoning essentially
explain transfer of a relational structure from a known
domain, the source, to a lesser known domain, the target (for
an overview see Gentner, 2010). Of course, not all problem
solving and knowledge transfer can be reduced to analogical
reasoning (see Nokes, 2009, Bransford & Schwarz, 1999).
However, to explain the phenomenon of transfer of
principles theories of analogical reasoning provide a highly
elaborated and parsimonious conceptual base.
Accordingly, educators have to support their students to
acquire a knowledge representation of the principle which is
a useful and flexible source to solve future (target)
problems. Merely teaching by analogy which means
basically providing learners with a single concrete source
that instantiates the principle and is grounded in everyday
experience has been shown to not result in satisfying
transfer performance (e.g., Duit, Roth, Komorek, &
Wilbers, 2001). Several reasons may account for this
failure: inferences strongly depend on the features of the
source chosen (e.g., Gentner & Gentner, 1983), learners fail
to spontaneously retrieve the required source (e.g., Gick &
Holyoak, 1980), or learners retrieve and integrate
knowledge in the reasoning process that is irrelevant for the
analogy (e.g., Mather, Knight, & McCaffrey, 2005). Given
the failure of “classic” analogy, several approaches have
been proposed on how to teach new principles.

Abstract
Education aims to equip learners with knowledge about
principles that can be applied across a wide range of
situations but often people do not recognize structural
similarity between known cases and novel problems. Several
approaches for designing learning materials to foster transfer
of principles have been proposed including learning a generic
instantiation, comparing instantiating concrete cases, and
learning multiple representations. However, these approaches
have rarely been tested against each other nor have they been
examined by a broad range of transfer tasks. We evaluated the
transfer potential of the different approaches separately
(Experiment 1) and in combination (Experiment 2) by
teaching undergraduates the principles of propositional logic.
Students were tested on an extensive transfer test one week
after learning. The best transfer performance resulted from
the simultaneous comparison of a generic instantiation with
two concrete cases. We suggest this approach for designing
learning materials that introduce new principles.
Keywords: transfer; analogical reasoning; comparison;
generic instantiation; learning by multiple representations.

Introduction
Transfer describes the phenomenon “how knowledge
acquired in one situation applies (or fails to apply) in other
situations” (Singley & Anderson, 1989, p.1). The ability to
transfer knowledge is especially important when scientific
principles are learned. Science often advances by the
discovery of principles that cross-cut and support the crossfertilization of superficially different domains (Goldstone &
Wilensky, 2008). Thus, learning a principle gives students
the possibility to understand a broad range of phenomena in
different domains. For example, if students learn the
principles of propositional logic this should help them to
comprehend the output of combinations of logic gates in
digital circuits and to evaluate the validity of philosophical
arguments. Therefore, it is important that principles learned
in educational settings are not restricted to the
idiosynchrasies of the learning situation.
Researchers have devised several approaches for
designing learning materials that foster transfer of

300

One approach suggests providing learners with a generic
instantiation of the principle, which formalizes or
symbolizes a principle without direct reference to concrete
objects (e.g., a formula or a sparse graphic representation).
Within the framework of analogical reasoning learning a
generic instantiation can be considered as learning a single
source comparable to learning via analogy. However, a
generic instantiation contains (almost) no additional
irrelevant information compared to a concrete familiar
source. Sloutsky, Kaminski, and Heckler (2005, p. 508)
aptly illustrate this: “…when different numerosities are
represented by a different number of frogs (as opposed to
being represented by a different number of dots), the
representation
communicates
additional,
irrelevant
information (e.g., shape, color, animacy)”. Providing
learners with a generic instantiation of a principle first is
common in mathematics textbooks and this tendency
increases with grade level (Nathan, Long, & Alibali, 2002).
Several researchers have demonstrated advantages
concerning learning and transfer for generic instantiations
over more concrete instantiations of principles (e.g.,
Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008; Mevarech & Stern,
1997; Nesher & Sukenik, 1991).
Another approach suggests comparing concrete cases
instantiating the principle to promote transfer. The
comparison of cases highlights the common relational
structure and supports the abstraction and encoding of a
general schema while superficial idiosyncratic features of
the single cases become less important (e.g., Gentner, 2010).
Thus, the source representation is actively abstracted by the
learner from multiple concrete cases. Like a given generic
instantiation, this “self-constructed” source representation
contains less irrelevant information than a single case.
Actively comparing cases (in contrast to processing cases
sequentially) has been found to increase transfer
performance. For example, students who learned the
principles of contingent contracts by comparing two case
studies formed more contingencies in a face-to-face
negotiation exercise than students who interpreted the case
studies separately (Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson,
2003). The schema abstracted from comparing cases is thus
more likely to be retrieved and more flexible than are the
concrete representations that are encoded when cases are
studied sequentially.
Finally, a third approach suggests providing learners with
multiple representations of a principle. Here, learners see
different representations of a principle simultaneously such
as a formula in combination with a graph or a concrete case.
This kind of learning is widely used in multimedia
environments (e.g., Ainsworth, 1999). In accordance to this
approach, learners actively construct a source representation
that integrates the information from the different
representations into a coherent structure by aligning the
multiple representations (Schnotz & Bannert, 2003).
However, this integration process is highly demanding for
learners and positive effects on learning and transfer often
do not occur (for an overview see Seufert, 2003). Educators

are thus advised to explicitly and consistently link examples
with corresponding symbols of generic instantiations (e.g.
Berthold & Renkl, 2009; Roy & Chi, 2005). The most basic
form of learning multiple representations is simultaneously
studying a generic instantiation and one concrete case (e.g.,
Colhoun, Gentner, & Loewenstein, 2008).
For educators it would be highly interesting to know
which of these approaches is most effective for fostering
transfer. However, providing an answer is difficult because
the transfer tasks used to test the different approaches are
hardly comparable (Barnett & Ceci, 2002) and the different
approaches have not yet been tested against each other
within one experimental design.

Overview of Research
In the present research, we evaluated three different
approaches to foster transfer separately (Exp 1) and in
combination (Exp 2). In both studies, students learned the
principles of propositional logic (i.e. the truth functionality
of the basic logic operators negation, conjunction,
disjunction, conditional, and biconditional). We chose
propositional logic because the principles are domaingeneral and difficult to learn (e.g., Cheng, Holyoak, Nisbett,
& Oliver, 1986). Participants in both studies received a
booklet that presented a short introduction to propositional
logic. They were instructed to write self-explanations for
each instance of a principle. This ensured that participants
actively processed the materials. More importantly, writing
self-explanations supports the integration of different cases
(e.g., Gentner, Loewenstein, & Thompson, 2003) and of
multiple representations (e.g., Berthold & Renkl, 2009).
Immediately after learning, we controlled learning of the
materials. One week after learning, participants worked on a
transfer test that comprised several transfer tasks to assess
the transfer potential of the different learning materials.
Thus, both studies consisted of three phases: learning,
learning control, and transfer.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, four groups of participants learned the
principles of propositional logic with different learning
materials. Learning materials of three groups were based on
the approaches described above: learning generic
instantiations of principles (GENERIC), comparing two
concrete cases instantiating the principles (COMPARE
_CASES), and comparing a generic instantiation with one
concrete case (COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE). A fourth
group served as baseline (BASELINE). The learners in the
BASELINE condition studied the two concrete cases of the
COMPARE_CASES approach sequentially without the
possibility to compare.
In the learning phase, participants of the four intervention
groups learned the principles of propositional logic by
studying truth tables of the basic operators (see Table 1 for
examples). If the learning material was based on generic
instantiations of principles (in the GENERIC group), truth
tables presented variables for propositions (i.e. p, q) and

301

symbols for the operator (i.e. →). If the learning material
was based on concrete cases (in the COMPARE_CASES
and BASELINE group), variables and symbols were
instantiated with simple sentences. If the learning material
was based on multiple representations (in the COMPARE_
GENERIC _CASE group), participants studied a generic
instantiation and one of the cases simultaneously.
In the learning control test, we tested whether participants
learned the principles they were just taught. This test
contained tasks based on the same representation used in the
learning materials of the respective group. For example,
having learned the principles with generic instantiations
(e.g., p → q) the tasks contained the identical generic
symbols; and having learned the principles instantiated by
simple sentences (i.e. cases) the tasks contained the identical
sentences. To solve the tasks participants merely had to
recall the principles (see Table 1 for examples of the
learning control test). Given the intelligible learning
material and given that the learning control test was directly
adapted to it, no differences were expected across the four
intervention groups. To ensure that participants of the four
intervention groups benefitted from the learning
environment we compared their performance on the learning
control test with an additional group without intervention.
One week after learning, the four intervention groups
worked on the transfer test. This test was identical for all
participants. It comprised 20 near and 24 far transfer tasks.
Half of the near transfer tasks contained representations
which were related to the variables used in the GENERIC
learning material. Variables used in the learning material
and the learning control test were replaced by different
variables (e.g., Proposition_1 for p). The other half of the
near transfer tasks contained concrete cases. In these tasks,
the simple sentences of the CASE-based learning materials
and learning control tests were substituted by other simple
sentences (see Table 1 for examples). The far transfer test
contained four different kinds of tasks: Wason’s selection

tasks, conjunction/disjunction fallacy tasks, Venn diagrams,
and logic flowcharts. All of these tasks strongly differed
from the learning materials, the learning control tests, and
the near transfer test with respect to superficial features but
could be solved by applying the principles of propositional
logic.
For the near transfer tasks we expected the three
experimental groups (GENERIC, COMPARE_CASES,
COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE)
to
outperform
the
BASELINE. Furthermore, we predicted the COMPARE_
GENERIC_CASE group to be superior to the other two
experimental groups as they were trained on the two
different representations of the principles, whereas the other
two groups were only trained on either one. For the far
transfer test, we again predicted all experimental groups to
outperform the BASELINE. However, given the lack of
research comparing the different approaches, we could not
make any predictions concerning which of the three
experimental groups would perform best.

Method
Participants One-hundred-fourteen undergraduates from
the University of Zurich and the ETH Zurich (Switzerland)
majoring in a wide range of subjects participated.
Additionally 20 undergraduates without any learning
intervention were tested on the learning control test. All
undergraduates were paid for participation. No participant
was familiar with propositional logic. They were randomly
assigned to the four groups.
Materials and Procedure In the learning phase,
participants worked on the learning materials for one hour.
The learning materials consisted of a printed-out booklet in
which the principles of propositional logic were introduced.
The booklets were identical for all participants with only the
presentation of the principles differing between the four
intervention groups. After a break of half an hour,

Table 1: Examples of the learning materials, the learning control tasks, and the near transfer tasks used in Experiment 1 and 2
Learning material
GENERIC
p
true
true
false
false

q
true
false
true
false

CASE
p→q
true
false
true
true

Henry is home.
true
true
false
false

Min is on board.
true
false
true
false

If Henry is home, Min is
on board.
true
false
true
true

Learning control
GENERIC
CASE
You know that the single propositions p and q are both false. Someone
You know that “Henry is home.” and “Min is on board.” are both false.
Someone claims “If Henry is home, Min is on board.” Which truth value
claims that p → q. Which truth value can you assign this conditional?
can you assign this conditional?

Near transfer tasks
GENERIC related tasks
CASE related tasks
You know that the single propositions “Proposition_1” and
You know that “It is raining.” and “Peter is going out.” are both false.
Someone claims “If it is raining, Peter is going out.” Which truth value can
“Proposition_2” are both false. Someone claims that “Proposition_1 →
you assign this conditional?
Proposition_2”. Which truth value can you assign this conditional?

302

participants worked on the learning control test for half an
hour. One week after learning the participants had one hour
to answer the tasks of the transfer test. Learning and transfer
were conducted in the same seminar room at the ETH
Zurich and participants were tested in groups with up to 15
students.

one-sided test).

Discussion
In contrast to our prediction, the COMPARE_GENERIC_
CASE group performed worst in both parts of the transfer
test. They did not perform better than the BASELINE and
were outperformed by GENERIC and COMPARE_CASES
groups. While the GENERIC group performed better than
the BASELINE only on the near transfer tasks, the
COMPARE_CASES group showed advantages both on near
and far transfer tasks. Findings of Experiment 1 thus suggest
that comparing two cases which instantiate a principle is
most efficient to promote transfer of this principle.
The
poor
transfer
performance
of
the
COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE group might be due to
superficial processing of the learning materials. For the
COMPARE_CASES group the joint interpretation of two
cases is only possible if idiosyncratic features of the single
cases are ignored. Thus, they had to actively abstract from
the learning materials and encoded a flexible schema that
supported transfer. GENERIC-learners might have been
encouraged to elaborate the learning materials with prior
knowledge, given that no reference to concrete objects was
given. In contrast, COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE-learners
may have only matched the symbols of the generic
instantiation to the idiosyncratic structure of the sentences
without abstracting from or elaborating learning materials.
Therefore, learning from different representations of
principles might induce superficial processing of the
materials in which only parts of one representation are
mapped onto corresponding parts of another representation.
This limits learning gains to tasks which directly match the
learning material (i.e. the tasks of the learning control test).
Given the best performance of the COMPARE_CASES
group, should teaching new principles be only based on
comparison of multiple concrete cases? For everyday
(academic) life, it is extremely important for learners to also
know a generic instantiation of a principle because this
enables them to solve complex problems with a formalized
procedure (Koedinger, Alibali, & Nathan, 2008). In
Experiment 2, we therefore explored different ways how to

Results
Learning control All intervention groups strongly
outperformed (all ps < .01, all ds > .8) the participants who
did not work on any learning material (their solution rate
was 57%). Thus, participants benefited from working on the
learning materials (see Table 2). As expected, solution rates
between the different intervention groups did not differ
significantly (F(3, 110) = 1.349, p = .262). Given that all
participants gained comparably from the different learning
materials, we used performance in the learning control test
as a covariate for the analyses of the transfer test as our aim
was to assess the pure transfer potential rather than the
learning efficiency of the learning materials.
Near transfer An ANCOVA revealed a main effect of the
learning material, F(3, 109)=5.372, p=.002, ηp2=.129 (see
Table 2 for means and standard deviations). The specific
comparisons unexpectedly revealed that the COMPARE_
GENERIC_CASE group showed the worst near transfer
performance. They were significantly outperformed by the
GENERIC (p=.002, d=.63) and COMPARE_CASES groups
(p=.001, d=.69). Furthermore, they did not perform better
than the BASELINE. The GENERIC and COMPARE_
CASES groups significantly outperformed the BASELINE
(p=.027, d=.37; p=.013, d=.43, respectively, one-sided
tests). There was no significant performance difference
between GENERIC and COMPARE_CASES groups.
Far Transfer An ANCOVA again revealed a main effect of
the learning material, F(3, 109)=2.692, p=.050, ηp2=.069.
The specific comparisons (see Table 2 for means and
standard deviations) showed a significant advantage for the
COMPARE_CASES group over the COMPARE_
GENERIC_CASE group (p=.005, d=.63). The latter group
was again least successful. Only the COMPARE_CASES
group slightly outperformed the BASELINE (p=.056, d=.39,

Table 2: Means (percentage of correct answers) and standard deviations of Experiment 1 and 2

Learning control
Near transfer
Far transfer

GENERIC

Experiment 1
COMPARE_CASES

COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE

(N=28)

(N=28)

(N =30)

(N=28)

73.5 (12.1)
66.8 (15.7)
55.7 (18.0)

72.5 (11.7)
67.7 (15.9)
61.5 (18.8)

67.9 (12.9)
57.5 (13.8)
50.0 (17.8)

72.8 (10.5)
60.9 (15.9)
54.9 (14.7)

GENERIC+TWO_CASES
Learning control
Near transfer
Far transfer

(N=27)
73.6 (14.5)
68.5 (13.4)
63.4 (16.8)

Experiment 2
COMPARISON_FIRST
(N=27)
71.7 (11.5)
63.1 (15.0)
56.7 (18.4)

303

BASELINE

GENERIC_FIRST
(N=27)
75.8 (11.8)
68.1 (17.4)
54.6 (13.2)

design effective learning materials which contain generic
and concrete instantiations of principles.

learners
who
simultaneously
compared
generic
instantiations and two concrete cases outperformed learners
from the other two groups.

Experiment 2
General Discussion

In Experiment 2, we combined the two approaches found to
have the highest transfer potentials, i.e. learning a generic
instantiation and comparing concrete cases, to three kinds of
learning materials. The first material presented
simultaneously the generic instantiation and two cases
(GENERIC+TWO_CASES) for a principle. This learning
material is similar to the COMPARE_GENERIC_CASE
material of Exp 1, but additionally incorporates a second
concrete case. The two additional kinds of learning
materials were constructed by sequencing the presentation
of generic instantiation and the two cases. In the second
group, participants learned the principles of propositional
logic first by comparing two cases and then by processing
the generic instantiation (COMPARISON_FIRST). In the
third group, the generic instantiation was presented first and
then the two cases (GENERIC_FIRST). The two additional
learning materials were included to serve as an adequate
baseline for the GENERIC+TWO_CASES group. We
predicted that the simultaneous comparison results in a
greater abstraction from the learning material and,
accordingly to an advantage for transfer relative to the
sequenced materials.

The present research evaluated three different approaches
for designing learning material which foster transfer of
knowledge about principles. Participants learned the
principles of propositional logic with different kinds of
materials. We assessed the transfer potential by an extensive
transfer test comprised of several different transfer tasks. All
transfer tasks required the retrieval and the application of
knowledge about propositional logic to problems which
differed in superficial characteristics from the learning
materials but were based on the same relational structures
(i.e. the principles of propositional logic).
In Experiment 1, we found that comparing two cases had
the highest far transfer potential. Students who learned the
generic instantiation did not perform better than the
baseline. Surprisingly poor transfer performance resulted
from comparing the generic instantiation with one case.
Thus, comparing only single instances of different
representations as it is usually implemented in multiplerepresentations-learning-materials seems not to be the best
way to support learners in encoding a flexible source to
solve future problems. In Experiment 2, we thus combined
learning a generic instantiation with comparing two cases in
different ways. The most successful combination was the
simultaneous comparison of the generic instantiation with
two cases (GENERIC+TWO_CASES). In contrast to the
most successful learning material in Experiment 1,
COMPARE_CASES, the GENERIC+TWO_CASES group
did not only abstract and encode a generalizable schema but
additionally learned a generic instantiation within the same
amount of time. Comparing cases and a generic instantiation
can thus be considered an effective way to support transfer
of principles across domains and the acquisition of a
representation that is needed for the formalized solution of
complex problems.
To our knowledge the present study was the first to
evaluate different approaches of how to foster transfer of
knowledge about principles within one research program by
using a broad range of transfer tasks. The findings have
practical importance. The learning of principles is
particularly common in mathematics and science
instruction. Principles often cross-cut domains and thus,
knowing principles and being able to flexibly transfer these
principles can help students to understand diverse
phenomena. Providing learners with a generic instantiation
and two concrete instantiations (i.e. cases) of the principle
simultaneously might be a promising way to design
introductory learning materials to foster the transfer of
knowledge about principles.

Method
Participants Eighty-one undergraduates from the same
population as in Exp 1 participated for payment. No
participant was familiar with propositional logic. They were
randomly assigned to the different learning conditions.
Materials and Procedure The learning materials were
novel combinations of the GENERIC and the
COMPARE_CASES learning materials used in Exp 1. To
assess learning and transfer we used the same tests as in Exp
1. The procedure was also identical to Exp 1. Note that the
complexity of the materials increased from Exp 1 to Exp 2
but we limited the time of learning to one hour in order to
keep the studies comparable.

Results and Discussion
No performance differences (see Table 2 for means and
standard deviations of all measures of Exp 2) were found in
the learning control test (F(2, 77)=.516, p=.599). Thus, we
again used performance in the learning control test as a
covariate for the analyses of the transfer test.
Learners of the three groups did not differ in their
performance on the near transfer tasks (F(2, 77)=1.519,
p=.225). For the far transfer task, however, we found a
marginally significant group effect (F(2,77)=2.705, p=.073,
ηp2=.066) which can be traced back to an advantage of the
GENERIC+TWO_CASES
group
over
the
COMPARISON_FIRST
(p=.093, d=.38) and the
GENERIC_FIRST group (p=.029, d=.58). Thus, the three
kinds of learning materials supported near transfer equally
well. When it comes to far transfer, however, the group of

304

memories of choice features. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 134(1), 38-51.
Mevarech, Z. R., & Stern, E. (1997). Interaction between
knowledge and contexts on understanding abstract
mathematical concepts. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 65, 68-95.
Nathan, M. J., Long, S. D., & Alibali, M. W. (2002). The
symbol precedence view of mathematical development: A
corpus analysis of the rhetorical structure of textbooks.
Discourse Processes, 33(1), 1-21.
Nesher, P., & Sukenik, M. (1991). The effect of formal
representation on the learning of ratio concepts. Learning
and Instruction, 1, 161-175.
Nokes, T. J. (2009). Mechanisms of knowledge transfer.
Thinking & Reasoning, 15(1), 1-36.
Paas, F. G. W. C., Renkl, A., & Sweller, J. (2003).
Cognitive load theory and instructional design: Recent
developments. Educational Psychologist, 38, 63-71.
Roy, M., & Chi, M. T. H. (2005). The self-explanation
principle in multimedia learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.),
Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 271287). Cambridge: England: Cambridge University Press.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and
interference in learning from multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 13, 141-156.
Seufert, T. (2003). Supporting coherence formation in
learning from multiple representations. Learning and
Instruction, 13, 227-237.
Singley, K., & Anderson, J. R. (1989). The Transfer of
Cognitive Skill. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and
transfer. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(3), 508-513.

References
Ainsworth, S. (1999). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198.
Barnett, S. M., & Ceci, S. J. (2002). When and where do we
apply what we learn? A taxonomy for far transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 128 (4), 612-637.
Berthold, K., & Renkl, A. (2009). Instructional aids to
support a conceptual understanding of multiple
representations. Journal of Educational Psychology,
101(1), 70-87.
Bransford, J. D., & Schwartz, D. L. (1999). Rethinking
transfer: A simple proposal with multiple implications.
Review of Research in Education, 24, 61-100.
Cheng, P. W., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., & Oliver, L.
M. (1986). Pragmatic versus syntactic approaches to
training deductive reasoning. Cognitive Psychology, 18,
293-328.
Colhoun, J., Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2008).
Learning abstract principles through principle-case
comparison. In B. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky
(Eds.), 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Washington: Cognitive Science Society.
Duit, R., Roth, W.-M., Komorek, M., & Wilbers, J. (2001).
Fostering conceptual change by analogies – between
Scylla and Charybdis. Learning and Instruction, 11, 283303.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752-775.
Gentner, D., & Gentner, D. R. (1983). Flowing waters or
teeming crowds: Mental models of electricity. In D.
Gentner & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp. 99129). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gentner, L., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 393408.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(1),
69-110.
Goldstone, R. L., & Wilensky, U. (2008). Promoting
transfer by grounding complex systems principles. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 17, 465-516.
Kaminski, J., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008). The
advantage of abstract examples in learning math. Science,
320, 454-455.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2008).
Trade-offs
between
grounded
and
abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem solving.
Cognitive Science, 32, 366-397.
Mather, M., Knight, M., & McCaffrey, M. (2005). The
allure of the alignable: Younger and older adults’ false

305

