UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Design features of language emerge from general-purpose learning mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7q1736rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Monaghan, Padraic

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Design features of language emerge from general-purpose learning mechanisms
Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancs.ac.uk)
Centre for Research in Human Development and Learning, Department of Psychology
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YF, UK
Abstract
There are certain universal properties of language that are
taken to be definitional to the concept of language itself, such
as the arbitrary relationship between sounds and meanings of
words. Another possibility is that these “design features” of
language may instead be the expressed consequences of
general purpose learning constraints within the cognitive
system learning the language. To test this, generations of an
inverse model learning to map between sounds and meanings
of words was tested. In this model, learning to associate
phonology to semantics influences the model’s production of
phonology from semantics, and phonological productions of
one model were used as input to the next generation. Over
generations of the model’s learning, the language became
easier to acquire, and demonstrated increased arbitrariness of
mappings between phonology and semantics. The iterative
modelling demonstrated that design features of natural
language can spontaneously emerge in a general purpose
learning system.
Keywords: Evolution; language acquisition; computational
modeling; arbitrariness of the sign; phonology; semantics.

Introduction
Languages change extremely rapidly. Gray and Atkinson
(2003), for instance, estimated that all the living IndoEuropean dialects diverged approximately 7900 years ago.
In terms of cultural transmission from generation to
generation, this means that language has been passed on
only a few hundred times to produce such variation as that
found between English, Gaelic, Greek, Italian, Lithuanian,
and Hindi. There are of course multiple forces at work in
determining language change (Labov, 1994), however, the
fact that language has to be transmitted from one generation
to the next suggests that learnability of the language is a
critical selective pressure contributing to language evolution
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008).
So what are these language properties that contribute to
language learnability? One place to begin is the recent
discussion over patterning of language universals
(Christiansen, Collins, & Edelman, 2009; Scalise, Magni, &
Bisetto, 2009). Evans and Levinson (2009) demonstrated
that for each “language universal” proposed in the literature
there is at least one extant language that violates the
prevailing pattern. Instead, Evans and Levinson (2009)
contend that it is language diversity, rather than universality,
that is the critical feature of human communication to be
explained. Importantly, this diversity tends to indicate
statistical clusters of language properties, which are
consistent with general cognitive constraints that assist in
learning or transmission of language that then become
embedded in language structure. Cross-linguistic

consistencies (rather than absolutes) in language structure
occur, then, because similar processing and learning
limitations are present in all language users.
Yet, there are properties of languages that are universal,
though these are not discussed by Evans and Levinson
(2009) because they are considered definitional properties of
language. These fundamental language properties, or
“design features” in Hockett’s (1960) terms, were listed by
Greenberg
(1963)
as
discreteness,
productivity,
arbitrariness, and duality of patterning. Discreteness refers
to the composition of utterances in a language from smaller
elements (words/morphemes or phonemes) the combination
of which provides meaning. Relatedly, productivity refers to
the ability to use the smaller elements of the language in
multiple combinations – from a small, finite set of elements
(words/morphemes) an infinite set of utterances can be
generated. Arbitrariness refers to the absence of
systematicity between the sounds of words and their
meaning (de Saussure, 1916), and duality of patterning
refers to the composition of words from smaller
phonological units, where the utterance meaning is carried
by the combination of words and is unrelated to the
phonological composition of these words.
Though researchers such as Greenberg (1963) question
the possibility of a language without each of these
properties, an alternative view is instead that many of these
properties could have been otherwise in language
(Monaghan, Christiansen, & Fitneva, 2011). It is possible to
conceive of a language where sounds of words do carry
some aspect of the meaning. Instead, this paper takes as its
perspective that design features are universal properties of
language not because they are definitional but rather
because of the constraints of our cognitive systems that
mean that languages are structured to make acquisition and,
consequentially, transmission easier. The current study tests
a framework that demonstrates how such design features of
language may have become instantiated within language
structure as a consequence of general-purpose (i.e., not
language-specific) learning mechanisms.
Monaghan et al. (2011) showed that one of the design
features – arbitrariness of the sign – resulted in more
accurate language learning by participants acquiring an
artificial language, and by associative networks learning the
same sound-meaning mappings. Thus, arbitrariness
bestowed an advantage for learning.
However, this work stopped short of demonstrating how
such arbitrariness becomes incorporated within the
language as a consequence of learning constraints. In this
paper, I present a model of cultural transmission where
general purpose learning constraints that affect language

2661

acquisition are expressed within the same model when it
undertakes language production, which is then used to
entrain the next generation of models. An appropriate
architecture for achieving this effect of acquisition
influencing production is the inverse model (Jordan &
Rumelhart, 1992), which resembles the sleep-wake
algorithm implemented in the stochastic inverse Helmholtz
model (Hinton, Dayan, Frey, & Neal, 1995). Such models
have close parallels to the learning occurring in feedforward
and feedback connections in the cortex (Carpenter &
Grossberg, 1987; Mumford, 1994), and have been
effectively used to simulate development of features of
human communication, such as segmental phonology (Plaut
& Kello, 1999). These models have the advantage over
previous models of iterated learning in that they permit
more enriched representations to be learned and to influence
performance (Kirby, 2001).
The critical feature of the modeling is that associative
learning forms the basis of the model’s performance, and
that the model’s approach to learning words’ meanings from
sounds influences the model’s production of the words’
sounds from meanings. Language structures that are easier
to acquire due to general purpose learning mechanisms will
be learned more accurately by the model and will, over
generations of learner, become stably expressed within the
words themselves. The dashed lines in Figure 1 illustrate
how the learning of the spoken input to an output meaning
representation can feedback to generate a spoken version for
each verbal input. Hence, the model as learner can adapt its
version of the language to more closely match its own
internal constraints. This spoken output can then be used for
the next generation of learner, and across multiple
generations the language can be altered in such a way to
make it more reflective of the model’s learning properties
and hence more easily learnable for future generations. The
language can then be analysed for the key “design features”
of natural languages.
The first prediction is that the expression of the model’s
learning constraints will result in a set of phonological
representations that the model learns to map onto the
meaning representations more quickly and accurately – so
future generations will find the language easier to acquire.
The second prediction is that “design features” of natural
language will be exhibited in the representations, in
particular that mappings between phonology and semantics
will instantiate arbitrariness in the mapping1. However,
based on previous studies (e.g., Monaghan et al., 2011) it is
also predicted that the patterns will demonstrate
systematicity at the category level, in terms of phonologycategory mappings. The first simulation tests the emergent
structure of phonology-semantics mappings, when the
phonology is initially random, so fully arbitrary. The second

simulation tests the emergent structure when the initial state
of the language is systematic.

Figure 1: The model of iterated learning. Solid arrows
indicate the forward model, where the model is trained to
map phonology onto semantics for each word, with two
categories (red/blue) centred at a different region of this
multidimensional space. The dashed arrows indicate the
inverse model, where the model produces phonology from
semantics which forms the input to the next generation of
learner.

Emergent structure from random origins
Method

1
The existence of small pockets of sound-symbolism in natural
languages has little effect on the overall arbitrariness of the
relationship between sound and meaning (see Monaghan et al.,
2011, for discussion).

Architecture
The model’s architecture is shown in Figure 1. A set of 10
units each represented the phonology and the semantics for
the model, and a set of 10 hidden units interconnected these
representations. For the forward run of the model, to
simulate language comprehension, the verbal input was
connected to the hidden units which were in turn connected
to the semantic units. These connections are illustrated with
solid arrows. For the inverse run of the model, to simulate
language production, there were connections from the
semantics to the hidden, and from the hidden to the
phonology to represent spoken output. The inverse model
connections are illustrated in Figure 1 by dotted arrows.
Weights on connections were given initial uniform random
values in the range [-0.25,0.25].
Training and Testing
The model was trained on 20 patterns mapping between
phonology and semantics. The phonological representations
were initially constructed by randomly selecting values in
the range [0,1] in 0.1 intervals for each of the 10 units in the
pattern. The semantic representation remained stable
throughout learning and was constructed by generating 10
exemplars of two prototypes, one centred at a value of 0.75
for each of the 10 units in the pattern, and the other centred
at 0.25 for each of the 10 units. Exemplars were produced
by randomly varying the prototype values by a uniform
value in the range [-0.25,0.25]. There were therefore two
clusters of meaning representations in the patterns to be

2662

learned. In previous simulations, such semantic categories
have simulated two grammatical categories of words, e.g.,
nouns and verbs (Monaghan et al. (2011).
The model was trained to map the phonology onto the
semantics to simulate learning to comprehend language, and
then learn to map the semantics back onto the phonology
using the same hidden unit representations as occurred
during the phonology to semantics mapping. This entailed
that the model’s learning constraints for acquiring the
language were applied during the model’s attempts to
produce the language. The forward model operated as a
standard three-layer backpropagation network: A pattern
was selected randomly and presented at the input. The
model’s hidden unit representation for this pattern was
recorded, and then the mean square error at the semantic
representation (the difference between target and actual
semantic representations) was used to adjust the weights on
the forward connections using the backpropagation learning
algorithm with learning rate of 0.1.
Then, the inverse model was applied to this same pattern:
The target semantic representation was presented at the
semantic layer of the model, and the model was required to
reproduce the hidden unit representation for that pattern
produced during the run of the forward model. The error at
the hidden layer was propagated back to adjust weights
between semantic and hidden units. Then, the model was
required to reproduce the phonology for that pattern given
the hidden unit representation, and once again error
(between the initial input phonology and the model’s actual
phonological production) was propagated back to adjust
weights between hidden and phonology layers.
At the end of training, the inverse model was presented
with each of the semantic representations and produced a
version of the phonology for these patterns that was
influenced by its learning of the mapping. These new
phonological patterns were used as the language for training
the next iteration of the model. There were 10 iterations
altogether of the model.
We varied the number of presentations of the patterns to
determine an effective level of change in the language – not
too much, such that the language would alter radically from
one generation to the next, and not too little such that no
representational change would be observed. We found that
500,000 patterns resulted in an interpretable level of
representational change. With fewer presentations than this,
the model produced phonological representations via the
inverse model that were distant from the original
phonological representations, and also that were indistinct
from one another, and so extremely difficult to learn for
future generations of the model.
We ran 20 versions of the model, varying the initial
phonological and semantic representations, and varying the
initial randomized weights on the connections between
units. Each simulation run of the model was used as a
separate participant in the analyses.

a

b

Figure 2. (a) Correlation among phonological
representations for all patterns, for patterns within the same
category. and across different categories, at first and tenth
iteration of learning. (b) Correlation between phonology and
semantic representations at first and tenth iteration for all
patterns, patterns within the same category, and patterns in
different categories.
Table 1: Mean error (SD in parentheses) for
phonology→semantics, and semantics→phonology
mappings at first and tenth iteration of training.
Iteration
1
10

phon→sem
2.40 (1.42)
1.31 (.75)

sem→phon
116.29 (32.45)
.03 (.07)

Results and Discussion
The first prediction was that over iterations of the model, the
model would learn to map between phonology and meaning
(comprehension task), and meaning to phonology
(production task) with less error. We compared the mean
square error of the model’s actual productions versus the
target semantic representation across the meaning layer
when the phonology was inputted, and the mean square
error across the phonology layer when the meaning layer
was inputted, we compared the error after the first iteration
to that after the tenth iteration. The error value provides a
reflection of how accurately the model reproduces the
semantic and phonological representations of the words.
Table 1 shows the results.
For both comprehension and production tasks, there was a
reduction in error over iterations, t(19) = 3.11, and 15.01,
both p < 0.01, thus the generations of learning resulted in
easier comprehension and production of the patterns.
To determine the changes that actually occurred to the
phonology representations as a consequence of the iterated
learning, we measured the cosine distance between each pair
of phonological patterns and then computed the mean of
these distances for each simulation run. High mean cosine
values indicate that there is similarity among the patterns.
We took this measure at the first iteration and at the tenth
iteration. The results are shown in Figure 2a. From first to
tenth iteration, the correlation increased among the
phonological representations, t(19) = 18.09, p < 0.001. To
determine whether this increased correlation was due to

2663

words of the same (semantic) category becoming more
similar to one another, or whether words of distinct
categories were becoming more aligned, we distinguished
the cosine distances among phonological representations of
the same category, and those among representations of
different categories. The results are also shown in Figure 2a.
An ANOVA with same/different category and first/tenth
iteration on mean cosine distance for each simulation run
resulted in a significant main effect of same/different
category, F(1, 19) = 8.46, p < 0.01, indicating that same
category responses were more correlated than different
category. There was also a significant main effect of
iteration, F(1, 19) = 327.40, p < 0.001, reflecting the general
increase in correlations from first to tenth iteration. The
interaction was also significant, F(1, 19) = 27.72, p < 0.001,
showing that the correlation increased more sharply for
same category responses than different category responses,
though the magnitude of the difference was small. Thus, the
model introduced systematicity at the category level into the
phonological representations resulting in easier acquisition
of the patterns at the end of the set of iterations.
To determine the extent to which the mappings between
phonology and semantics introduced greater or less
arbitrariness in the mapping, we correlated the cosine
distances between each pair of phonology representations
and each pair of semantics representations. If patterns that
are close together in phonology are also close together in
semantics and patterns that are distant in phonology are
distant in semantics then the correlation will be high,
representing systematicity in the mapping. If patterns that
are distinct in phonology are similar in semantics then the
correlation will be low, indicating arbitrariness.
The results are shown in Figure 2b. For all patterns, there
was an increase in correlation between the phonology and
the semantic spaces from first to tenth iteration, t(19) =
4.65, p < 0.001. There is thus an increase in systematicity
across the iterations. To determine whether this change was
within each category, indicating that words of the same
category were becoming increasingly systematic with
respect to their meanings, or whether the change was due to
systematicity across categories, we measured the correlation
between distances just for words within the same category,
and compared this to distances for words occurring in
distinct categories.
The results are again shown in Figure 2b. An ANOVA
with same/different category, and first/tenth iteration was
performed. There was a marginally significant main effect
of same/different category, F(1, 19) = 3.81, p = 0.07. There
was a significant main effect of iteration, F(1, 19) = 58.25, p
< 0.001, as correlations increased from first to tenth
iteration. There was also a significant interaction, F(1, 19) =
4.77, p < 0.05, indicating that for the first iteration there was
little difference in the correlation between phonology and
semantics for patterns in the same versus different
categories, but that after ten iterations, the correlation was
substantially higher for patterns of different categories than
same categories.

It may be that the development of systematicity at the
category level and arbitrariness at the individual word level
is an intermediate stage in the model’s development to an
optimal representation for the language, where this final
optimal state is fully systematic. In order to rule out this
possibility, the next simulation tested language change when
the initial language was highly systematic.

Emergent structure from systematic origins
Method
Architecture
The architecture was identical to the first simulation.
Training and testing
The training and testing were identical to the first simulation
except that the initial phonological representations were
highly correlated with the semantic representations for each
pattern. Each phonological representation was generated by
taking the semantic representation for that pattern and
varying each dimension by a random value in the range [0.25,0.25].
a

b

Figure 3. (a) Correlation among phonological
representations for all patterns, for patterns within the same
category. and across different categories, at first and tenth
iteration of learning for systematic origin model. (b)
Correlation
between
phonology
and
semantic
representations at first and tenth iteration for all patterns,
patterns within the same category, and patterns in different
categories for systematic origin model.
Table 2: Mean error (SD in parentheses) for phonology>semantics, and semantics->phonology mappings at first
and tenth iteration of training for the second simulation.
Iteration
1
10

phon->sem
1.06 (0.52)
15.35 (7.02)

sem->phon
18.00 (4.92)
0.003 (0.009)

Results and Discussion
In terms of the model’s error, for the production task there
was a significant increase in error between first and tenth
iteration, t(19) = -9.10, p < 0.001, but a significant decrease
for the comprehension task, t(19) = 16.39, p < 0.001 (see

2664

Table 2). Thus, systematic mappings resulted in easier
acquisition, but greater difficulties in producing
discriminating output, and the model adapted the
representations to meet better the production task.
The correlations among the phonological representations
were compared between first and tenth iterations, and as
with the initial arbitrary mapping the correlations increased,
t(19) = 31.15, p < 0.01. For the same/different category
comparing first and tenth iteration in an ANOVA, there was
a significant main effect of same/different, F(1, 19) =
137.99, p < 0.001, with same category resulting in higher
correlations. There was a significant main effect of
first/tenth iteration, F(1, 19) = 962.90, p < 0.001, and a
significant interaction, F(1, 19) = 4.64, p < 0.05. The
difference between same/different category was greater at
the tenth iteration (see Figure 3a).
For the correlations between phonology and semantic
representations comparing first and tenth iteration, the
correlation decreased with time, t(19) = 6.52, p < 0.001. An
ANOVA with same/different category and first/tenth
iteration resulted in a significant main effect of
same/different, F(1, 19) = 52.15, p < 0.001, with same
category resulting in higher correlation than different
category. There was also a significant main effect of
iteration, F(1, 19) = 4.90, p < 0.05, and a significant
interaction, F(1, 19) = 17.84, p < 0.001, with a decrease in
correlation between first and tenth iteration for same
category but an increase in correlation for different category
correlations (see Figure 3b). As with the model beginning
with fully arbitrary mappings, arbitrariness increased to a
greater extent for words belonging to the same category.

General Discussion
The results indicate that the model adapted phonological
representations to become easier to map onto semantics. The
model’s general learning constraints shaped the phonology
of the language to make mapping to and from semantics
easier for future models to acquire. Investigating the actual
changes in the phonological representations from first to
tenth generation revealed that this ease of learning was
accomplished through two primary changes in the
representations that resembled the design features of natural
language.
First, the iterations of the language increased the
similarity among words of the same category in terms of
their phonological representation. This accords with
observations over the variety of phonological and prosodic
cues that reflect grammatical categories of words crosslinguistically (Farmer, Christiansen, & Monaghan; 2006;
Monaghan, Christiansen, & Chater, 2007). Indeed, for
English, there are now more than 20 distinct phonological
and prosodic properties that relate to grammatical category
distinctions (Monaghan & Christiansen, 2008).
The inverse model presented here showed that such
coherence with respect to category structure can emerge as a
consequence of pressures of learning. The inverse model
instantiated learning constraints into the representations

themselves, and these learning constraints were expressed
by reflecting the output category structure within the input
phonology. In artificial language learning studies, such
reflections of category structure within phonology has been
shown to result in improved learning of categories (Frigo &
McDonald, 1998; St Clair, Monaghan, & Ramscar, 2009),
and may indeed be vital for effective acquisition of
grammatical categories (Braine, 1987). The model points to
the way such phonological characteristics of words can
become imprinted within the language as a consequence of
general-purpose learning mechanisms exerting their
influence through generations of language learners.
Second, the results of the model in terms of the properties
of the mapping between phonology and semantics show in
addition that arbitrariness can sit alongside systematicity
indicated at the category level. For words of the same
semantic category there is greater distinction between
individual phonological patterns in terms of the precise
semantic representation that they map onto. For words of
different categories, there is greater expression of words or
similar sound relating to meanings that are similar. This can
be interpreted in terms of the coherence among the
phonological representations being tempered by the
additional requirement to distinguish particular semantic
representations. Thus, emerges systematicity at the category
level, but arbitrariness for mapping between individual
patterns.
In this respect, the iterative inverse modeling results
presented here relate to learning studies of static artificial
languages that map between phonological and semantic
representations of words. Monaghan et al. (2011) trained
associative learning models and human participants to map
between phonological and semantic representations for
words belonging to one of two categories. They varied the
properties of the patterns in terms of whether the mappings
were arbitrary or systematic between phonology and
semantics, and also the extent to which additional
phonological cues provided information about the general
category to which the word belonged. Learning was most
accurate for both the associative learning model and the
behavioural results when the mapping between phonology
and meaning was arbitrary, but with coherence at the
category level. The iterative modeling presented here
demonstrates that similar general purpose learning
mechanisms imposed by requirements to associate between
two sets of representations can result in an attuning of the
representations themselves to approximate this structure as a
consequence of constraints imposed in learning the language
being expressed in production.
The model was trained with a starting language that was
either fully arbitrary or largely systematic. These situations
can be seen to resemble two theories of the origins of
language, where words emerge either from articulatory
noise (Jespersen, 1922), or from iconic or sound-symbolic
forms (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). In both cases, we
have shown that there is an increase in accuracy of
reproduction of the language across generations, and that

2665

this is coupled with generated systematicity at the category
level and greater arbitrariness in the form-meaning
mappings within those categories. Future work may also
permit investigation into whether the emergent
pronunciations are more likely to result from iconic or noisy
initial forms.
The starting point for this modeling approach was to
demonstrate how learning may, over generations of learners,
affect the structure of natural languages. In this respect, the
modeling demonstrates that “design features” of languages
may fall under the remit of the cognitive sciences in
explaining how and why such properties are observable
within language. Plaut and Kello (1999) demonstrated how
an inverse model can account for the development of
segmental phonology – a contributor to the design feature of
discreteness, and we have shown here how arbitrariness of
form-meaning mappings is an emergent property of
constraints on learning in a similar model. Though the
model learns only a small set of patterns, and consequently,
the results should be treated cautiously, the observations
tally closely with computational and behavioural studies on
learning effectiveness from different structures of a
language’s vocabulary. The model presented here provides
an iterative step to showing how such design features can
emerge spontaneously within a learning system. Natural
languages may possess “design features”, then, not as
necessary, definitional properties, but rather because having
such structure facilitates learning, and over generations this
process of learning becomes impressed within the structure
of language itself.

References
Braine, M.D.S. (1987). What is learned when acquiring
word classes: A step toward an acquisition theory. In
MacWhinney, B. (Ed.), Mechanisms of language
acquisition. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Carpenter, G. A., & Grossberg, S. (1987). Neural dynamics
of category learning and recognition: Attention, memory
and consolidation, and amnesia. In J. Davis, R. Newburgh
& E. Wegman (Eds.), Brain structure, learning and
memory: Westview Press.
Christiansen, M., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as shaped
by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 489-509.
Christiansen, M. H., Collins, C., & Edelman, S. (2009).
Language universals. NY: Oxford University Press.
de Saussure, F. (1916). Course in general linguistics. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for
cognitive science. Brain and Behavioural Sciences, 32,
429-492.
Farmer, T.A., Christiansen, M.H., & Monaghan, P. (2006).
Phonological typicality influences on-line sentence
comprehension. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 103, 12203-12208.
Frigo, L., & McDonald, J. L. (1998). Properties of
phonological markers that affect the acquisition of

gender-like subclasses. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 218-245.
Gray, R. D., & Atkinson, Q. D. (2003). Language-tree
divergence times support the Anatolian theory of IndoEuropean origin. Nature, 426, 435-439.
Greenberg, J. H., ed. (1963). Universals of language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hinton, G. E., Dayan, P., Frey, B. J., & Neal, R. M. (1995).
The wake-sleep algorithm for unsupervised neural
networks. Science, 268, 1158-1161.
Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203, 89-96.
Jespersen, O. (1922). Language: Its nature, development
and origin. London: Allen & Unwin.
Jordan, M. I., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1992). Forward models:
Supervised learning with a distal teacher. Cognitive
Science, 16, 307-354.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure - An iterated learning model of the emergence of
regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, 5, 102-110.
Labov, W. (1994, 2001), Principles of linguistic change,
Volume 1 Internal factors, Volume 2 Social factors.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Monaghan, P. & Christiansen, M.H. (2008). Integration of
multiple probabilistic cues in syntax acquisition. In
Behrens, H. (Ed.), Corpora in language acquisition
research: History, methods, perspectives. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2007).
The Phonological Distributional Coherence Hypothesis:
Cross-linguisitic evidence in language acquisition.
Cognitive Psychology, 55, 259-305.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Fitneva, S.A. (2011).
The arbitrariness of the sign: Learning advantages from
the structure of the vocabulary. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, in press.
Mumford, D. (1994). Neuronal architectures for patterntheoretic problems. In C. Koch & J. L. Davis (Eds.),
Large-scale neuronal theories of the brain. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Plaut, D. C., & Kello, C. T. (1999). The emergence of
phonology from the interplay of speech comprehension
and production: A distributed connectionist approach. In
B. MacWhinney (Ed.), Emergence of Language.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Ramachandran, V. S. & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Synaesthesia: A window
into
perception,
thought
and language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 3-34.
Scalise, S., Magni, E., & Bisetto, A. (Eds.). (2009).
Universals of Language Today. Berlin: Springer.
St Clair, M. C., Monaghan, P., & Ramscar, M. (2009).
Relationships between language structure and language
learning: The suffixing preference and grammatical
categorization. Cognitive Science, 33, 1317-1329.

2666

