UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Detecting Student Metacognition and Learning in Problem Solving with Biologically Inspired
Cognitive Architectures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1xq7h4w9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Samsonovich, Alexei V.
Kitsantas, Anastasia
O'Brien, Ellen
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Detecting Student Metacognition and Learning in Problem Solving
with Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures
Alexei V. Samsonovich
Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study, George Mason University

Anastasia Kitsantas
College of Education and Human Development, George Mason University

Ellen O’Brien
Department of Mathematical Sciences, George Mason University

Kenneth A. De Jong
Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study, George Mason University
Abstract: In order to study the role of metacognition and self-regulation in student learning, college students were
asked to solve problems in mathematics using an ITS assisting metacognition at the forethought stage. Activity
involved selecting relevant facts and strategies and connecting them by arrows.
It is found that patterns of arrow drawing have significant correlates in student performance and cognitive states.
(i) Forward chaining is significantly more predominant during problem solving than during initial exploration that
is not goal-driven. (ii) Students scoring in the middle are more likely to enter convergent pairs of arrows compared
to students who scored low or high (P<0.00005).
These findings enable diagnosing student problem solving and imply constraints on selection of cognitive architectures for modeling student learning. While no significant effect of the intervention on student scores was observed
compared to controls, many students reported that the tool helped them to learn how to solve problems.

3349

