UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Determinants of learning difficulty and boundary uncertainty in unidimensional category
learning
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3962g115
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Giguere, Gyslain
Love, Bradley C.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

      Determinants of learning difficulty and boundary uncertainty in
                                 unidimensional category learning
                                                  Gyslain Giguère
                                           The University of Texas at Austin
                                                  Bradley C. Love
                                           The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract: Many real-world learning and classification problems involve mastering subtle and noisy distinctions.
For example, predicting the winner of a baseball game is challenging due to numerous interactions and inherent
noise in outcomes. One common approach in machine learning to reduce overfitting and boost performance (i.e.,
generalization) on novel test items is to use regularization methods that effectively smooth the training data. One
research question is whether human performance can be boosted by effectively regularizing (i.e., idealizing) the
training set. In the first two studies, participants learned and were tested on perceptual categories. Idealization was
manipulated across conditions in terms of distribution variance and feedback type. In the third study, participants
predicted the outcome of actual baseball games after training on either actual or idealized game results. In all three
studies, participants performed better on generalization tests (involving actual items) when trained on idealized items
than on actual items.
                                                           3319

