UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do Culture Related Factors Influence Students' Critical Thinking Use?
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d59h20d
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Manalo, Emmanuel
Kusumi, Takashi
Koyasu, Masuo
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

Do Culture Related Factors Influence Students’ Critical Thinking Use?
                                                Emmanuel Manalo
                                                   Waseda University
                                                 Takashi Kusumi
                                                   Kyoto University
                                                  Masuo Koyasu
                                                   Kyoto University
                                                 Yasushi Michita
                                               University of the Ryukyus
                                                   Yuko Tanaka
                                            Stevens Institute of Technology
Abstract: This study examined whether culture related factors influence university students’ critical thinking use.
The participants were 363 students from Kyoto and Okinawa in Japan, and Auckland in New Zealand. They com-
pleted a questionnaire assessing critical thinking use, study self-efficacy, adherence to authority, regulatory mode
(assessment/locomotion), and self-construal (independence/ interdependence). Critical thinking was found to corre-
late with self-efficacy, locomotion, and independence. The Auckland group scored higher than both Japanese groups
in these factors. In contrast, the Okinawa group scored higher than the other two groups in adherence to authority
and interdependence. Compared to either or both Japanese groups, the Auckland students also scored higher in the
following critical thinking measures: objectivity in writing, logical thinking, and reliance on evidence. A hypothesis
is proposed that self-construal is linked to regulatory mode and self-efficacy, and these in turn are linked to critical
thinking use. The result of structural equation modeling supports this hypothesis.
                                                          3450

