UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do words reveal concepts?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0fq485ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Malt, Barbara
Ameel, Eef
Gennari, Silvia
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do words reveal concepts?
Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium,

Silvia Gennari (s.gennari@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York, York, England

Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp ) and Noburo Saji (nons@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Department of Environmental Information, Keio University at Shonan-Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan

Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6500AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract

Rogers & McClelland, 2004), conceptual combination (e.g.,
Hampton, 1997), and neuroscience (.e.g., Mahon &
Caramazza, 2007).
But from a cross-linguistic perspective, this approach is
startling. There are many possible ways to map between
words and the world, and languages vary dramatically in
how they carve up the world by name. Substantial crosslinguistic variation has been documented in domains
including color, causality, mental states, number, body
parts, containers, motion, direction, spatial relations, and
terms for acts of cutting and breaking and of carrying and
holding (see chapters in Malt & Wolff, 2010, for
illustrations).This variation occurs even in concrete domains
labeled by nouns, where structure in the world might seem
most likely to provide universally recognized groupings
captured by words. Hand vs. arm, bottle vs. jar, or dish vs.
plate may seem to English-speakers to be self-evident
distinctions based on obvious discontinuities in the
distribution of properties in the world, but not all languages
observe these same distinctions (e.g., Malt et al., 1999;
Majid, Enfield, & Van Staden, 2006).
In light of the documented diversity, there are three
possibilities for the relationship between words and
concepts. The first is that the words of a language do
effectively reveal much of the stock of general-purpose
concepts that a person holds. Given cross-linguistic
variability in naming patterns, this possibility implies that
word-learning creates much of the language user’s nonlinguistic representations of the world. Under this scenario,
it is not possible to hold that any substantial stock of basic
concepts is shared across speakers of different languages,
since the language-specific sets will be substantially
different from one another.
The second possibility is that concepts are dissociated to
some notable extent from the large differences in naming
patterns, and it is therefore impossible to use words to
identify concepts. After all, much learning about the world

To study concepts, cognitive scientists must first identify some.
The prevailing assumption is that they are revealed by words such
as triangle, table, and robin. But languages vary dramatically in
how they carve up the world by name. Either ordinary concepts
must be heavily language-dependent or names cannot be a direct
route to concepts. We asked English, Dutch, Spanish, and Japanese
speakers to name videos of human locomotion and judge their
similarities. We investigated what name inventories and scaling
solutions on name similarity and on physical similarity for the
groups individually and together suggest about the underlying
concepts. Aggregated naming and similarity solutions converged
on results distinct from the answers suggested by any single
language. Words such as triangle, table, and robin help identify
the conceptual space of a domain, but they do not directly reveal
units of knowledge usefully considered “concepts.”
Keywords: concepts; naming; cross-linguistic diversity;
universality; locomotion

Introduction
Concepts have been said to give human experience stability
(Smith & Medin, 1981), to hold our mental world together
(Murphy, 2002), and to provide the foundation of human
learning (Bloom, 2004). Fodor (1998) considered concepts
so fundamental to cognition that he declared that the heart
of a cognitive science is its theory of concepts. If concepts
are so important, then cognitive scientists need to be able to
identify concepts to study. We ask here how concepts are to
be found, and in particular what role words can play in
identifying them.
The prevailing assumption has been that many important
concepts can be easily identified because they are revealed
by words – in fact, for many researchers, the words of
English. English nouns such as hat, fish, triangle, table, and
robin are used to identify concepts in work encompassing
not only the adult concepts literature but developmental
work (e.g., Carey, 2009), computational models (e.g.,

519

comes from direct interaction, rather than through language.
Non-linguistic representations may be substantially shared
(while still allowing that language could have some
influence on them). Crucially, if linguistic and nonlinguistic representations are distinct and only loosely
linked, then the words of a language cannot routinely and
straightforwardly be used to identify a person’s concepts.
The third possibility is that the relation of words to
concepts is not as straightforward as current practice
assumes (also suggested by the second possibility), but still,
if examined in the right way, words may reveal something
useful about conceptual representations shared across
speakers of different languages.
By applying more
sophisticated techniques to extract structure from language
data, it may be possible to discern shared elements of
meaning that indicate constraints on cross-language
variability and reflect common underlying aspects of how
knowledge is represented.
Here, we assess the relation of words - specifically, verbs
for human locomotion - to conceptual representations. The
data discriminate among the three possibilities just
described and address what an appropriate use of words is
for researchers whose interest is in underlying non-linguistic
representations rather than in knowledge about the word
meanings of a particular language.

Japanese to name the motion in each. We first determined
the name inventories for the four languages to see what they
suggest as the basic concepts for human locomotion. We
then performed scaling analyses on the naming data of
individual groups to look further for common patterns
underlying the names produced. Last, we combined the
naming data of the four groups to see if greater coherence
arises from the aggregated information.

Method
Thirty English speakers were recruited at Lehigh University,
U.S.; 22 Spanish speakers at Comahue National University,
Argentina; 26 Dutch speakers at the University of Leuven,
Belgium; and 25 Japanese speakers at Keio University,
Japan. To generate the stimulus videos, we selected all the
verbs that named gaits of an individual moving forward,
upright, on a trajectory from a list of over 250 English verbs
of manner of movement provided by D. Slobin. We added
familiar gaits done in place (e.g., walking and running in
place), walking in high heels, and eight variants of
locomotion suggested by Japanese and Argentinean
informants that were not covered by the English terms. An
American college student was filmed portraying each gait
for 3-4 seconds on outdoor walkway at Lehigh University.
The stimulus set was then reduced by selecting the
movements that most clearly contrasted with each other. For
instance, if the clips filmed in response to amble and
saunter, or strut and swagger, looked very similar to us, we
kept only one of each. The final set contained 36 clips.
Figure 1 shows sample frames from four clips.

The Studies
Speakers of four languages named instances of human
locomotion such as walking, running, shuffling, and
jumping, and made similarity judgments about them.
Human locomotion provides a useful case study because
there are reasons to expect both commonalities and
differences in how speakers of different languages
understand and name the domain. Using film clips of
biomechanically defined instances of walking and running,
we (Malt et al., 2008) found that English, Dutch, Spanish,
and Japanese speakers all sorted the walking and running
clips into separate piles on the basis of similarity and also
drew a lexical distinction between them. We also found that
speakers of English and Dutch named more distinctions
within the two biomechanical gaits than speakers of Spanish
and Japanese. Together, these considerations mean that it is
useful to ask whether there is some shared understanding of
more varied instances of locomotion, and whether there is
any analysis of the potentially diverse naming patterns
across languages that can reveal this shared understanding.
The current studies again used speakers of English, Dutch,
Spanish, and Japanese. Although the first three all belong to
the Indo-European family, their histories are different
enough that the languages have shown substantial variation
in naming patterns in other domains (e.g., containers: Malt
et al., 1999) as well as in naming of locomotion for the more
restricted set of exemplars in Malt et al. (2008).

Figure 1. Sample frames from clips.
The clips were embedded in a web page. Participants
read instructions in the relevant language telling them that
they would see a series of video clips, and that they should
watch each one carefully and type into the response box the
word or phrase that best described what they saw in the clip.
Following the instructions were the 36 clips, each with a
response box preceded by the words, “What is the woman
doing? She is….” or their translation.

Results and Discussion

Study 1: Using Names to Look for Concepts

Name Inventories We determined the name inventories for
each language to see what concepts are implied if names are
taken to directly identify concepts, as is the common

We presented video clips of varied human locomotion and
asked native speakers of English, Dutch, Spanish, and

520

practice in the literature. We counted as an instance of a
name all surface forms containing the same root word(s)
labeling a manner of movement and then determined the
dominant (most commonly produced) name for each clip in
each language. All names dominant for at least one clip in a
language are given in Table 1. This tally makes clear that if
there are universally shared locomotion concepts, the name
inventories do not directly reveal what they are. The
different languages provide different answers about what
that set would be.

Table 2: Between-group correlations of naming matrices
English
Dutch
Spanish
English
Dutch
0.82
Spanish
0.69
0.65
Japanese
0.76
0.76
0.79
Note. All correlations are significant at p < .0009.
We then carried out multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) on
the matrix for each language with Additive Tree clusters
drawn on the solutions to help interpret the results (Sattath
& Tversky, 1977). Due to space constraints we do not
present the solutions here but note that they showed both
similarities and distinct differences. For all four languages,
the X-axis was interpretable in terms of the basic
biomechanical distinction between elastic, bounce-andrecoil gaits (running, hopping, jumping, etc.) and the
pendulum gaits where one foot is on the ground at all times
(walking, striding, etc.). The Y-axis for the most part
seemed to reflect a dimension of speed and/or
aggressiveness, but the Japanese solution less clearly
conformed to this possibility. The Addtree clusters
reinforced the idea that the biomechanical distinction is
salient for two of the languages – Dutch and Japanese –
which had similar top-level clusters separating essentially
the same clips. English and Spanish clusters were less like
the Dutch and Japanese results: for English, running actions
clustered with pendulum motions at the top level, and for
Spanish, walking backwards and several forms of marching
combined with bounce-and-recoil motions, as well as
walking in place. In the next level of clusters within these
top-level clusters, each language more or less separated the
faster/more aggressive pendulum actions from slower, more
cautious pendulum actions, but the exact composition of the
clusters was variable. The Dutch solution, in particular, did
not honor this separation as much as the others.
These solutions indicate that the naming patterns of the
four languages reflect a shared orientation to the same
dimensions of the movements. This outcome supports the
idea that speakers of the four languages may have more in
common in their perception of the domain than their name
inventories indicate. In light of the variability of the Addtree
clusters across the four solutions, though, it remains difficult
to specify exactly what could be identified as shared discrete
concepts in the traditional sense.

Table 1: Inventory of mono- and multi-morpheme names
Language
English

Dutch

Spanish

Japanese

creep
hinkelen
caminar aruku
gallop
huppelen
correr
hashiru
hop
joggen
marchar sukippu-suru
jog
lopen
saltar
ashibumi-suru
jump
marcheren trotar
kenken-suru
leap
rennen
koushin-suru
march
slenteren
janpu-suru
run
sluipen
skip
springen
stomp
stappen
walk
wandelen
shuffle
tiptoe
power walk
Note. Boldface indicates multi-morphemic terms.
Individual Languages’ Naming as Similarity Data We
next asked whether commonalities emerge from the naming
data of the four languages if we make use of the full set of
names produced by all participants. We created name
similarity matrices that reflect the extent to which each pair
of objects received the same name across speakers of a
language. We assigned, for each participant, a 0 or a 1 to
each possible pair of clips according to whether the person
gave the two clips a different name or the same name. We
constructed the similarity matrix for each language group by
summing the distance values for each of the 630 possible
pairs across the participants in that language group. This use
of the data is similar to using confusion matrices as
similarity data (e.g., Shepard & Chang, 1963).
We first correlated the name similarity matrices for each
pair of languages to give an overall sense of the
correspondence in the naming patterns, using the Mantel test
for correlation of matrices. Table 2 shows that these
correlations are all substantial and significant. The full
patterns of name use, while diverse, still share some
substantial commonalities.

Aggregated Naming as Similarity Data Last, we created
an MDS solution combining the naming data of all four
language groups. MDS looks for commonalities in the data,
and to the extent that it finds them, produces a coherent
solution. If a coherent solution emerges, this result would
support the idea of a shared conceptualization of the domain
while underscoring the inadequacy of individual words of a
single language to reveal it.
We carried out the MDS using a stacked name similarity
matrix consisting of 36 columns (the clips) and 4 x 36

521

(language x clips) rows. Stacking allows the program to
compute different weights for each language for the
dimensions extracted. Figure 2 shows the two-dimensional
solution, with clusters provided by Addtree. This solution
shows a neat horizontal separation of the bounce-and-recoil
motions (toward the right) from the pendulum motions
(toward the left). The vertical dimension appears to reflect
speed and aggressiveness of the actions, with slower/less
aggressive actions toward the top and faster/more aggressive
ones toward the bottom.

words of any one language do not directly reveal what they
are. Despite the diversity evident in the name inventories,
other ways of analyzing the data provide more evidence of
commonalities underlying the naming patterns. In particular,
scaling of the combined naming data of four languages
produces a coherent and interpretable solution, suggesting a
shared orientation to certain dimensions of the space. Still,
the clusters within the scaling solution indicated by Addtree
do not neatly correspond to those labeled by the names of
the languages, raising questions about what, if anything, can
be identified as discrete concepts in the traditional sense.

Study 2: Using Judgments
Similarity to Look for Concepts

of

Physical

We collected judgments of the physical similarity of the
actions in the video clips. We can evaluate to what extent
those perceived similarities are shared across speakers of
different languages, and to what extent they are related to
the naming patterns of the participant’s languages. Although
physical attributes most likely do not exhaust conceptual
knowledge in this domain, they are a large component of it.

Method
Twenty English speakers were recruited at Lehigh
University, U.S.; 20 Dutch speakers at the University of
Leuven, Belgium; 15 Spanish speakers at the Bariloche
Atomic Centre and Balseiro Institute, Argentina; and 24
Japanese speakers at Keio University, Japan. Stimuli were
the same 36 video clips of human locomotion used in Study
1. A computer program presented the clips in a 6 x 6 array
on a computer screen, with each clip running in a
continuous loop. Participants sorted the clips according to
the physical similarity of the actions by dragging and
dropping clips (still running) into boxes on the right side of
the screen, creating as many boxes as they wished.
Following Boster (1994), to reduce variability in the number
of piles created, if they had created five or fewer boxes in
the first sort, they were then asked to divide the boxes
further. If they had created more than five, they were asked
to combine boxes.

Figure 2. MDS solution based on the four languages’
stacked naming data. Clip names refer to names bestowed
by the experimenters, not names produced by participants.
At the top level of clustering, the bounce-and-recoil
motions are separated from the pendulum-based ones, with
the exception of the TROT clip falling into the pendulum
cluster. Within these clusters, sub-clusters separate the
running clips from the other bounce-and-recoil actions, and
separate the true pendulum motion clips from the
intermediate TROT clip. These clusters are thus readily
interpretable, although they do not seem to map directly
onto the words of any of the languages.
Thus, the naming data when aggregated across the four
languages provides more indication of a systematic
conceptual space than looking at scaling solutions of the
four languages individually. This shared space emerges out
of the noisiness of the individual name inventories, which
make different distinctions and numbers of distinctions.
Because MDS can discover commonalities in data but it
cannot invent them, the simplicity of the solution is
evidence in favor of a shared underlying understanding of
the domain. At the same time, though, if the clusters
identified by Addtree are taken to indicate discrete concepts
within this space, they do not seem to be picked out by
words of the languages.

Results and Discussion
For each participant, a distance of zero reflects the case
where two clips are not in the same pile in either sort; a
distance of one reflects the case where they are in the same
pile in one sort but apart in the other, and two reflects the
case where they are in the same pile in both (Boster, 1994).
We constructed a similarity matrix for each language group
by summing the distance values for each of the 630 possible
pairs of clips across its members. Table 3 shows that the
similarity judgments of the four groups are strongly
correlated. The correlations among the sorting matrices are
significantly higher than those for naming were with the
exception of Dutch to Japanese, ps < .0001. Speakers of the
four languages are more alike in how they sort the gaits
based on similarity than in how they name them.

Conclusions from Using Names to Look for Concepts
These analyses demonstrate that languages differ in what
their name inventories would tell us the concepts for the
domain are. If there are shared basic concepts, then the

522

Table 3: Between-group correlations of sorting matrices

that are more fast and aggressive (top cluster). On the right,
one sub-cluster encompasses all the bounce-and-recoil
actions that involve forward (or sideways) motion. The
other encompasses those that involve bounce-and-recoil
movements in place (hopping, jumping, and running in
place), plus marching in place and walking in place.
The sorting solution points to largely the same sets of
dimensions as the combined naming data did, despite the
somewhat different spatial layout and clustering. There was
one notable exception to the close correspondence with the
naming solution. In the sorting data, the five clips that entail
motion in place (hopping, jumping, running, marching, and
walking in place) do form a sub-cluster, but in the naming
they did not. It seems that being carried out in place is a
salient physical property of the actions, even though none of
the four languages honors it with a basic level name that sets
the actions apart on that basis.

English
Dutch
Spanish
English
Dutch
0.87
Spanish
0.84
0.83
Japanese
0.89
0.75
0.89
Note. All correlations are significant at p < .0009.
An aggregated MDS solution was constructed as for the
aggregated name similarity by stacking the matrices of the
four groups. The two-dimensional solution is shown in
Figure 3, overlaid with an Additive tree cluster analysis.

Conclusions from Using Physical Similarity Judgments
to Look for Concepts Speakers of our four languages make
closely corresponding judgments of the similarity among
the 36 actions. Furthermore, there is higher correspondence
among language groups on this sorting task than on naming,
consistent with other domains (e.g., Malt et al., 1999). The
data indicate that the understanding of locomotion is more
shared, and more tied to the perceptual and biomechanical
experience of the domain, than the varied word inventories
would imply. Again, the data argue against assuming a close
alignment of words with concepts.
Although the sorting data clearly indicate the inadequacy
of the inventories of individual names to reveal shared
understanding of the locomotion domain, the scaling
solutions do show a marked resemblance to the combined
naming data. This outcome suggests that both reflect some
deeper commonality in the dimensions of locomotion space
that people find salient. At the same time, and despite some
proposals in the literature that concepts fall directly out of
similarity space (e.g., Rogers & McCelland, 2004), the
scaling solution still does not directly reveal concepts in the
sense of bounded units of knowledge stored in long-term
memory. Would they be the top-level distinctions in the
cluster solution that seem to be grounded in the
biomechanical contrast between pendulum and bounce-andrecoil motions? Would they be at the level of the next set of
clusters, which corresponds better, but far from perfectly, to
the words of the languages? Or might they be at some other
level? And what about the discrepancies that do exist
between the sorting and naming solutions? In other words,
how can we identify exactly what the basic concepts are that
should be the subject of investigation by those researchers
who want to study them? We consider these points below.

Figure 3. MDS solution based on four language groups’
stacked sorting data. Clip names refer to names bestowed by
the experimenters, not names produced by participants.
As for naming, the horizontal dimension of the MDS
solution is readily interpreted in terms of the biomechanical
gait distinction described earlier. Toward the left are gaits
with the pendulum motion. To the right are the ones with
the elastic bounce-and-recoil motion. Toward the middle are
some stimuli having knees lifted high but lacking real
bouncing off the ground (sneaking, walking in place,
various forms of marching, etc.). Also as for naming, the
vertical dimension seems to reflect something about the
speed/aggressiveness of the actions, although on the left it
seems to be that faster, more aggressive motions are at the
top and on the right this pattern reverses. Allowing MDS to
use three dimensions (not pictured here) this reversal
between left and right goes away, with the extra dimension
allowing a speed dimension to separate itself from an
aggressiveness dimension. Consistent with the importance
of the biomechanical distinction and speed/aggressivness
dimensions, the two top-level clusters that Addtree
identifies largely separate the gaits with the bounce-andrecoil motion from those with a pendulum motion. Within
the left-hand large cluster, the sub-clusters may be
characterized as distinguishing groups of pendulum motions
that are more slow and cautious (lower cluster) from those

General Discussion
The data indicate that the relation of words to concepts is
not straightforward. Pervasive linguistic diversity, amply
documented in other research but rarely taken into
consideration within “concepts” research, is by itself cause

523

for serious concern. It would still be possible to preserve a
commitment to word-concept alignment by subscribing to a
strong version of the idea that language shapes thought.
However, the evidence here from aggregated naming and
from sorting suggests that any conceptual differences
between speakers of different languages are less than
implied by the large differences in word inventories. This
outcome is consistent with findings in other domains and
with the observation that attention to aspects of the world is
likely shaped by multiple forces that include but are not
limited to language. It seems unavoidable to conclude that
researchers need to stop relying on the word inventories of
English, or any other single language, to know what
constitutes the concepts of a domain.
Despite the complex nature of the relationship between
language and concepts, our data suggest that it is still
possible to use linguistic data to gain insight into something
more fundamental about the nature of conceptual space.
Combining naming information across languages does seem
to provide useful information, because the aggregate allows
the commonalities to emerge over the “noise” of individual
language idiosyncracies. However, for researchers whose
usual methodologies entail only members of one language
group, obtaining such cross-linguistic data may not be
feasible. Developing other methods of avoiding reliance on
a faulty word-concept equivalence will be crucial.
The scaling solutions still leave it unclear exactly what
units of knowledge should count as the most fundamental,
basic concepts of the domain. Different data sets (sorting vs.
naming) and different levels of the cluster analysis produce
somewhat different potential answers. The difficulty of
specifying exactly what constitute the basic concepts
suggests that it may be time for psychologists to more
radically rethink conceptual understanding of a domain. An
alternative approach to understanding where shared and
possibly innate elements of mental representation are to be
found is represented by the search for smaller units of
knowledge such as EVENT, STATE, THING, PATH,
PLACE, GOAL, MEANS, and END, etc. (see, e.g., Pinker,
2007). In this type of approach, the goal is not to identify
discrete, bounded, and stable units of knowledge stored in
long-term memory. Instead, what is identified are the
dimensions of experience to which people attend under
various circumstances. Such an approach may prove more
fruitful than looking for traditional concepts.

postdoctoral fellowship by the Fund for Scientific ResearchFlanders. We thank Adam Darlow, Kiri Lee, Yo
Matsumoto, Kyoko Ohara, Dan Slobin, Steven Sloman, and
Phillip Wolff for useful discussion. Kristine Schuster and
Hiroyuki Okada developed the web experiment for Study 1,
Naoaki Tsuda created the sorting program for Study 2, and
Stephanie Sterrett served as walkway actor. Ludy Cilissen,
Lisa Guest, Celina Hayes, and Erin Howard assisted with
data collection and analysis.

References
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boster, J. S. (1994). The successive pile sort. Cultural
Anthropology Methods, 6, 7-8.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1998). Concepts: Where cognitive science
went wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hampton, J. (1997). Conceptual combination: Conjunction
and negation of natural concepts. Memory & Cognition,
25, 888-909.
Mahon, B. Z & Caramazza, A. (2007). The organization
and representation of conceptual knowledge in the brain:
Living kinds and artifacts. In E. Margolis and S.
Laurence (Eds.). Creations of the mind: Theories of
artifacts and their representation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Majid, A., Enfield, N. J., & van Staden, M. (2006). Parts of
the body: Cross-linguistic categorisation. Special issue of
Language Sciences, 28(2-3).
Malt, B.C., Gennari, S., Imai, M., Ameel, E., Tsuda, N., &
Majid, A. (2008). Talking about walking: Biomechanics
and the language of locomotion. Psychological Science,
19, 232-240.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Malt, B. C. and Wolff, P. (Eds.) (2010). Words and the
mind: How words encode human experience. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Murphy, G. L. (2002).
The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (2007). The stuff of thought: Language as a
window into human nature. New York: Viking.
Rogers, T. T. & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
cognition: A parallel distributed processing approach.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sattath, S. & Tversky, A. (1977). Additive similarity trees.
Psychometrika, 42, 319-345.
Shepard, R. N. & Chang, J.-J. (1963). Stimulus
generalization in the learning of classifications. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65, 94-102.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. L. (1981). Categories and
concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Conclusion If the heart of a cognitive science is its theory
of concepts, then cognitive scientists need to re-think how to
find the concepts. Words can help identify the conceptual
space of a domain, but they do not directly reveal bounded
units of knowledge that can be labeled “concepts.”

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Max Planck
Gesellschaft, the Japanese Ministry of Education grant-inaid for Scientific Research (#15300088), and research grants
from Keio University. Eef Ameel is supported on a

524

