UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Category Labeling Lead to Forgetting?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/58k3d8jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Blanco, Nathaniel
Gureckis, Todd

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does category labeling lead to forgetting?
Nathaniel Blanco (nathanblanco@gmail.com)
Todd M. Gureckis (todd.gureckis@nyu.edu)
New York University, Department of Psychology
6 Washington Place
New York, NY 10003 USA

a recent set of findings reported by Lupyan (2008). In
this study, participants viewed photographs of everyday
objects (such as chairs, lamps and tables) while performing one of two tasks (Exp. 4). On some trials, an object
was presented on the screen briefly and the participant
was asked to label the object according to its basic-level
category (for example, by determining if the item was
a “chair” or a “lamp”). On other trials, a preference
judgement was elicited (“Do you like this item? Yes or
No?”). Following an initial phase where these two types
of trials were randomly intermingled, participants were
given a recognition memory test. During the test, participants were shown the original items along with a set
of highly similar lures and for each item were asked to
report if the item was presented during the initial study
phase. The study found that recognition performance
was lower for the items that had been labeled relative to
those for which a preference judgement had been elicited.
Lupyan (2008) explained this results in terms of a
“representational shift” hypothesis (also referred to as
the label-feedback hypothesis). According to this account, verbally labeling an object according to its basiclevel category activates the high-level category representation (i.e., prototype) which in turn exerts a top-down
influence on the encoding process. This additional activation has the effect of shifting the representation of
the study item toward the category prototype. When
the studied object is seen again during the recognition
test, there is a greater mismatch between the perceptual experience of the object and the representation
stored in memory, make subjects less likely to recognize
it as seen previously. The idea that top down activation from verbal processes might distort memory processing shares some similarity to accounts of the verbalovershadowing effect whereby verbally describing an experience degrades memory for the specific details of the
event (Schooler & Engstler-Schooler, 1990).

Abstract
In this paper, we evaluate the “representational shift”
hypothesis (Lupyan, 2008) which argues that the act of
explicitly labeling an object as a member of a familiar semantic category alters the trace of the encoded memory
in the direction of the category prototype. The typical procedure for such experiments has been to compare
category labeling to a non-categorization encoding task
such as a preference judgement. In a series of experiments, we examine alternative comparison tasks that
attempt to control the depth of encoding and the degree
to which category information is explicitly recruited at
the time of study. The results appear most consistent
with a depth of processing (Craik & Lockhart, 1972)
(Exp. 1) or distinctiveness (Exp. 2) explanation for
the pattern of memory effects found in previous studies.
Keywords: categorization, labeling, memory, depth of
processing, schema-encoding

Introduction
Since the seminal studies of Bartlett (1932), the idea
that memory and perception can be deeply influenced
by prior conceptual knowledge has been well appreciated. One way in which everyday knowledge makes contact with experience is through categorization. Categorization is a critical cognitive ability which allows us
to recognize novel objects in our environment as coming from distinct classes. However, the full relationship
between categorization and memory remains poorly understood. For example, what effect does categorizing an
object with respect to an established knowledge structure have on subsequent memory for the object?
Interestingly, a number of recent studies have shown
that categorization can sometimes have a negative impact on subsequent recognition memory. For example,
Sloutsky and Fisher (2004) found that 5-year-olds who
perform an induction task on a set of stimuli exhibit better memory for those objects than college-aged adults.
The hypothesis advanced by Sloutsky and Fisher was
that adults perform induction based on prior knowledge of real-world categories leading to more general,
category-level representations of the presented objects
while the younger individuals (who lack such general
world knowledge) use a more perceptual, similaritybased strategy. Other studies have shown that the very
act of learning a category can fundamentally distort
perceptual representations (Harnad, 1987; Goldstone &
Hendrickson, 2010).
One of the most provocative demonstration of the effect that categorization has on subsequent memory is

Does labeling cause forgetting? If so, why?
Intriguing as such demonstrations are, the interpretation
of the results is, as yet, unclear. While the experiments
clearly show that, relative to a non-labeling task (preference judgements), category labeling results in worse
memory, it is also possible that preference judgements
simply result in better memory relative to other tasks.
For example, participants may have found the categorization task easy since all the objects involved were

649

highly discriminable real-world objects and thus may not
have spent much time considering the individual features of each object. In contrast, it seems likely that
preference judgements might result in deeper consideration of the idiosyncratic features of an objects (e.g.,
“Would this chair match my desk? Would I like to sit
on it?”), something Lupyan acknowledged in his original report. Consistent with this view, Lupyan (2008)
found that response times were typically longer for preference judgments than for labeling trials, indicating that
participants may have been processing the items more
deeply. In addition, numerous studies have demonstrated a memory advantage for encoding items in relation to the self (see Symons & Johnson, 1997 for a
review).
The goal of the present study is to further explore the
impact that categorization or labeling has on memory
processes. In particular, we extend the design of Lupyan
(2008) in a way that would allow us to disentangle the
role that depth-of-processing might have played relative
to a top-down conceptual/representational shift effect.
In Experiment 1, we replicate the results of the original study while introducing a second comparison task
which is closely matched to the demands of category labeling while avoiding the interpretation problems associated with preference judgements. To foreshadow, the results suggest that worse memory also accompanies tasks
such as a simple orientation discrimination, which are
unlikely to tap the same kind of high-level prototypical
features that basic-level category labels are expected to
activate. In Experiment 2, we further examine a prediction of the representational shift hypothesis, namely that
factors that more strongly activate category knowledge
should more strongly impair memory.

!"#$%&''''''''''''''''''()#%

!"#$%&'''''''''''''''()#%

Figure 1: Example stimuli for Experiments 1 and 2. Targets were seen in the study phase. Both targets and lures
were presented (independently) during the recognition test.
Which items were targets and which lures was counterbalanced between participants.

nal study. If a representational shift occurs for labeled
items we expect lower memory performance for these
items compared to those in the orientation condition.
On the other hand, if the preference task causes particularly good memory, then preference items should be
remembered better than both labeled items and orientation items.

Methods
Participants and Apparatus 40 students at New
York University participated in partial fulfillment of a
class requirement. The experiment was administered on
standard Macintosh computers over a single half-hour
session.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 is a conceptual replication and extension of
Luypan (2008), Experiment 4 (described above). We introduced a third study task which required participants
to judge the orientation of the presented object (facing
left or facing right). The orientation task has a number
of properties that make it a desirable control for both
the preference and category labeling task. First, unlike the preference judgement task, the orientation discrimination requires little processing of specific idiosyncratic features of the items. In addition, while orientation (left/right) may be seen as a type of categorization
judgement, it is unlikely to activate the same kind of prototypical features as labeling an object according to its
basic-level category. Orientations judgments should neither result in reduced memory performance caused by a
representational shift nor improved performance caused
by requiring attention detail. Therefore, it provides a
good baseline to determine which of these two potential
effects contribute to the pattern of results in the origi-

Stimuli The stimuli were photographs of individual
everyday objects isolated against a plain white background. The photographs used for the main experiment
were pictures of chairs and lamps. In addition, six images of clocks and six images of bookshelves were used
during practice trials. The photographs were obtained
from online catalogs, the majority from the IKEA online catalog (www.ikea.com). The majority of the stimuli were from the set used by Lupyan (2008), obtained
through personal correspondence. However, stimuli that
did not have have a clear orientation were replaced with
related alternatives. The stimuli were divided into two
main sets. Each object in a given set was matched to
an object in the other set that was highly similar in appearance and acted as its critical lure (see Figure 1 for
examples). Each set consisted of 20 chairs and 20 lamps.
One half (i.e., 10) of the chairs/lamps were oriented facing to the left, and the other half were facing the right.

650

Table 1: Summary of the main dependent measures for Experiment 1 and 2 compared with the results from Lupyan (2008),
Exp. 4 and 5. The mean hit rate and false alarm rate is shown (standard deviations in parentheses), as well as d! and Cohen’s
effect size measure (d) calculated on the difference in d! between conditions.

Experiment/Condition

Hits

False-Alarms

d!

Cohen’s d

.32 (.12)
.34 (.17)

*
1.14
.85

.54

Experiment 1A
Preference
Category Labeling

*
.72 (.17)
.63 (.15)

Experiment 1B
Preference
Orientation
Lupyan (2008) Exp. 4
Preference
Category Labeling

*
.74 (.15)
.60 (.15)
*
.71 (.09)
.62 (.14)

*
.34 (.13)
.29 (.15)

Experiment 2
Preference (1-5)
Typicality (1-5)
Lupyan (2008) Exp. 5
Preference (y/n)
Typicality (1-5)
* p < .05

.76 (.13)
.75 (.14)
*
.83 (.10)
.75 (.13)

.30 (.13)
.29 (.12)

.32 (.14)
.40 (.19)

.41 (.16)
.40 (.16)

*
1.16
.88
*
1.11
.64
1.31
1.34
*
1.29
1.00

.52

.76

.05

.59

was displayed indicating which of the two tasks to perform. From the onset of the prompt subjects were given
a 2 second window in which to respond. The prompt remained on the screen until the subject made a response
by pressing an appropriate key on the keyboard or until
the two seconds expired, whichever came first.
One of the two stimulus sets was randomly selected
as the study set for each subject. Each stimulus from
that set was presented twice over the course of the study
phase (each time paired with the same task). Across
participants, which task was performed on which specific
stimuli was randomly counterbalanced.
In the test phase, participants were presented with a
stimulus and instructed to indicate whether they saw
the image during the study phase or not. The image
remained on the screen until the subject made a response
by pressing a key on the keyboard. All of the stimuli
from both sets were presented once during the test phase:
the 40 old items viewed during the study phase and the
40 novel items from the other set (the critical lures). The
test stimuli were presented in random order.

Procedure The experiment consisted of two subexperiments, referred to as Experiment 1A and 1B. Experiment 1A was a direct replication of Lupyan’s (2008),
Exp. 4. Experiment 1B was identical to Experiment
1A, except that the labeling task was replaced by an orientation judgment task. The experiments consisted of
practice trials, a study phase, and a subsequent recognition memory test. The study phase included the labeling
and preference tasks in Exp. 1A, and the orientation and
preference tasks in Exp. 1B.
In the category labeling task, subjects indicated
whether the object was a chair or lamp. In the preference task, subjects indicated whether they liked the
object or not. In the orientation task, subjects indicated
whether the object was facing to the left or to the right
(the instructions made clear how to interpret this task
and stimuli were selected so that the orientation was always obvious).
Before the study phase, participants were given 48
practice trials to acclimate them to the timing of the
tasks. The practice trials were identical to the trials of
the study phase, except images of clocks and bookshelves
were shown instead of the stimuli used in the main experiment.
On each trial of the the study phase, a photograph of
an object was presented in the center of the screen for
300 ms. Then a mask was displayed for 300 ms. The
mask disappeared and immediately following, a prompt

Results
Performance was high on both the labeling task and
orientation tasks, 99% correct and 97% correct, respectively. In the preference task, items were liked slightly
more often than disliked, with subjects giving a ‘like’
response to an average of 55% of the items.

651

Overall memory performance (independent of encoding condition) did not differ between Exp. 1A and 1B on
measures of d! , hit rate, or false alarm rate (t(38) < 1 for
all three comparisons). Collapsed across experiments,
overall d! was 0.97, hit rate was 0.67, and false alarm
rate (endorsing the critical lures) was 0.32.
Our key dependent measure was memory performance
(indicated by d! ) during the test phase as a function of
encoding task. Table 1 summarizes our key findings.
Exp. 1A replicated the results found by Lupyan (2008).
Performance (d! ) was lower for labeled items, t(19) =
2.27, p = 0.04. Hit rates also differed systematically as a
function of encoding task, t(19) = 2.29, p = 0.03. False
alarm rates did not differ by encoding task, t(19) < 1.
Results for Exp. 1B were qualitatively similar to Exp.
1A. Again, performance (d! ) was higher for the items
studied under the preference judgment task, t(19) =
2.50, p = 0.02. Hit rates were also higher for the preference items, t(19) = 3.86, p < 0.005. Though, unlike
Exp. 1A, false alarm rates were marginally higher for the
preference items than orientation, t(19) = 2.42, p = 0.03.
Importantly, performance in the labeling condition in
Exp. 1A and the orientation condition in 1B did not
differ significantly in d! , t(38) < 1, hit rate, t(38) < 1,
or false alarms, t(38) < 1. Memory performance for the
preference items also did not differ between Experiments
1A and 1B, t(38) < 1 for all measures.
Response times (RT) during the study phase were analyzed to assess their effect on the memory results. In
each experiment, the pattern of RT in the study phase
mirrors the pattern of hit rates in the test phase suggesting that longer RT lead to higher hit rates. RT during
the preference task was significantly longer than during
the category labeling (Exp. 1A), t(19) = 4.87, p < 0.005,
and orientation (Exp. 1B) task, t(19) = 6.19, p < 0.005.

Experiment 2
While depth-of-processing differences between category
labeling and preference judgments would appear to account for the results of our experiment and the results
of Lupyan (2008) Exp. 1-4 (which also consistently
found that response times were longer following preference judgements than in category labeling condition),
Lupyan presented at least one finding which would appear to rule out this straight-forward interpretation. In
particular, in a followup experiment (Exp. 5) memory
performance was compared in two conditions. In the
first task, participants were asked to give typicality ratings (on a scale from 1 to 5) to items and in the second
task, participants gave binary yes/no preference judgements. The study found that the typicality judgment
elicited both longer RTs and lower hit rates than the
binary preference judgment. While longer RT does not
always mean deeper encoding, there is no obvious depthof-processing explanation for this result.
Interestingly, Lupyan also found that response times
for typicality ratings had a non-linear pattern such that
ratings of both highly typical and highly atypical items
were made quickly while items of intermediate typicality
were judged more slowly. Hit rates showed an inverse
pattern: hit rates were highest for the most and least
typical items (i.e., those with the shortest RT). This result also seems to rule out a simple depth-of-processing
explanation. Lupyan explained the pattern of results as
being characteristic of a representational shift. According to this idea, in the typicality judgement task, more
time spent processing the item in relation to the category
might cause a stronger top-down influence on encoding.
As a result, typicality items with the longest RTs (i.e.,
those associated with intermediate ratings) should have
the lowest hit rates. An import implication of this explanation is that this pattern of results should be unique to
category-related encoding tasks such as typicality judgments, but not preference judgments.
In Experiment 2, we test this implication directly. We
use the same basic tasks as Lupyan’s Exp. 5, typicality judgments and preference judgments, but we simply
equated the scale used for the two tasks.

Discussion
We found that memory performance following an orientation judgement task was reduced relative to the preference judgement condition, but equivalent to the category labeling condition. Presumably, the orientation
judgement task did not require activation of the category prototype at the time of study (at least relative to
the category labeling condition). The pattern of memory deficits suggest that the labeling and orientation
tasks had nearly identical effects on subsequent memory, thereby undermining the representational shift hypothesis. The correlation between study response time
and subsequent memory is consistent with a levels-ofprocessing hypothesis (Craik & Lockhart, 1972). Overall, preference judgements appear to invoke deeper processing of the target object, and as a result, memory is
improved for these items. In contrast, the orientation
and labeling tasks were both simple judgements that
could be made without deeply processing the specific
perceptual details of the object.

Methods
Participants and Apparatus 29 students at New
York University participated in partial fulfillment of a
class requirement. The experiment was administered on
standard Macintosh computers over a single half-hour
session. The stimuli were the same as those used in Exp.
1.
Procedure As in Experiment 1, the experiment consisted of practice trials, a study phase, and a recognition
test. The recognition test was identical to that of Exp.
1. The procedure for the study phase and practice trials
was the same as Exp. 1 with the following exceptions. In

652

0.9

1100

0.8

1000

!"#$%&'$("
)*+,+*+-%+

900

1

2

3

4

5

0.7

!"#$%&'$("
)*+,+*+-%+

0.6

1

!/.)&0

2

3

4

5

!/.)&0

12*3"4'%5'!"#$%&#"#

1200

-).'!/."

!"#$%&#"'()*"'+*#,

1300

8

6

4

2

!"#$%&'$("
)*+,+*+-%+
1

2

3

4

5

!/.)&0

Figure 2: Left: RT during the study phase of Exp. 2 as a function of rating given. Middle: Hit rate in the test phase as a
function of rating given during the study phase. Right: The average number of times each rating was given. For both tasks
items were given extreme values less often, and these items have the shortest response times and the highest hit rates.
the typicality task subjects were asked to indicate on a
scale from 1 to 5 how typical the object is for its category
(e.g. “How typical is this lamp?” where 1 = very typical,
5 = very atypical), and in the preference task subjects
indicated how much they like the object on a scale from
1 to 5 (where 1 = really like, 5 = really dislike).

both the preference and typicality rating conditions is
that fewer items were given extreme scores of either 1
or 5. Figure 2 (right) show the average number of items
given each rating score for both types of encoding tasks.
Critically, fewer items were given extreme ratings (i.e.,
a score of 1 or 5). As a result, it is plausible that these
items were better differentiated in memory relative to
the larger number of items that were given intermediate
ratings. To evaluate this hypothesis, we performed an
ANCOVA with number of study items given each rating as a covariate and the actual rating (1-5) as a factor
(collapsed across condition). We found a significant effect of the covariate (F (1, 251) = 4.53, p = .03), but no
effect of the rating itself (F (4, 251) = 2.04, p = .09) nor
an interaction between these variables (F (4, 251) = 0.68,
p = .6). In addition, the beta weights estimated for the
covariate were all negative (reflecting the negative relationship between number of items within a bin and the
hit rate).

Results
Across subjects overall d! independent of encoding condition was 1.31. Overall hit rate was 0.76 and the falsealarm rate 0.30. Again, the key dependent measure was
memory performance (indicated by d! ) during the test
phase as a function of the encoding task (Table 1). Memory performance (d! ) did not differ between items studied
under the two different tasks, t(28) < 1. Additionally,
neither hit rate nor false alarms differed as a function of
encoding task, t(28) < 1 for both comparisons.
RT for typicality judgments (M =1062 ms, SD = 233
ms) was slightly shorter than RT for preference judgements (M = 1092 ms, SD = 232 ms), t(28) = 2.11,
p = 0.04. As shown in Figure 2 (left) RTs for both typicality and preference judgements followed an approximately inverted U-shaped curve based the rating given,
with intermediate ratings producing longer RTs.
For each condition we analyzed hit rate as a function
of the ratings given during the study phase. For each
subject, the average typicality or preference rating was
computed for each item (each item was seen twice), and
the items were placed into bins based on that average
rating. Figure 2 shows the average hit rate for each of
the bins for both conditions. Consistent with Lupyan’s
(2008) findings, the hit rates for items studied under the
typicality task form a roughly U-shaped pattern. Critically though, hit rates for the preference items follow the
same pattern.
One explanation of the U-shaped memory effect in

Discussion
According to the representational shift hypothesis, the
deeper category-related processing required by typicality
judgments should cause a larger decrement in memory
performance compared to the preference judgement task.
In our experiment which equated the response scale used
during both tasks, we found that memory performance
did not differ as a function of typicality or preference
judgments. Alone this would appear to be a null effect.
However, we replicated the U-shaped pattern of hit rates
as a function typicality rating that was found in Lupyan
(2008, Exp. 4), as well as the inverted U-shape for RT.
In particular, items given extreme typicality ratings have
higher hit rates (and lower RT) than those in the center of the scale. Importantly, we also found an identical
pattern for items studied under the 1-5 preference rating

653

Engstler-Schooler, 1990; Winawer, Witthoft, Frank, Wu,
& Wade, 2007; Lupyan, 2008). While we cannot rule
out the possibility that category induced distortions in
memory (such as those proposed by the representational
shift hypothesis) might occur specifically during linguistic or semantic processing, we found no unique evidence
to support this hypothesis outside of more traditional
variables known to influence memory. At a behavioral
level, establishing that one particular type of encoding
task retards memory in a distinct manner is challenging. In our view, the best way to make progress on such
issues is by leveraging multiple sources of data including insight from cognitive neuroscience about the role
of semantic memory in episodic encoding (Tse et al.,
2007; Gliga, Volein, & Csibra, 2010), and by building
and testing detailed computational models that triangulate between the multiple factors that influence memory
performance (Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997).

task, suggesting that this pattern is not unique to categorical processing. Closer analysis of our data showed
that there were consistently fewer items given extreme
ratings in both tasks. One plausible explanation of this
effect is that the items at the end points of the scale are
given enhanced encoding by virtue of being relatively
unique. This was supported by our ANCOVA analysis
which found that the number of items given each rating
was a better predictor of hit rates than was the rating
itself. Ultimately, the results of both our experiment
and Lupyan (2008) might be best explained in terms of
a distinctiveness effect (von Restorff, 1933; Sakamoto &
Love, 2006). Items were rarely given extreme values on
the rating scale, making them more distinct in memory.

General Discussion
In this paper, we examined a recent study which found
that labeling something as a member of a familiar category can result in a decrement in memory for that item
(Lupyan, 2008). In Experiment 1, we showed that we
can produce similarly reduced memory performance for
other tasks that do not obviously overlap with basic-level
category labeling (e.g., judging the orientation of an familiar object). Our data suggest that a critical feature
of the original results may not be that labeled items are
forgotten as much as making preference judgments for
objects results in superior memory relative to a variety
of other incidental encoding tasks (Symons & Johnson,
1997).
Experiment 2 examined a secondary finding in Lupyan
(2008) which found that typicality ratings could also results in lower memory compared to a preference judgement task. This finding was central to the original study
because it showed that memory could be worse for items
which were associated with longer study RTs (appearing
to undermine a simple depth-of-processing account). We
replicated the basic features of this design but showed
that the detailed pattern of hit rates is best explained
in terms of the number of items appear at each rating. Items given extreme ratings of both preference and
typicality were relatively infrequent, and thus may have
stood out better in memory.
Memory and categorization are fundamentally intertwined processes and there is no doubt that semantic
memory can strongly modulate memory encoding and
retrieval processes. Studies such as Sloutsky and Fisher
(2004) highlight the powerful influence that category related processing can have on memory. However, just as
fundamental is the recognition that memory is influenced
by a variety of factors including the context in which
items are studied (Tulving & Thomson, 1973) and the
degree or depth of encoding (Craik & Lockhart, 1972).
Recently, a number of authors have argued for specific
changes in memory or perception based on the top-down
influence of linguistic or verbal processing (Schooler &

Acknowledgements The preliminary results for this

study were presented as part of a final class project in an
undergraduate Lab in Human Cognition course at NYU. We
especially thank Kate Ray and Frank Lei. We also thank Eric
Dewitt, members of the Davachi lab, and the Concepts and
Categories (ConCats) group at NYU for helpful discussions
in the development of this project.

References
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering: An experimental and social study. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Craik, F., & Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for
memory research. levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Gliga, T., Volein, A., & Csibra, G. (2010). Verbal labels modulate perceptual object processing in 1-year-old children. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 22 (12), 2781-2789.
Goldstone, R., & Hendrickson, A. (2010). Categorical perception. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1 (1), 69-78.
Harnad, S. (Ed.). (1987). Categorical perception: The groundwork of cognition.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lupyan, G. (2008). From chair to “chair:” a representational shift account
of object labeling effects on memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137 (2), 348-369.
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B. (2006). Vancouver, toronto, montreal, austin: Enhanced oddball memory through differentiation, not isolation. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 13, 474-479.
Schooler, J., & Engstler-Schooler, T. (1990). Verbal overshadowing of visual
memories: some things are better left unsaid. Cognitive Psychology,
22, 36-71.
Shiffrin, R., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model of recognition memory: Rem retrieving effectively from memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
4 (2), 145-166.
Sloutsky, V., & Fisher, A. (2004). When development and learning decrease
memory. Psychological Science, 15 (8), 553-558.
Symons, C., & Johnson, B. (1997). The self-reference effect in memory: A
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 371-394.
Tse, D., Langston, R., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P., Wood, E.,
Witter, M., & Morris, R. (2007). Schemas and memory consolidation.
Science, 316, 76-82.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval
processes in episodic memory. Psychological Review, 80 (5), 352-373.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Analyse von vorgangen in spurenfeld. i. uber die
wirkung von bereichs-bildungen im spurenfeld [analysis of processes
in the memory trace. i. on the effect of group formations on the
memory trace]. Psychologische Forschung, 18, 299-342.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., & Wade, A. (2007). Russian
blues reveal effects of language on color discrimination. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 7780-7785.

654

