UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does retrieval require effort? Effects of memory strength on pupil dilation.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0m43w6gb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dalenberg, Jelle R.
Van Rijn, Hedderik

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does retrieval require effort? Effects of memory strength on pupil dilation.
Jelle R. Dalenberg (j.r.dalenberg@gmail.com)
Department of Artificial Intelligence
University of Groningen
P.O. Box 407, NL-9700 AK Groningen
The Netherlands

Hedderik van Rijn (D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl)
Department of Experimental Psychology
University of Groningen
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, NL-9721 TS Groningen
The Netherlands

Abstract

pupil dilation on subsequent presentations. His results
showed that pupil dilation was decreased if there were one
or zero intervening words, but dilation increased again for
four or eight intervening words. These results indicate that
encoding effort is decreased when recently encoded
information is repeated, in line with the idea that recently
encoded information is stronger represented in memory.
Although Magliero’s results indicate that there is a link
between memory strength and effort, the participants in this
study were not explicitly instructed to learn the words in the
list; the participants were told at the start of the experiment
that they would participate in a memory task after the list of
words was presented. The current study was set up to test
the effects of memory strength on pupil dilation during the
retrieval process. As relative memory strength is assumed to
decrease over time and increase with the number of
rehearsals, we will manipulate both the number of
intervening items (and thus the time between repetitions)
and the number of repetitions of a to-be-learned item.

The current study investigates the relation between retrieval
effort and the relative memory strength of mentally stored
information. A previous pupillary study by Magliero (1983)
showed that encoding effort reacts to the recency effect but no
studies have linked effort as measured by pupillary dilation to
the frequency effect. In the current study, phasic pupil dilation
of 15 participants was measured and analyzed during retrieval
tasks while they were learning topographical facts. The facts
were studied once and tested during four repetitions in one of
two repetition-interval conditions. We hypothesized that
retrieval effort will decrease as the relative strength of a
memory trace increases. This hypothesis accounts for recency
effects as well as for frequency effects. Analysis of the phasic
pupil response in the experiment shows a significant main
effect for the repetition interval condition. Furthermore an
interaction effect between the number of repetitions and
repetition interval was found, indicating that the difference in
effort between short and long repetition intervals decreased as
the number of rehearsals increased. These findings largely
confirm our hypotheses and the assumptions of theories that
assume that increased retrieval effort increases learning gains.

Decay, Interference, Associations and Rehearsal
Different theories propose different mechanisms
underlying the dynamics of memory strength. One of the
more constant mechanisms is the notion that rehearsals
strengthen memory traces, which increase retrieval
performance. A neuronal explanation of the beneficial effect
of rehearsing was proposed by Hebb (1949), who stated that
neurons strengthen their connection when they show
repeated temporal electrical activation. More support for the
beneficial effect of rehearsing was found in studies that
showed that recall performance decreased when rehearsal
was prevented (e.g., Brown, 1958; Peterson & Peterson
1959). Since these initial findings, many memory models
have been proposed to explain the constructs of human
memory such as the modal model by Atkinson & Shiffrin
(1968) and the multi-component model (Baddeley and
Hitch, 1974; Baddeley, 2009). Both these models
incorporate the importance of rehearsing and assume that
non-rehearsed items will drop out of short-term memory.
However, neither model provides a detailed account of this
process.
More recent theories are more explicit about how
information becomes less accessible. Decay based models
(e.g., ACT-R, Anderson et al, 1998) assume that
information becomes less accessible as a function of time,
whereas other models assume that the interaction with other
information causes the decreased performance (e.g,
association-based models, SAM, Raaijmakers, 2003; and

Keywords: Memory; Effort; Retrieval; Pupil; Dilation;
Learning; Rehearsal.

Introduction
Ever since Ebbinghaus (1885) it is known that recall
performance decreases over time, irrespective of whether
performance is measured as retrieval latency or accuracy.
Over the years, many different theories have been proposed
to explain this effect (Byrnes, 2000). Regardless of the
proposed underlying mechanisms, all theories assume that
the relative memory strength of an item decreases over time.
Furthermore, all theories assume that rehearsing the
materials can counter this decrease as the rehearsals increase
the relative memory strength, resulting in faster and more
accurate responses. However, whether these changes are
also reflected in the effort it takes to retrieve information is
still an open question. The study reported in this paper used
pupil dilation to investigate the relationship between effort
and relative memory strength.
Earlier work that associated memory strength with pupil
dilation is the study reported by Magliero (1983). In his
experiments pupil dilation was measured during an
encoding task. Participants were presented a list of words
and some of these words were repeated 1 or 2 times with
either 0, 1, 4 or 8 intervening words. During the whole
encoding phase pupil dilation was recorded. Magliero
compared the pupil dilation on the first presentation with the

132

interference-based models, such as SOB, Farrell &
Lewandowsky, 2002). This decrease in performance has to
be countered by rehearsals. Rehearsal either strengthens a
memory trace by increasing the activation of an information
chunk (i.e., the strength in memory; ACT-R), by creating
and strengthening associative connections between cues and
information (SAM), or by adjusting the vector weights of
the new and all other learned information (SOB).
Therefore, regardless of the underlying mechanisms, all
theories account for recency and frequency effects by means
of relative memory strength.

decrease of dilation is stronger in the more difficult
condition.

Method
Participants–Seven male and twelve female students of the
University of Groningen volunteered to participate in this
experiment in exchange for study credits. Informed consent,
as approved by the Ethical Committee Psychology of the
University of Groningen, was obtained before testing. All
participants were naïve to the study material.

Relative Memory Strength, Pupil Dilation and Effort
The time to retrieve mentally stored information increases
when the relative strength of this information decreases
(e.g., Sternberg, 1969; Stanners et al., 1969; Jolicœur &
Dell'Acqua, 1998). Although equating longer retrieval times
with increased effort might seem straightforward, Porter,
Troscianko and Gilchrist (2007) have shown effects of
effort on pupil dilation in tasks that were matched for
reaction time.
Although changes in pupil size as a response to mental
activities was actively studied from the late 19th century on
(e.g., Schiff and Fao, 1874, Heinrich, 1896?), renewed
interest in this measure stems from the early 1960s (e.g.,
Hess & Polt, 1964). In 1966, Kahneman and Beatty
conducted an experiment in which participants had to
memorize a list of items and later report it. As the pupil
dilation increased with each additional presentation, and
decreased after each successful report, this study is taken as
a prime example of the link between pupil dilation and
effort. After these initial findings, numerous studies
(involving memory, language processing, complex
reasoning, perception and attention) indicated that pupil
dilation increases as a response to increased mental effort in
various tasks (for a review see Beatty, 1982).
Because the study by Porter et al (2007) showed that
effort effects are not always reflected in reaction times, it
remains unclear whether the effort involved in retrieving
mentally stored information is also influenced by relative
memory strength.
We hypothesize that less effort is needed to retrieve
mentally stored information when the relative strength of
the information increases. To test this hypothesis an
experiment was performed in which participants had to
learn facts. To investigate the recency and rehearsal effects
independently, the facts were repeatedly tested at two
different repetition intervals. We predicted that (1) an
increased number of repetitions would result in a decreased
dilation of the pupil; (2) a longer time between two
repetitions will result in a increased dilation. Both these
predictions are based on the notion that increased relative
memory strength is reflected in lower effort as estimated by
pupil dilation. With respect to the interaction, if effort is
linked to relative memory strength in a similar way as
retrieval latency, an interaction is to be expected in that the

Figure 1: Display as presented to the participants during the
answer-part of a test-trial. Circles mark the 26 areas used in
this study.
Stimuli–Participants had to learn brain topography. The
cross-section of the brain used in this experiment is shown
in Figure 1. A total of 26 areas were presented, indicated by
the 26 circles shown. The areas largely correspond to
Brodmann areas, although some Brodmann areas were
combined into a single aggregate. Each of the areas was
indicated throughout the experiment by its topographical
full name (e.g., “Inferior Temporal Gyrus”, or “Dorsal
Anterior Cingulate Cortex”). Two types of trials were
presented, study trials and test trials. During the study trials,
the name of the to be identified area was shown above the
cross-section in Courier New 26 point font, and the
corresponding area was indicated by an arrow. During a test
trial, participants were first presented the name of a
previously learned area in Courier New 26 point font in
black on a white background, centered on the screen. After
this presentation, the cross-section as shown in Figure 1 was
shown. Participants indicated which area they thought
corresponded to the presented name by clicking on one of
the 26 circles.
Design–Every participant was presented all 26 areas,
randomly distributed over five learning blocks. Three
learning blocks contained four areas each, and two learning
blocks contained seven areas. Every block was presented
five times, in consecutive runs, before the next block
commenced. All items of a block were presented in each
run. The first run consisted of study trials; the four
subsequent runs of test trials. When a run was completed,
the order of areas within that block was randomized to avoid

133

learning the areas in a fixed order, while taking care that an
area was never presented twice in a row.
As the repetitions of each block were presented
consecutively, the average time or distance between two
presentations of the same area is a function of the number of
items in a block. The four area-blocks constitute the short
repetition interval condition, and two seven area-blocks
constitute the long repetition interval conditions. Because
the order of areas within each run was randomized, the
interval between two repetitions of same area in the short
repetition interval blocks was one to six areas. For the long
blocks the repetition interval was one to twelve intervening
areas. The first block was a short repetition interval block,
and subsequent blocks alternated between long and short
repetition interval (i.e., S, L, S, L, S). A total of 130 trials
were presented.
Procedure–Participants were seated in front of a 22” (20”
viewable) IIlyama Vision Master Pro 513 CRT monitor (set
at a resolution of 1280 x 1024) and were asked to rest their
chin on a head mount in front of the screen. Distance from
head mount to the screen was approximately 60 cm. Pupil
dilation of the right eye was measured at 500 Hz using a SR
Research EyeLink 1000 eye tracker which was placed
immediately below the computer screen. Presentation of all
stimuli was controlled using PsychToolBox (Brainard,
1997; Kleiner et al, 2007) with the Eyelink extensions
(Cornelissen et al, 2002).
Participants were instructed that they were to learn brain
topography, and that they would get a set of study trials that
presented the areas and the associated names, followed by
four runs of test trials in which they had to indicate the
answer by clicking on the circle of the correct region. All
instructions were presented on-screen.
A study trial started with the string “Study trial…”
presented centered on the screen for three seconds after
which the study screen appeared. This screen showed an
area name together with an arrow that indicated the right
corresponding position. Although the right answer was
indicated, the participant was still free to choose any desired
answer. After the participant clicked on a circle to indicate
his or her answer, feedback was provided. The selected
circle turned green for 1 second if correct, or red for 2
seconds if incorrect. If an incorrect answer was given, an
arrow highlighted the correct area.
A test trial started with a fixation cross that was presented
centered on the screen for 4 seconds, followed by the
presentation of the area name for 6 seconds. After this
period, the cross-section of the brain was presented. The
participant had 10 seconds to provide an answer by clicking
on a circle associated with an area using a standard
computer mouse. Feedback was identical to the feedback
presented during the study trials.
The slow pace of the experiment allowed for accurately
measuring the relatively slow fluctuations in pupil dilation.
The long presentation of the fixation cross at the start of
each test trial provided the baseline to which later measures

were scaled. The long presentation of the area name allowed
for measuring a complete phasic pupil response.
The complete experiment, including setup and debriefing,
lasted about 25 minutes.

Results
Four participants were excluded because of technical
measuring problems or not following instructions. The data
from 15 participants (5 male; average age 21.5 years; SD =
2.01) were used for further analysis. The first short
repetition interval block was considered training, and was
not analyzed. We will report data of Run 2 to 5 for Blocks 2
to 5, as in Run 1 only study trials were presented. We will
refer to these runs as Repetition 1 to 4. All trials with a
response time longer than 8 s or shorter than 500 ms were
considered outliers, and removed from further analyses (.9%
of all trials).

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

90%

●

●

●

●
80%

2.75

●
●

●

70%

Short RI
Long RI

2.5
2.25

●

2

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●●
●

1.75

Response Time (in s)

Percentage Correct

100%

1.5
#1

#2

#3

#4

Repetition

Figure 2: Percentage Correct and Response Time data for
Short and Long Repetition Intervals. The error bars
represent one standard error.
Behavioral Results Figure 2 shows the main behavioral
data. The two lines in black indicate the percentage correct
responses over the four repetitions, which were submitted to
a repeated measure ANOVA after an arcsine transform. As
expected, the correctness is higher for the short repetition
interval condition (F(1,14)=26.8,
=.66, p<0.001) and
increases with increased number of repetitions
(F(1,14)=24.4,
=.64, p<0.001). The figure also shows
that the advantage of the short repetition interval condition
decreases over time (F(1,74)=7.1,
=.09, p=0.009).
An inverse, but qualitatively similar pattern of results can
be observed for the response times, with main effects for
condition (long repetition intervals result in increased
response times, F(1,14)=16.9,
=.55, p=0.001) and
repetition (responses decrease with increased number of
repetitions, F(1,14)=26.7,

134

=.66, p<0.001). As for the

Short RI

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5

0

500

Relative Dilation (in %)

Repetition 1
Repetition 4

1000

1500

Time (in ms)

2000

2500

3000

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5

#1

1000

1500

2000

2500

#3

#4

#1

#2

#3

#4

Repetition

Figure 4: Phasic pupil response (in %) for the short (left)
and long (right) repetition intervals per repetition. The error
bars represent one standard error of the means.
Table 1 shows the results of this analysis. In line with the
hypotheses, the analysis shows that the long retention
interval is associated with increased pupil dilation (β=.14).
This effect is mainly caused by the first repetition as the
interaction effect decreases the difference between short and
long repetition interval with .06 for each additional
repetition. Post-hoc analyses indicated that the interaction
was indeed caused by the decrease in dilation in the long
repetition interval (β=-0.05, p<0.001) and a lack of
repetition effect in the short repetition interval condition
(β=0.02, p=0.393).

Long RI

500

#2

Repetition

Repetition 1
Repetition 4

0

22
16

Pupillary Results The pupil diameter as reported by the SR
Research Eyelink 1000 eye tracker was cleaned from
saccade and eye blink induced artifacts by linear
interpolation of 25 samples before and after a saccade, and
50 samples before and after a blink. Any remaining artifacts
were manually selected and the associated dilation was
replaced by linear interpolation. A total of 58 trials (3.9%)
were excluded because of either too fast or slow responses
or too many artifacts. The development of the relative
dilation during the presentation of the area name for the first
and last repetition is plotted for the short and long repetition
intervals separately in Figure 3.

20

repetitions (F(1,74)=38.2,
=.34, p<0.001). These results
are in line with previous studies: longer repetition intervals
are associated with lower performance than shorter
repetition intervals, and an increasing the number of
repetitions improves performance with a stronger effect for
the long repetition condition.

Long RI

Short RI

18

Phasic Pupil Response (in %)

24

percentage correct data, the initial response time advantage
for the short repetition interval blocks decreases with

3000

Time (in ms)

Table 1: Overview of the estimates (β), the upper and
lower 95% Bayesian highest posterior density (HPD)
confidence intervals, and p-values based on the MCMC
posterior distribution (determined using pvals.fnc with
10000 samples, Baayen, 2008) of the fixed factors entered
in linear mixed-effect model.
Fixed Effects
HPD95
β
lower upper
pMCMC
Intercept
2.81
2.67
2.97
<.001***
Repetition Interval
0.14
0.02
0.27
.024*
Repetition Number
0.01
-0.02
0.05
.424
RI x RN
-0.06 -0.11
-0.02
.006**

Figure 3: Lowess filtered (f=.05) relative dilation for first
and last repetition, plotted for short (left) and long (right)
retention intervals (RI). Zero ms is the onset of the screen.
The dashed lines indicate one standard error of the means.
The phasic pupil response was calculated per trial as the
difference in dilation between the constriction and peak
(see, e.g., Bradley, Miccoli, Escrig & Lang, 2008). For both
estimates, the average of a window of 400 ms around the
extreme was calculated. Mean phasic pupil response and
(between-subject ANOVA-type) standard errors are
depicted in Figure 4 for all conditions. As the resulting
distribution was heavily right skewed (Shapiro-Wilk test:
W=0.88, p<0.001), the data were log-transformed (W=0.99,
p>.9). Nine (.07%) outliers (> 2.5 SD) were removed.

Discussion
We conducted an experiment in which pupil dilation was
measured to assess effort during fact learning. We predicted
a reverse relation between relative memory strength and
effort. To test this hypothesis, we manipulated relative
memory strength by repeating all information multiple times
at one of two repetition intervals. The behavioral results of
the experiment indicate that our manipulations were
successful: performance increased with increased repetitions

We tested the effects of repetition interval and number of
repetitions on phasic pupil response in correct trials using
linear mixed effect models (Baayen, Davidson, Bates, 2008)
with crossed, independent random effects. Repetition
interval and number of repetitions were entered as fixed
factors, whereas area and participant were entered as
random factors1.
1

We also fitted more complex models, including, for example,
trial number and block. As these models did not qualitatively

change the outcomes, we decided against reporting the more
complex models here.

135

and decreased when the repetition interval was longer, an
effect that diminished with increased repetitions. These
effects are in line with the assumption that repeated
presentations increase relative memory strength and an
increased interval between two repetitions results in a
decreased memory strength (compared to a shorter interval).
Although slightly different, the pupil dilation effects also
indicate effects of relative memory strength. First of all, the
long repetition interval – in which a lower relative memory
strength is assumed – is associated with increased pupil
dilation. Second, the interaction between repetition interval
and number of repetitions indicates that the pupil dilation
decreases with an increased number of repetitions in the
long repetition interval condition. Both these effects argue
in favor of an effect of relative memory strength on effort.
However, we also predicted an effect of the number of
repetitions in the short repetition interval conditions, which
could not be found. There are multiple explanations possible
for the lack of an effect in this condition. One explanation is
that the short repetition interval condition resulted in very
strong memory traces that were retrieved in a fraction of the
time available to the participants. After retrieving the fact,
participants might have involved in other mental activities,
which artificially raised the measured pupil dilation.
Another possible explanation is that the phasic pupil
response as shown in Figure 4 has a floor effect of around
18% in our setup. This response could, for example, reflect
the effort associated with reading and processing the
presented area name. If these components of the process
already invoke a large pupillary response, small effects
during high levels of relative memory strength are difficult
to identify. To summarize, these data indicate a negative
correlation between relative memory strength and mental
effort.
Our findings can be explained by the leading memory
theories. According to these theories, introduced above, the
measured increases in retrieval can be explained by extra
memory decay after longer repetition intervals (ACT-R),
weakening of associative connections between cues and
mentally stored information (SAM) or greater interference
from the additional stimuli in the long repetition interval
(SOB).
Porter et al (2007) indicated that effort effects are not
always captured during the retrieval process. However, the
effects from the current experiment are in line with previous
response time memory studies that were able to find these
effort effects. By using pupil dilation as an additional
measure of effort, our study gives a stronger indication that
manipulations in repetitions and repetition intervals affect
retrieval effort (e.g., Sternberg, 1969; Stanners et al., 1969;
Jolicœur & Dell'Acqua, 1998). Furthermore, the finding that
retrieval effort is higher for facts with a lower relative
strength is in line with a fMRI study by Buckner, Koutstaal,
Schacter, Wagner, and Rosen (1998). They conducted a
word recognition task and found that during a successful
retrieval of shallow encoded words, activation in the
bilateral anterior insular regions and a left dorsal prefrontal

region increased. Buckner et al. argue that this increased
activation is indicative of increased effort. Thus, the current
study extends these and Magliero’s (1983) findings by
focusing on retrieval effort instead of on encoding or
recognition effort.
Although memory theories can explain our findings, it
still remains unclear what biological mechanism exactly
causes the increased retrieval effort. A number of recent
theories on the causes of pupillary effects might help in
unraveling this question. One explanation for the pupil
response to mental effort can be derived from the Adaptive
Gain Theory, which states that activation in the cortex is
strongly dependent on the Locus Coeruleus (LC), a nucleus
in the brainstem regulating arousal and behavior (AstonJones & Cohen, 2005). A high correlation between
activation in the LC and pupil dilation was found in
monkeys, and later the effect was confirmed in humans
(Rajkowski et al, 1994; Gilzenrat et al, 2010). By linking
effort during memory retrieval via pupil dilation with
activation in specific brain regions, more precise hypotheses
can be formulated.
Regardless of the underling mechanisms, the results of the
current study can have an extensive impact on learning
theories. Many studies have shown the beneficial effect of
deeper encoding on later retention, whether it is by an
implicit learning task or by mnemonics (Krinsky & Nelson,
1981; McDaniel et al, 1986; Byrnes, 2000). According to
the retrieval effort hypothesis by Pyc and Rawson (2009),
this effect is partly dependent on the amount of effort
required, also during successful retrievals. Although they
confirmed their hypothesis by manipulating retrieval
difficulty through changes in repetition interval and the
number of repetitions, they did not test whether effort was
indeed increased. The current study confirmed this
assumption by showing that pupil dilation decreases when
the repetition interval decreases and when the number of
repetitions increase.

References
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., & Matessa, M.
(1998). An integrated theory of list memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 341-380.
Aston-Jones, G., & Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative
theory of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function:
Adaptive gain and optimal performance. Neuroscience,
28(1), 403-450.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory:
A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W.
Spence, & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory (pp. 89195). New York: Academic Press.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data. a practical
introduction to statistics. Cambridge University Press.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390–412.

136

Baddeley, A. D. (2009). Working memory. In A. D.
Baddeley, M. W. Eysenck & M. C. Anderson (Eds.),
Memory (1st ed., pp. 41-68). New York: Psychology
Press.
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In
G.A. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, New York: Academic Press. 8, 47-89.
Bahrick, H. P. (1979). Maintenance of knowledge:
Questions about memory we forgot to ask. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 108(3), 296-308.
Bradley, M. M., Miccoli, L., Escrig, M. A., & Lang, P. J.
(2008). The pupil as a measure of emotional arousal and
autonomic activation. Psychophysiology, 45(4), 602–607.
Beatty, J. (1982). Task-evoked pupillary responses,
processing load, and the structure of processing resources.
Psychological Bulletin, 91(2), 276-292.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10(4), 433-436.
Brown, J. (1958). Some tests of the decay theory of
immediate memory. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 10(1), 12-21.
Brown, J., & Huda, M. (1961). Response latencies produced
by massed and spaced learning of a paired-associates list.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(5), 360-364.
Buckner, R. L., Koutstaal, W., Schacter, D. L., Wagner, A.
D., & Rosen, B. R. (1998). Functional-anatomic study of
episodic retrieval using fMRI: I. retrieval effort versus
retrieval success. NeuroImage, 7(3), 151-162.
Byrnes, J. P. (2000). Cognitive development and learning in
instructional contexts (2nd ed.) Allyn and Bacon Boston.
Cornelissen, F. W., Peters, E. M., & Palmer, J. (2002). The
Eyelink toolbox: Eye tracking with MATLAB and the
psychophysics toolbox. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 34(4), 613-617.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1885). Memory: A contribution to
experimental psychology (translated by HA ruger & CE
bussenues, 1913). New York: Teachers College, Columbia
University,
Farrell, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (2002). An endogenous
distributed model of ordering in serial recall.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(1), 59-79.
Fish, S. C., & Granholm, E. (2008). Easier tasks can have
higher processing loads: Task difficulty and cognitive
resource limitations in schizophrenia. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 117(2), 355-363.
Gilzenrat, M. S., Nieuwenhuis, S., Jepma, M., & Cohen, J.
D. (2010). Pupil diameter tracks changes in control state
predicted by the adaptive gain theory of locus coeruleus
function.
Cognitive,
Affective,
&
Behavioral
Neuroscience, 10(2), 252-269.
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior: A
neuropsychological theory. New York: Wiley.
Heinrich, W. (1896). Die aufmerksamkeit und die funktion
der sinnesorgane. Zeitschrift Für Psychologie Und
Physiologie Der Sinnesorgane, 9, 342-388.

Hess, E. H., & Polt, J. M. (1964). Pupil size in relation to
mental activity during simple problem-solving. Science,
143(3611), 1190-1192.
Jolicœur, P., & Dell'Acqua, R. (1998). The demonstration of
short-term consolidation. Cognitive Psychology, 36(2),
138-202.
Jones, N. P., Siegle, G. J., Muelly, E. R., Haggerty, A., &
Ghinassi, F. (2010). Poor performance on cognitive tasks
in depression: Doing too much or not enough? Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 10(1), 129-140.
Kahneman, D., & Beatty, J. (1966). Pupil diameter and load
on memory. Science, 154(3756), 1583-1585.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D., Pelli, D., Ingling, A., Murray, R.,
& Broussard, C. (2007). What’s new in psychtoolbox-3?
[Abstract]. Perception, 36 ECVP Abstract Supplement
Krinsky, R., & Nelson, T. O. (1981). Task difficulty and
pupillary dilation during incidental learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
7(4), 293-298.
Magliero, A. (1983). Pupil dilations following pairs of
identical and related to-be-remembered words. Memory &
Cognition, 11(6), 609-615.
McDaniel, M. A., Einstein, G. O., Dunay, P. K., & Cobb, R.
E. (1986). Encoding difficulty and memory: Toward a
unifying theory. Journal of Memory and Language, 25(6),
645-656.
Murdock, B. B. (1962). Direction of recall in short-term
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior,
1, 119-124.
Peterson, L., & Peterson, M. J. (1959). Short-term retention
of individual verbal items. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58(3), 193-198.
Porter, G., Troscianko, T., & Gilchrist, I. D. (2007). Effort
during visual search and counting: Insights from
pupillometry. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60(2), 211–229.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2009). Testing the retrieval
effort hypothesis: Does greater difficulty correctly
recalling information lead to higher levels of memory?
Journal of Memory and Language, 60(4), 437-447.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (2003). Spacing and repetition effects
in human memory: Application of the SAM model.
Cognitive Science, 27(3), 431-452.
Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P., & Aston-Jones, G. (1994). Locus
coeruleus activity in monkey: Phasic and tonic changes
are associated with altered vigilance. Brain Research
Bulletin, 35(5-6), 607-616.
Schiff, J. M., & Fao, P. (1874). La pupille considérée
comme esthésiomètre (translated by R. G. de Choisity).
Marseille Médical, 2, 736-741.
Stanners, R. F., Meunier, G. F., & Headley, D. B. (1969).
Reaction time as an index of rehearsal in short-term
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 82(3),
566-570.
Sternberg, S. (1969). Memory-scanning: Mental processes
revealed by reaction-time experiments. American
Scientist, 57(4), 421-457.

137

