UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Estimating scene typicality from human ratings and image features

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19n7p532

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Ehinger, Krista A.
Xiao, Jiangxiong
Torralba, Antonio
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Estimating scene typicality from human ratings and image features
Krista A. Ehinger (kehinger@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Jianxiong Xiao (jxiao@csail.mit.edu)
Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Antonio Torralba (torralba@csail.mit.edu)
Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Aude Oliva (oliva@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Abstract
Scenes, like objects, are visual entities that can be
categorized into functional and semantic groups. One of the
core concepts of human categorization is the idea that
category membership is graded: some exemplars are more
typical than others. Here, we obtain human typicality
rankings for more than 120,000 images from 706 scene
categories through an online rating task on Amazon
Mechanical Turk. We use these rankings to identify the
most typical examples of each scene category. Using
computational models of scene classification based on
global image features, we find that images which are rated
as more typical examples of their category are more likely
to be classified correctly. This indicates that the most typical
scene examples contain the diagnostic visual features that
are relevant for their categorization. Objectless, holistic
representations of scenes might serve as a good basis for
understanding how semantic categories are defined in term
of perceptual representations.

prototypes are an average or central tendency of all category
members. People do not need to actually encounter the
prototypical example of a category in order to form a
concept of that category; instead, they extract the prototype
through experience with the variation that exists within the
category (Posner & Keele, 1968).
Environmental scenes, like objects, are visual entities that
can be organized in functional and semantic groups. Like
other conceptual categories, scenes contain more and less
typical exemplars. Tversky and Hemenway (1983)
identified some typical examples of indoor and outdoor
scene categories, but the total number of scene categories
used in their studies was very small. Here, we extend the
idea of scene typicality to a very large database containing
over 700 scene categories. The goal of the current study is
two-fold: first, to determine the prototypical exemplars that
best represent each visual scene category; and second, to
evaluate the performances of state-of-the-art global features
algorithms at classifying different types of exemplars.

Method

Keywords: scene perception; prototypes; categorization.

Introduction

Dataset

Most theories of categorization and concepts agree that
category membership is graded – some items are more
typical examples of their category than others. For example,
both sparrows and ostriches are birds, but a sparrow is
generally regarded as a much more typical bird than an
ostrich. The more typical examples of a category show
many advantages in cognitive tasks. For example, typical
examples are more readily named than atypical examples
when people are asked to list examples of a category (eg.,
furniture) and response times are faster for typical examples
when people are asked to verify category membership (eg.,
“a chair is a piece of furniture”) (Rosch, 1975).
According to Prototype Theory, concepts are represented
by their most typical examples (Rosch, 1971). These

Stimuli were taken from the SUN Database, a collection of
130,519 images organized into 899 categories (see Xiao,
Hays, Ehinger, Oliva & Torralba, 2010). This database was
constructed by first identifying all of the words in a
dictionary corresponding to types of places, scenes, or
environments (see Biederman, 1987, for a similar procedure
with objects). Our definition of a scene or place type was
any concrete common noun which could reasonably
complete the phrase, “I am in a place,” or “Let’s go to the
place.” We included terms which referred to specific
subtypes of scenes or sub-areas of scenes. However, we
excluded specific places (like MIT or New York), terms
which did not evoke a clear visual identity (like workplace
or territory), spaces which were too small for a human body

2562

to navigate within (such as a desktop), and scenes with
mature content. We included views of the interiors of
vehicles (airplane cabin), but not exterior views of vehicles.
We included specific types of buildings (skyscraper, house),
because, although these can be seen as objects, they are
known to activate scene-processing-related areas in the
human brain (Epstein & Kanwisher, 1998). This procedure
yielded an initial set of about 2400 scene words, and after
combining synonyms and separating scenes with different
visual identities (such as indoor and outdoor views), we
obtained a list of about 899 unique semantic categories of
scenes and places. For each of these categories, we collected
a large set of images online, resulting in a database of about
130,000 images.
Note that there are different ways to define and categorize
“scenes,” which would generate a slightly different or more
complete database than the one used here. For example, one
might decide that different views of the same place qualify
as different scenes, or one might choose to subdivide scenes
based on spatial layout or surface features (e.g., forests with
or without snow). However, this work represents the first
attempt at estimating typicality on a dataset that is extensive
enough to cover most of the plausible scene categories used
to refer to places and scenes in discourse.

Stimuli
For the typicality experiment, we used the 706 scene
categories from this database that contained at least 22
exemplars. Category size ranged from 22 images in the
smallest categories to 2360 in the largest. A total of 124,901
images were used in the experiment.
Participants
935 people participated in the experiment through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, an online service where
workers are paid to complete short computational tasks
(HITs) for small amounts of money. All workers were
located in the United States and had a good performance
record with the service (at least 100 HITs completed with an
acceptance rate of 95% or better). Workers were paid $0.03
per trial.

Procedure
Participants were told that the goal of the experiment was to
select illustrations for a dictionary. Each trial consisted of
three parts.
First, participants were given the name of a scene
category from the database, a short definition of the scene
category, and four images. Workers were asked to select
which of the four images matched the name and definition
(one of the four images was drawn from the target category
and the other three were randomly selected from other
categories). The purpose of this task was to ensure that
participants read the category name and definition before
proceeding to the rating task.
Next, participants were shown 20 images in a 4 x 5 array.
These images were drawn randomly from the target

Figure 1: The display seen by participants in the typicality
rating task. In the experiment, images were shown in color.
category, and did not include the image which had served as
the target in the previous task. Images were shown at a size
of 100 x 100 pixels, but holding the mouse over any image
caused a larger 300 x 300 pixel version of that image to
appear. An example of this display is shown in Figure 1.
Workers were asked to select, by clicking with the mouse,
three images that best illustrated the scene category.
In the third part of the task, workers were shown the same
20 images (but with their array positions shuffled) and were
asked to select the three worst examples of the target scene
category.

Design
On each trial, the set of 20 images was drawn randomly
from the set of images in the target category. These random
draws were such that each image appeared at least 12 times,
and no more than 15 times over the course of the
experiment. This resulted in 77,331 experimental trials.
Each trial was completed by a single participant.
Participants could complete as many trials as they wished;
the mean number of trials completed per participant was
82.7 trials (median 7 trials).

Results
Participants’ performance was judged on two measures:
their performance on the 4AFC task, and whether they
selected different images as the best and worst examples on
a single trial. In general, participants performed well on the
4AFC task, with an average correct response rate of 97%
(s.d. 0.13%). Most of the incorrect responses occurred on
trials where one of the randomly-drawn foil images came
from a category similar to the target category (for example,
a cathedral might be the foil image for the category
“basilica”). Participants were also reliably able to select
different images as the best and worst examples of their
category: participants marked an image as both best and
worst on only 2% of trials (s. d. 0.10%); the likelihood of
reselecting an image by chance is 40%. However, there
were a few participants who reselected images at about
chance rates, which suggests that they were selecting images
at random with no regard for the task. We identified 19

2563

Figure 2: The five images rated most typical by participants, from the ten largest categories in
the database.

2564

participants who reselected the same images as both best
and worst on at least 25% of trials (2% of total participants).
Together these participants had submitted 872 trials (1.13%
of trials), which were dropped from further analysis.
A “typicality score” was obtained for each image in the
dataset. The typicality score was calculated as the number
of times the image had been selected as the best example of
its category, minus a fraction1 of the number of times it was
selected as the worst example, divided by the number of
times the image appeared throughout the experiment.
(Taking a fraction of the worst votes allows the number of
“best” votes to be used as a tie-breaker for images that
performed similarly.) A typicality score near 1 means an
image is extremely typical (it was selected as the best
example of its category nearly every time it appeared in the
experiment), and a typicality score near -1 means an image
is extremely atypical (it was nearly always selected as a
worst example).
Examples of the most typical images from various
categories are shown in Figure 2.

Comparison to chance
Even if participants selected “best” and “worst” examples at
random, some images in each category would emerge as
highly typical (or atypical) due to chance. It is important to
check that the most typical images in this experiment are
rated higher than would be expected if participants were
simply responding randomly.
To check this, we ran a set of 100 simulations in which
the images were rated randomly. Each image appeared in
the simulation the same number of times it appeared in the
actual experiment. On each appearance, the image had a
15% chance of being voted a “best” example, a 15% chance
of being voted a “worst” example, and a 70% chance of
receiving no vote. The simulation assumed that participants
never selected the same image as both “best” and “worst” in
a single trial, which was not actually true in the experiment.
This means that the simulation actually overestimates the
typicality scores that could be produced by random
responses.
As shown in Figure 3, the typicality scores obtained by
the most typical images in the experiment are much higher
than the maximum scores that would be expected if
participants were rating images randomly. More than half of
the categories (401 out of 706) have a most typical image
that is at least 3 standard deviations higher than the average
“most typical image” from the simulation. This indicates
that participants were selecting these images according to a
strategy (such as selecting images that best matched their
internal prototype for the scene category) and not just
selecting images at random.

1

This fraction was arbitrarily set to 0.9, but any value in the
range 0.500 to 0.999 gives essentially the same results: changing
this value changes the range of possible scores, but doesn’t
significantly change the rank order of scores within a category
(90% of images move by less than 5 percentile points).

Figure 3: A comparison of the typicality scores obtained by
the best image in each category in the expeirment to the
typicality scores obtained in a simulation where images
were rated randomly.
However, there are some categories where the most
typical image scores no higher than would be expected from
chance (46 categories have most typical image that is within
a standard deviation of the average best score from the
simulation). It’s not clear why participants gave chance-like
performance in these categories: although some of these
categories are very unusual (e.g., rectory, cloister), many of
them are familiar everyday categories like closet, desert
road, or factory. This may reflect the distribution of
exemplars we were able to obtain for these categories in the
initial image search: it’s possible that the images we
collected for these categories were fairly homogeneous,
with no particularly good or bad exemplars.

Typicality and models of scene classification
Do more typical exemplars of a scene category contain more
of the visual features relevant to scene classification? To
investigate this question, we classified scenes using the “all
global features” classifier described in Xiao, et al. (2010). In
computer vision, global features represent a class of
algorithms that encode the spatial layout of textures in the
image, without representing object information.
Global Features
As in Xiao et al. (2010), the all-feature kernel combines
several representations that have been shown to be reliable
for scene classification tasks. The GIST descriptor computes
the output energy of 24 filters (8 orientations at 4 different
scales) averaged on a 4x4 grid (Oliva & Torralba 2001). The
Dense SIFT features (Lazebnik, et al., 2006) builds a
coarse-to-fine spatial histogram pyramid of quantized

2565

orientation histograms of image magnitude and orientation
values on local patches. The HOG features (Dalal & Triggs,
2005; Felzenszwalb, et al., 2010) count occurrences of
gradient orientation and use overlapping local contrast for
normalization to improve invariance to changes in
illumination or shadowing. While SIFT is known to be very
good at finding repeated image content, the self-similarity
descriptor (SSIM) (Shechtman & Irani, 2007) relates images
using their internal layout of local self-similarities. Unlike
GIST, SIFT, and HOG, which are all gradient-based
approaches (measuring the density of the features), SSIM
may provide a distinct, complementary measure of scene
layout. Additionally, the “all-features” kernel includes
histograms for specific geometric classes as determined by
Hoiem et al. (2005), which represent aspects of a scene’s
spatial layout.
The “all global features” classifier is built from the large
set of classifiers based on these state-of-the-art features. It
covers a range of features which are likely to be important
in scene recognition, including color histograms,
representations of texture and scene regions (e.g., ground vs.
sky), and information about edges and line orientations.

Classification procedure
Classifiers were trained with one-versus-all support vector
machines as in Xiao et al (2010). In order to have enough
exemplars for training and testing, the following simulations
used the 397 categories that contain at least 100 exemplars.
From each category, 50 images were selected at random to
serve as the training set, and another 50 images were
randomly selected to serve as the test set. Since the training
and testing sets were chosen by random selection, they
contained a range of more and less typical exemplars.
Xiao et al. (2010) found that the average performance of
the “all global features” classifier on this 397-scene dataset

is 38% (chance performance is 0.25%). What are the
performances as a function of scene typicality? Figure 4
shows that classification of individual images varies with
their typicality score: the most typical images were
classified correctly about 50% of the time, and the least
typical images were classified correctly only 23% of the
time. Images were divided into four groups corresponding
to the four quartiles of the distribution of typicality scores
across the database. These groups contained 5020, 4287,
5655, and 4908 images (groups are listed in order from
fourth quartile -- lowest typicality – to first quartile). A oneway ANOVA comparing these quartile groups shows a
significant effect of image typicality quartile on
classification accuracy (F(3,19846) = 278, p < .001);
Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc tests show that the
differences between each quartile are significant.
Image typicality is also related to the confidence of the
SVM classifier. The confidence reflects how well the
classifier believes the image matches its assigned category –
scores near 1 indicate that the classifier is very confident
that the image belongs in the category and scores near -1
indicate that the classifier does not believe the image
belongs in the category. (Due to the difficulty of the oneversus-all classification task, confidence was low across all
classifications, and even correctly-classified images had
average confidence scores below zero.) Figure 5 shows the
SVM confidence as a function of image typicality for
correctly- and incorrectly-classified images. Confidence
increases with increasing typicality, but this pattern is
stronger in correctly-sorted images. A 4 x 2 ANOVA gives
significant main effects of image typicality (F(3,19842) =
79.8, p < .001) and correct vs. incorrect classification
(F(1,19842) = 6006, p < .001) and a significant interaction
between these factors (F(3,19842) = 43.5, p < .001).

Figure 4: Performance of the SVM classifier as a function of
image typicality. Images are sorted according to their
typicality score from least typical (4th quartile) to most
typical (1st quartile).

Figure 5: Confidence of the SVM classifier as a function of
image typicality. Images are sorted according to their
typicality score from least typical (4th quartile) to most
typical (1st quartile).

2566

Conclusion
Intelligent systems, artificial and biological, face the
problem of how to organize complex stimulus
representations. One framework for classifying scenes
involves identifying visually informative features within a
category. Previous attempts to characterize the categorical
representation of environmental scenes have capitalized on
uncovering a manageable set of dimensions, features, or
objects with which to represent environments (Oliva &
Torralba, 2001; Renninger & Malik, 2004; Fei-Fei &
Perona, 2005; Lazebnik et al., 2006; Vogel & Schiele, 2007;
Greene & Oliva, 2009; Ross & Oliva, 2010).
An alternate framework for classifying visual scenes
appeals to their conceptual nature. Scenes, like individual
objects, are associated with specific functions and
behaviors, and have a categorical structure (Tversky &
Hemenway, 1983). Here, we show that people have a
representation of a typical or “best” exemplar for a wide
range of scene categories. This elaborates on the scene
prototype work of Tversky and Hemenway, and extends
prototype research from the domains of objects, faces, and
abstract patterns to scenes.
Furthermore, we show that scenes which people rate as
more typical examples of their category are more likely to
be correctly classified by computer vision algorithms based
on global image features. Although we cannot claim that the
features used in these algorithms are the same features
which humans would use to perform the same classification
task, this nevertheless indicates that more typical examples
of a scene category contain more of the diagnostic visual
features that are relevant for scene categorization.
Finally, this study is the first to show that reliable
prototypes can be identified for a very large dataset of
environmental scene categories, by both human observers
and state of the art vision algorithms. One of the important
distinctions between objects and scenes is that the
categorical boundaries between scenes are less well defined
than the boundaries between objects. Natural scenes in
particular often lie on the boundary between two or more
categories, like forest/mountain or river/lake (Vogel &
Schiele, 2004), suggesting that typicality might be a
particularly important concept for future progress in the
field of human and computational scene understanding.

Acknowledgments
K.A.E. is funded by an NSF graduate research fellowship.
This work is funded by NSF CAREER award (0546262),
NSF grants (0705677 and 1016862), and a NEI grant
(EY02484) to A.O; NSF CAREER award (0747120) to A.T;
and Google research awards to A.O and A.T.

References
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-Components: A
Theory of Human Image Understanding. Psychological
Review, 94, 115-147.

Blanz, V., Tarr, M. J., & Bülthoff, H. H. (1999). What
object attributes determine canonical views? Perception,
28, 575-599.
Dalal, N., & Triggs, B. (2005). Histogram of oriented
gradient object detection. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 886-893.
Epstein, R. & Kanwisher, N. (1998) A cortical
representation of the local visual environment. Nature,
392, 598-60.
Felzenszwalb, P., Girshick, R., McAllester, D., & Ramanan,
D. (2010). Object detection with discriminatively trained
part based models. IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 32, 1627-1645.
Fei-Fei, L., & Perona, P. (2005). A bayesian hierarchical
model for learning natural scene categories. In
Proceedings of Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 524-531.
Greene, M.R., & Oliva, A. (2009). Recognition of natural
scenes from global properties: Seeing the forest without
representing the trees. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 137-179.
Lazebnik, S., Schmid, C., & Ponce, J. (2006). Beyond bags
of features: Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing
natural scene categories. In Proceedings of Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2169-2178.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the shape of the
scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope.
International Journal in Computer Vision, 42, 145-175.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.
Renninger, L.W., & Malik, J. (2004). When is scene
recognition just texture recognition? Vision Research, 44,
2301-2311.
Rosch, E. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology,
4, 328-350.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C., Gray, W., Johnson, D., & BoyesBraem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Ross, M.G., & Oliva, A. (2010). Estimating perception of
scene layout properties from global image features.
Journal of Vision, 10, 1-25.
Shechtman, E., & Irani, M. (2007). Matching local selfsimilarities across images and videos. In Proc. IEEE
Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Tversky, B., & Hemenway, K. (1983). Categories of
environmental scenes. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 121149.
Vogel, J., & Schiele, B. (2004). A semantic typicality
measure for natural scene categorization. In Pattern
Recognition Symposium DAGM 2004.
Vogel, J., & Schiele, B. (2007). Semantic model of natural
scenes for content-based image retrieval. International
Journal of Computer Vision, 72, 133-157.
Xiao, J., Hays, J., Ehinger, K. A., Oliva, A., & Torralba, A.
(2010). SUN Database: Large scale scene recognition
from abbey to zoo. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition.

2567

