UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Executive Functioning in Children and Adolescents with Disabilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4512h93z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sussman, Amy
Shah, Priti
Daunhauer, Lisa
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Executive Functioning in Children and Adolescents with Disabilities
Amy L. Sussman (amy.sussman@ed.gov)
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
555 New Jersey Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20208 USA

Priti Shah (priti@umich.edu)
Martin Buschkuehl
Susanne M. Jaeggi
John Jonides
Department of Psychology, 530 Church Street, University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA

Lisa Daunhauer1 (Lisa.Daunhauer@colostate.edu)
Deborah Fidler2
Department of Occupational Therapy1
Department of Human Development and Family Studies2
Colorado State University
410 W. Pitkin Street
Fort Collins, CO 80523

Janine P. Stichter (Stichterj@missouri.edu)
Melissa J. Herzog
Karen V. O’Connor
Kristin Lierheimer
Jaime Kerpash
Jaclyn Benigno
Department of Special Education, 303 Townsend Hall, University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65203

Frances A. Conners (fconners@as.ua.edu)
Department of Psychology, 345 Hackberry Lane, University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487

Keywords: Executive function; working memory; transfer;
education; social cognition; disabilities; attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder; autism; Down syndrome.

Recent research has demonstrated the importance of
executive functioning – a set of cognitive abilities necessary
for regulation and control of goal-directed behavior – to
academic skills in typically developing children. Executive
functioning may be of particular consequence for students
with disabilities who may already be at risk for academic
and learning problems.
One domain of executive
functioning, working memory, may be especially crucial for
academic performance. This symposium will present
research that takes knowledge of cognitive science to the
realm of educating children with disabilities. The projects
include both the exploration of executive functioning skills
and the development of strategies aimed at improving
executive functioning in children with disabilities. They
bring together researchers with various backgrounds (e.g.,
cognitive psychology, educational psychology, special

education, neuroscience) and cut across different types of
psychological and cognitive disabilities with impairments in
executive functioning skills. Amy Sussman, Program
Officer for the Cognition and Student Learning in Special
Education program at the Institute of Education Sciences,
will moderate this panel and facilitate discussion throughout
the symposium.

Working Memory Training in Typically
Developing Children and Children with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder:
Evidence for Plasticity in Executive Control
Processes
The overarching goal of this research is to evaluate the
extent to which working memory can be trained in a manner
transferable to tasks that tap working memory. We (Shah,
Buschkuehl, Jaeggi, & Jonides) trained typically developing
children as well as children with Attention Deficit

1460

Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) on a motivating working
memory (WM) game that incorporated a spatial n-back for 4
weeks. Before and after training, the children were tested for
transfer on a non-trained WM task and on an executive
control task that is a common marker for ADHD, the
continuous performance task. We compared the WM
training groups’ improvements on those transfer tasks to
improvements of control groups who practiced a general
knowledge and vocabulary game for the same duration as
the experimental groups. Our results show that for both the
healthy and the ADHD children, working memory training
is more effective than the control training in improving the
transfer measures of working memory and executive
control. The improvements are primarily based on
reductions in errors of commission, a result that is of
particular relevance for the children with ADHD. The
improved impulse control might be an underlying
mechanism for generalized transfer effects, such as fluid
intelligence and scholastic achievement tests. The ongoing
data collection and follow-up assessments will establish
whether and how long the transfer effects last.

Addressing Social Competence Deficits for
Adolescents with Autism in the Schools (SCI-S)

Preliminary Evidence for a Specific Executive
Functioning Profile in Children with Down
Syndrome
Different neurodevelopmental disabilities may have distinct
“executive fingerprints” with unique strengths and
challenges. We (Daunhauer & Fidler) will discuss
preliminary evidence indicating that some aspects of
executive functioning (EF) may be more impaired than
other areas in students with Down Syndrome (DS). We will
begin by reviewing the literature on EF component skills in
DS that suggests that working memory and planning skills
may be more severely impaired than cognitive flexibility or
inhibitory control.
In addition, we will discuss empirical support for this EF
profile from our recent study using caregiver report.
Caregivers of children with DS (chronological ages 4-10
years; mental ages 2-4 years) completed the Behavior
Rating Inventory of Executive Function – Preschool
(BRIEF-P),
a
caregiver
report
measure
of
everyday/functional EF skills in multiple domains. On the
BRIEF-P, deficits were noted on a global EF measure as
well as the Working Memory and Plan/Organize scales in
particular (relative to norms developed for typically
developing children of a similar mental age). These results
suggest a specific pattern of EF weaknesses in young
children with DS, consistent with the extant literature that
has focused primarily on older individuals utilizing
laboratory EF tasks. We conclude by discussing how these
results inform the design of our upcoming research project
that will compare the EF profile of children with DS to
comparison groups and examine how these EF skills relate
to academic skills concurrently and over time.

For this presentation, we (Stichter, Herzog, O’Connor,
Lierheimer, Kerpash, & Benigno) present data on two years
of a three year grant for the implementation of the Social
Competence Intervention (SCI). SCI-S is a school-based
implementation of SCI designed to impact social
competence performance for adolescents with Autism, with
a specific social-deficit subtype characterized by a diagnosis
of an ASD, an IQ of 70+, and specific social characteristics
consistent with high functioning Autism (HFA) or Asperger
Syndrome. The curriculum utilizes primarily cognitivebehavioral intervention supported by applied behavior
analysis to target social cognition deficits as characterized
by a theory of mind deficit, executive function (EF)
impairment, and an inability to recognize emotions. Results
from several measures, with an emphasis on EF, will be
presented. Specifically, on the Behavior Rating Inventory of
Executive Function (BRIEF), parents reported significant
pre to post improvements in students’ EF; teachers’ reports
of improvement were more modest. Across measures of
student performance, results indicated significant
improvement in cognitive flexibility, inhibition, and
attention/inhibition. Discussion will provide implications
for future work, including potential EF predictor variables
for response to intervention.

Discussant
Dr. Frances Conners investigates developmental cognition
in typical and atypical populations, particularly intellectual
disability. Her research focuses on working memory,
reading, and implicit processes.

Acknowledgments
Most of the research reported here was supported by the
Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S.
Department of Education.

1461

