UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explanation Effects Override Formal Category Definitions In Clinical Experts’ Diagnostic
Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p4749hq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kim, Nancy
Nguyen, Thao
Paulus, Daniel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explanation Effects Override Formal Category Definitions
In Clinical Experts’ Diagnostic Judgments
Nancy S. Kim, Thao P. Nguyen, and Daniel J. Paulus
(n.kim@neu.edu, nguyen.tha@husky.neu.edu, d.paulus@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 125 Nightingale Hall, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115 USA
Abstract
Having a plausible life-event explanation for a person’s
disordered symptoms leads clinicians to judge those
symptoms to be less abnormal than if their cause was
unknown (Ahn et al., 2003). Yet the American Psychiatric
Association’s official Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders formally states that only bereavementrelated life events should exclude a client from a diagnosis of
depression, and this bereavement exclusion criterion is slated
to be eliminated altogether from the next edition (under
development) of the manual. We asked whether clinicians
make diagnoses in the context of life-event explanations in
direct opposition to these formal prescriptive definitions. We
asked clinical psychologists to give diagnostic and other
clinical judgments for realistic case study vignettes including
a bereavement event, negative non-bereavement event, neutral
event, or no event. Both bereavement and non-bereavement
life events normalized clinicians’ perceptions of depression,
indicating a clear departure from both the current and
proposed DSM.
Keywords: explanation; categorization; diagnosis; reasoning;
judgment; expertise

Introduction
Do clinicians interpret symptoms within the explanatory
context of life events even when their official diagnostic
system explicitly specifies that they should not? Past
research has shown that students and clinical psychologists
systematically take causal life-event context into account
when judging the psychological abnormality and need-fortreatment of artificial, hypothetical case vignettes (e.g., Ahn
et al., 2003; Kim & LoSavio, 2009; Meehl, 1973). For
example, people were shown the hypothetical case of a
person who has insomnia, trouble remembering the names
of objects, and episodes of extreme anxiety. Those study
participants who did not receive an explanation for why
these symptoms had occurred rated them as quite abnormal.
In contrast, those who were given a relatively plausible
explanation for what precipitated those symptoms (e.g.,
workload stress caused the frequent insomnia, etc.) rated
them as significantly more normal and less in need of
psychological treatment. Life event causes normalized
symptoms more than biological causes (Ahn et al., 2003),
and externally-controlled life events reduced perceptions of
the need for treatment more than internally-controlled life
events (Kim & LoSavio, 2009). However, in past work, case
vignettes were synthesized from multiple unrelated
disorders, and thus did not bear a clear resemblance to any
one real disorder. An important question therefore remains

regarding the degree to which explanatory context would
affect diagnostic and clinical reasoning for “real” disorders.
Formal
category
definitions
for
psychological
abnormality have already been established in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (henceforth
DSM-IV-TR; 4th Edition, American Psychiatric Association,
2000), and are widely known and used by licensed clinical
practitioners.1 In particular, the strength of the influence of
explanations on clinical judgments is unknown for cases
wherein taking explanatory life-event context into account
would run directly contrary to DSM specifications.
To give an illustrative example, suppose that a person has
been showing depressive symptoms following a personally
catastrophic financial loss. Would expert clinicians judge
that person to be any less disordered than someone showing
the same symptoms following no particularly noteworthy
event? The diagnostic criteria for depression in the current
DSM-IV-TR and the February 2010 in-progress proposal for
the upcoming 5th edition of the manual (DSM-5; APA, 2010;
http://www.dsm5.org) do not distinguish between these two
cases; the formal recommendation of the American
Psychiatric Association is to treat both cases identically in
diagnosis, ignoring contextual differences. This deliberate
removal of explanatory context is characteristic of the
diagnostic criteria for the vast majority of disorders listed in
the manual (Horwitz & Wakefield, 2007).
On the flip side, consider the introduction sections of the
very same DSM-IV-TR and proposed DSM-5 (Stein et al.,
2010), in which the intended guiding philosophy of the
manuals is described. The introduction sections of both
versions explicitly state that significant life events should be
taken into consideration when identifying a set of behaviors
that correspond to a mental disorder, recognizing that
psychological distress reflects relatively normal mental
health under stressful circumstances (Horwitz, 2007). This
apparent internal ambivalence (between intended guiding
philosophy and actual diagnostic criteria) in the DSM-IV-TR
and the proposed DSM-5 is illustrative of a longstanding
ongoing debate regarding the proper role of explanatory life
events in assessment. In clinical science, the debate has
1

The disorders and diagnostic criteria contained in the DSM
system are determined by a “task force” comprised of a large set of
widely acknowledged experts in the field. The manual serves as
the core basis for communication among researchers and clinicians
in a number of countries, and is considered the authoritative basis
for psychiatric diagnoses by health insurance companies in the
U.S., the country from which our participant sample was drawn.

2782

focused on developing a normative model of diagnosis, with
the goal of identifying the optimal and correct way of
making judgments about psychopathology (Maj, 2008). It is
also critical, however, to understand what clinicians’
intuitions are in making such judgments. Nosologies of
disordered behaviors, such as the DSM-IV-TR and the
proposed DSM-5, have perhaps the most obvious direct
impact on how diagnoses are made. However, it is
clinicians’ own intuitions that will ultimately affect how
they choose to use those nosologies.
In the current study, we pitted the influence of
explanatory causal events against specific, formal diagnostic
recommendations in the DSM-IV-TR and the proposed
DSM-5. As a case in point, we focused on intuitions about
the so-called bereavement exclusion criterion (Wakefield,
Schmitz, First, & Horwitz, 2007; Zisook, Shear, & Kendler,
2007) in the diagnosis of depression. In the DSM-IV-TR,
people whose symptoms result from bereavement are
excluded from a depression diagnosis. According to
Wakefield (2011), this exclusion reflects a longstanding
clinical consensus, traceable through centuries of Western
medicine, that bereavement-induced depression indicates
“normal grief” and not psychopathology. However, recent
epidemiological evidence has suggested that the course of
depression does not differ depending on how it was caused
(Kendler, Myers, & Zisook, 2008; Wakefield et al., 2007).
On the basis of such data, the DSM-5 task force recently
announced plans to completely remove the bereavement
exclusion criterion from the definition of depression, such
that the presence or absence of any life events (bereavement
or otherwise) should not affect the diagnostic decision.
In other words, the DSM-IV-TR states that only a
bereavement life event should explain away depression
symptoms, the proposed DSM-5 states that no life events
should explain away depression symptoms, and previous
work in cognitive science (e.g., Ahn et al., 2003; Kim &
LoSavio, 2009) has indicated that clinicians considering
artificial disorders believe that any plausible negative life
event should explain away disorder symptoms. The critical
question is what clinicians actually believe when
considering realistic cases of real-life disorders that pit
formal DSM specifications against life event explanations.

Alternate Hypotheses
To examine this issue, we presented expert clinical
psychologists with realistic case studies of depression
including either a bereavement life event, a strongly
negative, non-bereavement life event, neutral information
that does not help to explain the symptoms, or no life event.
One hypothesis is that the influence of explanatory events
is strong enough to override the formal recommendations of
the DSM-IV-TR and proposed DSM-5. If so, then clinicians
assessing cases with explanatory life events (regardless of
whether they specifically involve bereavement or not) will
perceive cases as less in need of a depression diagnosis than
clinicians seeing the same cases without the life events or
with non-explanatory filler events.

An alternative hypothesis is that expert clinicians’
knowledge of formal diagnostic recommendations and years
of training to diagnose using the DSM system would result
in an override of the influence of explanatory events. If this
is the case, then either of the following may occur. If
clinicians adhere to the familiar, prescribed DSM-IV-TR
recommendations, then they will only perceive cases as less
in need of a depression diagnosis in the case of bereavement
life events, but not in the case of non-bereavement negative
life events. Alternatively, if they intuitively agree with the
most recent DSM-5 proposal, then there will be no effect of
explanation for bereavement life events or negative, nonbereavement life events, compared to control events.

Ecological Validity
Because a key goal of our study was to determine how
explanation influences judgments in a real-life domain, we
took several steps to increase the ecological validity of our
study, while still attempting to maximally retain the
experimental control characterizing previous work. First, we
recruited currently practicing, licensed, expert clinical
psychologists to participate, as they would be highly
familiar with both the DSM system and the task of mental
disorder diagnosis and clinical assessment.
Second, our approach was to use realistic case-based tasks
rather than more artificial or abstract reasoning tasks. As is
exemplified by the DSM itself, a broad rule for diagnosis in
general may not always be followed when a specific
disorder is at hand and a set of diagnostic and exclusionary
criteria is specified. By focusing on the bereavement
exclusion, we could measure the influence of explanations
when in opposition to formal DSM category definitions.
Finally, to our knowledge, the normalizing influence of
explanation on an actual diagnostic judgment has never
previously been tested. Therefore, we asked clinicians to
answer a straightforward diagnosis question for each case.
We also asked them to make three additional judgments
regarding the symptoms’ abnormality, cultural acceptability,
and statistical commonality. This last set of questions
allowed us to cast a broader net for corroborating evidence.
In particular, the abnormality judgment enabled us to more
directly assess clinicians’ own intuitions about the
psychological abnormality of behaviors, as opposed to their
knowledge of psychological abnormality as defined by the
DSM-IV-TR.

Method
Participants
Seventy-three clinicians participated in response to a mailed
postcard. Postcards were initially mailed to 350 clinical
psychologists randomly selected from various national and
state psychology board databases. Of these, 35 postcards
were returned to us by the postal service because the
clinician had moved, yielding a voluntary response rate of
23.2%. We pre-verified that each invited clinician had
completed a Ph.D. in clinical psychology, was currently

2783

practicing, and held a current license in good standing.
Participants received a $25 gift card to a major online
retailer. One participant did not complete a number of the
key dependent measures and was excluded from analysis.
The 72 remaining participants had a mean of 24.3 years of
experience (SE=1.4) and spent a mean of 21.9 hours seeing
patients per week (SE=1.2). Thirty-seven identified their
primary theoretical orientation as cognitive, behavioral, or
cognitive-behavioral, 13 psychoanalytic or psychodynamic,
16 eclectic, and 6 “other.” Clinicians estimated the mean
age of their patients to be 33.9 years old (SE=1.8), with
83.8% of patients having an Axis I diagnosis (SE=3.1%)
and 25.8% (SE=3.1%) having an Axis II diagnosis. One
clinician’s responses to the questions regarding percentages
of Axis I and Axis II diagnoses were non-numerical and
thereby not included in the above means. Thirty-three
participants were male and 38 were female (1 declined to
report gender). Six identified their ethnicity as Hispanic or
Latino/a (5 declined to report ethnicity). Sixty-two selfidentified as White, 3 as Asian, 2 as African American, 1 as
Native American, 1 as both Native American and White and
2 as both White and Asian (1 declined to report race).

paragraph describing these behaviors was approximately
matched for length across the four vignettes.

Procedure
Participating clinicians completed the task online via
Qualtrics (www.qualtrics.com), an internet-based survey
software package. Each clinician saw all four vignettes. All
four event types were also seen by all participants, one event
type per vignette.
Event type was rotated across vignettes and between
participants, such that each of the four vignettes was
presented equally frequently with each of the four event
types overall. Furthermore, each event type and vignette
was presented equally frequently in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th
positions (regarding presentation order) across participants.
Table 1: Sample Vignette (“Andrew”)
Component
Background

Materials
Four case study vignettes, two male and two female, were
created in a style similar to cases of depression in the DSMIV-TR Casebook (Spitzer, Gibbon, Skodol, Williams, &
First, 2001). Each vignette consisted of two full paragraphs.
The first paragraph described some background
information about a person, including an additional event.
For each vignette, we created three different events that
could be interchangeably placed in this paragraph. Two
were explanatory, causal events and one was a control
event. In the first type of causal event (Cause-Bereavement,
henceforth), the person was described as experiencing the
death of a close family member or friend. The second type
of causal event (Cause-Non-bereavement, henceforth)
involved divorce, job loss, or serious injury or illness
sustained by the character or a loved one. The control event
(Control-Filler, henceforth) consisted of relatively neutral
additional information that matched the causal events in
length, but did not explain the person’s behaviors. We also
created a second control, in which no event of any kind was
added (Control-No event, henceforth). Table 1 depicts a
complete set of materials for one vignette.
In each vignette, the second paragraph described the
person’s current behaviors, which were always held
constant. Each person was described as experiencing four
symptoms of depression as listed in the DSM-IV-TR and
DSM-5; one of those symptoms was always depressed
mood, widely considered the hallmark of depression and one
of the required symptoms for diagnosis. The time course of
the symptoms as stated in the paragraph always exceeded
DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 requirements for diagnosis (2
weeks), while remaining within the allowable time frame for
applying a bereavement exclusion (2 months). The

2784

Event Type

Current
Behaviors

Text
Andrew has been married to Karen for 5
years, and they have a son together named
Eric. Although they did occasionally get
into arguments during their first few years
together, Andrew and Karen generally got
along well and were a happily married
couple.
Cause-Bereavement
One day, while at work Andrew
received a call from the hospital,
informing him that his wife had gone
into cardiac arrest. The doctors tried
their best, but she passed away in the
emergency room.
Cause-Non-bereavement
One day, they got into a verbal
argument, during which Andrew was
stunned to discover that Karen had
been having an affair. A few days later,
Karen filed for divorce.
Control-Filler
There is a small community center
located down the street from their
house. Andrew and Karen often take
turns bringing Eric there to participate
in a variety of activities.
Control-No event
(No additional text)
For the past several weeks, Andrew has
been feeling really down. He has lost
interest in his weekly golf matches and
makes excuses to avoid attending any
social activities. These days, Andrew
listlessly picks at his food. As a result, he
has lost quite a bit of weight. His coworkers report that he constantly fidgets
with his hands, picking his fingernails,
seemingly unable to hold still.

For each vignette, four separate ratings were obtained from
each participant: (1) a diagnosis judgment (“should
[Andrew] be diagnosed with depression?” on a scale of 1-9,
where 1=definitely no and 9=definitely yes); (2) an
abnormality judgment (“how normal or abnormal are
[Andrew]’s current behaviors?” on a scale of 1-9, where
1=very normal and 9=very abnormal); (3) a cultural
acceptability judgment (“how acceptable or unacceptable
are [Andrew]’s current behaviors in U.S culture?” on a scale
of 1-9, where 1=completely acceptable and 9=completely
unacceptable); and (4) a statistical commonality judgment
(“how common or rare are [Andrew]’s current behaviors in
the U.S population?” on a scale of 1-9, where 1=very
common and 9=very rare).
The study was presented in three separate sections. In the
first section, the vignettes were presented sequentially. Half
of the participants made the diagnosis judgment first below
each vignette; the rest made the abnormality judgment first.
In the second section, the vignettes were re-presented with
the other question (abnormality or diagnosis) not presented
in the first section for that participant. In the third section,
the vignettes were re-presented and participants were asked
to make both the cultural acceptability judgment and
statistical commonality judgment below each vignette (order
counterbalanced between participants). People could edit
their responses, but once they advanced to the next vignette,
they could not go back; this was clearly stated up front in
the instructions. Finally, each clinician was asked about his
or her clinical background and experience (see above).

Results
Analyses were conducted at the ∝=.05 level except as
otherwise specified. There were no effects or interactions
involving vignette or question order, so these are not
discussed further.

bereavement condition relative to no event, but overall,
nearly 4 times as many clinicians gave lower diagnosis
ratings in the Non-bereavement condition than in the No
event control (N=46). The comparison between the two
Cause conditions approached significance (t[71] = 2.68; p =
.009; η2 = .09) at the Bonferroni-corrected alpha level,
either because of practice and familiarity with the DSM-IVTR or because clinicians truly find bereavement to be the
most compelling explanation for depression (or both).
However, the fact remains that both Cause conditions
elicited lower diagnosis ratings relative to both Control
conditions. Clinicians did not reliably differentiate between
the two Control conditions (t[71] = 2.32; p = .023; η2 = .07).

Figure 1. Diagnosis judgments. Higher bars indicate
stronger affirmation of depression diagnoses. Abbreviations:
Cause-BV (bereavement), Cause-NB (non-bereavement),
Control-FL (neutral filler), Control-NE (no event).

Abnormality Judgments

Diagnosis Judgments
A
(Condition:
Cause-Bereavement,
Cause-Nonbereavement, Control-Filler, and Control-No event)
repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a main effect of
Condition (F[3,213] = 24.61; MSE = 3.91; p < .001; η2 =
.26; Fig. 1). A set of six Bonferroni-corrected paired-sample
t-tests (∝=.008) was conducted to test whether the presence
of life events influenced diagnosis judgments, and to
determine whether clinicians distinguished between the two
Cause conditions (Bereavement versus Non-bereavement)
or between the two Control conditions (Filler or No event).
In all four pairwise comparisons between Cause conditions
and Control conditions, clinicians reliably advocated a
diagnosis of depression more strongly in the Control
conditions than in the Cause conditions (all t[71] > 3.72; all
p < .001; all η2 > .16), demonstrating that explanations
robustly influenced diagnosis judgments. Only 14 of the 72
clinicians were uninfluenced by the Non-bereavement life
event (relative to no event) in making their judgments, in
accord with DSM-IV-TR specifications. A small minority of
clinicians (N=12) gave higher diagnosis ratings in the Non-

Identical analyses were conducted for the abnormality
judgments. A repeated-measures ANOVA also uncovered a
main effect of Condition (F[3,213] = 121.52; MSE = 1.88; p
< .001; η2 = .63; Fig. 2). Across the same four pairwise
comparisons, clinicians judged behaviors to be less
abnormal in the Cause than Control conditions (all t[71] >
10.37; all p < .001; all η2 > .60). Clinicians did reliably
differentiate between the two Cause conditions (t[71] =
3.02; p = .004; η2 = .11); bereavement events made
depression symptoms seem less abnormal than did nonbereavement events. Clinicians did not differentiate between
the two Control conditions (t[71] = 0.46; p = .646; η2 < .01).

Cultural Acceptability Judgments
For cultural acceptability judgments, there was a main effect
of Condition (F[3,213] = 30.13; MSE = 2.23; p < .001; η2 =
.30; Fig. 3). Clinicians judged behaviors to be less
acceptable in U.S. culture in the Control than Cause
conditions (all t[71] > 4.87; all p < .001; all η2 > .25). As in
the Abnormality judgments, they differentiated between the

2785

Figure 2. Abnormality judgments. Higher bars indicate
judgments of greater abnormality.

Figure 4. Statistical commonality judgments. Higher bars
indicate judgments of greater statistical rarity of behaviors.

two Cause conditions, such that bereavement events
rendered depression symptoms more culturally acceptable
than did non-bereavement events (t[71] = 2.95; p = .004; η2
= .11). Clinicians did not distinguish between the two
Control conditions (p = 1.000).

Figure 3. Cultural acceptability judgments. Higher bars
denote judgments of greater unacceptability in U.S. culture.

Statistical Commonality Judgments
Finally, there was a main effect of Condition (F[3,213] =
17.25; MSE = 1.78; p < .001; η2 = .20) for statistical
commonality judgments (Fig. 4). Clinicians judged
behaviors to be more statistically rare in the Control than
Cause conditions for all four paired comparisons (all t[71] >
3.96; all p < .001; all η2 > .18). They did not reliably
differentiate between the two Cause conditions (t[71] =
1.36; p = .178; η2 = .03) or the two Control conditions (t[71]
= .07; p = 0.945; η2 < .01).

Discussion
Currently practicing, experienced clinical psychologists
were strongly influenced by explanations in making
diagnostic, abnormality, cultural acceptability, and
statistical likelihood judgments. Specifically, having a
plausible, negative life-event explanation for depressed
behaviors led clinicians to downgrade the appropriateness of
a disorder diagnosis and to perceive the behaviors as less
abnormal, more culturally acceptable, and more common.
These effects occurred across two different types of causal
life events (bereavement and non-bereavement) and two
different control events (neutral and no information).
Perhaps of greatest practical importance is our finding
that non-bereavement events and bereavement events both
reduced clinicians’ endorsement of a depression diagnosis,
overriding both DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 specifications. The
DSM system does not directly specify criteria for judging
cultural acceptability or statistical commonality per se; its
official recommendations explicitly pertain to diagnosis
(which, in turn, is simply a formalized definition of
abnormality). Yet explanations influenced clinicians’
straightforward diagnosis judgments, for which the contrast
with the DSM is clear. We take this finding to indicate that
the influence of explanation on categorization (diagnosis)
and other clinical judgments is strongly cognitively
compelling even in real-world categories when conflicting
influences are present. Thus, our data suggest that prior
results showing the influence of life-event explanations on
clinicians’ abnormality judgments are not likely to be the
product of demand characteristics of artificially manipulated
experiments. In our study, real-world requirements failed to
override the powerful contextual influence of explanation.

Implications for Clinical Science
As we previously mentioned, it has now been relatively well
established by clinical epidemiological work that the
symptomatology of depression does not differ when caused

2786

by bereavement versus non-bereavement life events
(Kendler et al., 2008; Wakefield et al., 2007). However,
there remains marked disagreement as to how such findings
should affect specifications for depression in the DSM-5.
One view is that the bereavement exclusion criterion for
depression should be expanded into a broader exclusion
criterion for strongly negative life events. Those subscribing
to this view argue that even the most extreme behaviors
may, in many cases, turn out to be culturally accepted,
normal and reasonable responses to tragic or traumatic
events (Horwitz & Wakefield, 2007; Lifton, 1988;
Wakefield et al., 2007), and that these behaviors cannot be
appropriately assessed in a vacuum. Proponents of this view
have argued that if a tragic life event precipitates a person’s
experience of depressive symptoms, then this experience is
quite normal in our society, and therefore should not be
labeled as disordered. This viewpoint appears to be
overwhelmingly shared by the clinicians in our study.
The major alternative view in the clinical literature is that
if the effects of bereavement and other negative life events
cannot be distinguished from one another, then the validity
of an exclusion criterion is no longer supported, and
therefore should be removed from the DSM (Kendler et al.,
2008). Again, interestingly, this viewpoint is reflected in the
proposed DSM-5 as of February 2010. The status of the
bereavement exclusion criterion in the definition of
depression has interesting implications for clinical
epidemiology. Removing it from the nosology, as the DSM5 work group has proposed, would significantly expand the
range and number of cases officially considered to be
clinical depression, whereas retaining it or even expanding it
to include other significant life events, as some theorists
have proposed (Horwitz, 2007; Wakefield et al., 2007),
would drastically reduce the range and number of cases,
potentially resulting in undertreatment (Maj, 2008).
As we have suggested, however, the intuitions of
clinicians themselves, to the degree that they affect their
actual diagnoses, may also play an important role in shifting
the apparent prevalence of depression, regardless of its
ultimate DSM-5 definition. Recently, Whooley (2010)
reported the practical consequences of what he called a
sociological ambivalence held by practicing clinicians
toward the DSM-IV-TR. His research demonstrated that
even clinicians who wish to adhere to the DSM-IV-TR in
principle nonetheless routinely implement informal
“workarounds” to allow them to apply their own clinical
judgment (e.g., essentially ignoring many of DSM-IV-TR’s
297 diagnostic categories, fudging DSM-IV-TR category
codes, and negotiating the diagnosis with the client),
effectively undermining the influence of the DSM-IV-TR in
practice. Given our results, we predict even greater future
circumvention of the DSM-5 in the diagnosis of depression.

Acknowledgments
We thank Jacob Walker for help with data entry. This
research was supported by NIMH Grants MH084047 and
MH081291 awarded to Nancy S. Kim. The content is solely

the responsibility of the authors, and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the NIH.

References
Ahn, W., Novick, L, & Kim, N. S. (2003). “Understanding
it makes it normal:” Causal explanations influence person
perception. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 746-752.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th Ed., text
revision). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2010). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th Ed., working
draft). Retrieved from http://www.dsm5.org
Horwitz, A. V. (2007). Transforming normality into
pathology: The DSM and the outcomes of stressful social
arrangements. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 48,
211-222.
Horwitz, A. V., & Wakefield, J. C. (2007). The loss of
sadness: How psychiatry transformed normal sorrow into
depressive disorder. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kendler, K. S., Myers, J., & Zisook, S. (2008). Does
bereavement-related major depression differ from major
depression associated with other stressful life events?
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 1449-1455.
Kim, N. S., & LoSavio, S. T. (2009). Causal explanations
affect judgments of the need for psychological treatment.
Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 82-91.
Lifton, R. J. (1988). Understanding the traumatized self. In
J. P. Wilson, Z. Harel, & B. Kahana (Eds.), Human
adaptation to extreme stress. New York: Plenum.
Maj, M. (2008). Depression, bereavement, and
“understandable” intense sadness: Should the DSM-IV
approach be revised? American Journal of Psychiatry,
165, 1373-1375.
Meehl, P. E. (1973). Psychodiagnosis: Selected papers.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Spitzer, R. L., Gibbon, M., Skodol, A. E., Williams J. B.
W., & First, M. B. (Eds.). (2001). DSM-IV-TR casebook.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Stein, D. J., Phillips, K. A., Bolton, D., Fulford, K. W. M.,
Sadler, J. Z., & Kendler, K. S. (2010). What is a
mental/psychiatric disorder? From DSM-IV to DSM-V.
Psychological Medicine, 40, 1759-1765.
Wakefield, J. (2011). Should uncomplicated bereavementrelated depression be reclassified as a disorder in the
DSM-5?. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease, 199(3),
203-208.
Wakefield, J. C., Schmitz, M. F., First, M. B., & Horwitz,
A. V. (2007). Extending the bereavement exclusion for
major depression to other losses. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64, 433-440.
Whooley, O. (2010). Diagnostic ambivalence: Psychiatric
workarounds and the DSM. Sociology of Health & Illness,
32, 452-469.
Zisook, S., Shear, K., Kendler, K. S. (2007). Validity of the
bereavement exclusion criterion for the diagnosis of
major depressive episode. World Psychiatry, 6, 102-107.

2787

