UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Functional Biases in Language Learning: Evidence from Word Order and Case-Marking
Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0194j2z3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Fedzechkina, Maryia
Jaeger, T. Florian
Newport, Elissa L.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Functional Biases in Language Learning: Evidence from Word Order and
Case-Marking Interaction
Maryia Fedzechkina (mashaf@bcs.rochester.edu), T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu),
Elissa L. Newport (newport@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract

efficient information transmission (Cancho, 2006; Piantadosi,
Tily, & Gibson, 2011) and that these properties reflect preferences of incremental production (Aylett & Turk, 2004;
Jaeger, 2010).

Why do languages share structural properties? The functionalist tradition has argued that languages have evolved to suit
the needs of their users. By what means functional pressures
may come to shape grammar over time, however, remains unknown. Functional pressures could affect adults’ production;
or they could operate during language learning. To date, these
possibilities have remained largely untested. We explore the
latter possibility, that functional pressures operate during language acquisition. In an artificial language learning experiment we investigate the trade-off between word order and case.
Flexible word order languages are potentially ambiguous if no
case-marking (or other cues) are employed to identify the doer
of the action. We explore whether language learners are biased against uncertainty in the mapping of form and meaning,
showing a tendency to make word order a stronger cue to the
intended meaning in no-case languages.
Keywords: Language acquisition; language universals; acquisition biases; word order; case-marking

Further evidence for the idea that functional pressures may
constrain the space of possible language structures comes
from studies showing a strong correlation between the phenomena categorically required by the grammar in some languages and speakers’ gradient preferences in other languages
where the grammar allows choices. One example comes from
the effects of animacy on word order. The animacy of the
grammatical object is an obligatory determinant of word order in the ditransitive construction in Sesotho (Morolong &
Hyman, 1977) and Mayali (Evans, 1997). The same factor
influences speakers’ gradient preference between the two permissible orders in ditransitive alternation in English (Bresnan,
Cueni, Nikitina, & Baayen, 2007).

Introduction

In short, there is evidence (a) that grammatical constraints
reflect gradient processing preferences and (b) that languages
have properties that facilitate language use (processing and
communication) compared to what would be expected if
functional pressures did not affect the shape of languages over
time. What remains unknown, however, is by what means
functional pressures come to shape grammar over time and
affect the transmission of language from generation to generation. The two broad logical possibilities are that functional
pressures throughout life affect language production in adults,
causing them to subtly change the input provided to the next
generation, or that functional pressures operate during language acquisition itself, biasing learners to deviate slightly
from the input they receive. Despite the long history of these
claims, direct tests of these two hypotheses have been rare.

Despite a variety of obvious differences, languages show
striking underlying commonalities at all levels of linguistic
organization (Dryer, 1992; Greenberg, 1963). Such regularities have been the subject of a long-standing debate (e.g.,
Christiansen & Chater, 2008; Chomsky, 1965; Evans &
Levinson, 2009): Are the observed phenomena shaped by
linguistic-specific constraints on structure and acquisition, or
do they result from cognitively and communicatively motivated constraints? The latter possibility is intriguing as it
would reduce the number of linguistic-specific and hence arbitrary properties that need to be accounted for and would
result in a more parsimonious explanation of cross-linguistic
regularities.
It has long been hypothesized that grammatical structures
that reduce the complexity associated with acquisition or processing of language tend to persist diachronically and hence
cross-linguistically (e.g., Bates & MacWhinney, 1982; Bever,
1970; Hawkins, 2004; Newport, 1981; Slobin, 1973). The
hypothesis that pressures on language use over time affect
what grammatical properties of a language survive is supported by evidence that existing languages have properties
that have relatively low average processing cost and high efficiency of information transfer. For example, dependency
length is known to correlate with processing difficulty. Evidence from English and German suggests that the average dependency length in these languages is close to the theoretical
minimum and far below what would be expected by chance
(Gildea & Temperley, 2010). Cross-linguistic evidence also
suggests that languages have properties that are beneficial for

We address the latter possibility, that functional pressures
affect language acquisition, using an artificial language learning paradigm in which we expose learners to experimentally designed miniature languages. Artificial language learning studies have several properties that make them ideally
suited for the current purpose. Generally, adult learners acquire the statistical patterns in the input and reproduce them
with roughly the same frequency as the input – ‘probabilitymatching’ (Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009). However, some
studies have shown that learners preferentially acquire typologically attested patterns (Finley & Badeker, 2008; Newport
& Aslin, 2004; Tily, Frank, & Jaeger, 2011). When learners deviate from the artificial language input they receive,
their productions reflect typologically more frequent patterns

318

(Culbertson & Smolensky, 2009).
These results suggest that the artificial language learning
paradigm can be used to study biases in language acquisition. However, previous work has not directly tested the prediction that these biases are functional in nature. Here we
test whether a functional pressure to avoid systemic ambiguity (i.e., systemic high uncertainty about the intended meaning) causes learners to deviate from the input in such a way
that it reduces the uncertainty about form to meaning mappings in the language. Such a deviation would introduce the
functional bias into the learned language, providing a vehicle
for language change over generations. While some degree of
temporary ambiguity is expected if languages are shaped by
the pressure of efficient communication (Cancho, 2006), systemic global ambiguity would hinder communication and is
indeed rarely (if at all) observed cross-linguistically.
As a simple test of our prediction, we explore the trade-off
between flexible word order and case-marking. We expose
different groups of participants to two artificial languages that
have flexible word order but differ in the presence of casemarking on the object. If language learners indeed have a bias
against systemic ambiguity and case-marking is not available, word order should become a stronger cue to the intended
meaning.

their biases in acquisition. The 10 verbs in the language were
divided into four classes approximating verb subcategorization constraints found in natural languages (see Table 1).
Table 1: Verb classes used in the languages.
Number of verbs associated with dominant word order
100%
83%
50%
0%
3
3
2
2
The assignment of the verbs to the verb classes was counterbalanced between the participants to prevent any accidental
associations between a verb and a particular bias class.

Method

Figure 1: Still images of two sample animations from the
experiment.

Participants
Nineteen adult monolingual native speakers of English participated in the experiment. All were undergraduate students or
recent graduates from universities in Rochester. Participants
were paid daily for their participation and received a bonus
upon completion of the entire study.

The two languages differed in the presence of casemarking on the object. In Language 1 no objects were casemarked; in Language 2 all objects were case-marked. Subjects were never case-marked. Thus, all sentences in the nocase input language were globally ambiguous. For example,
in the no-case language, the two scenes shown in Figure 1
could be described as either Flugit glim daf (SOV) or Glim
flugit daf (OSV). In the case language, however, the patient
was always unambiguously identified by the accusative casemarker kah, as in Flugit glim kah daf (SOV) or Glim kah
flugit daf (OSV).

Description of the two Languages
Lexicon Nouns The two languages used in the experiment contained 6 human nouns: flugit (MOUNTIE), glim
(CHEF), melnawg (REFEREE), norg (CONDUCTOR), bliffen
(HUNTER), and zub (BANDIT). There were no lexical restrictions on the nouns: Each of them occurred once in the Subject
and Object position with each of the verbs.
Verbs There were 10 verbs that denoted various transitive actions: shen (CHOP), daf (HUG), kleidum (HEADBUTT),
slergin (KICK), jentif (KNOCK OVER), blerfee (PICK UP),
zamper (POKE), prog (PUNCH), geed (ROCK), mawg (TAP).
Case-marker The case language had an accusative casemarker kah that marked the object of the action.

Prediction
Given the design of our language, learners have two ways to
reduce ambiguity: They can take advantage of verb-specific
information and regularize word order (i.e., make variable
word order more consistent and regular) within a verb class,
or they can regularize word order across verb classes. As a
first step, we predict that in the absence of case-marking, participants will be more likely to regularize word order in the
language overall. In contrast, if case-marking is available and
language users use it as a cue to the meaning of the sentence,
then this should limit word order regularization and learners
should acquire greater word order variation.

Grammar Both languages had flexible word order. SOV
word order was dominant and occurred in 63% of the input
sentences; OSV was the minority word order and occurred
in 37% of the input sentences. Within these overall percentages, a system of verb-specific biases was introduced into the
language to increase the complexity of the system. Based on
previous work (Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009), we hypothesized that a more complex and irregular system would limit
the learners’ probability matching behavior and would reveal

Procedure
Participants were shown short computer-generated videos depicting transitive actions (cf. Figure 1). Each video was

319

Results

accompanied by a short aural description in the novel language. The sentences were created by concatenating prerecorded single words normalized for duration, pitch and intensity. This procedure ensured that the scene descriptions in
the two languages were identical except for the case-marker
kah and that no other cues (e.g., intonation) were available to
identify the doer of the action.
Participants were trained and tested on one of the languages over four consecutive days. The same procedure was
followed on days 1-3, and a slightly different procedure was
adopted for the final day of training.

Several behavioral measures were collected. To assess the
degree of word order regularization, we scored participants’
word order choices in production and comprehension. Reaction times were recorded for the forced choice comprehension test to investigate the differences in processing the two
languages. Mistakes made in production were scored as well.

Accuracy of Acquisition
Both languages were acquired with a high degree of accuracy, providing evidence that the task was feasible. The total
number of grammatical mistakes (i.e., incorrect use of casemarker or word order) was below 5%; lexical mistakes (such
as using an incorrect noun or verb) were also rare (around 2%
across all days of training).

Days 1-3
Noun Training Participants viewed static pictures of the
characters and heard their names in the novel language. The
initial exposure was followed by a series of short tests where
participants were asked to choose the character whose name
they heard from a group of characters and to name the character shown on the screen. Feedback on performance was
provided after each trial.

Word Order Regularization
We assessed the effect of the presence of the case-marker on
the extent of word order regularization in comprehension and
production. Since both word orders are acceptable in comprehension in the no-case language, we scored the participants’
deviation from verb-specific biases. All analyses presented
below are conducted on the previously unseen scenes containing familiar verbs; scenes containing novel verbs presented
on Day 4 were analyzed separately. The effects reported below also hold when both categories of items are collapsed.

Sentence Presentation Participants viewed 60 short videos
depicting transitive actions, one at a time, and heard an accompanying sentence describing the event in the novel language. They were instructed to repeat each sentence aloud
to facilitate learning. On day 1, participants could replay the
first 12 scenes as many times as they wished, to familiarize
themselves with the language; no repetitions were allowed at
any other time.

Word Order Regularization in Comprehension We used
a mixed logit model (Jaeger, 2008) to analyze the extent
of word order regularization on the final day of training,
given the presence of case-marking in the language and verbspecific information. We also included the maximum random
effect structure for subjects and items justified by the data.
There was a significant negative effect of case on word order
regularization (β =-.7, z=-2.07, p<.05). In the case condition,
participants’ word order choices closely mirrored the input
they received, suggesting that they relied on case-marking as
a cue to the meaning of the sentence. In the absence of casemarking, learners tended to generalize the dominant word order. This tendency appeared most strongly when the majority
word order was most variable in the input language (i.e., when
the verb-specific constraints allowed essentially free choice
of word order), as shown in Figure 2.
The pattern of differential word order regularization is also
evident in participants’ treatment of the two novel verbs presented on Day 4, one of which was heard exclusively with
the SOV word order and the other with the OSV word order. The learners of the case language rely on case-marking
in interpreting the meaning of the novel scenes and treat the
novel verbs as familiar SOV-only and OSV-only verbs (97%
and 11% SOV responses respectively). However, the learners
of the no-case language use the overall dominant word order
for both verbs around 90% of the time.
We also investigated word order preferences of individual
participants (see Figure 3). Learners of the case language
consistently chose the dominant word order in around 60%

Noun Test Participants viewed static pictures of the characters (once for each character) and named them. They received
feedback from the experimenter on their performance.
Comprehension Test In each trial, participants heard a
novel sentence in the language and were shown two scenes in
which the actor and patient were reversed. They were asked
to choose the scene that matched the sentence. Reaction times
were recorded. All scenes (60 total) contained novel combinations of familiar nouns and verbs.
Production Test Participants were shown a novel short
transitive scene and were instructed to describe it in the language learned during the experiment, using the provided verb
prompt. All scenes (60 total) contained novel combinations
of familiar nouns and verbs, different from the ones used in
the comprehension test.
Day 4 On the final day of training the comprehension and
production tests included 12 additional scenes depicting previously unseen actions. These scenes were introduced to assess participants’ word order choice for novel actions. To
avoid effects of fast implicit learning of verb-specific biases
for these novel verbs through exposure during the comprehension test, the order of the tests was reversed: Participants
performed the production test first and then were presented
with the comprehension test. Apart from these changes the
procedure remained the same.

320

% dominant word order (SOV)

of the no-case language consistently generalized the majority
word order. There was no clear pattern for the case language:
Learners sometimes overgeneralized (e.g., for equi-biased
and OSV-only verbs, see Figure 4), but they sometimes undergeneralized as well (see SOV-only and SOV-biased verbs
in Figure 4).
The learners of both types of languages behaved similarly
on newly encountered verbs: They all used the overall dominant word order more frequently with these actions.
The word order preferences of individual subjects differed
depending on the condition as well. Most learners of the
no-case language consistently used the dominant word order more frequently than it was present in the input. We
also observed two ‘super-regularizers’ (same as the ‘superregularizers’ discussed above, cf. Figure 3), who essentially
fixed word order in their productions. No such word order
regularizers were present among the learners of the case language. There was more spread in word order consistency in
the case condition: While one half of the participants tended
to generalize the dominant word order, the other half tended
to under-generalize. These behaviors suggest that the presence of case-marking limits word order regularization and allows word order flexibility in the language.

Language
Case
No Case
Input

100
80
60
40
20
0

96

92

100

SOV−only

84

86

83

55

SOV−83%

78

50

5

SOV−50%

32

0

OSV−only

Verb bias

Figure 2: Word order regularization in comprehension. Numbers at the bottom of the bars represent condition means.

Language
Case
No case

100

% dominant word order (SOV)

% dominant word order (SOV)

of their responses, which closely mirrors its input frequency
(63%). This pattern of behavior suggests that the learners acquired case-marking and were using it as a cue to the meaning
of the sentence. Learners of the no-case language behaved
differently. First, there were more individual differences
in this condition: Only 2 participants probability-matched,
while the majority of participants generalized the dominant
word order. We also observed 3 ‘super-regularizers’ in this
condition, who had a strong preference for the dominant word
order and used it in about 90% of their responses.

80
60

80
60
40
20
0

40

Language
Case
No Case
Input

100

77

96

100

SOV−only

76

88

83

SOV−83%

61

71

50

SOV−50%

27

26

0

OSV−only

Verb bias
20

Figure 4: Word order regularization in production. Numbers
at the bottom of the bars represent condition means.

re

jh

mvb

jb

kf

mg

mc

jl

ss

sd

jc

mm

tm

oe

sb

cm

st

mb

aa

0
Subject

Processing Advantage of Case In principle, grammatical
functions can be signaled using a single cue, but most languages employ several redundant cues, including word order
and case-marking. Can several cues to meaning be advantageous for language processing? To address this question we
used a linear mixed-effects model to predict the adjusted2 response time given the presence of case, chosen word order,
and bias-consistency.

Figure 3: Individual word order preferences in comprehension.
Word Order Regularization in Production The betweenlanguage mixed model analyses of Day 4 performance revealed a marginal effect of case on word order regularization
(β = -1.1, z=-1.74, p<.09). No learners exactly reproduced
the input frequencies of the two word orders1 . The learners

2 Since in our design, all sentences in the case language had the
same duration as the sentences in the no-case language + the duration of the case-maker kah, we subtracted the duration of the casemarker from the response times for all learners of the case language
to make the performance across conditions comparable. There was
no effect of case on raw reaction times since our participants generally responded after hearing the stimulus till the end.

1 All

participants achieved 100% accuracy on the vocabulary test
on Day 4. Occasionally, they mispronounced the name of one of the
two referents (in less than 0.3% of the trials). Given their low frequency and participants’ perfect performance on the vocabulary test,
the trials containing pronunciation errors were not excluded from the
analysis.

321

There was no effect of case on reaction times. This null
effect is unlikely to be due to insufficient power or lack of
sensitivity of the timed forced choice task we employed in
the comprehension tests. We found that learners exhibited
processing effects for the artificial languages that resemble
those found in natural languages (e.g. Trueswell, Tanenhaus,
& Kello, 1993): Participants were significantly faster to respond if the word order they chose was congruent with verbspecific biases.
Further analysis revealed that the observed fast reaction
times for the no-case language were primarily driven by the
same three ‘super-regularizers’ who essentially fixed word order (see Figure 3). These learners seem to have a different hypothesis about the language: They responded to stimuli significantly faster, presumably because they added fixed word
order to the language and thus had little or no uncertainty
about the form-meaning mapping. Once these participants
were removed from the analysis, the effect of case-marking
reached significance (β = -.1, t=-1.53, p=.055).

ferential word order regularization is observed depending on
the condition.
Our participants systematically generalize towards SOV
word order, but we do not observe any learners who consistently use OSV word order in the majority of their productions. Several factors can explain this pattern of behavior. First, SOV word order is the dominant word order in
our language, and learners are regularizing the most frequent
patterns in the input. Second, since our participants are native English speakers and a subject before object (SO) word
order is typical in English, this might be a partial reflection
of the native language bias (cf. Tily et al., 2011). However,
SO is a cross-linguistically preferred word order as well, so
the observed tendency to generalize the majority word order
could indicate a cognitive bias favoring SO ordering. Ongoing follow-up experiments are teasing apart these factors by
investigating the learning of languages with the inverse word
order patterns (e.g. OSV 63%, SOV 37%).
Our findings suggest that at least some learning biases are
functional in nature. The participants in our experiments
showed a bias against systemic ambiguity in the language and
more readily learned the structures that reduced uncertainty
in the form-meaning mapping. These acquisition biases are
reflected in typologically recurrent grammatical patterns and
might account for structural similarities found in natural languages. Our participants do not induce cross-linguistically
unattested structures, but they acquire and generalize towards
typologically frequent patterns in the language they learn:
They tend to regularize word order in the absence of casemarking, but maintain a more flexible word order when case
is available. This behavior mirrors natural phenomena, such
as the loss of free word order from Old to Modern English.
Old English was a highly inflected free word order language
that gradually lost case-marking and acquired relatively fixed
word order during its transition to Modern English.
Having several redundant cues to signal grammatical relationships is potentially advantageous for processing. We find,
in particular, that case-marking provides a processing advantage for languages with flexible word order, presumably because it offers an earlier disambiguation point: Stimuli in the
case language are processed significantly faster. However,
this might not be true for languages with fixed word order:
The participants who fixed the word order in the no-case language were just as quick to respond as the learners of the case
language. This points to a hypothesis articulated most clearly
by Hawkins (2004) that ease of processing is a factor in typological variation.
Our experiment has explored one specific prediction of the
functionalist account, but there are several outstanding issues
which we will investigate in follow-up work. First, we have
only investigated the most simple strategy of ambiguity reduction in the absence of case-marking – overall word oder
regularization in the language. It is, however, possible that
language learners employ more sophisticated ambiguity reduction techniques and take advantage of the system of verb-

Discussion
We find that case-marking and word order interact during acquisition. If case-marking is present in the language, it serves
as a strong cue to the meaning of the sentence and limits word
order regularization. In the case language, the case-marker
was obligatory in our setup and always unambiguously identified the doer and patient of the action, rendering word order
a less important cue to acquire and allowing more freedom in
word order variation.
However, if grammatical functions are signaled exclusively
by word order, as in our no-case language, flexible word order
does not serve as a sufficiently informative cue to meaning.
Put differently, the uncertainty about form-meaning mappings (or, more formally, the entropy of the distribution of
possible meanings given a sentence) is much higher in the
no-case input language than in the case input language. If
learners are biased to reduce excessive uncertainty of this
type, they can do so by regularizing word order - either in
verb-specific ways or, as tested here, over the entire language.
Indeed, in the absence of case-marking, learners tend to gradually give up word order flexibility and generalize the dominant word order in both comprehension and (to a lesser extent) in production. This effect is partially driven by a group
of learners of the no-case language who almost completely fix
word order. One possibility to be addressed in future work is
whether such ‘super-regularizers’ are more likely in the nocase language.
The observed tendency to regularize word order more in
the no-case language is not due to arbitrary mistakes since
the participants in the experiment did learn verb biases: Word
order preferences in the production of both languages are
clearly conditioned on verb class (cf. Figure 2 and 4). Our
results also cannot be attributed to the fact that the participants’ native language is a language with a relatively fixed
word order (English), since this would not explain why dif-

322

specific biases. We address this possibility in ongoing work.
Second, in the no-case language used in this study, all sentences were potentially globally ambiguous. However, in
natural languages global ambiguities are rare – at least once
context is taken into consideration. In an ongoing experiment we investigate how learners reduce uncertainty when
it is limited to certain types of sentences, as is more common
cross-linguistically. We have so far addressed the question of
whether language learners reduce systemic ambiguity during
language acquisition, but this is only one of many functional
biases that have been proposed in the literature.

Culbertson, J., & Smolensky, P. (2009). Testing Greenberg’s Universal 18 using an artificial language learning
paradigm. In Proceedings of NELS 40.
Dryer. (1992). The Greenbergian word order correlations.
Language, 68, 81-183.
Evans, N. (1997). Role or cast? Noun incorporation and
complex predicates in Mayali. In J. Bresnan & P. Sells
(Eds.), Complex predicates (p. 397-430). Stanford.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Beh. and Brain Sciences, 32, 429-492.
Finley, S., & Badeker, W. (2008). Substantive biases for
vowel harmony. In J. Bishop (Ed.), WCCFL 27 (p. 168176).
Gildea, D., & Temperley, D. (2010). Do grammars minimize
dependency length? Cognitive Science, 32(2), 286-310.
Greenberg, J. (1963). Universals of language. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Hawkins, J. A. (2004). Efficiency and complexity in grammars. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. (2009). Getting it right by
getting it wrong: When learners change languages. Cognitive Psychology, 59, 30-66.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology Psych., 61(1), 23-62.
Morolong, M., & Hyman, L. M. (1977). Animacy, objects
and clitics in Sesotho. Studies in African Ling., 8, 199-218.
Newport, E. (1981). Constraints on structure: Evidence
from American Sign Language and language learning. In
W. A. Collins (Ed.), Aspects of the development of competence. Minnesota symposia on child psychology (Vol. 14).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newport, E., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a distance:
I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word
lengths are optimized for efficient communication. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 108(9), 3526-3529.
Slobin, D. I. (1973). Cognitive prerequisites for the development of grammar. In C. A. Ferguson & D. I. Slobin (Eds.),
Studies of child language development. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.
Tily, H., Frank, M. C., & Jaeger, T. F. (2011). The learnability
of constructed languages reflects typological patterns. In
Proceedings of CogSci 2011.
Trueswell, J., Tanenhaus, M., & Kello, C. (1993). Verbspecific constraints in sentence processing: Separating effects of lexical preference from garden-paths. J. of Exp.
Psych.: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 528-553.

Conclusions
We have investigated the role of functional biases in language
acquisition, focusing on the trade-off between flexible word
order and case. We find that word order and case-marking interact during acquisition, with learners relying on one of these
cues to reduce ambiguity. In the absence of case-marking,
learners tend to generalize the dominant word order in both
comprehension and in production, suggesting a bias to reduce
systemic ambiguity in the language. When case is present, it
limits word order regularization since learners use case to resolve ambiguity and word order becomes a less important cue
to meaning.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by NSF grant BCS-0845059,
an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship and a Wilmot Award to TFJ and
by NIH grant DC00167 to ELN. We thank Colleen Dolan and
Keryn Bernstein for their help collecting subject data.

References
Aylett, M. P., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy hypothesis: A functional explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence and duration in spontaneous speech. Lang. Speech, 47(1), 31-56.
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1982). Functionalist approaches to grammar. In E. Wanner & L. Gleitman (Eds.),
Language acquisition: The state of the art. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bever, T. G. (1970). The cognitive basis for linguistic structures. In J. R. Hayes (Ed.), Cognition and development of
language (p. 279-362). New York: Wiley.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, R. H. (2007).
Predicting the dative alternation. In G. Boume, I. Kraemer,
& J. Zwarts (Eds.), Cognitive foundations of interpretation.
Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences.
Cancho, R. Ferrer-i. (2006). When language breaks into
pieces. A conflict between communication through isolated signals and language conflict between communication
through isolated signals and language. Biosystems, 242253.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behav Brain Sci, 31, 489–509.

323

