UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generating 3D Spatial Descriptions from Stereo Vision Using SIFT Keypoint Clouds
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7227j0xv
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Skubic, Marjorie
Blisard, Samuel N.
Luke, Robert H.
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

   Generating 3D Spatial Descriptions from Stereo Vision Using SIFT
                                              Keypoint Clouds
                                                  Marjorie Skubic
                                                  University of Missouri
                                                Samuel N. Blisard
                                                  University of Missouri
                                                Robert H. Luke III
                                                  University of Missouri
                                                   Erik E. Stone
                                                  University of Missouri
                                                Derek T. Anderson
                                                  University of Missouri
                                                  James M. Keller
                                                  University of Missouri
Abstract: To facilitate more natural interaction with robots, we have been investigating an approach for generating
descriptions of objects in a scene, using point cloud models built with the Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT).
The 3D models are constructed from 24 images taken from different viewing angles. For each recognized object, the
model is placed into an internal representation of the environment, at the recognized location. The object keypoints
are then projected onto horizontal and vertical planes. The convex hulls of the projected points are computed in
each plane and used as boundary representations for computing the Histograms of Forces (HoF). Features from the
HoF are then used in a system of fuzzy rules to generate descriptions using spatial referencing language, e.g., the
cup is on the table to the right of the lamp. Support is included for right, left, front, behind, on top, above, below,
inside, contains, and near.
                                                           2310

