UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Geographic Event Conceptualization: Where Spatial and Cognitive Sciences Meet

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/155877qv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Li, Rui
Klippel, Alexander
Yang, Jinlong

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Geographic Event Conceptualization: Where Spatial and Cognitive Sciences Meet
Rui Li, Alexander Klippel, Jinlong Yang
{rui.li, klippel, jinlong}@psu.edu
GeoVISTA Center, Department of Geography
302 Walker Building, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA
Abstract
We present the results of two behavioral experiments on
the conceptualization of geographic events (here, the
movements of hurricanes). The focus is on juxtaposing
two types of presentation: static versus animated
trajectories. We designed 72 animated and 72 static icons
of the same hurricane movements and asked participants
to group them. Within each condition we distinguished
paths of hurricanes using topological equivalence
classes. Topology allows for differentiating ending
relations that are potentially relevant for event
conceptualization (Regier, 2007). Results show that
motion matters. Participants constructed static icon
groups more distinctly and focused more on ending
relations. The presentation mode additionally influenced
linguistic descriptions. These findings contribute to
understanding and formalizing geographic event
conceptualization.
Keywords: Category construction; geographic event
conceptualization; topological relations; movement
patterns.

Introduction
Event cognition is addressed in several research fields
and as such, this article caters to an interdisciplinary
community. Cognitive scientists address questions of
event segmentation (Zacks, et al., 2001), the role of
causal relationships (Wolff, 2008), or how events are
related to language (Talmy, 1988); spatial scientists are
interested in formally characterizing movement patterns
(Gottfried,
2008),
analyzing
spatio-temporal
information (Yuan & Hornsby, 2008), and more
recently, using formal characterization to ground the
semantics of movement patterns by formally capturing
those aspects of movement patterns which are
meaningful to a cognitive agent (Kurata & Egenhofer,
2009). Topology, as one aspect of the spatial
characterization of events, has long been a topic of
interest to both spatial science and cognitive science
communities. This article uses a topological framework
to provide a formalized understanding of geographic
event conceptualization, and discusses topology from a
multidisciplinary perspective.
The importance of topology is based on two main
aspects. First, topological characterizations are
qualitative and offer an abstract-level characterization
of spatial information, which is potentially relevant to
higher-level cognition, as knowledge is created through

abstraction. Second, topology offers a formal basis for
identifying invariants in spatial information. These
invariants might be the very basis of event cognition.
One critical aspect in event cognition is coherence,
which allows for the determination of meaningful
units/segments of events (Tversky, et al., 2008).
Identifying topologically equivalent events (or parts
thereof) may therefore contribute to rendering the
notion of coherence more precise.
In this article we focus on geographic events and
more specifically on the paths of hurricane movements.
From a formal, topological perspective, path
characteristics can be captured using either of the two
most prominent topological frameworks in spatial
information science, the region connection calculus,
RCC (Randell, et al., 1992), or Egenhofer’s intersection
models (Egenhofer & Franzosa, 1991). An assumption
we need to make is that both entities (figure or moving
entity, and ground or reference entity) are spatially
extended (see Figure 1). The central question that we
address here is whether the mode of presentation
(dynamic
or
static)
results
in
different
conceptualizations of this geographic event.
This question has been addressed in multidisciplinary
search efforts; for example, Tversky and collaborators
(2002) questioned whether animation facilitates
learning and information processing; Gentner and
Boroditsky (2001) found that learning verbs poses more
difficulties than learning names of objects; and, closely
related to our research here, Maguire and collaborators
(in press) found that geometric path characteristics are
used differently to segment events depending on the
presentation mode (static or dynamic).
To operationalize this research question from a
topological perspective, we employ a modification of
the endpoint hypothesis (Regier, 1996; Regier &
Zheng, 2007). The essence of this hypothesis states that
a focus (by a cognitive agent) is placed on ending
relations in processing spatio-temporal information.
Within the framework of topological characterization,
ending relations of events can be formally characterized
by different topological relations (as identified by the
RCC or intersection models).
Here we focus exclusively on topological relations
and the mode of presentation while excluding other
aspects such as shape or speed changes. Our goal is to
use a multi-methodological, formally grounded

3168

approach to demonstrate how the mode of presentation
affects event conceptualization.

Participants
40 undergraduate students, 20 per condition (mean
age=21.65, 9 females in the dynamic condition and
mean age=19.80, 11 females in the static condition). All
participants received a cash reimbursement of $10.

Methods
Materials
We followed a design from our previous experiments
(Klippel & Li, 2009). This design is inspired by the
endpoint hypothesis (Regier, 1996; Regier & Zheng,
2007) and we distinguished movement patterns on the
basis of the topological relations at the end of the
movement. The basis for this distinction is a conceptual
neighborhood graph, CNG (Freksa, 1992), that is
derived from eight topologically distinguished spatial
relations as part of either Egenhofer’s intersection
models (Egenhofer & Franzosa, 1991) or the region
connection calculus, RCC (Randell, et al., 1992). This
conceptual neighborhood graph is shown in Figure 1.
We created eight icons (both static and dynamic) for
each of the following nine topological equivalence
classes derived from paths through the conceptual
neighborhood graph:
 DC1 – the hurricane does not make a landfall (CNG
path: DC);
 EC1 – the hurricane kind of bumps into the peninsula
(CNG path: DC-EC);
 PO1 – the hurricane just reaches land such that half
of the hurricane is on land and the other half is over
water (CNG path: DC-EC-PO);
 TPP1 – the hurricane makes landfall but is still
‘connected’ to the water (CNG path: DC-EC-POTPP);
 NTPP – the hurricane makes landfall and is
completely over land (CNG path: DC-EC-PO-TPPNTPP);
 TPP2 – same as TPP1 but the hurricane nearly made
it out to the water again (CNG path: DC-EC-POTPP-NTPP-TPP);
 PO2 – same as PO1 but on the other side of the
peninsula (CNG path: DC-EC-PO-TPP-NTPP-TPPPO);
 EC2 – same as EC1 but on the other side of the
Peninsula (CNG path: DC-EC-PO-TPP-NTPP-TPPPO-EC);
 DC2 – same as DC1 but has crossed the peninsula
completely (CNG path: DC-EC-PO-TPP-NTPP-TPPPO-EC-DC).
Within each icon the starting and ending locations of
the hurricanes were randomized without violating
topological information. In total, two sets of 72 icons
each were created showing either an animation of a
hurricane or a static image in which a hurricane symbol
demarcated the ending relation and a line represented
the trajectory (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Conceptual neighborhood graph (left) and
examples of icons representing the same topological
relations (DC2) in the two conditions (right).

Procedure
Both experiments were carried out as group
experiments in a computer lab. The lab was equipped
with 16 Dell desktops (Model: Optiplex 755, CPU: Duo
E8200, 2.66GHz) with 24” widescreen LCD monitors.
We used view blocks to make sure that participants
could only see their own screens. Each participant
performed two tasks: a category construction task and a
linguistic labeling task.

Figure 2. Top: initial interface, bottom: ongoing (mock)
experiment.

3169

We used our custom-made grouping software
CatScan that allows for the presentation of both static
and dynamic stimuli (see Figure 2). All 72 hurricane
icons in each condition were initially displayed on the
left side of the screen. Participants were required to
create groups on the right side of the screen. After
creating at least one empty group they were able to drag
icons from the left side into a group on the right side.
They were explicitly advised that there was no right or
wrong answer regarding either the number of groups or
which icons belong to which group. They also had the
opportunity to move icons between groups, move icons
back to the left side, or delete whole groups. The main
grouping experiment was preceded by a warm up task
(sorting animals) to acquaint participants with the
software. Participants performed a linguistic labeling
task upon finishing the main grouping experiment.
They were presented with the groups they created and
provided two linguistic descriptions: a short name of no
more than five words, and a longer description detailing
their rationale for placing icons into a particular group.

these three methods shows that their results are
comparable. Here we represent the clustering analysis
using Ward’s method; the results of using complete
linkage and average linkage are posted on our website
(http://www.cognitivegiscience.psu.edu/cogsci2011).
DC1 DC2

EC1 EC2

PO1 PO2 NTPP TPP1 TPP2

TPP2
TPP1
NTPP
PO2
PO1

Hurricane
dynamic

EC2
EC1
DC2
DC1
DC1 DC2

Results

TPP2

The category construction of participants is recorded
in individual similarity matrices. In these similarity
matrices a value of ‘0’ indicates that two icons of a pair
of icons are not placed into the same group.
Correspondingly, a value of ‘1’ indicates two icons are
placed into the same group. The total number of cells in
each similarity matrix is 5184 (2556 cells after
removing redundancy). We created an overall similarity
matrix (OSM) by summing over individual matrices of
all 20 participants in each condition. Similarity in the
OSM is represented by a number ranging from 0 to 20,
where 0 indicates the least similarity between two icons
and 20 indicates the highest similarity between two
icons. Figure 3 shows a visualization of the raw
similarities using a tool we implemented called Matrix
Visualizer (Klippel, et al., accepted). We started our
analysis by examining the patterns in Matrix Visualizer.
Darker regions in each matrix indicate that
corresponding icons (intersection of row and column)
were considered similar by more participants. For
example, cells at the intersection of EC2 and DC2 in
the dynamic condition are darker than that in the static
condition. This indicates that there are more
participants in the dynamic condition who grouped
icons of EC2 and DC2 together.
Next, we used cluster analysis to analyze the
similarities with the goal to reveal natural groupings.
We used Ward’s method, average linkage, and
complete linkage (Romesburg, 2004). Clatworthy and
collaborators (2005) suggested comparing different
cluster analysis methods in order to cross validate the
interpretation of clustering results. The comparison of

TPP1

EC1 EC2

PO1 PO2 NTPP TPP1 TPP2

NTPP
PO2
PO1
EC2

Hurricane
static

EC1
DC2
DC1

Figure 3. Similarity matrices for dynamic and static
presentation. The darker the color, the more similar two
icons (at the intersection of rows and columns) are.
We found that the category constructions are
different between static and dynamic presentation (see
Figure 4). In the static condition, overall, we found that
participants created more distinct groups with the
topologically distinguished paths, i.e., the topological
ending relations are clearly separable. A good example
is the ending relations EC2 and DC2, which are barely
distinguishable (in fact mixed) in the dynamic group,
but separated in the static group. Likewise, we find a
change in the similarities between individual
topological equivalence classes and how and when they
are grouped together. Most strikingly, in the dynamic
condition, EC1 and PO1 are grouped together before
DC1 is added. In contrast, in the static condition, the
two non-overlapping ending relations DC1 and EC1 are

3170

grouped together, while PO1 is considered closer to the
proper part relations (TPP1 and NTPP).
Following the cluster analysis of grouping patterns,
we looked into the actual numbers of participants who
placed icons of the same topological equivalence class
into the same group. Using the tool KlipArt
(Clatworthy, et al., 2005), we counted the number of
participants who placed a) all icons of the same
topological equivalence class (Figure 5) and b) icons
that are conceptual neighbors into the same group
(Figure 6).
A paired samples t-test shows a statistically
significant difference between static and dynamic
presentation. Icons in the static condition are grouped
together more often than are the corresponding icons in
the dynamic condition (dynamic: M = 10.22, SD = 2.22;
static: M = 12.89, SD=2.37; t(8) = -6.532, p<0.001).
This indicates that the mode of presentation influences
the conceptualization of events.

condition. In contrast, proper part relations are more
similar in the dynamic condition. At the end of the
movement patterns (EC2&DC2), differences become
smaller. Please note that this analysis is rigorous in the
sense that only participants who place all icons
belonging to a topological equivalence class are
counted, while cluster analysis takes into account
individual icon similarities.

Figure 5. Number of participants who grouped all icons
of the same topological ending relation.

Figure 4. Results of cluster analysis.
We were also interested in seeing how conceptual
neighbors were grouped. We paired topological
equivalence classes that are conceptual neighbors, and
counted the number of participants who grouped them
together. The paired equivalence classes are:
DC1&EC1, EC1&PO1, PO1&TPP1, TPP1&NTTP,
NTTP&TPP2, TPP2&PO2, PO2&EC2, and EC2&DC2
(Figure 6).
Overall, we did not find significant differences
between the two conditions. However, the results offer
additional insights into the interpretation of the results
of the cluster analysis and Matrix Viewer. For example,
DC1&EC1 are conceptually closer (they have a higher
number) in the static condition than in the dynamic
condition. Likewise, the pair PO1&TPP1 is considered
more similar in the static condition than in the dynamic

Figure 6. Number of participants who grouped all icons
in the same conceptual neighbor pairs
Finally, we investigated the linguistic descriptions
that participants provided through the software
AntConc (Anthony, 2006). We looked at the top ten
most frequently used words in the short names. Within
these words, we eliminated the figure (hurricane) and
ground (peninsula) to see how participants used words
to describe the relations between them. The remaining
word frequencies show some interesting differences in
how categories (groups) were labeled and linguistically
characterized within each condition. The three most
frequently used words are shown in Table 1. We found

3171

that while participants in the static condition focused on
elements present in the scene as such, for example, the
coast or the visualized trajectory (path), participants in
the dynamic condition focused on the actual movement
and used verbs more frequently.
Table 1. Word frequency in short names.
“coast”
“path”
“stops”
Dynamic
2
0
8
Static
25
21
0
We then investigated the long descriptions, which
showed similar patterns. We used the same tool to rank
the frequency of words used. Participants in both
conditions used similar numbers of words related to
directions (e.g. left, right, north, south, west, east: 51
times in the dynamic condition and 62 times in static
condition). Participants in the static condition, however,
used the word “path” (43 times) and “coast” (28 times)
more often compared to participants in the dynamic
condition (5 and 14 times, respectively). Moreover,
participants in the dynamic condition used verbs (e.g.
stop, end land, touch, or cross) 70 times while
participants in the static condition used a verb “located”
(14 times) only to describe hurricanes.

Discussion
The results of these two experiments extend current
research on the conceptualization of events in a number
of ways. We carried out a comparison of statically and
dynamically presented paths of hurricanes. Path
characteristics were systematically varied based on
formal theories that have developed in spatial
information science (and artificial intelligence). This
combination allows us to render the influence of the
presentation mode more precise.
Through a multi-methodological approach, we found
primarily that topologically defined ending relations of
geographic movement patterns are important, but that
they are salient to different degrees. Not every
topological relation is cognitively salient (adequate
from a modeling perspective) to the same degree.
Additionally, we found that the static presentation of
paths (of events) adds a focus on ending relations and
strengthens topology as a criterion for distinguishing
and conceptualizing movement patterns.
These results contribute to the literature in the
domain of qualitative spatial and temporal reasoning
which relates formal and cognitive conceptualizations
of space. For example, research by Knauff et al. (1997)
showed that there is basically no difference between
topological equivalence classes when the entities in a
scene are a) static and b) simple geometric figures.
However, if there is both a dynamic and a semantic
context, such as in the experiments by Lu et al. (2009),
topological equivalence classes are combined into

larger (super-ordinate) categories. They found that
relations that do not overlap (DC and EC) are
distinguished from those that do overlap1.
Based on these findings, we suggest that a) a
semantic context changes the conceptualization of
spatial relations (both static and dynamic), and b) static
presentations of movement patterns place an additional
focus on the ending relation of a movement pattern.
Looking at the conceptualization of movement
patterns (static or dynamic) through linguistic analysis,
we can further corroborate that there are differences in
processing the same spatial and semantic information
depending on the presentation mode. While dynamic
presentations elicit linguistic descriptions that provide
accounts of actions, static presentations place a focus
on entities involved in a scene.

Conclusions
Research on the conceptualization of events has
become a focus in both the cognitive and the spatial
sciences. Now that computational developments allow
the use of dynamic events as stimuli, it becomes
possible to relate approaches in both areas. We consider
this combination mutually beneficial because spatial
information science offers formalisms that render
notions of spatial information precise, and (behavioral)
cognitive science allows for evaluating spatial
formalism. Hence, we can address questions on the
conceptualization of events and spatial configurations
more precisely as a basis for behavioral evaluations.
For example, the notion that topology is central to
human thought is omnipresent in the cognitive sciences.
Researchers such as Piaget and Inhelder (1948; 1967),
Klix (1971), Shaw (1974), and Johnson and Lakoff
(1980), to name just a few, intimately and explicitly
refer to topology as central to their theories. What this
means, however, can scientifically be answered only by
rendering the notion of topology precise, on the basis of
formal theories. We find that formal topology makes
more and richer distinctions than assumed in several
cognitive theories. Behavioral evaluations therefore
become necessary.
We also showed that the development of new tools
for data analysis and the integration of multiple
methods allows for an in-depth analysis of behavioral
data. We briefly discussed our approach that comprises
tools for data collection (CatScan) and data analysis
(MatrixViewer, KlipArt) with other tools such as
Clustan and AntConc.
Future research directions, suggested by both our
results and the literature discussed, should address the
influence of semantic contexts on conceptualizing
otherwise identical spatial events, the evaluation of
1

Allen’s (1991) temporal calculus used by Lu and
colleagues is isomorphic to the RCC used in this paper.

3172

other formalisms that could capture movement patterns
of single agents (Kurata & Egenhofer, 2009), and the
integration of further path characteristics (Maguire, et
al., in press).

References
Allen, J. (1991). Time and time again: The many ways
to represent time. International Journal of Intelligent
Systems, 6(4), 341-355.
Anthony, L. (2006). Developing a freeware,
multiplatform corpus analysis toolkit for the technical
writing classroom. Professional Communication,
IEEE Transactions on, 49(3), 275-286.
Clatworthy, J., Buick, D., Hankins, M., Weinman, J., &
Horne, R. (2005). The use and reporting of cluster
analysis in health psychology: A review. British
Journal of Health Psychology, 10(3), 329-358.
Egenhofer, M., & Franzosa, R. (1991). Point-set
topological spatial relations. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 5(2), 161-174.
Freksa, C. (1992). Temporal reasoning based on semiintervals. Artificial Intelligence, 54(1), 199-227.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman
& S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and
conceptual development (Vol. 3, pp. 215-256).
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Gottfried, B. (2008). Representing short-term
observations of moving objects by a simple visual
language. Journal of Visual Languages &
Computing, 19(3), 321-342.
Klippel, A., & Li, R. (2009). The endpoint hypothesis:
A topological-cognitive assessment of geographic
scale movement patterns. In K. S. Hornsby, C.
Claramunt, M. Denis & G. Ligozat (Eds.), Spatial
Informaiton Theory (pp. 177-194). Berlin: Springer.
Klippel, A., Weaver, C., & Robinson, A. (accepted).
Analyzing cognitive conceptualizations using
interactive visual environments. Cartography and
Geographic Information Science.
Klix, F. (1971). Information und Verhalten:
kybernetische
Aspekte
der
organismischen
Informationsverarbeitung:
Einführung
in
naturwissenschaftliche Grundlagen der allgemeinen
Psychologie. Bern, Hurber: Deutscher Verlag der
Wissenschaften.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Renz, J. (1997). A cognitive
assessment of topological spatial relations: Results
from an empirical investigation. In A. U. Frank (Ed.),
Spatial Information Theory: A Theoretical Basis for
GIS, (pp. 193-206). Heidelberg: Springer.
Kurata, Y., & Egenhofer, M. (2009). Interpretation of
behaviors from a viewpoint of topology. In B.
Gottfried & H. Aghajan (Eds.), Behaviour monitoring
and interpretation. Ambient intelligence and smart
environments (pp. 75-97). Amsterdam: IOS Press.

Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live
by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lu, S., Harter, D., & Graesser, A. C. (2009). An
Empirical and Computational Investigation of
Perceiving and Remembering Event Temporal
Relations. Cognitive Science, 33(3), 345-373.
Maguire, M. J., Brumberg, J., Ennis, M., & Shipley, T.
F. (in press). Similarities in object and event
segmentation: A geometric approach to event path
segmentation. Spatial Cognition and Computition.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1948). Child’s Conception of
Space. New York: Norton.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1967). The children's
conception of space. New York: Norton.
Randell, D. A., Cui, Z., & Cohn, A. G. (1992). A spatial
logic based on regions and connection. Paper
presented at the The 3rd International Conference on
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, San
Francisco.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential:
Spatial language and constrained connectionism.
Cambridge (MA), London: The MIT Press.
Regier, T., & Zheng, M. (2007). Attention to endpoints:
A cross linguistic constraint on spatial meaning.
Cognitive Science, 31(4), 705-719.
Romesburg, C. (2004). Cluster analysis for
researchers: Lulu press.
Shaw, R., McIntyre, M., & Mace, W. (1974). The role
of symmetry in event perception. In R. B. MacLeod
& H. L. Pick (Eds.), Perception (pp. 276-310).
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12(1), 49-100.
Tversky, B., Morrison, J., & Betrancourt, M. (2002).
Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 57(4), 247-262.
Tversky, B., Zacks, J. M., & Hard, B. M. (2008). The
structure of experience. In T. F. Shipley & J. M.
Zacks (Eds.), Understanding events: How humans
see, represent, and act on events (pp. 436-464). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Wolff, P. (2008). Dynamics and the perception of
causal events. In T. F. Shipley & J. M. Zacks (Eds.),
Understanding events: How humans see, represent,
and act on events. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Yuan, M., & Hornsby, K. S. (2008). Computation and
visualization for the understanding dynamics in
geographic domains: A research agenda. Boca
Raton, Fla.: CRC Press.
Zacks, J. M., Tversky, B., & Iyer, G. (2001).
Perceiving, remembering, and communicating
structure in events. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(1), 29-58.

3173

