UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ghosts of Theories Past: The Ever-Present Influence of Long-Discarded Theories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x06g0pb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Shtulman, Andrew
Valcarcel, Joshua

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ghosts of Theories Past: The Ever-Present Influence of Long-Discarded Theories
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Joshua Valcarcel (jvalcarcel@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

(Johnson & Carey, 1998; Slaughter & Lyons, 2003); the
transition from a behavioral theory of illness to a germbased theory (Au et al., 2008; Solomon & Cassimatis,
1999); and the transition from an essentialist theory of
evolution to a selection-based theory (Shtulman, 2006;
Shtulman & Schulz, 2008).
Different scholars have characterized these transitions in
different ways. Carey (2009) and Smith (2007) have
characterized them as a series of conceptual differentiations,
in which new conceptual boundaries are established, and
conceptual coalescences, in which old conceptual
boundaries are collapsed. Thagard (1992) and Chi (2008)
have characterized them as the reassignment of a key
concept or system of concepts from one branch of an
ontological hierarchy to another. And Vosniadou (1994) and
Wellman and Gelman (1992) have characterized them as a
revision of the core presuppositions of a framework theory,
or a theory that defines a domain’s ontological categories
and causal mechanisms. Common to all characterizations is
a commitment to knowledge restructuring, or the conversion
of one conceptual system into another by radically altering
the structure (and not just the content) of that system.
Implicit in the idea of knowledge restructuring is the idea
that early modes of thought, once restructured, should no
longer be accessible, for the basic constituents of that
system are no longer represented. A number of recent
findings have challenged this idea, however, by showing
that early modes of thought do sometimes reemerge later in
life. Lombrozo, Kelemen, and Zaitchik (2007), for example,
found that adults with Alzheimer’s disease endorse
teleological explanations for natural phenomena that young
children also endorse but that age-matched adults without
Alzheimer’s disease do not – explanations like “trees exist
so that plants and animals have shade” and “rain exists so
that plants and animals have water to drink.” Kelemen and
Rosset (2009) found that, under speeded conditions, college
undergraduates are also inclined to endorse the same kinds
of explanations. The fact that individuals who explicitly
disavow such explanations under normal circumstances will
still endorse them under abnormal circumstances (i.e.,
cognitive load or biological impairment) implies that
teleological thought is suppressed with additional education
but never completely overwritten.
In a different line of experiments, Goldberg and
Thompson-Schill (2009) found that adults are slower and
less accurate at categorizing plants as living things than at
categorizing animals as living things, despite knowing full
well that both plants and animals are alive. While young
children explicitly deny that plants are alive, they typically

Abstract
When individuals replace their naïve theories of natural
phenomena with more accurate, scientific ones, what happens
to the original theories? Are they overwritten or merely
suppressed? We investigated this issue by asking college
undergraduates to verify two types of statements as quickly as
possible: statements whose truth value was the same across
naïve and scientific theories of the phenomena at hand (e.g.,
“The moon revolves around the Earth”) and statements whose
truth value differed across those theories (e.g., “The sun
revolves around the Earth”). Participants verified the former
more quickly and more accurately than the latter, though this
difference was smaller for early-developing domains
(fractions, germs, inheritance, matter, physiology) than latedeveloping domains (astronomy, evolution, mechanics,
thermodynamics, waves). These findings suggest that
intuitive theories survive the acquisition of a mutually
incompatible scientific theory, coexisting with, or even
competing with, that theory for many years to come.
Keywords: intuitive theories, conceptual change, knowledge
acquisition, science education

Introduction
Knowledge acquisition can take two very different forms.
One form, known as “knowledge enrichment,” involves the
accretion of beliefs expressible in terms of preexisting
concepts, like learning the traits of an unfamiliar animal or
learning the history of an unfamiliar country. Another form,
known as “conceptual change,” involves revising the very
concepts that articulate those beliefs, like learning that the
earth is a sphere, not a plane, or learning that weight is a
relational property of objects, not an intrinsic property. The
result is a capacity to represent information incommensurate
with our prior beliefs and experiences.
Numerous instances of conceptual change have been
documented in the cognitive development and science
education literatures. They include the transition from an
impetus-based theory of motion to an inertial theory
(Clement, 1982; McCloskey, 1983); the transition from a
substance-based theory of energy to a process-based theory
(Reiner, Slotta, Chi, & Resnick, 2000; Wiser & Amin,
2001); the transition from a geocentric model of the solar
system to a heliocentric model (Siegal, Butterworth, &
Newcombe, 2004; Vosniadou & Brewer, 1994); the
transition from a tactile theory of matter to a particulate
theory (Nakhleh, Samarapungavan, & Saglam, 2005; Smith,
2007); the transition from an integer-based understanding of
fractions to a division-based understanding (Hartnett &
Gelman, 1998; Moss & Case, 1999); the transition from a
psychological theory of bodily functions to a vitalist theory

213

revise this belief by the age of eight or nine (Carey, 1985).
Yet this belief apparently persists at an implicit level across
decades of additional education and experience, for even
Yale biology professors were found to be slower and less
accurate at classifying plants as alive than at classifying
animals as alive. Years of professional experience had not
apparently erased an erroneous distinction these biologists
had once drawn as children.
These findings, among others (e.g., Legare & Gelman,
2008; Shafto, Coley, & Baldwin, 2007), suggest that
scientific knowledge serves to mask, rather than replace,
one’s initial, intuitive conceptions of the relevant domain. A
more conservative interpretation, however, is that teleology
and animism are particularly resilient modes of thought but
that nothing comparable occurs in other domains of
knowledge. We decided to explore this issue by adopting
Goldberg and Thompson-Schill’s (2009) methods but by
expanding the scope of inquiry beyond the living-nonliving
distinction to a variety of other conceptual distinctions in a
variety of other domains: astronomy, evolution, fractions,
germs, inheritance, matter, mechanics, physiology,
thermodynamics, and waves. For each domain, we
measured the speed and accuracy with which well educated
adults verified two types of domain-specific statements:
statements whose truth-value is known to remain constant
across a conceptual change within that domain (e.g., “The
moon revolves around the Earth,” which is true on both
naïve and scientific theories of astronomical phenomena)
and statements whose truth-value is known to reverse across
conceptual change (e.g., “The sun revolves around the
Earth,” which is true on naïve theories of astronomical
phenomena but is not true on a scientific theory).
We hypothesized that, if naïve theories survive the
acquisition of a mutually incompatible scientific theory,
then statements whose truth-value is known to reverse
across conceptual change should cause greater cognitive
conflict than statements whose truth-value is known to
remain constant across that change, resulting in slower and
less accurate verifications of the former as compared to the
latter. If, on the other hand, naïve theories are generally
overwritten by scientific theories, then statements whose
truth-value reverse across conceptual change should cause
no greater cognitive conflict than statements whose truthvalue remain constant, since the naïve theories would no
longer be present to cause such conflict.
We also hypothesized that, if long-discarded theories do
indeed cause cognitive conflict when reasoning about
phenomena once covered by those theories, then
participants should experience different levels of conflict for
theories discarded at different points in time, with theories
discarded early in life yielding the least conflict and theories
discarded late in life yielding the most. To test this
hypothesis, we included both domains that tend to undergo
conceptual reorganization during the first decade of life, like
fractions and physiology, and domains that tend to undergo
conceptual reorganization during the second decade of life
(or later), like evolution and mechanics.

Method
Participants
The participants were 65 college undergraduates (19 men,
46 women) recruited from introductory psychology and
cognitive science courses. Nine were majoring (or intending
to major) in the natural sciences, 25 were majoring in the
arts and humanities majors, and 31 were majoring in the
social sciences. The number of college-level science and
math courses that participants had taken prior to the study
ranged from 0 to 9 and averaged 2.2.

Materials
Participants were presented 200 statements about natural
phenomena and asked to decide whether each was true or
false. The statements were designed to exemplify one of
five conceptual relations specific to one of ten domains
(four statements per relation, five relations per domain).
Five of the domains entailed relations that typically undergo
restructuring in the first decade of life (fractions, germs,
inheritance, matter, physiology), and five entailed relations
that typically undergo restructuring in the second decade of
life, if at all (astronomy, evolution, mechanics, thermodynamics, waves). We refer to the former as “early
developing domains” and the latter as “late developing
domains.” This classification, though inexact, was based on
prior findings within the cognitive development and science
education literatures (noted above). Our selection of
domain-specific conceptual relations was based on these
findings as well.
As an illustration, consider the five relations used to
represent the domain of matter: “[material1] is denser than
[material2],” “[material1] weighs more than [material2],”
“[entity] is composed of matter,” “[entity] can be cut in
half,” and “atoms have [property].” Each of these relations
was represented by four particular types of statements:
statements true on both naïve and scientific conceptions of
the domain (e.g., “steal is denser than foam”); statements
false on both naïve and scientific conceptions of the domain
(e.g., “foam is denser than brick”); statements that true on
naïve conceptions of the domain but false on scientific
conceptions (e.g., “ice is denser than water”), and
statements that true on scientific conceptions of the domain
but false on naïve conceptions (e.g., “cold pennies are
denser than hot pennies”). The first two statements were
classified as “consistent,” because their truth-value was
consistent across both naïve and scientific theories, and the
last two were classified as “inconsistent,” because their
truth-value was not consistent across the two theories.
Sample statements of each type and from each domain are
displayed in Table 1.
This design proved useful for a number of reasons. First,
it ensured there would be an equal number of objectively
true and objectively false statements (as determined by their
correspondence with the scientific theory), which would
discourage participants from adopting a response bias
toward one truth-value or the other. Second, it ensured that

214

Table 1: Sample items from the early-developing domains (top) and late-developing domains (bottom) involving the same
conceptual relation. Consistent items were true on both the naïve theory (T1) and the scientific theory (T2) or false on both
theories; inconsistent items were true on one theory but false on the other.
Domain
Fractions

Type
Consistent
Inconsistent

Germs

Consistent
Inconsistent

Inheritance

Consistent
Inconsistent

Matter

Consistent
Inconsistent

Physiology

Consistent
Inconsistent

Astronomy

Consistent
Inconsistent

Evolution

Consistent
Inconsistent

Mechanics

Consistent
Inconsistent

Thermodynamics

Consistent
Inconsistent

Waves

Consistent
Inconsistent

T1
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False
True
False

T2
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True
True
False
False
True

Statement
12/13 is greater than 1/13.
1/17 is greater than 16/17.
1/17 is greater than 1/9.
1/13 is greater than 1/30.
Being sneezed on can make a person sick.
Being happy can make a person sick.
Being cold can make a person sick.
Being depressed can make a person sick.
Hair color is heritable.
Pierced ears are heritable.
Immunity to chickenpox is heritable.
Intelligence is heritable.
Rocks are composed of matter.
Numbers are composed of matter.
Fire is composed of matter.
Air is composed of matter.
Fish are alive.
Rocks are alive.
The sun is alive.
Coral is alive.
The moon revolves around the Earth.
The sun revolves around the moon.
The sun revolves around the Earth.
The Earth revolves around the sun.
Humans are descended from tree-dwelling creatures.
Humans are descended from plants.
Humans are descended from chimpanzees.
Humans are descended from sea-dwelling creatures.
A moving bullet loses speed.
A moving bullet loses weight.
A moving bullet loses force.
A moving bullet loses height.
Ovens produce heat.
Rain produces heat.
Coats produce heat.
Pressure produces heat.
Red objects reflect red light.
Red objects reflect blue light.
Red objects absorb red light.
Red objects absorb blue light.

the complexity of each conceptual relation was balanced
across statement type (consistent vs. inconsistent) and
response type (true vs. false) so that simple relations (e.g.,
“[entity] evolves over time”) were represented as often as
complex relations (e.g., “[species1] is descended from
[species2]”) within each stimulus category. Third, it ensured
that the average number of words per statement remained
relatively constant across both statement type (consistent vs.
inconsistent) and response type (true vs. false), which was a
necessary precondition for comparing response times across
categories. Additional care was taken to balance the average

number of words per statement across domains, which
ranged from 5.1 to 6.9 and averaged 5.9. No domain was an
outlier on this measure.

Procedure
Stimuli were presented to participants with MediaLab v1.21
software, which also recorded the speed and accuracy of
their truth judgments. The mean response time across items
and across subjects was 3928 ms, and all response times that
fell more than two standard deviations beyond this mean
(200 of 13200, or 1.5%) were eliminated from the dataset.

215

Participants were instructed to verify each statement as
quickly as possible without sacrificing accuracy. Responses
were recorded by pressing “1” or “2” on the keypad,
corresponding to “True” and “False” respectively. Once a
response had been selected participants were then asked to
rate the certainty of that response on a 5-point scale (1 = not
certain, 2 = 25% certain, 3 = 50% certain, 4 = 75% certain,
5 = 100% certain). Confidence ratings were included mainly
to provide a brief respite between statements and are not
analyzed here. It should be noted, however, that the mean
confidence rating was 4.1 and the modal confidence rating
was 5 (or “100% certain”), indicating that participants were
highly confident in their responses.
Statements from the same domain (n = 20) were presented
as a block, in order to minimize abrupt changes in content,
but their presentation was randomized within that block, and
the presentation of each domain was randomized as well.
No two participants therefore encountered the same domains
or the same statements in the same order.

0.68), and a significant interaction between statement type
and domain type (F(1,64) = 9.36, p < .01). The source of
this interaction was a 21% greater difference between
consistent and inconsistent statements for the latedeveloping domains (Mdiff. = 0.23) than for the earlydeveloping domains (Mdiff. = 0.19). Participants apparently
erred on more inconsistent statements in the late-developing
domains than in the early-developing domains, implying
that naïve theories held greater sway in the late-developing
domains. This finding is consistent with the fact that many
high school students never actually make conceptual change
in domains like mechanics (McCloskey, 1983) or evolution
(Shtulman, 2006), though participants had most likely been
introduced to the relevant scientific theories previously.

Response Latency
Participants’ speed at verifying consistent and inconsistent
statements is displayed in Table 3. As predicted, participants
verified consistent statements more quickly than they
verified inconsistent statements in all ten domains, though
the effect was statistically significant in only eight
(fractions, t(64) = 7.94, p < .01; germs, t(64) = 4.31, p < .01;
matter, t(64) = 5.33, p < .01; physiology, t(64) = 6.25, p <
.01; astronomy, t(64) = 2.97, p < .05; evolution, t(64) =
2.06, p < .05; thermodynamics, t(64) = 5.85, p < .01; waves,
t(64) = 4.52, p < .01). These effects remained significant
even when incorrect responses were removed from the
dataset (fractions, t(64) = 9.67, p < .01; germs, t(64) = 5.58,
p < .01; matter, t(64) = 3.12, p < .01; physiology, t(64) =
5.44, p < .01; astronomy, t(64) = 2.80, p < .01; evolution,
t(64) = 2.21, p < .05; thermodynamics, t(64) = 6.85, p <
.001; waves, t(64) = 3.13, p < .01). In fact, one nonsignificant effect became significant on this analysis
(mechanics, t(64) = 2.33, p < .05).

Results
Response Accuracy
Participants’ accuracy at verifying statements whose truth
value was consistent across naïve and scientific theories
(“consistent statements”) and statements whose truth value
differed across those theories (“inconsistent statements”) is
displayed in Table 2. Participants correctly verified
consistent statements significantly more often than they
correctly verified inconsistent statements in all ten domains
(paired samples t(64) > 3.9, p < .01 for all comparisons).
Table 2: Mean proportion of consistent and inconsistent
statements correctly verified in the early-developing
domains (top) and late-developing domains (bottom).
Domain
Fractions
Germs
Inheritance
Matter
Physiology
Astronomy
Evolution
Mechanics
Thermodynamics
Waves

Consist.
.90
.90
.78
.90
.94
.83
.72
.78
.85
.81

Inconsist.
.74
.69
.70
.61
.71
.66
.47
.50
.61
.59

Table 3: Mean response times (ms) for consistent and
inconsistent statements in the early-developing domains
(top) and late-developing domains (bottom).

Difference
.16**
.21**
.08**
.29**
.23**
.17**
.25**
.28**
.24**
.22**

Domain
Fractions
Germs
Inheritance
Matter
Physiology
Astronomy
Evolution
Mechanics
Thermodynamics
Waves

A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
used to determine whether, and how, the effects of statement
type (consistent vs. inconsistent) varied by domain type
(early-developing vs. late-developing). This analysis
revealed a significant main effect of statement type (F(1,64)
= 705.73, p < .001), as expected, but it also revealed a
significant main effect of domain type (F(1,64) = 196.00, p
< .001), with participants demonstrating greater accuracy
for statements about early-developing domains (M = 0.79)
than for statements about late-developing domains (M =

Consist.
3534
2720
3667
3248
2832
3457
3800
3997
3591
3480

Inconsist.
4134
2976
3769
3652
3350
3700
3971
4149
4151
3853

Difference
-600**
-256**
-102
-404**
-518**
-243*
-172*
-151
-560**
-374**

As with the accuracy data, the latency data were analyzed
with a repeated-measures ANOVA for effects of statement
type (consistent vs. inconsistent) and domain type (earlydeveloping vs. late-developing). This analysis revealed
significant main effects of both (statement type: F(1,64) =
188.94, p < .001; domain type: F(1,64) = 52.40, p < .001),

216

indicating that participants were not only faster at verifying
consistent statements (M = 3324) than at verifying
inconsistent statements (M = 3765) but were also faster at
verifying statements about early-developing domains (M =
3387) than at verifying statements about late-developing
domains (M = 3702). This analysis also revealed a
significant interaction between statement type and domain
type (F(1,64) = 10.43, p < .01), owing to a greater
difference between consistent and inconsistent statements in
the late-developing domains (Mdiff. = 507) than in the earlydeveloping ones (Mdiff. = 375).
Thus, just as participants were most accurate at verifying
consistent statements in early-developing domains (M =
88% correct) and least accurate at verifying inconsistent
statements in late-developing domains (M = 57% correct),
they were fastest at verifying consistent statements in earlydeveloping domains (M = 3200 ms) and slowest at verifying
inconsistent statements in late-developing domains (M =
3956 ms). While the accuracy data seem to suggest that
many participants simply defaulted to naïve theories in the
late-developing domains, the latency data do not, for if they
had, the difference in response latency between consistent
and inconsistent statements in the late-developing domains
should have been smaller, not larger, than that in the earlydeveloping domains. Thus, participants appeared to
experience more cognitive conflict between naïve and
scientific theories in the late-developing domains than in the
early-domains, perhaps because the relevant scientific
theory was less well understood or less well consolidated.

these findings, however, by showing that this effect is
pervasive across many domains of knowledge – from the
life sciences (physiology, evolution) to the physical sciences
(astronomy, thermodynamics) to mathematics (fractions) –
and across many conceptual relations within those domains.
They also extend this literature by showing that the
influence of naïve theories appears to diminish over time,
though the magnitude of difference between earlydeveloping and late-developing domains was much smaller
than the magnitude of difference between consistent and
inconsistent statements.
While the present findings are consistent with other
findings in the literature, they are not particularly consistent
with many prominent models of conceptual change, like
Carey’s (2009) differentiation-coalescence model or Chi’s
(2008) ontology-reassignment model, because these models
assume a kind of conceptual restructuring that should render
early modes of thought inaccessible. While these models
could certainly be amended to account for the data at hand,
doing so would require a specification of how a single
concept, like heat or force, could hold different meanings
for the very same individual across different contexts or
different tasks.
One model of conceptual change that may hold more
promise in this regard is Ohlsson’s (2009) “resubsumption”
model, in which a class of phenomena (e.g., the motion of
objects) initially subsumed under one theory (e.g., impetus
theory) is re-subsumed under another (e.g., Newtonian
mechanics). The process is initiated by the learner noticing a
correspondence between one class of phenomena and two
different theories – say, a naïve theory and a scientific
theory – and is completed by a competitive evaluation of the
cognitive utility of each correspondence. While this model
does not currently explain where scientific theories come
from or how learners notice correspondences between
scientific theories and phenomena currently subsumed by
other theories (Shtulman, 2009), it does help to explain the
findings documented here in that it explicitly stipulates that
the outcome of conceptual change is not a single theory,
derived step-by-step from some parent theory, but two
theories in active competition.
An important prediction of the resubsumption model is
that the longer an individual holds a scientific theory, the
less he or she should rely on the naïve theory with which it
competes (assuming, of course, that the scientific theory
will ultimately prove more useful in its explanatory power
and explanatory scope than the naïve one). Consistent with
this prediction, we found that naïve theories held less sway
for early-developing domains than for late-developing
domains, presumably because the competition between
naïve theories and scientific theories had been resolved (in
favor of the scientific theories) to a much larger extent in the
early-developing domains than in the late-developing ones.
Similar results were obtained by Goldberg and ThompsonSchill (2009) in that biologists exhibited less cognitive
conflict classifying plants as alive than undergraduates did,
even though both groups exhibited more conflict classifying

Discussion
A significant component of science education is replacing
inaccurate, pre-instructional theories of natural phenomena
with more accurate, scientific ones, but what happens to the
original theories? Our findings strongly suggest that those
theories are suppressed, not supplanted. Across many
different domains, participants were significantly faster and
more accurate at verifying statements whose truth-value
remained constant across a conceptual change (e.g., “people
turn food into energy,” “whales are more closely related to
fish than to plants”) than at verifying structurally analogous
statements whose truth-value reversed (e.g., “bacteria turn
food into energy,” “whales are more closely related to
humans than to fish”). This effect was observable not only
in domains where participants were likely to have
undergone conceptual change within the past five years but
also in domains where they were likely to have undergone
conceptual change as children, implying that even children’s
naïve theories remain intact, at some level of representation,
following conceptual change.
These findings are consistent with many other recent
findings, including Lombrozo et al.’s (2007) demonstration
that Alzheimer’s patients endorse teleological explanations
of natural phenomena typically endorsed only by children
and Goldberg and Thompson-Schill’s (2009) demonstration
that adults are slower and less accurate at classifying plants
as alive than at classifying animals as alive. They extend

217

plants as alive than classifying animals as alive. Expertise in
biology apparently decreased the influence of a longdiscarded ontological distinction between plants and
animals but did not eliminate that distinction altogether.
Future research could explore this issue more directly by
explicitly manipulating the cognitive utility of a newly
acquired scientific theory – by, for example, involving
students in inferential-reasoning tasks easily accomplished
in light of the scientific theory but not possible to
accomplish in light of the naïve theory – and measuring the
effects of that manipulation on the speed and accuracy of
their responses to the kinds of stimuli presented here. If
cognitive utility is indeed a determinant of the continued
survival of a naïve theory, then decreasing the cognitive
utility of that theory should decrease the likelihood that it
will be activated when reasoning about the phenomena it
once subsumed. No manipulation, however, would likely
the eliminate the effect altogether, as the extant data suggest
that naïve theories continue to persist even after decades of
disuse and disrepair.

Inferring design: Evidence of a preference for teleological
explanations for patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
Psychological Science, 18, 999-1006.
McCloskey, M. (1983). Naïve theories of motion. In D.
Gentner and A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental Models (pp.
299-324). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Moss, J., & Case, R. (1999). Developing children’s
understanding of the rational numbers: A new model and
an experimental curriculum. Journal for Research in
Science Education, 30, 122-147.
Nakhleh, M. B., Samarapungavan, A., & Saglam, Y. (2005).
Middle school students’ beliefs about matter. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 42, 581–612.
Ohlsson, S. (2009). Resubsumption: A possible mechanism
for conceptual change and belief revision. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 20-40.
Reiner, M., Slotta, J. D., Chi, M. T. H., & Resnick, L. B.
(2000). Naïve physics reasoning: A commitment to
substance-based conceptions. Cognition and Instruction,
18, 1-34.
Shafto, P., Coley, J. D., & Baldwin, D. (2007). Effects of
time pressure on context-sensitive property induction.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 890-894.
Shtulman, A. (2006). Qualitative differences between naïve
and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive
Psychology, 52, 170-194.
Shtulman, A. (2009). Rethinking the role of resubsumption
in conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 44, 4147.
Shtulman, A. & Schulz, L. (2008). Essentialist beliefs about
species and their relationship to evolutionary reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 32, 1049-1062.
Siegal, M., Butterworth, G., & Newcombe, P. A. (2004).
Culture and children’s cosmology. Developmental
Science, 7, 308-324.
Slaughter, V., & Lyons, M. (2003). Learning about life and
death in early childhood. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-30.
Smith, C. L. (2007). Bootstrapping processes in the
development of students’ commonsense matter theories.
Cognition and Instruction, 25, 337-398.
Solomon, G. E. A., & Cassimatis, N. L. (1999). On facts
and conceptual systems: Young children’s integration of
their understandings of germs and contagion.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 113-126.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Capturing and modeling the process
of conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 4, 45-69.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of
the day/night cycle. Cognitive Science, 18, 123-183.
Wellman, H. M. & Gelman, S. A. (1992). Cognitive
development: Foundational theories of core domains.
Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 337-375.
Wiser, M., & Amin, T. (2001). Is heat hot? Inducing
conceptual change by integrating everyday and scientific
perspectives on thermal phenomena. Learning and
Instruction, 11, 331-355.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grant DRL-0953384 to
Andrew Shtulman.

References
Au, T. K. F., Chan, C. K. K., Chan, T. K., Cheung, M. W.
L., Ho, J. Y. S., & Ip, G. W. M. (2008). Folkbiology
meets microbiology: A study of conceptual and
behavioral change. Cognitive Psychology, 57, 1-19.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Chi, M. T. H. (2008). Three types of conceptual change:
Belief revision, mental model transformation, and
categorical shift. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), Handbook of
research on conceptual change. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clement, J. (1982). Students’ preconceptions in introductory
mechanics. American Journal of Physics, 50, 66-70.
Goldberg, R. F., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2009).
Developmental “roots” in mature biological knowledge.
Psychological Science, 20, 480-487.
Hartnett, P., & Gelman, R. (1998). Early understandings of
numbers: Paths or barriers to the construction of new
understandings? Learning and Instruction, 8, 341-374.
Johnson, S. C., & Carey, S. (1998). Knowledge enrichment
and conceptual change in folkbiology: Evidence from
Williams Syndrome. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 156-200.
Kelemen, D., & Rosset, E. (2009). The human function
compunction: Teleological explanation in adults.
Cognition, 11, 138-143.
Legare, C., & Gelman, C. H. (2008). Bewitchment, biology,
or both: The co-existence of natural and supernatural
explanatory frameworks across development. Cognitive
Science, 32, 607-642.
Lombrozo, T., Kelemen, D., & Zaitchik, D. (2007).

218

