UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammatical aspect in language production: Using gesture to reveal event representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gf344vx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Parrill, Fey
Bergen, Benjamin
Lichtenstein, Patricia

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammatical aspect in language production:
Using gesture to reveal event representations
Fey Parrill (fey.parrill@case.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 10900 Euclid Ave.
Cleveland, OH 44106 USA

Benjamin Bergen (bkbergen@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Patricia Lichtenstein (plichtenstein@ucmerced.edu)
Department of Cognitive and Information Science, 5200 North Lake Rd
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract
Grammatical aspect is a pervasive linguistic device that,
according to linguistic analyses, allows speakers to encode
different ways of construing events. For instance, the
progressive (I am writing a book) is thought to reflect
increased focus on the internal details of an event, as
contrasted with the perfect (I have written a book). However,
there is to date no experimental evidence that speakers in fact
think about the same events differently when they describe
them using progressive versus perfect aspect. We used cospeech gesture as a means to investigate what speakers' event
representations are like when they produce perfect versus
progressive utterances. We found that progressive event
descriptions were accompanied by longer-lasting and more
complex gestures than perfect event descriptions, but only
when participants described events originally presented in the
progressive. This evidence suggests that people are actually
construing events differently when they use different
grammatical aspects.
Keywords: Gesture, aspect, language production, mental
simulation.

Introduction
Most of the world’s languages mark the structure of
events, using a linguistic device known as grammatical
aspect. A variety of possible aspectual distinctions are
attested, but among the more common ones is to mark
whether an event is to be understood as ongoing or
completed. For instance, the English progressive aspect, as
in I was writing a book indicates that the event is to be
conceived of as ongoing, while the perfect, seen in I had
written a book, marks the event as completed. (Aspect is
distinct from tense, which marks when an event occurred
relative to the time an utterance is produced.) Linguists who
have looked closely at grammatical aspect have argued that
using the progressive, as contrasted with the perfect,
increases focus on the internal structure of the event, or
increases the granularity or detail with which people think
of events (e.g., Comrie, 1976; Dowty, 1977; Langacker,
1991).
This intuition jibes well with native speaker intuition, but
to date there has been no experimental work on the question.

When speakers use different aspectual forms, are they
actually thinking about events differently? This is the basic
question we address in the research below.
While there hasn't been work on how speakers represent
events while producing different grammatical aspects, there
has been a bit of recent work on language comprehension.
Several studies (Madden & Zwaan, 2003; Bergen &
Wheeler, 2010) have found evidence that aspect modulates
how comprehenders represent described events, in ways
quite compatible with the predictions that the linguistics
literature on aspect makes. For instance, Bergen & Wheeler
(2010) compared the extent to which comprehenders
represent the details of motor actions when presented with
progressive sentences (John is opening the drawer) and
perfect sentences (John has opened the drawer). They found
an increased action-sentence compatibility effect (Glenberg
& Kaschak, 2002) with progressive sentences; progressive
sentences led to faster performance of subsequent
compatible actions, but perfect sentences did not show such
an effect. The authors interpreted this as evidence that the
progressive encourages comprehenders to mentally simulate
the nucleus of an event (in this case, a motor action) with
greater detail than the perfect does.
The idea that aspect modulates mental simulation in
comprehension is based on the more basic hypothesis that
understanding language involves generating perceptual and
motor representations of what is being talked about.
Substantial theoretical and empirical work now supports this
view (Barsalou, 2008, 2009; Bergen & Chang, 2005;
Bergen, Lindsay, Matlock, & Narayanan, 2007; Bergen &
Wheeler, 2010; Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002; Hostetter &
Alibali, 2008, 2010; Kaschak & Glenberg, 2000; Kaschak et
al., 2005; Matlock, 2004; Zwaan, 1999; Zwaan, Stanfield, &
Yaxley, 2002). As a result, we adopt its terminology for the
purposes of our exposition here. However, it is not essential
to the study we describe below; when we talk about mental
simulation of events, we could just as well be talking about
mental representations of events that are not modality
specific, as long as the representational format affords the
possibility of different construals of events.

3223

As mentioned above, while there is now some evidence
that reading or hearing progressive sentences encourages a
language user to simulate the internal details of an event,
there has been no work to date on aspect and the mental
operations of people producing language. It is possible that
language production is like language comprehension in that
speakers are more likely to produce progressive aspect when
they are mentally simulating the event they are describing in
greater detail; simulation-based theories usually assume that
similar principles operate during comprehension and
production (e.g., Barsalou, 2009, Bergen & Chang, 2005).
How can we assess whether people are thinking
differently about events when they produce sentences using
progressive versus perfect aspect? One valuable source of
data is the gestures that speakers spontaneously produce
along with speech. Such co-speech gestures are very closely
linked, both in meaning and time, to the speech they
accompany (McNeill, 1992, 2005). As a consequence, they
provide a window—one distinct from the speech stream
itself—onto the mental representations that underlie
language. Co-speech gestures have long been thought to
reflect imagistic aspects of thinking (e.g., Kita & Özyürek,
2003), but recent work has begun to link research on gesture
to simulation-based theories of language. Hostetter and
Alibali (2008, 2010) have suggested that gestures might
reflect simulations carried out during language production.
That is, perceptual and motor representations that
automatically become active during language production
might be the source of these gestures.
If gestures reflect underlying processes of simulation,
then it stands to reason that gesture may shed light on
whether aspectual choices reflect simulation differences
during language production. In particular, gestures that
accompany progressive-marked speech might reflect greater
intensity or detail of focus on events that the speaker is
thinking about. This greater attention could result in
gestures that last longer and are more likely to encode
information about the internal structure of events. Some
corroboration for this possibility comes from work by
Duncan (2002), who found that when the progressive
appeared in narrative speech, co-occurring gestures were
longer and more complex.
Gestural complexity can come in several forms, but a
frequent characteristic is some kind of iteration or repetition.
For example, if a narrator is describing someone walking,
her co-occurring gesture might encode only the trajectory of
motion (a straight line), or the gesture might also encode the
internal structure of the event, by (for example) having the
fingers wiggle while the hand moves in a straight line. The
second gesture would be considered more complex, as it
encodes an additional semantic feature (in this case, manner
of motion: see Duncan, 2002; and see Kita & Özyürek, 2003
for more on manner of motion). In short, increased
complexity, in the form of repeated or iterated gestures, can
indicate a focus on the internal structure of an event.
The current study uses gesture in language production to
assess the extent to which produced aspects reflect different

construals of the described event. In doing so, it makes two
main contributions. First, while there has been some work
on how aspect affects event construal in comprehenders, this
is the first work to address the reverse relation, in speakers.
Second, we replicate and extend Duncan’s (2002) gesture
results by asking whether the same patterns can be observed
for a carefully controlled set of events, where the same
events are presented with different aspects.

Study
If speakers use progressive aspect when they are focusing
on the internal structure of events, gestures that accompany
utterances marked with the progressive may reflect that fact.
Specifically, they make take longer to produce and they may
be more likely to encode semantic aspects of the eventinternal structure.
To assess this possibility, we presented participants with a
series of texts in which half of the events appeared in the
past progressive, and half in the past perfect. We then asked
participants to re-describe these texts to a listener, a task that
tends to elicit gesture. This design allows us to look at two
things. First, we can assess the relationship between the
aspect of presentation (that is, the grammatical aspect in
which an event appeared in the stimulus) and a participant’s
verbal and gestural behavior. Second, we can assess the
relationship between the aspect of production (that is, the
grammatical aspect a participant chooses to use when
describing an event) and a participant’s gestural behavior.
If, as other work suggests, mental simulation occurs
during language comprehension, then reading sentences that
vary in aspect should create varying representations during
encoding. Those representations then form the content used
in utterances subsequently formulated during language
production. So presentation aspect might affect gestures
produced during event retelling. Moreover, if production
involves simulation as well, and if the aspect produced
reflects differences in event construal, then production
aspect might be affected by presentation aspect, and even
when it does not, progressive aspect in production might
correlate with more complex and longer lasting gestures.

Method
Participants read a series of short texts, then described them
to a partner.
Materials We created a set of fifteen written stories. Each
consisted of seven sentences, the first of which was a scenesetting sentence that always appeared in the simple past.
The remaining sentences each described an event likely to
evoke gesture (a motion event). These events appeared in
either the past progressive (e.g., was floating) or the past
perfect (e.g., had floated). Aspect in each story alternated
with each sentence: if the first sentence was past
progressive, the next would be past perfect. We created two
versions of each story (A and B), with aspect reversed for
each target event. That is, in the A version, the first target
event appeared in the past progressive, while in the B

3224

version that same event appeared in the past perfect. We
chose to alternate aspect within each story rather than across
stories because stories containing only past perfect seemed
awkward (they described a series of things that event
participants had done). We used past progressive and past
perfect (unlike the present progressive and present perfect
found in Bergen & Wheeler (2010), for instance) because
the past tense made the narratives seem more like typical
stories. Two versions of each story were created so that we
would have data for each event in both aspects. A sample
text is found below. Target event verbs are in bold.
There was a trail through the woods. A woman was
hiking/had hiked down a little hill on the winding
path. Afterwards, she had walked/was walking up
to a little stream. A big stick was floating/had
floated down the stream in front of a pair of ducks.
The ducks had paddled/were paddling around it.
Then they were bobbing/had bobbed around a
bend in the stream out of sight. The woman had
leapt/was leaping along some rocks to the other
side of the stream.
Each story contained the same number of human, nonhuman-animate, and inanimate entities. Stories were normed
to ensure that each was comprehensible and that there were
no differences in comprehensibility across A and B
versions. Twenty participants rated the A version of the
stories on a scale from 1 (very hard to understand) to 5 (very
easy to understand), and a separate group of twenty
participants rated the B versions on the same scale. We
selected the ten stories with the highest mean ratings for use
in the study (Version A mean rating = 4.08, SD .16, Version
B mean rating = 4.03, SD .13). There was no significant
difference in the mean ratings across the A and B versions
of these ten stories: t(20) = .86; p (two-tailed) = .40.
Thirty-five Case Western Reserve University students (17
women) participated in the study for payment. All were
native speakers of English. Following informed consent,
participants were seated at a computer and read a story
sentence by sentence, pressing a computer key to advance to
the next sentence. After the final sentence, the participant
was prompted to move over to the recording area and to
describe the story to his or her partner. The partner came to
the study with the participant and served as a listener.
Participants were told to describe the story in as much detail
as possible, and that the partner would take a
comprehension quiz at the end of the study. Participants
randomly received either the A or B version of each story.
Three participants were dropped from the study because
they never gestured, for a total of 32 participants (17 who
received version A, 15 who received version B).
Coding One coder transcribed all utterances that matched
one of the target events from the stimuli, using audio alone.
The grammatical aspect of these utterances was then coded
as either progressive or non-progressive (typically simple

past). One coder carried out this analysis for the entire
dataset, and a second coded 42% of the dataset. For
categorical data in this study, agreement was calculated
using Cohen’s kappa. Landis and Koch (1977) suggest that
a kappa value kappa above .61 indicates substantial interrater agreement. For utterance aspect, kappa was .86. Any
gesture that accompanied an utterance describing a target
event was then coded according to the following categories
(after McNeill, 1992, 2005): concrete iconic (the shape or
motion of the hands maps onto some aspect of the scene
being described), metaphoric iconic (the shape or motion of
the hands maps onto an abstract property, such as discourse
content), deictic (a pointing gesture), beat (a rhythmic
gesture with no obvious semantic content), or self-adaptor
(a self touching gesture, such as scratching the nose). Given
our research questions, only concrete iconic gestures (66%
of the total gestures produced in this dataset) were analyzed
further. These gestures were coded for the presence of
iteration. As noted above, iteration is a repeated action of
the hands and is frequently associated with manner of
motion. One coder carried out gesture type and iteration
coding for the entire dataset. A second coder coded 46% of
the dataset. Agreement was good: κ = .70 for gesture type
and κ = .76 for iteration. Finally, gesture stroke duration
was coded for concrete iconic gestures. Gestures are
typically made up of multiple phases (McNeill, 1992): a
preparation phase, a stroke phase (defined as the effortful,
meaningful portion of the gesture: McNeill, 1992), and a
retraction phase. In addition to these phases, gestures often
involve holds, and these holds can extend a gesture’s overall
duration. However, holds can arise because of a need to
keep gesture and speech temporally synchronous, and
therefore are not necessarily semantically meaningful. For
these reasons, gesture stroke duration was used for this
study (as it was for Duncan, 2002) rather than overall
gesture duration. Using software that displays frames per
second, gesture stroke onset and offset can be identified
within a 30th of a second, with good reliability. Gesture
stroke duration was coded using Final Cut Pro: stroke onset
and offset were recorded and then converted to a total
duration value in milliseconds. One coder carried out this
analysis for the full dataset. A second coder coded 25% of
the dataset. The correlation between the two coders was .86,
indicating very good agreement.
In summary, the final dataset contained all utterances that
matched a stimulus target event, coded for verbal aspect.
When an utterance was accompanied by a concrete iconic
gesture, that gesture was coded for the presence of iteration,
and the duration of that gesture’s stroke phase was
calculated.

Results
Results are presented below in terms of presentation aspect
(the aspect that stimulus sentences appeared in) and
production aspect (the aspect of participants’ utterances).
Before turning to gesture, we analyzed the relationship
between these factors. First, we asked whether presentation

3225

aspect affected production aspect in general, regardless of
whether a gesture was produced. To account for variation
across participants, we examined the proportion of matches
(utterances that agreed in presentation and production
aspect) for each participant. Table 1 shows these proportions
(SDs in parentheses).
Table 1: Mean proportion of matches by presentation and
production aspect (all utterances).

Presentation
Perfect
Progressive

Production
Perfect
0.53 (.15)
0.39 (.08)

Progressive
0.47 (.15)
0.61 (.06)

Participants did not always perfectly reproduce what they
read, which is not surprising given the design: participants
read sentences alternating between perfect and progressive.
A Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test1 showed participants were
not significantly more likely to produce perfect when
presentation aspect was perfect: Z =.97, p (two-tailed) = .32.
However, when presentation aspect was progressive,
participants were significantly more likely to produce
progressive: Z =3.41, p (two-tailed) = .0006. We next
examined the proportion of matches for each participant
when concrete iconic gestures were produced. These means
were
identical
to
those
in
Table
1.
Again, a Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test showed participants
were not significantly more likely to produce perfect when
presentation aspect was perfect: Z =1.16, p (two-tailed) =
.25. However, when presentation aspect was progressive,
participants were significantly more likely to produce
progressive: Z =3.32, p (two-tailed) = .0009. This greater
tendency to produce progressive after reading progressive
may reflect the fact that progressive is more common in
speech.
Finally, we examined the relationship between
presentation aspect and frequency of concrete iconic gesture
production, to determine whether stimulus aspect had any
impact on participants’ tendency to produce such gestures.
We compared the mean proportion of target event
descriptions accompanied by gesture as a function of
stimulus aspect: a Wilcoxon Signed Ranks showed no
significant difference between these proportions (Z =.35, p
(two-tailed) = .73).
Our second set of analyses focused on the relationship
between presentation aspect, production aspect, and gesture
stroke duration. Figure 1 shows the mean gesture stroke
duration for utterances according to presentation and
production aspect.

Figure 1. Mean gesture stroke duration (in msec)
according to presentation and production aspect. Error bars
show standard error.
Overall, gesture stroke duration was longer when the
aspect of production was progressive: t(31) =2.04; p (twotailed) = .049. To explore this result further, we first looked
at the cases where presentation aspect was perfect, and
compared mean gesture duration when production aspect
was progressive and non-progressive. This test showed no
significant difference between these means (t(31) =.87; p
(two-tailed) = .38). When an event was originally presented
using the perfect, people’s gestures were not significantly
longer when they themselves were recounting that event
using progressive aspect than when they used perfect aspect.
Second, we turned to gesture duration when presentation
aspect was progressive, again comparing progressive and
non-progressive production aspect. This test showed a
marginally significant difference between these means
(t(31) =2.00; p (two-tailed) = .054). When an event had
been originally described using progressive aspect, people
made longer-lasting gestures when they themselves were
recounting that event using progressive aspect than when
they used perfect aspect. We also compared gesture stroke
duration across production categories. There was no
significant difference in duration as a function of
presentation aspect: t(31) =1.14; p (two-tailed) = .26 for
progressive utterances, and t(31) =.29; p (two-tailed) = .77
for non-progressive utterances.
We then turned to our second dependent measure, gesture
iteration. Figure 2 shows the mean proportion of utterances
accompanied by an iterated gesture, by presentation and
production aspect. Overall, participants produced a larger
proportion of gestures with iteration when aspect of
production was progressive: Z = 2.32, p (two-tailed) = .02.

1
Presentation aspect is an independent variable but production
aspect is a dependent variable, thus a two-factor ANOVA is not
appropriate for these analyses (assumptions of independence are
violated). For this reason, we report results of Wilcoxon Signed
Ranks tests for non-parametric data (frequencies), and paired ttests for durations.

3226

progressive utterances were particularly long, but rather that
non-progressive utterances were particularly short. This is
borne out by the near-significant difference in mean
utterance duration when non-progressive utterances are
compared across presentation categories: t(31) =1.92; p
(two-tailed) = .06. Importantly, this result is different from
the result seen in gesture. For gesture, duration was roughly
the same except when events presented in the progressive
were described in the progressive, in which case gestures
were longer. For speech, duration was roughly the same
except when events presented in the progressive were
described with non-progressive aspect, in which case event
descriptions were shorter.
Figure 2. Mean proportion of gestures with iteration
according to presentation and production aspect. Error bars
show standard error.
To explore this result further, we first looked at the case
where presentation aspect was perfect, and compared mean
proportion of gestures with iteration in the two production
aspects. This test showed no significant difference in the
mean number of iterated gestures produced with progressive
or non-progressive utterances (Z = 1.196, p (two-tailed) =
.23). When an event had been originally described in the
perfect, people were no more likely to use iterated gestures
when they themselves were recounting that event using
progressive aspect than when they used perfect aspect.
Second, we looked at the mean proportion of gestures
with iteration when presentation aspect was progressive.
This test showed a significant difference between the mean
rate of iterated gesture for perfect and progressive utterances
(Z = 2.35, p (two-tailed) = .018). When an event had been
originally presented in the progressive, people were more
likely to use iterated gestures when they themselves were
recounting that event using progressive aspect than when
they used perfect aspect. We also compared iteration across
production categories. There was no significant difference
in mean proportion of gestures with iteration as a function
of presentation aspect: Z = 1.3; p (two-tailed) = .19 for
progressive utterances, and Z =.66; p (two-tailed) = .51 for
non-progressive utterances.
Finally, we explored the possibility that progressive
utterances were accompanied by longer and more iterated
gestures because they were simply longer, allowing more
time for gesture to be produced. Figure 3 shows mean
utterance duration according to presentation and production
aspect. When presentation aspect was perfect, we found no
significant difference in mean utterance duration as a
function of production aspect: t(31) =1.22; p (two-tailed) =
.23. That is, progressive utterances were not longer in this
case, which argues against an account where progressive
utterances simply allow for longer gestures. However, when
presentation aspect was progressive, non-progressive
utterances were significantly shorter: t(31)=4.97; p (twotailed) < .001. It does not seem to be the case that

Figure 3. Mean utterance duration (in msec) according to
presentation and production aspect. Error bars show
standard error.

Discussion
When people described events using progressive aspect,
they produced gestures that were both longer on average and
more likely to be iterated, but this occurred only when
events had been originally presented with progressive
aspect. The interpretation of these results requires some
care, as the patterns observed don’t appear to arise from
either aspect of presentation or aspect of production alone.
To begin with, we have reason to believe that participants
did not encode the aspect of presentation very well when
events were presented in the perfect. The weakness of this
tendency may have been the product of the design, which
presented sentences alternating between perfect and
progressive. That is, because participants were frequently
being asked to comprehend sentences in both aspects, there
may have been carry-over effects from one sentence to the
next (perhaps in the form of priming) that muddied the
results. Had we elected to use a between-participants design,
we may have seen stronger effects of presentation alone, for
perfect as well as progressive. In addition, the design
involved a relatively naturalistic task: telling a story to a
friend. The emphasis was thus on being a good
communicator, not on perfectly reproducing the stimuli.

3227

The effects of presentation and production aspect on
utterance duration were also complex. In general, using the
progressive aspect did not appear to make event descriptions
longer, but there is no obvious theoretical reason why
having an event presented in the progressive and choosing
to describe it with non-progressive aspect would make event
descriptions shorter. Finer-grained analyses of speech might
clarify this result.
What might we conclude based on these results? To the
extent that this task reflects naturalistic behavior, the results
suggest that people don’t merely produce longer and more
iterated gestures when they're using the progressive; they
only do so when they originally learned about the event
they're describing using the same aspect. One interpretation
of this effect is that congruency between presented and
produced aspect is key, perhaps because people encode
events with more detail when they're presented with
progressive, which allows them the option of recalling them
with more vivid detail later on if they choose.
Critically, the results reported here add to those reported
in Duncan (2002), showing that the gesture differences
between perfect and progressive utterances are not merely
the product of different events with different intrinsic
properties tending to be described with the perfect or the
progressive. We presented participants with the same events
in two different aspects. Depending on aspect of
presentation and aspect of production, we saw different
gestural behaviors.
These results also raise some interesting possibilities for
the issue of how simulation during comprehension might
interact with simulation during production. If mental
simulation occurs during language comprehension,
representations formed then should serve as the input for
utterances formulated during the process of language
production. If simulation also occurs during production, this
second process might be congruent with the first, or might
conflict with and override it. Our naturalistic narrative task
suggests that we are indeed looking at a complex and
dynamic process.

Acknowledgments
Funding was provided by the W.P. Jones Foundation.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou,
L.
W.
(2009).
Simulation,
situated
conceptualization,
and
prediction.
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London: B, 364,
1281-1289.
Bergen, B., & Chang, N. (2005). Embodied construction
grammar in simulation-based language understanding. In
J.-O. Östman & M. Fried (Eds.), Construction
Grammar(s): Cognitive Grounding and Theoretical
Extensions (pp. 147-190). Amsterdam: Benjamin.

Bergen, B., Lindsay, S., Matlock, T., & Narayanan, S.
(2007). Spatial and linguistic aspects of visual imagery in
sentence comprehension. Cognitive Science, 31, 733-764.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (2010). Grammatical aspect and
mental simulation. Brain and Language, 112, 150-158.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Dowty, D. (1977). Toward a semantic analysis of verb
aspect and the English "imperfective" progressive.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 1, 45-77.
Duncan, S. D. (2002). Gesture, verb aspect, and the nature
of iconic imagery in natural discourse. Gesture, 2, 183206.
Glenberg, A., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 96,
558-565.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible
embodiment: Gesture as simulated action. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 15(3), 495-514.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2010). Language,
gesture, action! A test of the Gesture as Simulated Action
framework. Journal of Memory & Language, 63, 245257.
Kaschak, M. P., & Glenberg, A. M. (2000). Constructing
meaning: The role of affordances and grammatical
constructions in sentence comprehension. Journal of
Memory & Language, 43(3), 508-529.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley, R.
H., Aveyard, M., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan, R. A.
(2005). Perception of motion affects language processing.
Cognition, 94(3), 79-89.
Kita, S., & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic
variation in semantic coordination of speech and gesture
reveal?: Evidence for an interface representation of spatial
thinking and speaking. Journal of Memory & Language,
48(1), 16-32.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics,
33(1), 159-174.
Langacker, R. W. (1991). Concept, Image, and Symbol: The
Cognitive Basis of Grammar. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Madden, C. and Zwaan, R. (2003). How does verb aspect
constrain event representations? Memory & Cognition,
31, 663-672.
Matlock, T. (2004). Fictive motion as cognitive simulation.
Memory & Cognition, 326, 1389-1400.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal
about Thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and Thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999). Embodied cognition, perceptual
symbols, and situation models. Discourse Processes,
28(16), 81-88.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002).
Language comprehenders mentally represent the shapes
of objects. Psychological Science, 136, 168-171.

3228

