UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
GREEBLES Greeble greeb. On reduction in speech and gesture in repeated references.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7dq635z3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hoetjes, Marieke
Koolen, Ruud
Goudbeek, Martjin
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

GREEBLES Greeble greeb
On Reduction in Speech and Gesture in Repeated References
Marieke Hoetjes (m.w.hoetjes@uvt.nl)
Ruud Koolen (r.m.f.koolen@uvt.nl)
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@uvt.nl)
Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Faculty of Humanities, Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
Previous research has shown that predictable information in
speech is often reduced. The present study aims to find out
more about reduction with regard to speech but mainly
whether reduction also occurs in speech-accompanying
gestures. To this end, a director-matcher task was set up in
which speakers of Dutch took part. In this task the director
had to refer to the same abstract object several times. The
repeated references thus obtained were analysed for their
reduction in speech and gesture. Speech results show that the
number of attributes is reduced and gesture results show that
gestures are reduced with regard to the number of hands that
are used, their size and their precision. Implications for
existing gesture models are discussed.
Keywords: speech; gesture; reduction; repeated references

Introduction
Reduction in repeated references
When speaking, people often produce referring expressions
to describe objects in the world, mostly in order to identify a
target referent to an addressee. For example, a speaker
might point out someone to an addressee by saying “that tall
guy with the glasses” while producing a pointing gesture.
The interaction between the speaker and the addressee is
multimodal: the speaker may use both auditory (speech) and
visual cues (gestures) to ensure that the addressee knows
what he or she is talking about.
In a conversation, it is likely that a speaker refers to the
same object more than once, leading to the production of
repeated referring expressions. From previous research, it is
known that these repeated references lead to reduction in
speech (e.g. Bard et al., 2000; Brennan & Clark, 1996; Lam
& Watson, in press), while reduction in gesture has
remained unexplored.
The Uniform Information Density (UID) hypothesis
(Frank & Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger, 2010; see also e.g. Aylett &
Turk, 2004) states that reduction in language production

serves to optimize the interaction between the speaker and
the addressee. More specifically, the UID hypothesis
predicts that speakers are flexible in the sense that they
lengthen the elements of an utterance with a relatively high
information density, and shorten the elements with a low
information density, which are less important for successful
communication. This process makes the amount of
information that is transmitted more uniform and optimal
for both speaker and addressee. In this way, the UID
hypothesis is in line with Grice’s (1975) Maxim of
Quantity: “Make your contribution as informative as is
required (for the current purpose of the exchange)”.
Arguably, reduction in repeated references follows a
similar pattern: it could be the case that when speakers
repeatedly refer to an object, they tend to only reproduce
those auditory and visual cues of the initial referring
expression that help the addressee to easily identify the
target referent, while the less informative cues are omitted.
In short, this implies that speakers reduce predictable
information, but do not reduce important information.

Reduction in speech
Consistent with the UID hypothesis, previous research has
indeed shown that repeated references lead to reduction in
speech in at least two ways. Firstly, several studies have
found that repeated references contain fewer words than
initial references to the same target (e.g. Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986). Brennan and Clark (1996) explain this in
terms of people establishing conceptual pacts, which they
define as temporary agreements between speaker and
addressee about how a target is conceptualized. These
conceptual pacts are usually determined by the common
ground between the speaker and the addressee. Since these
conceptual pacts are not established all at once, but during a
series of successive references, as Brennan and Clark (1996)
argue, speakers often shorten their repeated references to
simpler and more efficient expressions (e.g. from an initial

3250

reference where an object is described as “the purple one
with the curly bit at the end that looks a bit like a snake” to a
repeated reference where the same object is simply
described as “the snake”).
Secondly, among others, Aylett and Turk (2004) and Bard
et al. (2000) have revealed that repeated references are also
reduced acoustically. In their paper, Bard et al. (2000)
measured the intelligibility of initial and repeated target
descriptions, where they regarded utterances as highly
intelligible when the addressee could easily identify the
target. Their results showed that repeated references were
less intelligible than initial ones, because these were uttered
less clearly, even when there was no mutual visibility
between speaker and addressee. In line with this, Lam and
Watson (in press) found a similar effect for reduction in
word duration.

Reduction in gesture
Considering the UID hypothesis (Frank & Jaeger, 2008;
Jaeger, 2010) that predictable information is reduced, and
given that communication does not only consist of verbal
but also of nonverbal aspects, one may wonder whether a
similar reduction process as discussed above also takes
place for gestures produced in repeated references.
In gesture research, there is general consensus that speech
and gesture are closely related (Kendon, 1980, 2004;
McNeill, 1992). Most gesture models are based on the
language production model by Levelt (1989) and agree that
speech and gesture have a shared origin. The difference
between the different gesture models lies in the point at
which the two communication streams (speech and gesture)
part. This means that different gesture models predict
different results with regard to gesture reduction in repeated
references. The gesture model as proposed by De Ruiter
(2000), for example, where speech and gesture are planned
together, would predict that speech and gesture can be
reduced together. The gesture model as proposed by
McNeill (1992), where there is an even closer link between
speech and gesture and where gestures are seen as a direct
“window into the mind”, might predict that speech and
gesture have to be reduced together.
Presently, as far as we are aware, no studies have been
done on gesture reduction in repeated references. Earlier
work on speech reduction has revealed that (a) repeated
references are shorter than initial ones, and (b) that repeated
words are less intelligible. Taking into account the close
relationship between speech and gesture, we hypothesize
that repeated references are accompanied by fewer gestures,
and also that these gestures are less ‘precise’ than those
accompanying initial references. A research question is to
what extent gesture reduction during repeated references is
similar to speech reduction in repeated references.
Even though we are not aware of any studies looking at
gestures during repeated references, some circumstantial
evidence for our hypothesis can be derived from studies

looking at gesture and common ground. In these studies,
common ground was established in repeated story
narrations. Results from most of these studies (e.g. de
Ruiter, Bangerter, & Dings, in press; Holler & Wilkin,
2009; Jacobs & Garnham, 2007) show gesture reduction due
to common ground but results are mainly based on
reduction in the quantity of the gestures. Reduction in
gesture quality has presently not received a lot of attention,
with the exception of two studies. One study, by Holler and
Stevens (2007), found that speakers are less likely to
represent specific information (in this case of size) in
gesture when there is common ground between
interlocutors. Gerwing and Bavelas (2004) found that,
overall, gestures produced when there was common ground
were less complex, precise and informative than gestures
produced when there was no common ground. However, in
this study gestures were not studied pairwise but overall
across story narrations.
Several open questions from above mentioned previous
research can be answered by studying gesture reduction in
repeated references. Firstly, gesture reduction in repeated
references can tell us more about the details of the
relationship between gesture and speech. Secondly, since
previous research has found reduction in speech in repeated
references, it is interesting to see whether a similar process
takes place for gesture. Furthermore, the previous work on
gesture reduction is only based on common ground, not on
repeated references, and has focused on gesture quantity.
Presently, no consensus has been reached on how to study
qualitative reduction of gestures.

The present study
In the present study we will look at speech and gesture
reduction in repeated references. Since there is no consensus
yet on how to study qualitative gesture reduction, one of the
aims of the present study is to develop a methodology with
which to objectively quantify qualitative gesture reduction.
We expect that gestures will become reduced in number and
in appearance, or, in other words, that there will be
quantitative and qualitative gesture reduction in repeated
references. We also want to compare reduction in speech
with reduction in gesture.
To study these aspects of speech and gesture, we
conducted a director-matcher task and a perception test,
details of which will be discussed below.

Experiment I: Data collection and analysis
Method
In order to study reduction in repeated references a data set
was created which consisted of video recordings of
participants taking part in a director matcher task. In this
task, the director had to describe an abstract figure (a
“Greeble”) to the matcher in such a way that the matcher
could identify the correct figure from a range of similar

3251

looking figures. In the stimuli, there were several figures
that had to be described two or three times, leading to
repeated references to the same item.

Participants

crucial manipulation in the task was that several Greebles
had to be described repeatedly: in each of the picture grids,
two Greebles had to be described twice, and two Greebles
had to be described three times. Repeated references to the
same object were never straight after one another.

Participants were 106 undergraduate students (31 male, 75
female, age range 18-29 years old, M = 21 years and 7
months), who took part in pairs as partial fulfilment of
course credits. From these pairs, data from 5 pairs was left
out because there were technical problems or because the
participants had not understood the experiment, leading to a
data set consisting of data from 48 pairs of participants (48
directors and 48 matchers).

Stimuli
The stimulus material consisted of pictures of Greebles 1,
which are intended to be hard to describe, small yellow
objects, initially designed so as to share characteristics with
human faces. These Greebles vary in terms of their main
body shapes (“Samar”, “Galli”, “Radok”, “Tasio”), their
gender (“Plok”, “Glip”), the different types of protrusions
that they have (“Boges”, “Quiff”, “Dunth”) and in terms of
the shapes and sizes of these protrusions (see Figure 1 for an
example Greeble and see Gauthier & Tarr (1997) for a more
detailed description of the Greebles and their properties).

Figure 2. Example of one of the picture grids presented to
the director. The object with the red square surrounding it is
the target object of that particular trial.

Setup
The experiment was performed in a lab, where the director
and the matcher were seated at a table opposite each other
(see Figure 3 for the setup).

Figure 1. Example Greeble, in this case with the main body
shape “Tasio” and of the gender “Glip”.
The Greebles were selected for their abstractness, their
similarity to each other, and because they differed mainly
with regard to their shape, making it likely that the director
would give detailed target descriptions and that many
gestures would be used. In order to avoid associations with
small puppets (which would make the pictures less abstract),
the Greebles were turned upside down.
Two picture grids containing 16 Greebles were used. Each
picture grid was used for 15 trials, which made a total of 30
trials. In each trial, there was one target object (marked by a
red line), which was surrounded by 15 distractor objects. An
example of a picture grid can be seen in Figure 2.
The order in which the participants were presented with
the picture grids was counterbalanced over participants. The
1

Images courtesy of Michael J. Tarr, Center for the Neural
Basis of Cognition and Department of Psychology, Carnegie
Mellon University. URL: http://www.tarrlab.org/

Figure 3. Setup of the experiment, matcher sits on the left
and director sits on the right.
Both participants were filmed during the experiment: one
camera was positioned behind the matcher (filming the
director) and another camera was positioned to the side of
the director (filming the entire setup). The participants were
given written instructions and had the opportunity to ask
questions, after which the experiment started. The director
was presented with the trials on a computer screen, and was
asked to provide a description of the target in such a way
that it could be distinguished from the 15 distractor objects.
The matcher had a box filled with 16 cards in front of her,
which was not visible to the director. The cards in the
matcher’s box showed the same objects as on the director’s
screen, but these objects were ordered differently for the
director and the matcher. Based on the director’s target
description, the matcher had to pick the corresponding card

3252

from the box in front of her. Once the correct card was
found, the director went on to the next trial. The matcher
was allowed to ask for more information or to repeat
information that had already been given but there was no
free conversation between the director and the matcher.
After 15 trials, the director was shown a second grid
containing 16 new objects, and the matcher was presented
with a new box filled with stacks of cards of these objects.

Data analysis
Speech and gesture analysis has taken place for the first and
third references to the objects that had to be described three
times The statistical procedure consisted of repeated
measures ANOVAs.
Speech analysis We looked at aspects that would tell us
more about reduction in speech, such as speech duration,
number of words and number of attributes. The number of
attributes shows how repeated references are reduced in
terms of their content. An attribute can be defined as a
property that can be assigned to a target referent. When
constructing the trials, we made sure that all targets could be
distinguished by means of 4 attributes. We designed an
annotation scheme containing over 20 attributes that
speakers could potentially mention when describing a
Greeble. This scheme was based on the basic characteristics
of Greebles (main body shape, gender, protrusions) and was
expanded with attributes describing all other properties that
they can possibly have (mainly concerning the protrusions’
shapes, locations and sizes). The attributes in the annotation
scheme were based on the participants’ descriptions.
Gesture analysis For the gesture analysis we not only
looked at the quantity of gestures (in raw numbers and
proportional use), but also developed several ways to
analyse reduction in the quality of the gestures. For these
qualitative analyses we created a subset of the data. This
subset consisted of all directors (23 out of 48) who produced
at least one gesture for each initial and repeated reference.
We took the following qualitative aspects into account. We
measured the duration of the stroke (main part of the
gesture, see Kendon, 2004 and McNeill, 1992) in seconds.
We measured the visibility of the gesture by coding whether
the gesture was visible for the addressee (code 1) or not
(code 0). We measured the amount of repetition within the
gesture by counting the number of repeated strokes. This
was done because the data set contained many gestures with
repetitive strokes. We measured the size of the gesture by
coding whether the gesture was produced with a finger
(code 1), the hand (code 2), the forearm (code 3) or the
entire arm (code 4). We measured the proportion of gestures
that were produced using two hands. Finally, we studied
whether the gesture was perceived to be more or less precise
in a perception test (discussed in Experiment II).

Results
Reduction in speech As can be seen in Table 1, compared
to initial references, repeated references showed reduction
in speech in several ways. Firstly, it was found that it took
the participants significantly less time (in seconds) to refer
to the target in a repeated reference (M = 27.2, SD = 1.9)
compared to when they referred to the target in an initial
reference (M = 42.5, SD = 1.5) (F(1,47) = 40.752, p < .001).
Note that this effect cannot be explained through a general
reduction of descriptions over time, since non-repeated
references later in the grid were not shortened compared to
the initial references. Also, the number of words that
speakers used to describe a target, was significantly lower
for repeated references (M = 59.8, SD = 5.2) than for initial
references (M = 91.9, SD = 3.4) (F(1,47) = 37.283, p < .001).
The total number of attributes that were mentioned in initial
and repeated references shows how repeated references are
reduced in terms of their content. We found that
significantly fewer attributes were mentioned in repeated
references (M = 7.4, SD = .3) compared to initial references
(M = 9.4, SD = .3) (F(1,47) = 40.614, p < .001).
Table 1. Overview of overall mean results for dependent
variables in speech, for initial and repeated references.

Duration ***
Words***
Attributes***
*** p < .001

Initial (SD)
42.5 (1.5)
91.9 (3.4)
9.4 (.3)

Repeated (SD)
27.2 (1.9)
59.8 (5.2)
7.4 (.3)

Reduction in gesture As can be seen in Table 2, compared
to initial references, repeated references showed reduction
in gesture in several ways. For the quantitative analyses,
results show that speakers produce significantly fewer
gestures during repeated references (M = 3.9, SD = 0.42)
compared to initial references (M = 5.5, SD = 0.46), (F(1,47)
= 22.750, p < .001). Since this could also be due to the
reduction in the number of words in repeated references, we
also looked at the proportional use of gestures (G/W,
number of gestures divided by the number of words) and
here we see a significant increase in the proportional use of
gestures for the repeated references (M = .094, SD = .02)
compared to the initial references (M = .067, SD = .02)
(F(1,47) = 4.037, p = .05). In other words, the reduction in
repeated references is smaller for gestures than for the
number of words.
The qualitative analyses revealed that gestures produced
during repeated references were smaller (F(1,22) = 5.419, p <
.05) than the gestures produced during initial references.
Gestures produced in repeated references were relatively
more often produced with the smaller articulators (finger
and/or hand) whereas gestures produced in initial references
were relatively more often produced with the larger

3253

articulators (forearm and entire arm). Moreover, we found a
reduction in the percentage of two handed gestures, meaning
that even though overall, most gestures were produced with
two hands, there were fewer two-handed gestures in
repeated references (M = .075) than in initial references (M
= 0.85) (F(1,22) = 8.209, p < .01). The other variables taken
into account (gesture duration, gesture visibility, repetition
within the gesture) were found to be not significant.

produced in descriptions to the same object. No instructions
were given with regard to what they should base this
precision judgment on. The test was a forced choice test and
participants were asked to go with their fist intuition. Each
gesture that was considered to be the most precise received
one point.

Results

Table 2. Overview of overall mean results for dependent
variables in gesture, for initial and repeated references.
Initial (SD)
Number of gestures***
5.5 (.46)
Gesture proportion (G/W)*
.067 (.02)
1.6 (.09)
Gesture duration (sec)
Gesture visibility (0-1)
.93 (.03)
Gesture repetition
.37 (.09)
Gesture size (1-4)*
3.7 (.07)
Two-handed gestures (%)**
0.85
*** p < .001, ** p < .01, * p < .05

Repeated (SD)
3.9 (.42)
.094 (.02)
1.4 (.14)
.93 (.03)
.38 (.08)
3.5 (.11)
0.75

Experiment II: Perception
As part of the qualitative gesture analysis, the aim was to
measure gesture precision. It is difficult to define objective
measures with which to code gestures’ precision, therefore a
perception test was run where participants had to judge
gestures’ precision.

Participants
Twenty three participants (20 female, 3 male, age range 1965 years old, M = 26 years old) who did not take part in the
Greebles experiment took part in the perception test. All
participants were academically qualified but had no
previous knowledge about the Greebles experiment.

Stimuli
For this perception test, 66 pairs of video clips were selected
from the qualitative data subset obtained in Experiment I.
These pairs of video clips contained two gestures (one in
each video clip), produced by the same director, showing
the main shape of the same stimulus item. One video clip
showed a gesture produced in an initial description of a
stimulus item, the other video clip showed a gesture
produced during a repeated description of the same stimulus
item. The order in which the initial and repeated gestures
were presented was counterbalanced.

Setup
The participants were presented with the 66 pairs of video
clips. For each pair of video clips, they had to decide in
which video clip they thought the gesture was “the most
precise”. Participants were not aware that the gestures were

A two-tailed t-test showed that overall, gestures produced
during repeated references (M = 9.23, SD = 6.9) were
considered to be significantly less precise than the gestures
produced during initial references (M = 13.77, SD = 6.9),
(t(65) = 2.658, p < .05). The proportional results, where not
just the gesture that received the most points but the
gesture’s exact scores were taken into account (each gesture
that was considered to be the most precise received one
point from each participant), also show that gestures
produced in an initial reference were considered to be more
precise (M = 0.60, SD = .30) than the gestures produced in
repeated references (M = 0.40, SD = .30). The perception
test has shown that gestures produced in repeated references
are seen as significantly less precise than those produced in
initial references.

Discussion
The results of the two experiments presented in this paper
have shown that speakers reduce their speech and gestures
in several ways when they repeatedly refer to the same
target. These results are in line with our expectations, and fit
the Uniform Information Density hypothesis (Frank &
Jaeger, 2008; Jaeger, 2010). As we have seen in the
introduction of this paper, the UID hypothesis holds that
predictable information is reduced in language production,
and that elements with low information density are likely to
be omitted from an utterance. Our results suggest that the
same goes for repeated references: speakers reduce repeated
descriptions in terms of both their speech and their gestures.
With regard to the speech that speakers produce, our
results show that reduction in repeated referring expressions
occurs in terms of the number of attributes that speakers
mention when describing a target: significantly fewer
attributes were mentioned in repeated references as
compared to initial ones, showing that repeated references
are less informative than initial ones. Besides this, our
results also reconfirmed the findings of, among others,
Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986), by revealing that repeated
referring expressions contain fewer words than initial ones.
With regard to gesture we can now claim two things.
Firstly, we found that repeated gestures are reduced with
regard to their overall number, their size, the percentage of
two-handed gestures, and their perceived precision. These
results show that gestures, as previous findings found for
speech, are reduced in repeated references. There are
parallels with reduction in speech, both in the reduction in
the overall number of gestures, which can be compared to

3254

the reduction in number of words and creation of conceptual
pacts in speech, and in the reduction in gesture precision,
which is arguably comparable to acoustic reduction in
speech. Secondly, the results also showed that even though
overall, speakers use fewer gestures in repeated references,
the proportional use of gesture increases. In short, there is
more reduction in words than in gestures. This finding, that
speech and gesture are not necessarily reduced together, can
be interpreted as evidence for the fact that speech and
gesture production are, at least to some extent, separate
processes.
The results showed an overall reduction in the duration of
the descriptions. However, the reduction due to repetition
was larger than the overall reduction, showing that the effect
was not simply due to the director’s overall description
practise but mainly due to the communicative situation. The
fact that the communicative situation seems to play such a
large part in the experiment also suggests that the gestures
were mainly produced for the listener. However, it could
still be the case that the gestures serve a speaker internal
purpose as well. In the present study almost all gestures
were visible for the addressee. To be able to say more about
whether the changes in gesture that we found are due to
speaker internal or communicative reasons, we will conduct
a follow-up study with no mutual visibility between
interlocutors. Other future work will include further
developing the present methodology with which to quantify
the quality of the gestures. Aspects of the gestures that have
not yet been taken into account but that might be relevant
are, for example, the handshapes used in the gestures and
the length of the gesture holds.

Conclusion
In conclusion, in this study on reduction in speech and
gesture in repeated references we found for speech that
repeated references are less informative than initial
references. For gesture we found that gestures in repeated
references are reduced in their overall quantity as well as in
several aspects of their quality. We also found that
proportionally, the gesture quantity increases for repeated
references compared to initial references.
The present study contributes to previous research in two
major ways. Firstly, the finding that speech and gesture are
not necessarily reduced together indicates that their
reduction might to some extent be two independent
processes. Secondly, reduction in gesture in repeated
references has not been studied before and to date there has
been no consensus on a methodology with which to study
qualitative gesture reduction. The present study is an
important step in this direction.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Joost Driessen for help in
annotating the data and Bas Roset for technical support. We
received financial support from The Netherlands

Organization for Scientific Research, via a Vici grant (NWO
grant 27770007), which is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy
hypothesis: a functional explanation for relationships between
redundancy, prosodic prominence, and duration in spontaneous
speech. Language and Speech, 47(1), 31-56.
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M., DohertySneddon, G., & Newlands, A. (2000). Controlling the
intelligibility of referring expressions in dialogue. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42, 1-22.
Brennan, S., & Clark, H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and lexical
choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
22(6), 1482-1493.
Clark, H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative
process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
de Ruiter, J. P. (2000). The production of gesture and speech. In D.
McNeill (Ed.), Language and gesture. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
de Ruiter, J. P., Bangerter, A., & Dings, P. (in press). The interplay
between gesture and speech in the production of referring
expressions: Investigating the trade-off hypothesis. Topics in
Cognitive Science.
Frank, A. F., & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform
information density as an optimal strategy for language
production. Paper presented at the 30th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Society (CogSci), Washington.
Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. (1997). Becoming a “Greeble” expert:
exploring mechanisms for face recognition. Vision Research,
37, 1673-1682.
Gerwing, J., & Bavelas, J. (2004). Linguistic influences on
gesture's form. Gesture, 4, 157-195.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech arts. New
York: Academic Press.
Holler, J., & Stevens, R. (2007). The effect of common ground on
how speakers use gesture and speech to represent size
information. Journal of Language and Psychology, 26(1), 4-27.
Holler, J., & Wilkin, K. (2009). Communicating common ground:
how mutually shared knowledge influences speech and gesture
in a narrative task. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(2),
267-289.
Jacobs, N., & Garnham, A. (2007). The role of conversational hand
gestures in a narrative task. Journal of Memory and Language,
56, 291-303.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers manage
syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1), 2362.
Kendon, A. (1980). Gesture and speech: two aspects of the process
of utterance. In M. R. Key (Ed.), Nonverbal communication and
language. The Hague: Mouton.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture. Visible action as utterance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lam, T. Q., & Watson, D. G. (in press). Repetition is easy: Why
repeated referents have reduced prominence. Memory and
Cognition.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind. What gestures reveal about
thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

3255

