UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Having an Interdependent Self-Construal Leads to Greater Weighting of Data In Causal
Judgment
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zf5n37t
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Geodert, Kelly M.
Grimm, Lisa R.
Markman, Arthur B.
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

 Having an Interdependent Self-Construal Leads to Greater Weighting
                                    of Data In Causal Judgment
                                               Kelly M. Goedert
                                                Seton Hall University
                                                 Lisa R. Grimm
                                             The College of New Jersey
                                             Arthur B. Markman
                                             University of Texas, Austin
                                             Barbara A. Spellman
                                                University of Virginia
Abstract: People’s causal judgments show systematic biases, including over-weighting of confirming information,
and favoring prior beliefs over data. We investigated the effects of self-construal on data-weighting in causal judg-
ments. We primed participants with interdependent or independent self-construals (interdependent people define
themselves through relationships; independent through individual traits). On 56 trials, each containing complete fre-
quency information (i.e., frequency of presence/absence of the cause and presence/absence of the effect), participants
judged the ability of a cause to produce an effect. We observed a main effect of prime: Interdependent participants’
judgments covaried more with frequency information, suggesting they make greater use of data. Furthermore, on
non-contingent trials, interdependents weighted all frequency data equally (independents did not). However, be-
ing interdependent did not perfectly ameliorate biases in the weighting of data: on contingent trials, both groups
weighted the data unequally, favoring confirming, cause-present information. Thus, independents only sometimes
demonstrated extra sensitivity to background information.
                                                         3451

