UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Horizontal Trumps Vertical in the Spatial Organization of Numerical Magnitude

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7tq3z4s0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Holmes, Kevin J.
Lourenco, Stella F.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Horizontal Trumps Vertical in the Spatial Organization of Numerical Magnitude
Kevin J. Holmes (kevin.holmes@emory.edu)
Stella F. Lourenco (stella.lourenco@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
36 Eagle Row, Atlanta, GA 30322

Abstract
The vast majority of research on the spatial nature of numerical
representation has focused on the horizontal axis, highlighting
the left-to-right orientation of increasing values (i.e., the mental
number line). Recent evidence points to spatial organization
along the vertical (bottom-to-top) axis as well. We argue,
however, that these findings are better characterized as
generalized magnitude mappings between number and other
magnitude dimensions (e.g., near-far spatial extent), rather than
genuine vertical orientation. Here we replicate generalized
magnitude mappings for number (Exp. 1A) and show that they
take precedence over left-to-right orientation (Exp. 1B), likely
because of the direct mapping between dimensions. In contrast,
we find no evidence of spontaneous organization along the true
vertical axis (Exp. 2A), and left-to-right orientation trumped
bottom-to-top orientation when the two were inconsistent with
each other (Exp. 2B). Reliable bottom-to-top orientation was
evident only after priming of magnitude relations among
numbers (Exp. 3). Together, these findings demonstrate that
number is more strongly represented horizontally than
vertically. We suggest that experience with cultural tools may
drive this asymmetry, and we highlight other cognitive and
environmental factors that may influence the mental
organization of magnitude dimensions beyond number.
Keywords: number; spatial organization; SNARC effect;
mental magnitude line.

Introduction
Across a wide range of common cultural tools and artifacts,
numbers are spatially organized. Many of these external
symbolic representations depict numbers horizontally (e.g.,
rulers, measuring tapes), but some do so vertically (e.g.,
mercury thermometers, measuring cups). Despite this
variation in spatial forms, the vast majority of research on the
mental association between number and space has focused
almost exclusively on the horizontal axis. Many such studies
have suggested that numerical representations take the form
of a mental number line, running from left to right in
representational space (at least in Western cultures; for
reviews, see Fias & Fischer, 2005; Hubbard et al., 2005),
without examining other spatial axes on which number might
also be mentally organized.
Recent findings suggest, however, that the vertical axis
(specifically, bottom-to-top orientation) may also be recruited
in the mental organization of number. In a parity judgment
task, with response buttons arranged vertically on a tabletop,
Ito and Hatta (2004) found that as numerical magnitude
increased, “top” responses became faster relative to “bottom”
responses (see also Gevers et al., 2006; Müller & Schwarz,
2007). Using saccadic latency as a dependent measure,

Schwarz and Keus (2004) found that larger numbers elicited
faster upward (relative to downward) saccades, and Loetscher
et al. (2010) showed that vertical (not just horizontal) changes
in participants’ eye position were predictive of the magnitude
of numbers they subsequently generated.
While such findings have been regarded as evidence for
vertical orientation of number, they are also compatible with
the notion that number is but one component of a more
general system of magnitude representation (Walsh, 2003).
On this account, different dimensions of magnitude are
spontaneously aligned, producing generalized mappings of
more/less relations across dimensions (e.g., number, duration,
size). As such mappings have been observed even in
preverbal infants (Lourenco & Longo, 2010), they do not
appear to require the same degree of cultural support as
organization of number along spatial axes (e.g., left-to-right
orientation), and hence may be especially robust. In the case
of previous findings for vertical orientation, generalized
magnitude mappings can fully account for the observed
effects without invoking spatial axes, or a specific orientation,
at all. That is, numerical magnitude may have been mapped to
another magnitude dimension rather than to the vertical axis
per se. In studies using tabletop responses, number may have
been mapped to distance, given that response buttons were
not arranged along the true vertical bottom-top axis (i.e.,
sagittal plane). Instead, they differed in relative spatial extent
from the body (i.e., transverse plane; see Fig. 1); the “top”
and “bottom” responses in these studies may be better
characterized as “far” and “near” responses, respectively.
Thus, larger numerical values may have been associated with
greater distance, rather than upward locations in space.
Generalized magnitude mappings may also underlie the
effects observed with saccadic measures. In these studies,
number may be associated with effort, since upward and
downward saccades may be considered more and less
effortful, respectively. Vision research has shown that upward
saccades are slower than downward saccades, and the resting
position of the eyes is slightly lower than the actual vertical
midpoint (Collewijn, Erkelens, & Steinman, 1988). Overall
downward shifts in eye position have also been observed
during number bisection tasks (Loetscher, Bockisch, &
Brugger, 2008), suggesting that upward saccades may require
greater effort, particularly during number processing. Thus, in
studies using saccadic measures to examine vertical
orientation, larger numerical values may have been associated
with more effortful bodily actions (as has been shown for
grasping; e.g., Lindemann et al., 2007).
Given that the vertical axis has been confounded with other
magnitude dimensions in previous studies, whether number is

2276

represented vertically at all remains an open question. One
reason to suspect that vertical orientation (if any) might be
relatively weak is that vertical depictions of number on
common cultural tools are often at odds with each other. For
example, calculators display numbers in bottom-to-top
orientation (i.e., smaller numbers on the bottom, larger
numbers on the top), whereas telephone keypads display
numbers in top-to-bottom orientation. These opposing orders
may reflect a distinction between magnitude (i.e., more/less)
and non-magnitude (e.g., ordinal position) properties of
number. That is, the numbers on calculators are used in
computations of magnitude, while the numbers on telephone
keypads are merely ordinal. Importantly, calculators and
telephone keypads are consistent with respect to the horizontal
axis; on both, increasing values are displayed from left to
right. Indeed, in Western cultures, left-to-right orientation is
ubiquitous; there may be no common instantiation of number
in which values increase from right to left.
For these reasons, we hypothesized that number might be
more strongly represented horizontally than vertically. We
examined this idea by comparing the relative strength of
spatial organization along various axes, both separately (i.e.,
for horizontal or vertical alone) and when axes were at odds
with each other (i.e., using response locations congruent with
one axis and incongruent with another). First, to establish that
generalized magnitude mappings are not interchangeable with
the true vertical axis, we used tabletop keyboard responses to
compare mappings of number to the horizontal axis (i.e., leftto-right orientation) and to near-far distance (i.e., generalized
magnitude mapping), separately (Exp. 1A) and together (Exp.
1B). Second, we used responses on a vertically mounted
touchscreen to tap true vertical, comparing horizontal and
vertical orientation within (Exp. 2A) and across axes (Exp.
2B). Finally, we probed more directly the nature of vertical
orientation by priming various vertical depictions of number
and examining subsequent spatial organization along the
vertical axis (Exp. 3).

Experiment 1: Horizontal vs. Near-Far
Method
Participants. A total of 42 Emory University undergraduates
(22 in Exp. 1A; 20 in Exp. 1B) participated for course credit.
Materials. Stimuli were Arabic numerals (0-9), presented
centrally on a computer screen in black font on a white
background (Arial font, 6.5° × 5.5°).
Procedure. In Exp. 1A, participants completed Horizontal
and Near-Far tasks (order counterbalanced). In both tasks,
participants made parity (odd/even) judgments on each trial
by pressing one of two keys on the numerical keypad of a
computer keyboard (Horizontal: 4 and 6; Near-Far: 2 and 8;
see Fig. 1). Keys were covered with opaque stickers. Each
task consisted of two blocks of trials: one in which “even”
responses were assigned to the left/near key and “odd”
responses to the right/far key, and the other with the reverse
assignment (order counterbalanced). Each block consisted
of 10 practice trials and 90 test trials, with each number

Figure 1: Response keys in Exp. 1A (Horizontal task: blue;
Near-Far task: red) and Exp. 1B (Congruent task: purple;
Incongruent task: black). Colors in this figure are for
illustrative purposes.
presented 9 times (random order). Each trial began with a
fixation cross (presented centrally, 500 ms) and was
followed by a number that remained onscreen until a
response was made. Trials were separated by a blank screen
(500 ms). Instructions emphasized both speed and accuracy.
In Exp. 1B, each participant completed Congruent and
Incongruent tasks (order counterbalanced). In the Congruent
task, response keys were 1 (near-left) and 9 (far-right). Hence,
left-to-right orientation and the number-distance mapping
were congruent (e.g., faster responses to smaller numbers
with the near-left key and larger numbers with the far-right
key were consistent with both mappings). In the Incongruent
task, response keys were 3 (near-right) and 7 (far-left). Hence,
the two mappings were incongruent (e.g., faster responses to
smaller numbers with the near-right key and larger numbers
with the far-left key were consistent with the number-distance
mapping, but not left-to-right orientation). All other
procedural aspects were identical to Exp. 1A.

Results and Discussion
After excluding trials in which participants responded
incorrectly (Exp. 1A: 3.1% of trials; Exp. 1B: 4.6%) and in
which reaction times (RTs) were greater than 2.5 SD from
individual means (Exp. 1A: 2.7%; Exp. 1B: 2.9%), mean
RTs for each participant were computed for left, right, near,
and far responses (Exp. 1A) and for near-left, far-right, farleft, and near-right responses (Exp. 1B) separately for each
digit pair (0-1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-7, and 8-9). In Exp.1A, left
responses were subtracted from right responses (Horizontal
task) and near responses from far responses (Near-Far task)
for a measure of RT differences (dRT), with negative dRT
indicating faster right and faster far responses, respectively,
for the two tasks. In Exp. 1B, near-left responses were
subtracted from far-right responses (Congruent task) and
far-left responses from near-right responses (Incongruent
task); negative dRT indicated faster far-right and faster
near-right responses, respectively, for the two tasks.
dRT values were regressed on digit magnitude to produce
the unstandardized slope coefficient of the best-fitting linear
regression (Fias & Fischer, 2005). The slope data were
analyzed in separate 2 (task; within-subjects) × 2 (order of
tasks; between-subjects) ANOVAs for Exp. 1A and 1B. The
main effect of task was significant in Exp. 1B, F(1,18) =
12.56, p = .002, but not in Exp. 1A, F(1,20) = .22, p = .65.

2277

vertical axis, the results of Exp. 1 leave open the question of
whether number is in fact represented vertically, and, if so,
whether vertical orientation is as strong as horizontal
orientation. Exp. 2 was designed to address these questions.

Experiment 2: Horizontal vs. Vertical
Method
Participants. Fifty-two Emory University undergraduates (20
in Exp. 2A; 32 in Exp. 2B) participated for course credit.
Materials. Arabic numerals 0-9 were presented on a touch
screen (Keytec Magic Touch, 4096 × 4096 resolution, USBXD) attached to a 15-in. computer monitor.

Figure 2: Mean dRT for number pairs in (A) Exp. 1A (Left-Right
task: blue diamonds; Near-Far task: red squares) and (B) Exp. 1B
(Congruent task: purple diamonds; Incongruent task: gray squares).
In Exp. 1A, negative slopes were observed in both the
Horizontal and Near-Far tasks. As expected, both slopes
differed significantly from zero (see Fig. 2A), indicating
reliable left-to-right orientation and near-far mapping when
tested separately. In Exp. 1B, the Congruent task yielded a
significant negative slope (see Fig. 2B), consistent with both
left-to-right orientation and near-far mapping. However, the
Incongruent task yielded a significant positive slope,
consistent with near-far mapping, but not left-to-right
orientation (i.e., far responses became faster with increasing
distance, despite also being on the left). No other main
effects or interactions were significant (ps > .07).
The results of Exp. 1 replicate previous findings of left-toright orientation and the generalized magnitude mapping of
number to near-far distance. While Exp. 1A suggests that
horizontal orientation and generalized magnitude mappings
may both be recruited, Exp. 1B shows that when the two are
at odds, the near-far mapping trumps left-to-right
orientation. Why might this be? As suggested above,
generalized magnitude mappings may be stronger than
organization of number along spatial axes. Because near-far
distance reflects differences in spatial extent, analogous
differences in numerical magnitude can be readily mapped
to this dimension, producing a direct, “magnitude-onmagnitude” mapping (similar to congruity between number
and other spatial properties such as physical size; Henik &
Tzelgov, 1982). Because previous research has mistakenly
assumed that near-far distance is interchangeable with the

Procedure. In Exp. 2A participants completed Horizontal
and Vertical tasks (order counterbalanced). On each trial, a
number (Calibri font, 3.3° × 2.4°) was presented centrally
and surrounded by two boxes (each 11.8° × 11.0°),
separated by 20°. Participants made parity judgments by
pressing one of the two boxes. All other aspects of the
procedure were identical to Exp. 1A.
In Exp. 2B, each participant completed Congruent and
Incongruent tasks (order counterbalanced). In the Congruent
task, response boxes were located at the bottom-left and topright of the screen. Hence, horizontal (left-to-right) and
vertical (in this case, bottom-to-top) orientations were
congruent (e.g., faster bottom-left responses to smaller
numbers and faster top-right responses to larger numbers
were consistent with both orientations). In the Incongruent
task, response boxes were located at the top-left and bottomright of the screen. Hence, the two orientations were
incongruent (e.g., faster bottom-right responses to smaller
numbers and faster top-left responses to larger numbers
were consistent with bottom-to-top, but not left-to-right,
orientation). [Note: Although the labels for the two tasks in
Exp. 2B assume bottom-to-top orientation, top-to-bottom
orientation can also be assessed. From the perspective of
top-to-bottom orientation, the Congruent task is
incongruent; for example, faster bottom-left responses to
smaller numbers and faster top-right responses to larger
numbers were consistent with left-to-right, but not top-tobottom, orientation).] In both tasks, the response boxes were
separated by 130 mm (20° × 20°) diagonally. All other
procedural aspects were identical to Exp. 2A.

Results and Discussion
Using Exp. 1 criteria, data were trimmed (Exp. 2A: 8.3% of
trials excluded, with 5.2% incorrect; Exp. 2B: 7.1%
excluded, 4.1% incorrect). dRT was calculated for each
participant (Horizontal task: right minus left; Vertical task:
top minus bottom; Congruent task: top-right minus bottomleft; Incongruent task: bottom-right minus top-left) and
regressed on digit magnitude to produce slope coefficients.
As in Exp. 1, the slope data were analyzed in separate 2
(task) × 2 (order of tasks) ANOVAs for Exp. 2A and 2B. In
Exp. 2A, there was a significant main effect of task, F(1,18)
= 20.49, p = .0003. Slope differed significantly from zero in
the Horizontal task, but not in the Vertical task (see Fig. 3A),

2278

Why might number be only weakly represented along the
vertical axis, if at all? One possibility is that conflicting
depictions of number on cultural tools, perhaps reflecting
dissociable magnitude and non-magnitude properties, pull
vertical orientation in opposing directions, effectively
canceling each other out. If so, priming a particular vertical
depiction might induce its corresponding orientation (top-tobottom or bottom-to-top), suggesting that number can, at
least to some extent, be represented vertically. Although
most top-to-bottom depictions of number convey ordinal
position exclusively, some also convey magnitude (e.g., the
numerical markers denoting levels of depth in a swimming
pool). In Exp. 3, we primed different orientations with and
without magnitude, comparing subsequent vertical
orientation across the various priming conditions.

Experiment 3: Priming Vertical Orientations
Method

Figure 3: Mean dRT for number pairs in (A) Exp. 2A
(Horizontal task: blue diamonds; Vertical task: yellow squares),
and (B) Exp. 2B (first task completed only; Congruent task:
green diamonds; Incongruent task: gray squares).
indicating reliable horizontal (left-to-right) orientation but
no reliable vertical (bottom-to-top or top-to-bottom)
orientation when tested separately. Neither the main effect
of order, nor the interaction between task and order, was
statistically significant (ps > .5).
In Exp. 2B, there were significant main effects of task,
F(1,30) = 13.29, p = .001, and order, F(1,30) = 6.48, p =
.02, and a significant interaction between the two, F(1,30) =
4.67, p = .04. When completed first, the Congruent task
yielded a significant negative slope (see Fig. 3B), consistent
with both left-to-right and bottom-to-top orientations. The
Incongruent task also yielded a significant negative slope
when completed first, suggesting that left-to-right
orientation trumps bottom-to-top when the two are in
opposition. As there was no significant difference between
slopes in the two tasks, t(30) = .26, p = .80, the effect in the
Congruent task was likely driven primarily, if not
exclusively, by left-to-right orientation. [When each task
was completed second, slope in the Congruent task was
significantly negative, but slope in the Incongruent task was
non-significantly positive.]
The results of Exp. 2A replicate previous research and
Exp. 1A in showing reliable left-to-right orientation, but no
reliable vertical orientation. The results of Exp. 2B suggest
stronger horizontal than vertical orientation by showing that
when the two are in opposition, horizontal trumps vertical.

Participants. Seventy-four Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit.
Materials and Procedure. Each participant completed the
Horizontal and Vertical tasks of Exp. 2A (order
counterbalanced), making parity judgments to numbers on a
touch screen. Participants were assigned to one of three
priming conditions (Shopping, N = 16; Building, N = 16;
Swimming, N = 42), differing only in how number was
described in the instructions. In the Shopping condition,
numbers were described as items on a shopping list (e.g., 1st
item on the list, 2nd item, etc.), priming top-to-bottom
(ordinal) orientation. In the Building condition, numbers were
described as floors in a building (e.g., 1st floor, 2nd floor, etc.),
priming bottom-to-top (magnitude; i.e., upward elevation)
orientation. In the Swimming condition, numbers were
described as levels of depth in a swimming pool (e.g., 1 ft.
from the surface of the water, 2 ft. from surface, etc.), priming
top-to-bottom (magnitude; i.e., downward elevation)
orientation. The instructions included no vertical terms or any
explicit description of the spatial layout of the numbers.
Unlike in the previous experiments, each task included
only numbers 1 through 8 (because 0 is not meaningful in
all conditions). The two blocks of each task consisted of 8
practice trials and 80 test trials each, with each number
presented 10 times (random order). All other aspects of the
procedure were identical to Exp. 2A.

Results and Discussion
Using Exp. 1 criteria, data were trimmed (8.5% of trials
excluded, with 4.7% incorrect). dRT was calculated for each
participant (right minus left in Horizontal task; top minus
bottom in Vertical task) and regressed on digit magnitude to
produce slope coefficients.
The slope data were analyzed in separate 2 (task) × 2
(order of tasks) ANOVAs for each condition. Fig. 4 displays
results in the Vertical task across conditions. In the
Shopping condition, there was a marginal main effect of
task, F(1,14) = 3.33, p = .09, and no significant main effect
of order or interaction (ps > .2). In the Horizontal task, slope

2279

differed significantly from zero (M = -9.54), t(15) = 2.02,
p = .03 (one-tailed), but in the Vertical task, there was no
hint of a difference, suggesting left-to-right orientation but
no reliable vertical orientation when top-to-bottom (ordinal)
orientation was primed. In the Building condition, there
were no significant effects of task or order (ps > .4). In both
Horizontal (M = -11.61), t(15) = 2.44, p = .03, and Vertical
tasks, slope differed significantly from zero, indicating both
left-to-right and bottom-to-top orientations when bottom-totop (magnitude) orientation was primed. In the Swimming
condition, there was a significant main effect of order,
F(1,40) = 6.28, p = .02, but no significant main effect of
task or interaction (ps > .1). When each task was completed
first, slope differed significantly from zero in the Vertical
task, but not in the Horizontal task (M = -4.52), t(20) = 1.03,
p = .32, indicating reliable bottom-to-top orientation but no
reliable horizontal orientation when top-to-bottom
(magnitude) orientation was primed. [When each task was
completed second, slope in the Vertical task was nonsignificantly positive, but slope in the Horizontal task was
significantly negative.]
Despite the non-significant horizontal slope in the
Swimming condition (when the Horizontal task was
completed first), pairwise comparisons of slope in the
Horizontal task across the three conditions yielded no
significant differences (ps > .2). In contrast, pairwise
comparisons of slope in the Vertical task showed that the
Shopping condition differed significantly from the Building
condition, t(30) = 2.47, p = .02, and marginally from the
Swimming condition, t(35) = 1.84, p = .07, but no
significant difference between Building and Swimming
conditions, t(35) = .13, p = .9.
The results of Exp. 3 suggest that number can be
represented vertically, but only when explicitly primed and
only when priming invokes numerical magnitude (Building
and Swimming conditions). Particularly remarkable is that
magnitude priming induced bottom-to-top orientation even
when a top-to-bottom instantiation of magnitude was
invoked (Swimming condition). No vertical orientation was
evident when priming suggested ordinality alone (Shopping
condition). These findings suggest that numerical magnitude
recruits bottom-to-top orientation, but that it is less robust
than left-to-right orientation (at least in Western cultures).

General Discussion
An implicit assumption in research on the spatial organization
of numerical magnitude has been that representations of
number primarily, if not exclusively, recruit the horizontal
axis. While recent evidence has pointed to spatial
organization along the vertical axis, such effects may instead
be examples of generalized magnitude mappings between
number and other magnitude dimensions, such as near-far
distance or effort. The present research demonstrates that
near-far distance should not be mistaken for the true vertical
axis (Exp. 1A and 1B), and that when the latter is examined
without the confound of effort, horizontal orientation is
stronger than vertical (Exp. 2A and 2B). Indeed, we observed

Figure 4: Mean dRT for number pairs on Vertical task in Exp.
3 across conditions (Swimming: first task completed only).
reliable vertical (bottom-to-top) orientation only after explicit
priming of numerical magnitude (Exp. 3). The results suggest
that horizontal orientation may be psychologically privileged,
as it is robustly evident without priming and sometimes even
after priming designed to induce vertical orientation. Our
findings indicate that the oft-invoked metaphor of the mental
number line, implying a single linear representation rather
than multiple potentially conflicting ones, is essentially apt,
with the caveat that different ways of mentally organizing
number are certainly possible despite not holding equal sway.
Indeed, although horizontal orientation may trump vertical,
the finding that vertical (bottom-to-top) orientation can be
primed suggests some propensity to represent number
vertically. Evidence that hemispatial neglect patients can
show selective impairments in horizontal, but not vertical,
number bisection (Cappelletti, Freeman, & Cipolotti, 2007)
suggests that horizontal and vertical representations of
number may be functionally independent. Interestingly,
orientation was manipulated in these patients via a priming
technique similar to that of Exp. 3, perhaps accounting for
some of the vertical effects.
The findings of Exp. 3 offer clues as to why vertical
orientation may be relatively weak. Priming magnitude
relations among numbers induced bottom-to-top orientation,
but priming only ordinal position, though not enough to fully
reverse this orientation, may have attenuated the bottom-totop effect by pulling it in the other direction (i.e., top-tobottom). As mentioned previously, these opposing effects
may reflect competition between different properties of
number (magnitude vs. non-magnitude) and the
corresponding orientations in which they are commonly
depicted on cultural tools and in the environment more
generally (e.g., elevator buttons vs. call numbers on library
shelves). Another possibility, suggested by the lack of a
significant effect when ordinality alone was primed, is that no
reliable top-to-bottom orientation exists, but that there may be
other top-to-bottom influences such as reading direction.
Although reading direction in Western cultures is
predominantly left-to-right, there is also a top-to-bottom
component (i.e., shifting to the next row of text). As
horizontal reading direction has been shown to influence
spatial organization of number (Shaki & Fischer, 2008), it is
possible that vertical reading direction may have a similar

2280

effect, serving to undermine bottom-to-top orientation of
numerical magnitude (while left-to-right reading direction in
turn bolsters left-to-right orientation). Yet another possibility
is that left-to-right depictions of number are simply more
prevalent than bottom-to-top depictions in everyday
experience. Such possibilities are not mutually exclusive,
however, and, indeed, may even work in combination to
render the horizontal axis more dominant.
Interestingly, despite the consistency with which numbers
are depicted from left to right in Western cultures, the
horizontal axis may in fact show greater flexibility than the
vertical. Bächtold, Baumüller, and Brugger (1998) found that
left-to-right orientation reversed in participants who were
primed with an image of a clock-face (i.e., smaller numbers
on the right, larger numbers on the left). In the present study,
priming a top-to-bottom depiction of numerical magnitude
(i.e., levels of depth in a swimming pool) induced bottom-totop orientation of comparable strength to that induced by
priming of bottom-to-top magnitude, suggesting striking
inflexibility. These differences in flexibility may arise from
the inherent perceptual asymmetry of the vertical axis, with
gravitational forces perhaps establishing the ground as a
natural zero point (Clark, 1973), and from exposure to
metaphors in language that reinforce mappings of greater
magnitude to higher space (e.g., prices “climb” and stocks
“fall”; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
Importantly, number is but one of countless dimensions of
magnitude, all of which may potentially be represented
spatially (i.e., a mental magnitude line; Holmes & Lourenco,
2011). Which axes and orientations are recruited is likely to
differ, however, across dimensions. On the one hand, our
findings might not be expected to extend to other magnitude
dimensions (e.g., spatial extent) for which the horizontal axis
is more agnostic than the vertical with respect to the direction
of increasing magnitude (e.g., trees and buildings extend
upward rather than downward, but snakes and trains can
extend leftward or rightward). On the other hand, there is
evidence that other dimensions (e.g., emotional expression;
Holmes & Lourenco, 2011) may co-opt left-to-right
orientation of number, showing a clear resemblance in their
spatial organization. Comparisons of the relative strength of
horizontal and vertical orientation across multiple dimensions
and points in development will be particularly informative for
unpacking the relative contributions of cultural tools,
perceptual factors, reading direction, and co-opting of
structure to the spatial organization of different forms of
magnitude.

Acknowledgments
We thank D. Addy, E. Fernandez, and P. Pfeilschiefter for
assistance with data collection. This research was supported by
a William Orr Dingwall Foundation fellowship (to K.J.H.) and
by a Scholars award from the John Merck Fund (to S.F.L.).

References
Bächtold, D., Baumüller, M., & Brugger, P. (1998).
Stimulus-response compatibility in representational space.
Neuropsychologia, 36, 731-735.

Cappelletti, M., Freeman, E. D., & Cipolotti, L. (2007). The
middle house or the middle floor: Bisecting horizontal
and vertical mental number lines in neglect.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 2989-3000.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Collewijn, H., Erkelens, C. J., & Steinman, R. M. (1988).
Binocular co-ordination of human vertical saccadic eye
movements. The Journal of Physiology, 404, 183-197.
Fias, W., & Fischer, M. H. (2005). Spatial representation of
numbers. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of
mathematical cognition. New York: Psychology Press.
Gevers, W., Lammertyn, J., Notebaert, W., Verguts, T., &
Fias, W. (2006). Automatic response activation of implicit
spatial information: Evidence from the SNARC effect.
Acta Psychologica, 122, 221-233.
Henik, A., & Tzelgov, J. (1982). Is three greater than five:
The relation between physical and semantic size in
comparison tasks. Memory & Cognition, 10, 389-395.
Holmes, K. J., & Lourenco, S. F. (2011). Common spatial
organization of number and emotional expression: The
mental magnitude line. Manuscript under review.
Hubbard, E. M., Pinel, P., Piazza, M., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between numbers and space in
parietal cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 435-448.
Ito, Y., & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of quantitative
representation of numbers: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory & Cognition, 32, 662-673.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lindemann, O., Abolafia, J. M., Girardi, G., & Bekkering,
H. (2007). Getting a grip on numbers: Numerical
magnitude priming in object grasping. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 33, 1400-1409.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C. J., & Brugger, P. (2008).
Looking for the answer: The mind’s eye in number space.
Neuroscience, 151, 725-729.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C. J., Nicholls, M. E. R., &
Brugger, P. (2010). Eye position predicts what number
you have in mind. Current Biology, 20, R264-R265.
Lourenco, S. F., & Longo, M. R. (2010). General magnitude
representation in human infants. Psychological Science,
21, 873-881.
Müller, D., & Schwarz, W. (2007). Is there an internal
association of numbers to hands? The task set influences
the nature of the SNARC effect. Memory & Cognition,
35, 1151-1161.
Schwarz, W., & Keus, I. M. (2004). Moving the eyes along
the mental number line: Comparing SNARC effects with
saccadic and manual responses. Perception &
Psychophysics, 66, 651-664.
Shaki, S., & Fischer, M. H. (2008). Reading space into
numbers: A cross-linguistic comparison of the SNARC
effect. Cognition, 108, 590-599.

2281

