UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How do 100 people walk a tightrope together? An experiment in large scale joint action

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6tp7x36w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Richardson, Daniel
Dale, Rick
Rogers, John
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How do 100 people walk a tightrope together?
An experiment in large scale joint action
Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)

Cognitive, Perceptual & Brain sciences, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK

Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)

Department of Psychology, The University of Memphis
202 Psychology Building, Memphis, TN 38152, USA

John Rogers (john@delosis.com)
James Ireland (james@delosis.com)

Delosis, 8 Grosvenor Road, Twickenham, Middlesex TW1 4AE, United Kingdom

Abstract
A lecture hall full of people played a computer game
together. Their goal was to keep a tightrope walker
balanced. Each had a handset that could deliver a left or
right nudge. The tightrope walker was also pelted by
tomatoes which knocked him off balance. Across
several games, the difficulty of the task was changed by
the frequency of tomatoes and whether or not they were
visible. After each game, the participants rated their
own and the group’s performance. We analysed the
button presses of individuals, and quantified how they
related to the moment by moment action of the group
and movement of the tightrope walker. On successful
games, participants were able to anticipate the
behaviour of the group and kept the tightrope walker in
equilibrium.
Keywords: joint action; wisdom of crowds; group behaviour,
situated cognition

Introduction
There is wisdom and beauty in a crowd. Galton (1907)
studied competitions to guess the weight of a cow, a
common game at village fares. He noted that the average
response of the crowd usually equalled or bettered any of
the individual guesses. We now know that if the faces of all
those villages were averaged too, they would beat any
individual villager in a beauty contest (Langlois &
Roggman, 1990). These principles have been extended into
business decisions, analysing markets and predicting
political events (Surowiecki, 2004). In each case, the claim
is that the average of group’s response is superior to
individual’s judgements, even when those individuals are
thought to be experts. The same idea applies to a large
number of judgements made by a single person: one’s own
average estimate is better than any single guess (Vul &
Pashler, 2010). One explanation is that the biases that distort
individual judgements (or facial characteristics) are roughly
randomly distributed. Polling a large number of people or
decisions evens out these distortions. The principle is that if
incompetence is normally distributed, then the average
response will be wise.

But is the superiority of crowds restricted to wisdom? In
all these cases, single judgements or measurements are
being made in response to static problems or criteria. What
about governing continuous action, when a stream of
decisions have to be made in time, in response to changing
circumstances? In short, there may be wisdom in a crowd
but what happens when they have to act together?
Around the time of Galton, people were very interested in
‘the mob’, and the possibility of understanding a crowd as if
it were an organism with a single mind (e.g., Le Bon, 1896,
Freud, 1921). Analysis of the behaviour of large groups
became the domain of sociology and political science,
however, as psychology focused experimental tools on the
individual. Social forces themselves are studied in social
psychology of course, but perception and action are
typically studied in their absence. The laboratory cubicle of
a typical cognitive psychologist is a lonely place. More
recently, that has been changing.
A diverse set of researchers have come to the realisation
that perception, action and cognition cannot be fully
understood by investigating single individuals (e.g.,
Barsalou, Breazeal & Smith, 2007; Robbins, & Aydede,
2009; Sebanz, et al 2006). Studies of situated cognition
show that cognition ‘in the wild’ is intimately linked not
only to representations of the external world, but also to the
cognitive processes of others. For example, Hutchins (1995)
observed the ways that navy navigators would distribute
cognitive processes between themselves by using external
tools and representations, such as maps and notations.
Knoblich and Jordan (2003) gave a detailed analysis of the
way that two people coordinate their actions. To be
successful, participants had to anticipate both the
movements of the objects in the game and the actions of
their partner.
In our experiment, over a hundred people played a
computer game together. Our first goal was to see if the
ability of crowds to make good judgements (Surowiecki,
2004) also meant that they could successfully act together in
a dynamic task. Our second goal was to take predictions
about pairs of participants acting together (Knoblich &
Jordan, 2003) and see if they scale up to much larger
groups.

1924

Figure 1. Screen capture from the tightrope walker game and (inset) the participants controlling him.
On the right, the impact of a tomato causes the end of a game

Models: Agent Policies and Bob’s Survival

The tightrope game
We developed a simple game that could be played by a large
number of people simultaneously 1. Participants saw on a
projection screen a picture of a man holding a pole,
balanced on rope (Figure 1). Each participant held a handset
and pressed one of two buttons. A laptop computer collected
the responses and controlled the movements of the tightrope
walker. Each time one of the participants pressed a button, it
immediately sent a very small nudge to the tightrope walker,
sending him to the left or right. The movements of the
tightrope walker were governed by a physics engine that
accounted for the size and position of the figure and the pole
and their momentum. A game ended when the tightrope
walker fell off the rope.
The game was made harder by introducing random noise
in the form of tomatoes. They were fired from the sides of
the screen at random and knocked the tightrope walker to
the left or right. The frequency of these missiles could be
varied to change the difficulty of the game. Additionally, the
tomatoes could be made invisible, so Bob’s balance would
be perturbed unpredictably.
We ran a series of 18 games, systematically varying the
degree and visibility of the tomatoes, and whether (without
their knowledge) the tightrope walker was being controlled
by all of the participants or only half of them. All button
pressed were recorded for analysis. We quantified the
success of each game in terms of its duration and the
tightrope walkers average deviation from the vertical, and
polled participants on their view of their individual
performance and that of the group as a whole. This allowed
us to investigate participants’ perception and evaluation of
their own actions under different levels of difficulty, and
develop models of how they performed the task and
responded to each other.
1

Knoblich and Jordan (2003) studied the dynamics of a
simple game of coordination. Pairs of participants saw a
target dot move repeatedly across a screen. The participants
task was to move a ring shape so that it hovered over the
target. Although the target immediately reversed its
direction when it reached the edges of the screen, the ring
could only be sped up or slowed down in increments, each
time one of the participants pressed a key for or against the
current direction of motion. An optimal strategy was to
anticipate when the ring would need to change direction,
and begin pressing the key in the opposite direction before
the turn had to be made. When one participant could use
both keys, this strategy was followed. When two
participants acted together, each using a different key, they
had difficulty performing the task. However, if they could
hear a bleep each time that their partner pressed a key, then
they had little difficultly learning the strategy of anticipatory
control, and performing the task to the level of an individual
acting alone.
We developed a simple group dynamics model that would
explore whether strategies like anticipation, and response
diversity (see below), can assist the group in sustaining
Bob’s position on the tightrope. To do this, we simply
defined a vector of button states, with as many elements as
we had participants in the classroom:
v(t) = <a1, ..., a120>
Each of these “agents,” ai, can take on values 1, -1, or 0,
depending on whether they are moving Bob to the right, left,
or inactive, respectively. To initiate a simulation, we take
Bob’s position as being an iterated function of the current
state of v, and the previous state of Bob:

If this paper is presented as a talk at the Cognitive Science conference, then the audience will of course be invited to play the game

1925

Bob(t) = Bob(t-1) + α∑v(t) + τα∑v(t-1) + N

Methods

So Bob’s current position is a function of his last position,
displaced by the summed response vector of the classroom
(α is a multiplier to set how much each button press acts on
Bob’s position). We also included a momentum term which
displaces Bob by a small proportion (τ) of the previous
response, and a Gaussian noise signal (N). This is a
simplification of the physics in the real game, but suffices as
a test of different strategies. The model is a simple linear
accumulator that will fluctuate between negative values and
positive values depending on the policies that the agents (ai)
use to issue a pulse. Take the simplest policy: press left (ai =
-1) when Bob is right (Bob(t) > 0), vice versa for pressing
right (ai = +1), and otherwise do nothing (ai = 0). The result
is an oscillating Bob position.
By setting an arbitrary threshold for Bob’s demise, the run
of Bob(t) values will end at some point that his absolute
position exceeds that threshold and he falls off the rope. We
can run simulations of different agent policies to see what
works best to keep Bob aloft in this context. We considered
the strategy sets described below. These include two
primary kinds of response strategies agents (“participants”)
could engage in: diversity of responding and anticipation.
Bare: For each cycle, a random 30 agents press a button
in the opposite direction of current position
Anticipate: In addition to the above, a random 20 agents
per cycle press a button in Bob’s direction of movement if
he is not yet past the 0 mark (in other words, press left when
Bob is just about to cross over to the right)
Diversity: In addition to “bare,” 20 random agents per
cycle randomly select their buttons.
Both: Use the anticipate and diversity strategies together.

/01,-.

,-.)*+

We ran 1,000 simulated “trials” for each, and calculated the
#!
&
number of cycles for which these different
strategies
kept
threshold: trial
over
Bob balancing. As can be seen $in Figure 2, the strategies
"
improve
the performance of the group. Creating individualbased policies that mix different
responding strategies
%
!
among
the group -- avoiding simplistic uniformity of
!
responding patterns -- helps maintain
the Bob(t) variable
before
it
reaches
its
threshold.
These
two notions will be our
!"
!%
focus in analysis of the large-scale
human experiment:
A
B of responding patterns,
uniformity
(or,
conversely,
diversity)
!#!
!$
!
"!
#!!
!
"
#!
#"
and anticipatory
tendencies.
$%&'()*+

'()*+,-.

Bob(t) survival cycles

90.0
C
67.5
45.0
22.5
0

bare

anticipate

diversity

both

Figure 2. Game Simulations with different strategies

Participants
123 people participated in the experiment as part of a first
year psychology laboratory class.

Apparatus
Each participant had a 12 button TurningPoint audience
response system handset (Turning technologies).The
handsets broadcast a RF signal containing the key press and
handset identity number. These signals were detected by a
USB receiver inserted in a Mac laptop. The game was
written in Java by Delosis, and read data from the receiver
using the Turningpoint API. Survey data was collected using
the TurningPoint AnyWhere application. The game and
survey questions were displayed on an 2x3m projection
screen in front of the participants.

Design
The participants played 18 games across two blocks. In the
first block, the tomatoes were not visible, and in the second
they were. Within each block we randomised and
counterbalanced the frequency of the tomatoes (none, low,
high) with the controllers that were active (all, handsets with
odd identity numbers, handsets with even identity numbers).
The experimenter gave a countdown before each game
commenced. It continued until the tightrope walker fell off
the rope, or until 30 seconds had passed.
After each game, four questions were displayed on screen,
and participants gave their responses by pressing a button
between 1 and 9:
Q1. How much control over Bob did you feel that you
had?
Q2. How much did you feel that you were acting as part
of a coherent group?
Q3. How do you rate your performance as an individual?
Q4. How do you rate your performance as a group?

Results
Question Ratings and Trial Time
Sense of individual control. We tested how participants’
sense of individual control (Q1) related to how long they
kept Bob balanced. To do so, we used a linear mixed-effects
model as described in Baayen, Davidson, and Bates (2008),
using participant as a random factor, and predicting sense of
individual control score with total trial time in seconds
(reflecting how long the group was able to keep Bob on the
tightrope). There was a strong and significant positive
relationship between these variables, beta = .37, p < .0001.
The longer Bob balanced, the more they felt they had
control over the situation.
Sense of group coherence. There was a strong and
significant positive relationship between sense of group
coherence (Q2) and trial time, beta = .40, p < .0001. The
longer they kept Bob aloft, the more they felt they acted as a
group.
Sense of individual performance. We carried out the
same analysis for Q3, and also found a strong positive
relationship, beta = .31, p < .0001.

1926

-40

Angle

-60
-80

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

15

20

Trial time (s)

25

30

5

10

15

25

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.2
0.0

0.0

30

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Proportion completed trial

Trial time (s)

B

0.4

Response uniformity

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Proportion of maximum angular displacement

20

A

0.0

0.6

Average response uniformity

3.0

0.2

0.4

6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5

Average rating

B

0.8

A

Q3
Q4

1.0

Time (s)

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Proportion completed trial

Figure 3. Correlations between trial time and average
(A) performance rating, (B) response uniformity

Figure 4. Proportion of trial completed, plotted against
(A) proportion of max angle and (B) response uniformity

Sense of group performance. As one would expect,
group performance rating (Q4) is strongly predicted by how
long Bob balanced, beta = .40, p < .0001. Interestingly, as
shown in Figure 3A, this relationship was different
compared to Q3: The sense of individual performance was
higher than sense of group performance when the group
performed poorly. This is expressed as a difference in
regression slopes, and can be tested by using an interaction
term in a model predicting trial time. These slopes are
indeed different, beta = .17, p < .0001. In other words, when
the group of which participants are a member performs
poorly, they are biased to attribute this gradually more to the
group than to themselves.

p < .0001. So, while successful trials sustain response
diversity for longer periods of time (as shown above),
within-trial failure appears to correlate with a rising
uniformity in displacement of Bob.

Group Behavior
Response diversity. What predicts group success? We
generated an average “uniformity score” for the group
within each trial. This was based on a scoring of how
uniform responses are at 5 time points with a trial (0-.25, .
25-.50, etc., proportion of trial completed), then aggregated.
For example, in the extreme cases, the group may generate
all leftward or rightward responses, and response uniformity
would be high (= 1). At the other extreme, responses may be
equibiased within a trial, exhibiting maximal diversity (= 0).
Uniformity tended to go down as a function of group
performance (trial time), r = -.75, t(14) = -4.3, p < .001.
This relationship is shown in Figure 3B. The greater the
response diversity, on average, the longer trials lasted.
Bob’s oscillatory amplitude increases. What predicts
that the group will fail? First, inspection of Bob’s absolute
angle suggests that he is gradually being pushed to more and
more extreme angular displacements as a trial proceeds. In
Fig.4A, we show the time course of each trial superimposed
by using proportion time instead of raw time. This figure
shows that across trials, angle is gradually going up. The
trial-by-trial average correlation between time and angle
magnitude is .72, t(15) = 12.2, p < .0001.
Within-trial uniformity increases. It appears that one
possible reason for increasing angle magnitude is that all
trials involve an increase of response uniformity. This would
gradually cause increasing magnitude of sway back and
forth as the group’s uniform responding adds momentum to
Bob’s sway, causing him to fall. Fig. 4B shows the score of
response uniformity, as defined above, as it changes within a
trial, showing a rise over time. The trial-by-trial average
correlation between time and uniformity is .56, t(15) = 6.6,

Individual Behavior
Because the data track the responses at an individual level, it
is possible to analyze the strategies employed by different
participants. The following analyses are more qualitative in
nature, and are meant to reflect the emergence of different
agent policies that we demonstrated in the simple model
used above.
Do participants engage in diversity of responding? The
uniformity analyses above suggest that diversity is crucial
for the group to succeed, lest Bob gain too much angular
momentum as he fluctuates. Does this diversity reside at the
group or individual level? In the latter case, this would
suggest that participants may be gaining a sense of the
collective dynamics of the group itself.
Response uniformity increased from the first to the final
quarter of the trials to the end (slopes > 0, p < .01). But the
measures at the beginning of the trials are surprisingly high,
indicating that some trials involve early responding that is
completely consistent within a participant. Figure 5A shows
that the success of a trial (in seconds) is a function of
response diversity within subjects, at the start of the trials, r
= -.77, t(14) = -4.5, p < .0005.
Do participants make anticipation responses? How do
individual participants respond to angle displacement? Like
the simulations above, if participants responded simply, they
would just wait for Bob to be leftward leaning then click the
right button, and vice versa for rightward leaning. However,
if participants gain a sense of the group’s overall behaviour,
and the need to control Bob’s momentum in that context,
they may choose to respond leftward just before Bob leans
right, in order to control Bob. This would suggest that more
sophisticated policies are emerging.
We defined an “anticipation response” as one that is made
when the response is in the direction of the current angle,
but opposed to the ongoing angular change. For example, if
angular movement is rapidly moving rightward when Bob is
leaning left, then participants who anticipate that once Bob’s
angle becomes right leaning, it will be difficult for the group
(if responding with uniformity) to pull him back. As
discussed above, this is likely the source of Bob’s demise:

1927

0.8
0.7
0.6

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04

Proportion anticipation responses

B

0.00

0.02

Response uniformity (by su

0.5
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Response uniformity (by subject)

End

A

1.0

0.4

Trial segment

Start

5

10

15

20

25

30

5

10

Trial time (s)

15

20

25

30

Trial time (s)

Figure 5. Correlation between trial time and
(A) response uniformity (by subjects), (B) anticipations
growing uniformity of responses causes angular momentum
to increase monotonically and thus Bob’s angle to gradually
grow until he falls. Anticipation may come from subjects,
like the agents in the simulation, who wish to pull Bob back
from the brink before the rest of the group pushes his
momentum to much in the opposing direction.
Based on this logic, anticipation is occurring when the left
button is pushed when Bob is in a left (negative) angle but
moving rightward (positive change); vice versa, when a
participant presses a right button when Bob is at a positive
angle, but moving left (moving in a negative, leftward
direction). The number of anticipatory responses made has a
strong relationship to group performance, r = .99, t(14) =
30.3, p < .0001. This is a curiously orderly pattern, so we
carried out a control analysis looking at the proportion of
responses that are anticipatory. This controls for length of
the trial, which may simply relate to anticipatory responses
because there are proportionally more responses overall that
are made. Even with this control analysis (proportion
anticipation), there remains a robust relationship with group
performance, r = .84, t(14) = 6.00, p < .0001. Thus,
participants are making anticipatory responses, and the more
they do so (proportionally) the more likely Bob will stay
aloft (see Figure 5B).

General Discussion
What is the difference between thinking and acting alone,
and thinking and acting in a social context? From the
margins of traditional cognitive science, a diverse set of
results have established three broad conclusions about the
effect of social context on behaviour. First, as a result of
social interaction, people often become more alike. Second,
behaving more alike has cognitive and affiliate
consequences. Third, the cognitive processes of an
individual flexibly and eagerly couple with those of others:
these are mechanisms of joint action (Gallantucci & Sebanz,
2009).
When two people meet, they become more like each
other. They implicitly imitate each others’ accent, speech
rate and syntax; they look at the same things and use the
same words; they adopt similar postures, gesture alike and
gently sway together (Chartrand & van Baaren, 2009). Pairs
of participants completing a puzzle task (Shockley et al

2003), and mobile phone users separated by miles (MurraySmith et al., 2007) will synchronise their body movements.
Such behavioural coordination has an effect on its
participants. From simply tapping in time (Hove & Risen,
2009), to copying mannerisms (e.g. Chartrand & Bargh,
1999) to aligning postures (Maurer and Tindall, 1983),
mimicry can increase rapport, liking, empathy and
affiliation (Chartrand & van Baaren, 2009), and how well
conversants remember their interaction (Macrae et al 2008).
Alignment at the level of word and syntax choice is argued
to ease linguistic processing for speakers and listeners
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004).
Experimental methods are starting to reveal the
mechanisms involved in joint activity. In a standard
stimulus-response compatibility task, participants make a
judgment about one stimulus property (colour) and ignore
another stimulus property (location). If there is an
incompatibility between the irrelevant location property and
the response (left or right finger movement), then reaction
times increase, as the irrelevant property activates the
incompatible response representation (Simon, 1969).
Sebanz, Knoblich, & Prinz (2003) took this task and split it
between two people. They sat next to each other, and each
person responded to one colour: in effect, each acting one of
the fingers of a participant in Simon’s (1969) experiment.
Although each individual had only one response to execute
(and hence no need to represent the incompatible response),
they still showed slower responses in the incompatible
trials. When performing the same single response task
alone, there was no incompatibility effect. Sebanz et al
(2003) concluded that, when acting jointly, participants
represented their partners’ actions as if they were their own.
Studies of gaze coordination tell a similar story of social
interaction, joint action, and a close coupling of behaviour.
We showed two people the same scene, such as a painting,
and tracked their gaze while they conversed (Richardson,
Dale & Kirkham, 2007). Using the same cross-recurrence
analysis tools as used here, we showed that their gaze is
tightly coordinated: about three seconds before and after one
person is looking at something, their conversational partner
is likely to be looking at the same thing. This coordination is
causally linked to comprehension. When parts of the scene
that the speaker looked at are flashed, dragging a listener’s
gaze toward them, then the listener’s comprehension
improves (Richardson & Dale, 2005). This coordination
changes according to the conversants’ common knowledge
and what they believe each other can see (Richardson, Dale
& Tomlinson, 2009). Even when people are not interacting
with each other, there is an effect of social context. When
they are performing the same task as another person, they
improve their memory for shared stimuli (Shteynberg, 2010)
and even shift whether they look at pleasant or unpleasant
pictures (Richardson, et al submitted).
The traditional view of group action is that it is individual
action plus an additional compensation for the behaviour
others. Our results, and the findings we have reviewed here,
suggest that perhaps group action comes more naturally to
the brain than it does to our theories of it.

1928

Conclusion
Reading of the ‘wisdom of the crowds’ for the first time, it
is tempting to imagine a world devoid of experts and
pundits, in which important judgements and decisions are
made by a large community of people individually clueless
but together wise. But in the biggest experiments in joint
action - democratic elections - we tend to favour systems
that sample the full electorate infrequently, and cede the day
to day decision making to a few individuals. As democracy
this would be unrecognisable to the ancient Greeks, who
debated and voted upon each decision before them. The
common argument for our modern system (an intermittently
elected oligarchy) is that it delivers strong leadership that
can respond decisively to dynamic situations. In Britain and
the US, such arguments are used to support two party
systems and first-past-the-post voting. The fear with more
representational forms of democracy is that their broad
spectrum of diverse opinions would produce a mire of
continual compromise, and be unable to act in a timely,
coherent fashion. In our experiment, however, a large group
cooperated to perform a dynamic task that required
continual action. More significantly, its success rested upon
disagreement and diversity of responses.
Of course, there is more to politics than simply swaying
to the right or left. In our simple game, there is only one
goal: to keep the tightrope walker upright. The group
collaborated to achieve this goal. What will happen when
the group has to select sub-goals, such as whether to move
to the left or right to avoid a falling rock? Here, a simple
compromise between left and right would lead to failure.
Before acting together, the group would have to perceive
where the majority are headed, and then follow that
decision. Our future research will explore the space of
different games and investigate how a large group can both
think and act together.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Günther Knoblich, Natalie Sebanz
and the participants of JAM 3 for the inspiring discussions
that led to these experiments, to Lee Tbaily for assistance
collecting the data, and Karen Scher at Turning
Technologies for technical support and encouragement.

References
Barsalou, L.W., Breazeal, C., & Smith, L.B. (2007). Cognition as
coordinated non-cognition. Cognitive Processing, 8, 79-91.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., and Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and
items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon effect:
The perception-behavior link and social interaction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893–910.
Chartrand, T. L., & van Baaren, R. (2009). Human mimicry. In
M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology. (pp. 219-74). Burlington: Academic Press.
Freud, S. (1921). Group Psychology and the Analysis of the
Ego.W. W. Norton & Company

Galantucci, B., & Sebanz, N. (2009). Joint action: Current
perspectives. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 255-259.
Hove, M. J., & Risen, J. L. (2009). It's all in the timing:
Interpersonal synchrony increases affiliation. Social Cognition,
27(6), 949-961
Hutchins, E., (1995). Cognition in the Wild. MIT Press.
Knoblich G., Jordan S. (2003). Action coordination in
individuals and groups: Learning anticipatory control. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition,
29, 1006–1016.
Langlois, J.H., & Roggman, L. (1990). Attractive faces are only
average. Psychological Science, 1, 115-121
Le Bon, G. (1895) The Crowd: A study of the popular mind.
Dover Publications.
Galton, F. (1907). Vox populi. Nature, 75, 450-451.
Macrae, C. N., Duffy, O. K., Miles, L. K., & Lawrence, J.
(2008). A case of hand waving: Action synchrony and person
perception. Cognition, 109, 152–156.
Maurer, R. E., & Tindall, J. H. (1983). Effect of postural
congruence on client’s perception of counselor empathy.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 30, 158–163.
Murray-Smith, R. D., Ramsay, A., Garrod, S., Jackson, M., &
Musizza, B. (2007). Gait alignment in mobile phone
conversations. In A. D.Cheok & L.Chittaro (Eds.), Proceeding
of MobileHCI 2007 (pp. 214–221). AMC International
Conference Proceeding Series, 309
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 27
(2), 169-90; discussion 190-226.
Richardson, D.C & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand: The
coupling between speakers’ and listeners’ eye movements and
its relationship to discourse comprehension. Cognitive
Science, 29, 1045–1060.
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R., & Kirkham, N.Z. (2007). The art of
conversation is coordination: Common ground and the
coupling of eye movements during dialogue. Psychological
Science, 18(5), 407-413.
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R., & Tomlinson, J.M. (2009).
Conversation, gaze coordination, and beliefs about visual
context. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1468-1482.
Robbins, P. & Aydede, M. (Eds.) (2009). The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others’ actions: Just like one’s own? Cognition, 88, B11–B21.
Shockley, K., Santana, M. V., & Fowler, C. A. (2003). Mutual
interpersonal postural constraints are involved in cooperative
conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 29, 326-32.
Shteynberg, G., (2010). A silent emergence of culture: The social
tuning effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
Online Aug 16, 2010.
Simon, J. R. (1969). Reactions toward the source of stimulation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81, 174–176.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The wisdom of crowds. New York:
Random House.
Vul, E. & Pashler, H. (2008). Measuring the crowd within:
probabilistic representations within individuals. Psychological
Science, 19(7), 645-647.

1929

