UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How visual saliency affects referent accessibility

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/58k323jv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Vogels, Jorrig
Krahmer, Emiel
Maes, Alfons

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How visual saliency affects referent accessibility
Jorrig Vogels (j.vogels@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Alfons Maes (maes@uvt.nl)
Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
As referents are more accessible in discourse, they can be
referred to with more attenuated expressions, such as
pronouns. Accessibility is known to be affected by the
referent’s saliency in the linguistic context, but much less is
known about the effect of saliency in the visual context. In
this paper, we investigate whether a referent’s visual saliency
affects the choice of referring expression in a discourse
context. The results of a story completion experiment show
that visually salient referents induce more attenuated
expressions, but only when they are linguistically non-salient.
Linguistically salient referents receive more reduced
references when they are visually non-salient. We argue that
visual saliency affects accessibility when the impact of
linguistic factors is moderated. In addition, when the story
does not match people’s expectations, processing difficulties
might result in the use of less costly expressions.
Keywords: saliency; accessibility; visual context; referring
expressions; language production.

Introduction
In discourse, the same entity can be referred to with
different types of expressions, ranging from elaborate
descriptions involving full noun phrases and modifiers (e.g.
the blonde girl with the big earrings) to short, lowinformative elements such as pronouns (e.g. she). It has
been argued that the referring expression a speaker chooses
reflects the cognitive status of the referent (Ariel, 1990;
Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 1993). That is, it is believed
that speakers make assumptions about the degree of
activation of the referent in the memory of their addressees.
The more accessible an entity is to the addressee, the less
information a referring expression needs to contain to be
correctly understood. In addition, production processes are
constrained by speaker-internal factors, such as cognitive
load, that may affect referent accessibility in the speaker’s
memory (e.g. Arnold & Griffin, 2007).
An important source of a referent’s accessibility is its
saliency. The role of saliency in the choice of referring
expressions within a discourse has mainly been investigated
in relation to the preceding linguistic context. For example,
subjects and topics (i.e. what a sentence is about) are
considered to be salient entities in a discourse (e.g. Arnold,
1998; Givón, 1983; Gordon, Grosz, & Gilliom, 1993;
Grosz, Joshi, & Weinstein, 1995). Hence, a referent that is
the subject or the topic of a preceding utterance is more
accessible than other possible referents. Therefore, it is
more likely to be referred to with an attenuated expression,

such as a pronoun, while a less accessible referent needs a
more elaborate description, such as a full noun phrase. Other
factors that affect a referent’s saliency in the linguistic
context include recency, givenness, thematic roles and
syntactic position (e.g. Clark & Sengul, 1979; Gundel et al.,
1993; Stevenson, Crawley, & Kleinman, 1994).
It is much less clear whether saliency in the visual context
also plays a role in the accessibility of referents in a
discourse. In everyday life, the things we talk about are
often not only available to us through previous linguistic
mention, but in many cases they are also physically present.
In this paper, we investigate whether the accessibility of a
referent is influenced by its salience in the visual context.
Language production studies that have taken into account
the visual context suggest that speakers use non-linguistic
information in planning their utterances. For instance, the
syntactic structure of visual scene descriptions is affected by
where people look in the scene (e.g. Gleitman et al., 2007).
Visual information is also used to choose a referring
expression. For example, people use disambiguating
expressions to refer to visually ambiguous referents (e.g.
Brown-Schmidt & Tanenhaus, 2006; Ferreira, Slevc, &
Rogers, 2005), and more reduced expressions when
referents are visually in focus (Beun & Cremers, 1998).
When a referent is also accessible from the linguistic
context, it might be the case that effects of visual
information are overruled by linguistic information. In a
story completion experiment, Arnold and Griffin (2007)
found that participants used fewer pronouns to refer to the
target character when a competitor referent was mentioned
in the linguistic context. Whether the competitor was also
visually present in the target scene did not make a
difference, suggesting that the linguistic presence of the
competitor affected accessibility, but not its visual presence.
In contrast, Fukumura, Van Gompel and Pickering (2010)
found in a similar experiment that visual context did
influence the choice of referring expression: Participants
used fewer pronouns to refer to the target referent when a
competitor was visually present than when it was not
visually present. However, the effect of the visual context
was larger when the competitor was also linguistically
present than when it was not mentioned at all. This suggests
that accessibility is affected most by linguistic context, but
that the influence of visual context becomes more apparent
when the linguistic context is less compelling.
Fukumura et al. (2010) argued that the visual presence of
the competitor in their experiment reduced the salience of
the referent, which led to a decrease in accessibility.

3128

However, it is not clear whether this is really an effect of
salience, or merely an interference effect due to the fact that
multiple possible referents have to be kept in memory.
Therefore, we argue that, instead of varying the number of
competing entities, the perceptual prominence of the
referent itself should be taken into account. A number of
properties have been identified as important cues to
perceptual salience, such as size, centrality, color,
foregrounding, orientation, intensity and visual complexity
(e.g. Coco & Keller, 2009; Kelleher, Costello, & Van
Genabith, 2005; Mazza, Turatto, & Umiltà, 2005; Parkhurst,
Law, & Niebur, 2002). Since the role of these properties in
determining the accessibility of a referent in discourse is
still unclear, it remains an open question in what way visual
salience affects the choice of a referring expression in
interaction with linguistic context.
In this paper, we present a story completion experiment in
which we investigate the effect of a referent’s visual
salience on the use of pronouns versus full noun phrases in
Dutch narrative discourse. Since Dutch has a distinction
between full and reduced pronouns, we also examine the use
of reduced pronouns versus full pronouns (cf. Kaiser &
Trueswell, 2004). If visually salient characters are more
accessible, they are expected to be referred to with more
reduced expressions than visually non-salient entities. Thus,
we predict more pronouns than full NPs and more reduced
pronouns than full pronouns in references to visually salient
referents. In addition, if linguistic information is more
important in determining accessibility than visual
information, as suggested by previous studies, an effect of
visual saliency should at least be expected in contexts where
linguistic saliency is moderated.

Methods
Participants
Sixty-four students (54 female; mean age 21) from Tilburg
University participated for course credit. They were all
native speakers of Dutch and had normal or corrected to
normal vision.

Materials
Sixteen short stories served as the stimulus items. Each item
consisted of two pictures, two context sentences and the
onset of a third sentence, which had to be completed by the
participants. The first two context sentences accompanied
the first picture of a pair, while the onset of the third
sentence was aligned with the onset of the second picture.
The pictures showed a male and a female character in a
certain situation. One character was the target referent,
which always performed an action in the second picture.
Therefore, it was expected to be mentioned in subject
position in the participant’s completion. We manipulated the
visual and the linguistic salience of the target referent,
resulting in four different picture pairs for each stimulus
item. These are exemplified in Figure 1.

The target referent was either mentioned as the subject of
the second context sentence, which directly preceded the
sentence that had to be completed by the participants
(condition A & B in Figure 1), or as the subject of the first
context sentence (condition C & D in Figure 1). In the
former case, the target referent was considered linguistically
salient. In the latter case, it was considered linguistically
non-salient. This is in line with the common assumption in
theories of reference that the subject or topic of the
preceding utterance is the most prominent entity at the start
of the current utterance (e.g. Grosz et al., 1995). When the
target referent was the subject of the first context sentence,
the other character was the subject of the second sentence,
and vice versa. This subject shift was included to ensure that
neither character became so linguistically salient that any
effects of visual salience would be overruled.
For each item, the linguistic context was the same in all
versions of the picture pairs. The first context sentence
always started with the phrase Er was eens ‘Once upon a
time there was’, followed by an indefinite subject, which
referred to the female character (either een vrouw ‘a
woman’ or een meisje ‘a girl’) in half of the cases and to the
male character in the other half (either een man ‘a man’ or
een jongen ‘a boy’). The subject was modified by a relative
clause describing the situation (e.g. die een gesprek voerde
‘who had a conversation’), always followed by a
prepositional phrase introducing the other character (e.g.
met een jongen ‘with a boy’). Subsequently, this character
became the subject of the second sentence, which described
a physical or emotional state (e.g. De jongen raakte enorm
verveeld ‘The boy got really bored’). The adjective used
here always denoted a temporary, event-like property, such
as verveeld ‘bored’, which would make it less likely that the
second picture would be described as a habitual or generic
event. To further emphasize the episodic nature of the
stories, the finite verb in the second sentence was always a
dynamic verb, such as worden ‘to become’. The onset of the
third sentence always consisted of the word Daarom ‘That’s
why’. Because Dutch is a verb second language, this means
that participants had to start their utterance with a finite
verb, directly followed by the subject, which was the
constituent of interest. All sentences were recorded by a
female native speaker of Dutch. A pretest of the sentences
revealed that three items contained a bias for continuing the
context sentences with either one or the other character.
After the sentences were adapted, the bias disappeared.
In the pictures, the target referent either appeared in a
central position in the foreground (condition A & C in
Figure 1), or in a more peripheral position in the background
(condition B & D in Figure 1). In the former case, the target
referent was considered visually salient, while in the latter
case it was considered visually non-salient. Since the other
character was in the background when the target referent
was in the foreground and vice versa, visual salience was
always relative to the other character. In most cases, the
foregrounded character also partly occluded the
backgrounded character. Some additional steps were taken

3129

to emphasize the difference in visual salience. Firstly, the
character in the foreground was made more prominent by
putting a spotlight and the camera’s focus on this person.
Secondly, the positions of the two characters were kept
constant across items, such that the distance between them
was always the same. In addition, the action in the second
picture always involved at least standing up from a chair,
causing the target referent to be upright at all times. To
minimize distraction from the two characters caused by
other objects, the only furniture used were two chairs and an
optional table, and photographing was done against a white
screen. Four couples posed for all pictures. To avoid any
effects of the left-to-right orientation of the characters in the
pictures, a mirror version was created for each picture pair
(not shown in Figure 1).
In the first picture of each story, both characters were in a
neutral position (e.g. sitting next to each other). In the

second picture, either the male or the female character
performed a simple action, which was one of two kinds:
Either getting an object related to the state of the character
described in the second sentence (e.g. getting a pillow when
tired), or walking away. Care was taken that the action
depicted in the second picture was compatible with the
context sentences in the different versions of an item, i.e.
both when the man and when the woman was the agent. For
example, the action of getting a beer in reaction to the man
being thirsty can be performed by both characters, since one
can do this for oneself or for someone else.
An additional 20 items serving as fillers and 4 practice
items were constructed. These were similar to the
experimental items, except that 5 items included only one
character and another 9 items included two characters of the
same gender. In addition, the characters sometimes had
roles like ‘a teacher’ or ‘a saleswoman’. The filler and

Figure 1: A stimulus item in four different conditions: (A) target referent (i.e. the person performing
the action in the second picture) is both linguistically and visually salient; (B) target referent is
linguistically but not visually salient; (C) target referent is visually but not linguistically salient; (D)
target referent is neither linguistically nor visually salient. The corresponding context sentences are
translations of the Dutch originals.

3130

practice items came in only one version. All items were
distributed over eight lists using a Latin square design, such
that each list contained one version of a given stimulus item.
On each list, items were quasi-randomized, with the filler
items having a fixed position and no two experimental items
occurring in consecutive slots.

Procedure
Participants sat in a low noise cabin behind a computer
screen. In front of the computer screen was a microphone to
record the participants’ responses. The experiment was
assembled and run with the E-Prime 2.0 software program.
Participants were instructed to complete each story initiated
by the context sentences in such a way that it would fit in
with the situation shown in the second picture. They were
told that they had to build a sentence that connected to the
word Daarom ‘That’s why’. They were not allowed to
repeat this word, because this would cause a break in the
continuation of the story. Participants were further
instructed to use their first intuitions about how to complete
the story and not to ponder too long. Before the experiment
started, participants went through four practice items and
had the opportunity to ask any remaining questions.
In the experiment, first the trial number appeared on the
screen for 1500 ms, accompanied by a 500 ms beep. Next, a
fixation cross was shown for 600 ms, after which the first
picture appeared. Immediately with the first picture, the first
two context sentences were presented over the computer
speakers. The second picture was presented 700 ms after
termination of the second sentence, together with the word
Daarom ‘That’s why’. Recording started at the same time.
An 8 s pause followed, in which the second picture
remained on the screen and the participant could complete
the story. When the 8 s had elapsed, recording stopped and
the next trial was started automatically. It took about 15
minutes to complete the experiment.

Data coding
After discarding the filler and practice items, the remaining
(16 x 64 =) 1024 responses were scored for the type of
referring expression used to refer to the target referent. The
following codings were employed: NPs preceded by a
definite article (de man ‘the man’) were coded as ‘NP’; third
person singular pronouns (hij, ie/die ‘he’, zij, ze ‘she’) were
coded as ‘pronoun’. In addition, reduced pronouns were also
separately coded. However, since in contrast to the feminine
reduced pronoun (ze ‘she’), the masculine reduced pronoun
(ie/die ‘he’) is a clitic with a restricted distribution, analyses
were only performed on the feminine forms.
Only responses in which reference was made to the agent
character in the second picture as a subject directly
following Daarom and a finite verb were analyzed. We
excluded 43 responses in which participants referred to the
non-agent character, 2 cases in which reference was made to
both characters at the same time, 5 cases in which the word
Daarom ‘That’s why’ was repeated, 3 cases in which the
referring expression was not clear, and 2 cases in which

there was no response. In all, 55 responses (5.4%) were
excluded, equally spread over the conditions.

Design and statistical analyses
Crossing the two independent variables resulted in a 2
(target referent is + or – linguistically salient) x 2 (target
referent is + or – visually salient) within-subjects and
within-items design. The proportion of pronoun responses
out of all responses and the proportion of reduced feminine
pronoun responses out of all feminine pronoun responses
were the dependent variables. We conducted two logit
mixed model analyses (Jaeger, 2008): One over the
proportion of pronoun responses, and one over the
proportion of reduced feminine pronoun responses. In both
cases, linguistic and visual salience of the target referent
were included as fixed factors, and participants and items as
random factors. One stimulus item was omitted from the
analyses, because the overall proportion of pronouns in this
item exceeded 2.5 standard deviations from the mean.

Results

Figure 2: Percentage of pronoun references out of all
references by linguistic and visual salience of the target
referent (letters correspond to conditions in Fig. 1).
The results for the proportion of pronoun responses out of
all responses are presented in Figure 2. We found a
significant main effect of linguistic salience on pronoun use
(β = 4.24, SE = 0.28, z = 15.27, p < .001): more pronouns
were used when the target referent was linguistically salient.
There was no main effect of visual salience on pronoun use
(z < |1|). However, there was a significant interaction
between linguistic and visual salience (β = -1.43, SE = 0.43,
z = -3.36, p < .001), indicating that the effect of visual
salience was different for linguistically salient referents than
for linguistically non-salient referents. Planned comparisons
showed that the effect of visual salience was significant both
in the linguistically salient (β = -0.90, SE = 0.33, z = -2.71, p
< .001) and in the linguistically non-salient (β = 0.58, SE =
0.27, z = 2.16, p = .03) condition. This means that when the
target referent was linguistically salient, a lower visual
salience led to more pronouns, while pronoun use increased
with a higher visual salience when the target referent was
linguistically non-salient. The inclusion of the random

3131

effects for participant and item ensures that the model
controls for between-participants and between-items
variance (s2 = 4.57 and s2 = 0.11, respectively).
Next, we investigated the proportion of reduced pronouns
in a subset of the data including only the cases in which a
feminine pronoun (ze, zij ‘she’) was used. The results are
shown in Figure 3. We found a significant main effect of
linguistic salience on the use of full versus reduced
pronouns (β = 2.72, SE = 0.64, z = 4.26, p < .001): More
reduced pronouns were used when the target referent was
linguistically salient. There was a marginally significant
effect of visual salience (β = -1.10, SE = 0.56, z = -1.95, p =
.05), suggesting a tendency for more reduced pronouns
when the target referent was visually non-salient. There was
no significant interaction between linguistic and visual
salience (z < |1|). The between-participants and betweenitems variances were s2 = 6.76 and s2 = 0.60, respectively.

Figure 3: Percentage of reduced feminine pronoun
references out of all feminine pronoun references by
linguistic and visual salience of the target referent
(letters correspond to conditions in Fig. 1).

Discussion
Our story completion experiment supports findings from
other studies (e.g. Arnold, 1998; Gordon et al., 1993;
Stevenson et al., 1994) that a referent’s salience in the
preceding linguistic context has an impact on the choice of
referring expression: The likelihood of using a pronoun is
higher when the referent is the subject of the directly
preceding sentence than when it is not. In addition, the use
of reduced pronouns as opposed to full pronouns also
increases with a higher linguistic salience. While this
contrasts with the finding by Kaiser and Trueswell (2004)
that the full pronoun zij (‘she’) and the reduced pronoun ze
are equally likely to refer to the subject of the preceding
sentence, it is not incompatible with their suggestion that the
use of full pronouns in Dutch is driven by contrast. It is
possible that in the linguistically non-salient conditions,
participants contrasted the target referent with the subject of
the directly preceding sentence, which might explain the
higher frequency of zij in these conditions.
More importantly, our results suggest that a referent’s
visual salience influences pronoun use. For linguistically

non-salient referents, pronoun references increased with a
higher visual salience. This is compatible with an
accessibility-based account of reference. Entities occupying
the foreground of a visual scene are more prominent in
perception than entities in the background (Mazza et al.,
2005). Therefore, visually salient referents have a
representation in memory that is more activated and thus
better accessible than that of less visually salient referents.
As a result, expressions referring to visually salient entities
tend to be more reduced. The fact that this effect was only
found in the linguistically non-salient condition suggests
that linguistic salience is still a more important factor in
determining a referent’s accessibility. This is in accordance
with previous findings on the interaction between linguistic
and visual information in reference production (Arnold &
Griffin, 2007; Fukumura et al., 2010). When salience in the
linguistic context is not decisive, visual properties of the
referent may come into play in the choice of referring
expression. In our experiment, the fact that a linguistically
non-salient referent was still the subject of the first context
sentence probably caused such a tempering effect on
linguistic salience, as we intended. This might explain why
a higher visual salience only led to more pronouns when the
referent was linguistically non-salient.
For linguistically salient referents, however, pronoun
references increased with a lower visual salience. In
addition, the number of reduced pronouns tended to increase
with visually non-salient referents. These findings are not
predicted by an accessibility account. It might be the case
that some other process is responsible for this effect. We
tentatively propose that a clash between participants’
expectancies as to which character the story is about and the
actual story continuation may have caused processing
difficulties, resulting in an increase of low-cost referring
expressions. Recall that in the condition where the target
referent was linguistically salient and visually non-salient
(condition B in Figure 1), the other character was presented
as the subject of the first context sentence (‘Once upon a
time there was…’). In addition, this character was already
visually foregrounded in the first picture. This could have
led participants to perceive this character as the protagonist.
They could have seen the second context sentence as an
aside, expecting the main story line to return to the
protagonist. Indeed, protagonists have been found to remain
accessible in a narrative, even after a topic shift (Anderson,
Sanford, & Garrod, 1983). Analyzing the responses that
were excluded because participants referred to the nonagent, however, did not reveal an effect of protagonisthood
or visual salience on referent choice. Still, uncertainty in
discourse understanding may occur when prominent
characters are not involved in prominent events (Morrow,
1985). Thus, when the story continues with a visually nonsalient character that was not the protagonist, more
processing might be needed to integrate the unexpected
event in the context and to formulate an utterance to
describe that event. Consequently, speakers may turn to
more economical expressions, such as pronouns, in case of

3132

processing difficulties (Almor, 1999; Ariel, 1990). Such an
analysis might also explain our finding that reduced
pronouns tend to be more frequent for visually non-salient
referents, even in the linguistically non-salient conditions.
Here, entities are apparently accessible enough in both
linguistic contexts to be referred to with a pronoun. When
they are involved in a visually non-salient event, their
linguistic accessibility does not match the construction of
the visual scene. This mismatch may lead to a larger effort
in integrating the two modalities, resulting in more reduced
forms.
A new study should address these issues by constructing
the linguistic context in such a way that no expectations are
raised about the upcoming event. For example, the
characters could be introduced in a coordinated NP (‘a boy
and a girl had a conversation’). In addition, to investigate
whether visual salience only increases accessibility when
linguistic salience is indecisive, a condition should be
included in which both characters are kept equally
prominent in the story, such that the linguistic context does
not impose a clear preference for a pronoun or a full NP.
In sum, the present study provides evidence that visually
salient referents induce more pronoun references than
visually non-salient referents, but only when they are not
linguistically salient. This suggests that visual properties of
referents affect accessibility, but can be overruled by
linguistic properties. Future research should shed more light
on the exact interplay between linguistic and visual
information in the production of referring expressions.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Marjolijn Antheunis, Martijn Balsters,
Ben Bergmans, Ed Boschman, Rein Cozijn, Constantijn
Kaland, Ruud Koolen, Kitty Leuverink, Lisette Mol,
Hanneke Schoormans, Mandy Visser, Hans Westerbeek and
our other colleagues at TiCC for their help with the
experiment and their useful comments.

References
Almor, A. (1999). Noun-phrase anaphora and focus: The
informational load hypothesis. Psychological Review,
106(4), 748-765.
Anderson, A., Garrod, S. C., & Sanford, A. J. (1983). The
accessibility of pronominal antecedents as a function of
episode shifts in narrative text. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 35(3), 427-440.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents.
London: Routledge.
Arnold, J. E. (1998). Reference form and discourse patterns.
PhD dissertation, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
Arnold, J. E., & Griffin, Z. (2007). The effect of additional
characters on choice of referring expression: Everyone
counts. Journal of Memory and Language, 56, 521-536.
Beun, R.-J., & Cremers, A. H. M. (1998). Object reference
in a shared domain of conversation. Pragmatics &
Cognition, 6(1/2), 121-152.
Brown-Schmidt, S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006). Watching

the eyes when talking about size: An investigation of
message formulation and utterance planning. Journal of
Memory and Language, 54, 592-609.
Clark, H. H., & Sengul, C. L. (1979). In search of referents
for nouns and pronouns. Memory and Cognition, 7, 35-41.
Coco, M. I., & Keller, F. (2009). The impact of visual
information on reference assignment in sentence
production. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci) (pp. 274-279).
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Ferreira, V. S., Slevc, L. R., & Rogers, E. S. (2005). How
do speakers avoid ambiguous linguistic expressions?
Cognition, 96, 263–284.
Fukumura, K., Van Gompel, R., & Pickering, M. J. (2010).
The use of visual context during the production of
referring expressions. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 63(9), 1700-1715.
Givón, T. (1983). Topic Continuity in Discourse.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gleitman, L. R., January, D., Nappa, R., & Trueswell, J. C.
(2007). On the give and take between event apprehension
and utterance formulation. Journal of Memory and
Language, 57(4), 544-569.
Gordon, P. C., Grosz, B. J., & Gilliom, L. A. (1993).
Pronouns, names and the centering of attention in
discourse. Cognitive Science, 7(3), 311-347.
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., & Weinstein, S. (1995).
Centering: A Framework for Modelling the Local
Coherence of Discourse. Computational Linguistics,
21(2), 203-225.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993).
Cognitive status and the form of anaphoric expressions in
discourse. Language, 69, 274-307.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorial data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 434-446.
Kaiser, E., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The referential
properties of Dutch pronouns and demonstratives: Is
salience enough? Proceedings of the Sinn und Bedeutung
8, Arbeitspapier Nr. 1977: FB Sprachwissenschaft,
Universität Konstanz.
Kelleher, J., Costello, F., & Van Genabith, J. (2005).
Dynamically structuring, updating and interrelating
representations of visual and linguistic discourse context.
Artificial Intelligence, 167, 62-102.
Mazza, V., Turatto, M., & Umiltà, C. (2005). Foregroundbackground segmentation and attention: A change
blindness study. Psychological Research, 69(3), 201-210.
Morrow, D. G. (1985). Prominent Characters and Events
Organize Narrative Understanding. Journal of Memory
and Language, 24(3), 304-319.
Parkhurst, D., Law, K., & Niebur, E. (2002). Modeling the
role of salience in the allocation of overt visual attention.
Vision Research, 42(1), 107-123.
Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. (1994).
Thematic roles, focus and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 94, 473-592.

3133

