UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Spoken and Signed Language Structure Space Differently

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47s0k7nm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Talmy, Leonard

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Spoken and Signed Language Structure Space Differently
Leonard Talmy
Department of Linguistics and Center for Cognitive Science University at Buffalo State University
of New York Buffalo, NY 14260
Abstract: Spatial concepts are structurally represented in spoken language by a 3-level system. At the componential level, there is a relatively closed universally available inventory of fundamental spatial elements. At the
compositional level, elements of the inventory combine in particular arrangements to form whole spatial schemas.
Each language has a relatively closed set of ”pre-packaged” schemas of this sort. And at the augmentive level, the
system includes a set of processes that can extend or deform pre-packaged schemas, enabling a language’s particular
set of schemas to be applied to a wider range of spatial structures. Signed language structurally represents space
with a different system seemingly more like visual parsing. It can mark finer spatial distinctions with its inventory
of more structural elements. It can represent many more of these distinctions in any particular expression. It represents these distinctions independently in the expression, not bundled together into pre-packaged schemas. And
its spatial representations are largely iconic with visible spatial characteristics. The findings suggest that instead of
some discrete whole-language module, spoken language and signed language are both based on some more limited
core linguistic system that then connects with different further subsystems for the full functioning of the two different
language modalities.

2417

