UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Iconicity in language processing: What signed languages reveal

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5jx984bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Thompson, Robin L.
Skinner, Robert
Vinson, David P.
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Iconicity in language processing: What signed languages reveal
Robin L. Thompson
University College London Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre Cognitive,
Perceptual and Brain Sciences Research Department

Robert Skinner
University College London Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre Cognitive,
Perceptual and Brain Sciences Research Department

David P Vinson
University College London Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre Cognitive,
Perceptual and Brain Sciences Research Department

Gabriella Vigliocco
University College London Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre Cognitive,
Perceptual and Brain Sciences Research Department
Abstract: The visual/gestural modality of signed languages allows meaningful form/meaning mappings (iconicity)
across numerous basic concepts. Some previous studies show that iconicity affects sign language processing. However
work to date does not provide a clear answer about the mechanisms driving such an effect. In three experiments we
found differential effects of iconicity in British Sign Language such that iconicity facilitates decisions on a meaningrelated task (for phonological decisions about features motivated by iconicity), but slows responses when the task is
not related to meaning (decisions about unmotivated features for the same signs). Further in a language production
task, picture naming is facilitated for iconic signs. The findings suggest that iconic signs activate meaning representations more quickly than non-iconic signs regardless of the task (meaning-based or not) for both comprehension
and production, whereby decisions related to that meaning are aided, but decisions not related to the meaning are
hindered.

3501

