UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Immunity to error through misidentification and non-attributive self-reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n888981

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Lougheed, Ted

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

1

Immunity to Error through Misidentification
and Non-attributive Self-reference
Ted Lougheed (ted_lougheed@carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Abstract
Recent empirical literature (Jeannerod & Pacherie, 2004;
Mizumoto & Ishikawa, 2005) purports to challenge the thesis
that certain forms of self-awareness are immune to errors of
misidentification with respect to the first-person (IEM). I
argue, first, that these studies do not present a challenge to the
IEM thesis, and furthermore that IEM is indicative of a
fundamental distinction between two ways of being selfaware—a distinction that has real consequences for empirical
studies of self-awareness. In the final section of the paper I
suggest that the non-attributive self-reference (NSR) thesis
better explains what is special about the distinction than IEM
does by itself.
Keywords: self-awareness; self-as-subject; non-attributive
self-reference; immunity to error through misidentification;
consciousness; proprioception; attribution errors

Introduction
Recent empirical research into the self-attribution of actions
(Jeannerod & Pacherie, 2004) and illusions of body
ownership (Mizumoto & Ishikawa, 2005) purports to
challenge the thesis that certain forms of self-awareness are
immune to error through misidentification with respect to
the first-person (hereafter, IEM). Briefly, IEM is the view
that for certain judgments, a person cannot make the
judgment, claim that the judgment is about her, and be
wrong. Exactly what falls under the label of “certain
judgments” is a point on which there is disagreement, and I
will argue that the only judgments that count as IEM are
judgments about the owner of experience—the one that is
having the experience. IEM does not apply to judgments
about others, a point that will become important when I
examine the empirical challenges to IEM.
IEM has been the basis for making a fundamental
distinction between two senses of self. First is the sense of
self as an object of experience (hereafter, SAO-awareness).
SAO is comprised of the particular components of
experience that I attribute to myself; in other words, the
object(s) of current experience that I take to be part of me.
Second is the sense of self as the subject of experience
(hereafter, SAS-awareness), that is, the sense that there is
something—namely, me—doing the experiencing, owning
or authoring (Shoemaker, 1968; Evans 1982). I examine the
empirical challenges to IEM, and argue that while the
research may challenge some claims about IEM with respect
to certain kinds of self-knowledge, we still have IEM with
respect to ownership of the experience.
Nevertheless, there is good reason to suggest that IEM
does not fully capture what is distinctive about SAS-

awareness. In particular, it does not capture the fact that
SAS-awareness does not divide experience—that when I am
aware of SAS, there is no alternative subject of experience
with whom I could confuse. In the final section of the paper,
I argue that the thesis of non-attributive self-reference, or
NSR (what Brook, 2001 calls non-ascriptive self-reference 1)
explains whatever immunity may exist and, because it also
explains the non-experience-dividing quality of SAS just
mentioned, tells a better story about what is special about
SAS-awareness than bare IEM does by itself.

Two Senses of Self: SAS and SAO
Self-as-object or SAO can be defined as the set of
features or properties—for example our bodily appearance
or mental states and the like—that I identify with myself.
When I think of SAO, I am thinking of a particular object in
the world, namely a human being named Ted, with a certain
height, weight, hair color, and so forth. Aspects of my
physical appearance, political opinions, taste preferences,
propensity to particular emotions, and other particular
characteristics are all features that might compose one's
sense of SAO at a given time.
Our sense of SAO is constantly changing; at any given
moment I may only be conscious of a small subset of selfrelated properties. I specify “at any given moment” because
I cannot possibly be conscious of the features that I
associate with myself all at once, given the limitations of
working memory. SAO-awareness changes over time as I
come to attribute different features to myself. The properties
that I attributed to myself as a child are not the same ones
that I attribute to myself now, so my SAO may be different
in almost every respect. Indeed, the features I attribute to
myself can change daily, or from one moment to the next. I
do not have a static conception of myself as an object that I
call upon whenever I think about myself. At one moment I
may have a rich concept of myself, as when caught in a
moment of deep introspection while standing in front of a
mirror; at other times, such as in the middle of a dream, I
may have only a hazy concept of myself consisting of one or
two significant features. These features need not accurately
reflect the real properties of my bodily or mental states—
they are simply the parts of my experiential field that I take
to be part of me, rather than someone or something else.
SAS-awareness, by contrast, is the sense I have of
myself as the subject of particular experiences, that is, the
1

2504

In the interests of clarity and cross-disciplinary understanding, I
have chosen the term non-attributive instead of non-ascriptive,
as the term ascription is less common across disciplines.

2
entity who has the experiences. I make a distinction between
SAS—the notion of a single entity common to all
experience—and SAS-awareness, which is the state of being
conscious of said notion. SAO-awareness is sufficient for
SAS-awareness, but SAS-awareness is insufficient for SAOawareness; it is possible for me to be SAS-aware yet fail to
attribute any objects of experience to me. The point is not
that SAS-awareness is a particular experience in addition to
SAO-awareness; it is rather that SAS-awareness makes
possible the identification of particular features as mine. To
have SAS-awareness is to appear to myself as myself, as
Brook (2001) explains. That is, to experience “x as subject”
is for x to appear to me as x rather than y. Consider a
particular conception that I have of myself at the time of
writing. It is not enough to be aware of a constellation of
specific features, because I must also recognize that those
features are my features, and not those of somebody else or
the external world.
To appreciate the significance of the SAS/SAO
distinction, it is helpful to consider a case in which no such
distinction exists. Consider a being—a mollusk, perhaps—
that is conscious of its own body, and capable of
distinguishing its body from external objects, yet fails to
conceive of that body as “me.” Such a being would be
capable of autopoiesis, taking a special interest in protecting
its body yet not conceiving of that body as belonging to a
common subject of experience (the “I” or first-person).
We need not speculate beyond our own species to
appreciate the significance of SAS-awareness, however. It is
possible for me to be conscious of a part of my body yet fail
to recognize that it is my body part. I may see a partial
reflection of myself in a mirror (where all I can see is an
arm), for example, and not realizing that I’m looking at a
mirror, think that I am seeing someone else’s arm.

IEM: Definition and Brief History
Immunity to error through misidentification with
respect to the first-person (IEM) is the claim that I cannot
make a judgment about myself, take the judgment to be
about me, and be wrong. IEM only applies in one direction,
meaning that it does not apply to judgments about others. I
can make a judgment about someone else, take the judgment
to be about me, and be wrong. This point is often lost in
discussions of IEM, and it must be kept in mind when I
consider the empirical challenges, below.
When I make a judgment involving SAS, it is IEM
because there is no identification component involved
(Shoemaker, 1968; Evans, 1982). That is, it is neither
necessary nor sufficient to identify certain properties in
order to identify SAS, so there is no logical possibility of an
error of misidentification. For example, when I say, “I feel
hungry,” I cannot be wrong about who is feeling hungry,
even if I am wrong about being hungry. If, on the other
hand, I look to my right, see a wrist with a watch on it, and
declare “I am wearing a watch,” I could be in error about
who is wearing the watch (e.g., if the view of the rest of my

arm is obscured and the wrist belongs to someone else). The
latter kind of error is relatively easy to produce under
experimental conditions, especially when participants need
to rely on indirect visual feedback about their own bodies
(Jeannerod & Pacherie, 2004). Even when a participant
knows that a body part is not her own, a feeling of
ownership over that part can be induced, as in the famous
“rubber hand illusion” pioneered by Botvinick and Cohen
(1998). In this illusion, the participant’s arm is hidden while
a rubber hand is placed on the table, oriented in the same
direction as her real hand but laterally displaced. When
strokes are applied synchronously to both real and rubber
hands, the participant reports feeling the touch in the
location of the rubber hand. The illusion breaks down when
strokes are applied asynchronously, demonstrating that the
effect is not simply a product of empathy.
The observation that there is something special about
“I” thoughts has been observed for several centuries, most
notably in the form of Descartes' “cogito” in his Meditations
(1641/1996), where he famously declares that he cannot be
in error about being a thinking thing, despite being able to
doubt all other contents of experience. It was not until the
early part of the last century, however, that the phenomenon
of IEM was identified as such. Wittgenstein (1934/1960)
was the first to explicitly note that certain predicates were
immune to misidentification errors:
There are two different cases in the use of the word “I” (or
“my”) which I might call “the use as object” and “the use as
subject”… One can point to the difference between these two
categories by saying: the cases of the first category involve the
recognition of a particular person, and there is in these cases the
possibility of an error, or as I should rather put it, the possibility
of an error has been provided for. …On the other hand, there is
no question of recognizing a person when I have a toothache. To
ask, ‘are you sure it is you who have pains?’ would be
nonsensical. (pp. 66-7)

As there is no identification of a particular object
(person) involved and thus no possibility of misidentifying
the object, Wittgenstein took the lack of a referent as
evidence against a physical self. I will not speculate on the
metaphysical implications of IEM in this paper; suffice it to
say that the absence of a referent (or representation, percept,
etc.) need not imply the absence of underlying
psychological processes (that I assume are physical).
IEM in its current form was first explicitly identified by
Shoemaker (1968). Following directly from Wittgenstein's
distinction between subject and object, Shoemaker observes
that identifying oneself as an object in the world cannot be
the foundation for the use of the first-person pronoun as
subject. He states that to identify himself as an object would
require either finding something true of the object that he
knows to be true of himself, or knowing that the object is
related to himself in a way that only he could be related to
the object. If neither condition holds, he would be led to an
infinite regress of identifying an object with some further
object, and that object with yet another object, and at no
point would he relate an object with himself. Furthermore,
the identification of some object with him would always

2505

3
carry with it the potential for an error of misidentification;
when he uses “I” as subject, there is no such possibility
(Shoemaker, 1968).
Now because this fundamental knowledge of self as the
subject of experience cannot be based upon identification of
objects, Shoemaker concludes that there is no principled
reason against other sorts of knowledge being identificationfree. He supposes that there might be an entire class of
psychological predicates that are identification-free. For
example, “sees a blue cylinder near the center of the field of
vision” would qualify as such a predicate, according to
Shoemaker, because we do not need to make a further
identification of what sees a blue cylinder in the center of
the field of vision.
Gareth Evans (1982) extends identification-free
knowledge to certain bodily predicates, specifically
proprioceptive knowledge—the sense of where our body
parts are located relative to one another. In other words,
proprioceptive knowledge of my body parts is enough to
guarantee that those parts are mine. On this view, when the
knowledge that my arm is extended over my head comes to
me via proprioception, it makes no sense to ask,
“Someone’s arm is over his head, but is it my arm that’s
over my head?” The claim that proprioceptive knowledge
counts as identification-free is directly challenged by
Mizumoto & Ishikawa (2005), and I consider this challenge
below.
Brook (2001) claims that if I ever have IEM in
identifying myself, it can only be when I am aware of
myself in virtue of having an experience, and not on any
other basis. On this interpretation, it is not enough for a
judgment to be identification-free to be IEM—the judgment
must occur with respect to what one is currently
experiencing. I defend this interpretation of IEM, claiming
that any predicate about an experience is IEM, whereas any
predicate about a non-phenomenal state of affairs will fail to
be IEM in principle—that is, as a matter of logical
necessity. I can be wrong about who is wearing a watch, just
in case it turns out that the watch is not fastened around this
body's wrist. If I said instead, “I think that I am wearing a
watch,” I am describing my experience of thinking “I am
wearing a watch”, and cannot be in error about who is
having that experience, although I could still be in error
about wearing the watch, that is, the content of my
experience. In sum, I cannot be wrong about who is having
this experience.
While there may be cases of de facto IEM with respect
to SAO, what is missing is the logical guarantee. Logically
speaking, however unlikely, we have no difficulty supposing
that someone could mistakenly attribute an identificationfree predicate to herself, when the predicate applies to
someone else. The fact that we never have access to the
mental states of others is a contingency of our particular
biology.
I defend Brook’s claim that IEM applies only at the
level of the structure of experience—specifically to SAS—

not the contents of experience. I maintain that neither
mental nor physical predicates are logically IEM, and that
logical IEM extends only to the experience itself. The
subject’s idea of “I” is not tied to any particular mode of
experience, perceptual or otherwise, but a kind of realization
generated by a separate cognitive faculty (SAS-awareness).

Empirical Challenges to IEM
It may seem difficult, if not impossible, to imagine
what conditions would need to hold for IEM to be false.
However, for IEM to be empirically testable, we need to be
able to specify what would need to be true for IEM to fail
with respect to SAS. IEM would fail just in case I could
have an experience, claim that it is my experience, but be
wrong about who is experiencing it. If I think that I am
having an experience of a blue mug on the table in front of
me, but in fact it is John having that experience, and I am
not actually having the experience, then SAS would not be
IEM. It does not seem to be possible to claim someone
else’s experience as one’s own, because the very nature of
having an experience makes it one’s own, even if the source
is someone else.
We can imagine a scenario where one is having a
shared experience—that is, my nervous system is hooked up
in such a way that a copy of John’s sensory inputs is sent to
my brain. John goes about his daily business, while I sit in a
lab somewhere. There is an intuitive appeal to supposing
that the experiences are actually John’s, because we identify
John with the physical body that is going about its daily
activities—standing in line at the coffee shop, walking to
work, writing papers, smelling roses, and so forth. There is a
sense in which these experiences are also mine, however,
because I am in fact experiencing them. There seems to be
something inherent to experience that guarantees that the
possessor recognize it as her own experience, to the extent
that she possesses a sense of self. In the complete absence of
the distinction between self and other, the question of who is
having what experience can’t even be formulated. I am not
suggesting, contrary to many conceptions of self-awareness,
that to be aware is necessarily to be self-aware. I am
suggesting that the possession of a sense of self guarantees
mental self-attribution of all experience.
I examine two empirically-supported claims against
IEM in this section, specifically that some judgments
involving reference to SAS violate IEM. Jeannerod and
Pacherie (2004) claim that the fact we can make errors
regarding the agency behind an observed action
demonstrates that we can make errors of misidentification
with respect to SAS; meanwhile, Mizumoto and Ishikawa
(2005) claim that under certain conditions, proprioception is
not IEM. While I do not accept Evans’ claim that
proprioception is logically IEM, I will show that Mizumoto
and Ishikawa’s experiment fails to challenge the claim that
proprioception is de facto IEM.

2506

4

Claim: Agency is not IEM
Jeannerod and Pacherie (2004) claim that we do not
have IEM with respect to agency (i.e., authorship of
actions). They identify agency as a subset of subjectivity
(i.e., SAS). If they are right, then we do not have IEM with
respect to SAS in certain cases. I argue that while their
results may show that our actions are not IEM, we still have
IEM with respect to SAS. My argument is based on a
rejection of the premise that agency is part of SAS.
Jeannerod and Pacherie's claim is based on the
following considerations:
1) We are aware of the intentions of ourselves and
others non-inferentially, that is, we perceive them
directly via the process of action simulation. The
same parts of the brain that are active when we
plan our own actions are active when we observe
someone else's actions.
2) We are aware of intentions as “naked” intentions,
that is, there is nothing inherent to awareness of an
intention to identify whose it is. An additional step
is needed to identify the owner of the intention.
3) The process by which we attribute an intention to
an owner is not entirely reliable, so it is possible to
misattribute in certain circumstances.
According to the authors, action simulation is the
primary mechanism by which we self-attribute. On the
action simulation theory, simulated and actual actions are
indistinguishable at the neural level save for the execution.
A person is better at simulating her own action than
simulating that of another, because she is far more familiar
with her own actions. However, by manipulating the
accuracy of simulation, one can cause a person to identify
herself as the source of someone else’s action.
The authors claim that the Alien Hand paradigm
(Nielsen, 1963; Fourneret & Jeannerod, 1998) demonstrates
how such errors of misidentification can be caused in
mentally healthy people, and that we have a tendency to
over-attribute actions to ourselves. In this experiment, the
participant places her arm through a hole in a box, and is
instructed to draw a line towards the top of a page. A small
window in the top of the box allows the participant to
observe her line-drawing. Unbeknownst to the participant,
the box is fitted with a mirror so that the participant actually
sees the hand of the experimenter (both the participant and
the experimenter wear a glove to mask obvious differences
between the hands).
When the participant is asked to draw the line, the
experimenter mimics the action. Midway through the task,
the experimenter makes the line diverge from straight
according to a set number of degrees up to 10°. Even though
the line starts to diverge, the participant still believes that
she is the one drawing the line, so long as the divergence is
not too great. Furthermore, she attempts to correct for the
path of the line, but does not realize that she is doing so.
When confronted with the discrepancy, participants would
commonly confabulate, claiming for instance that they must

have been tired or inattentive (Jeannerod & Pacherie, 2004).
As Jeannerod and Pacherie explain, when we make a
determination about who is performing an action, we rely on
visual information so long as the discrepancy is not too
large. So long as our intention is roughly congruent with the
perceived action, we attribute the action to ourselves. The
authors claim that the feeling of ownership is tightly bound
to the feeling of agency, such that when we make a mistake
with respect to the latter, we also make a mistake with
respect to ownership. In other words, we make an error of
misidentification with respect to SAS.
There are a number of problems with the authors’
conclusion. First, their argument depends on the highly
dubious suggestion that we are aware of intentions noninferentially. They conflate perception of action with
awareness of intention but are not justified in doing so based
on the evidence they provide. Second, being wrong about
the author of an action is not the same as being wrong about
the owner of an intention. Clearly, the participant is
confused about the former, and does not have IEM with
respect to actions (this should not be surprising), but
actions, as movements of objects of experience, are part of
SAO, not SAS. The participant is not confused about her
intention just because she mis-attributes the action; it just
happens that someone else’s action tracks that intention
accurately. The problem of mis- or over-attribution reduces
to a mere problem of causation, and does not introduce any
difficulties for IEM.
Finally, even if the participant was mis-attributing the
action of another to herself, this would not count as a
counter-example to IEM. Shoemaker never claimed that
IEM applied in the reverse direction—that a person could
not make a judgment about someone else, think that it was a
judgment about someone else, and yet think the judgment is
about her. IEM only applies to judgments with respect to the
self.

Claim: Proprioception is not IEM
Mizumoto and Ishikawa (2005) attack IEM from a
different angle, claiming that proprioception is not IEM
because it is tightly (perhaps inextricably) bound to visual
perception. They claim that misidentification errors with
respect to vision are thereby also errors with respect to
proprioception. I argue that, far from challenging the view
that proprioception is IEM, Mizumoto and Ishikawa’s
findings actually support that view, and bolster the central
distinction we make between SAS and SAO.
The authors base their claim on the results of a study on
the “body-swap” illusion, whereby the participant is made to
feel as if she has swapped bodies with another participant.
This experiment is supposed to show that a touch is taken to
be located where it is seen, not where it is in fact felt. The
authors argue that this experiment demonstrates that
judgments based on proprioception are not IEM.
The participant wears a head-mounted display that relays
visual information from stereo cameras, mounted on the

2507

5
head of another participant. The two participants sit in
chairs some distance apart. The view from the HMD shows
only the one participant sitting in a chair. One of two
manipulations is done to try to “trick” the participant into
reacting as if she were the other. In the first manipulation
the experimenter taps the shoulders of both participants at
the same time, and then asks the first participant to report on
how she felt. The second manipulation uses a non-verbal
measure. In this one, the experimenter pretends to hit the
participant and records whether or not she reacts (Mizumoto
& Ishikawa, 2005).
On the first manipulation, all participants reported
feeling as if they were the other participant. On the nonverbal measure, one of three participants reacted to the
threat of being hit, and Mizumoto and Ishikawa report that
the other two “almost” reacted.
Mizumoto and Ishikawa take these results to show that
misleading visual information can cause errors in judgments
based on proprioception. Because an identification
component (in this case, misleading visual stimuli) is
involved, and the judgment is based on proprioception, they
claim that proprioceptive judgments are therefore subject to
errors of misidentification. This claim hinges on the
assertion of the de facto inseparability of visual and
proprioceptive information. They suggest that single-mode
proprioception is impossible, because there is always an
“imagined” visual space associated with the proprioception.
So, although it is logically possible to be IEM with respect
to proprioceptive data alone, it is never actually possible
because the visual information is intimately linked with
proprioception (Mizumoto & Ishikawa, 2005).
There is a problem with the authors’ claims. Mizumoto
and Ishikawa interpret the IEM thesis correctly, but overextend what they are actually justified in claiming about
proprioception. Mizumoto and Ishikawa acknowledge that it
doesn't make sense to ask, “Someone is being tapped, but is
it really me who is being tapped?” (2005), but they persist in
claiming that proprioception is not immune because the
judgment based upon proprioception is in error.
It is clear that the participants are not mistaken about
who is being tapped, even if they are mistaken about who is
about to be hit. In the latter case, however, they are not
confusing someone else's proprioception for their own, or
wondering if the proprioception they are feeling is their
own, which is what it would mean to misidentify the
proprioception.
Judgments based on proprioception can be wrong, but
we can't be mistaken about the fact that those judgments are
ours. If proprioception were not immune, then we would be
able to have awareness of the proprioception of another and
attribute it to ourselves in the same way I attribute the visual
percept of a hand to myself. Even if vision and
proprioception are tightly linked, there is a component of
the judgment about which the participant cannot be in error,
namely, who is feeling the tap. Mizumoto and Ishikawa have
not presented any data that can challenge the claim of IEM

with respect to proprioception.
Also, while the authors claim that the results
demonstrate a tight link between vision and proprioception,
the experiment actually serves to demonstrate that
participants can distinguish the source of visual perception
(SAO) from proprioceptive feelings, which we know are
ours in virtue of having, and therefore part of reference to
SAS. Thus the findings of the authors actually support the
claim that proprioception is IEM, and the distinction
between SAS and SAO.

Non-attributive Self-reference (NSR)
IEM is often heralded as the key feature of reference to
SAS. While I agree that IEM is significant, I argue that the
thesis of non-attributive self-reference spells out why IEM is
significant, and provides some clues as to the psychological
mechanism of self-awareness.
The NSR thesis is as follows: when we refer to SAS
alone, we do not attribute any particular properties to
ourselves. All the experience that is required to refer to SAS
is given in the structure of experience itself, rather than the
content. It is neither necessary nor sufficient to be aware of
any particular object of experience in order to be aware of
SAS (Brook, 2001). We are of course frequently aware of
SAO when we are aware of SAS. The point is that reference
to SAS cannot be reduced to awareness of SAO.
We are not aware of ourselves in the same way that we
are aware of objects of experience. For instance, for me to
identify a car as a car, I need only be aware of some object
of experience, namely a certain collection of colors, edges,
sounds, and possibly smells and other sensory data that I
associate with “car-ness”. But it is not sufficient, or even
necessary, for me to identify certain properties to identify
myself – I need only be having an experience, any
experience whatsoever, to be aware of SAS. To use another
example, if I think or say “I am seeing the color red,” I need
not have in mind any particular properties of myself. All I
can say about myself is that I am seeing the color red, but
this does not provide me with any additional information
about myself.
To identify a given subject as my-self due to the
possession of some property, I would have to know that I
observe it (Shoemaker, 1968). Because this self-knowledge
is the grounding for my identification of self as myself, that
knowledge can't also be grounded on the identification of a
particular object, or else we would have an infinite regress
of self-predication.
If we grant that self-reference must at bottom be nonattributive (and I do not see how it could be otherwise) then
IEM logically follows. Being non-attributive, SAS cannot
be “experience-dividing.” (Brook, 2001; Bennett, 1974)
That is, the subject (SAS) has no features with which to
distinguish it from others. As Brook explains, “no
representation of mine is made different from any other
representation of mine by the fact that it makes me aware of
myself as its subject… What we cannot do is compare

2508

6
[SAS] to, contrast it with, one object rather than another.”
(2001) It is in virtue of the fact that I cannot contrast SAS
with any object that I have IEM with respect to SAS. In
other words, what it is for x to be “me” is just for x to be
placed in a certain relationship with the structure of
experience. This relationship holds both synchronically and
diachronically, since when we are aware of SAS, it is
always presented in the same manner.
Contrast the experience of a tree. I can identify one tree
from another by various features, such as the shape of the
leaves or the hardness of the bark, but there are no
analogous features by which I can distinguish one subject of
experience from another. I am only ever aware of one
subject (namely, me)–I am only aware of others as objects,
and if I were to become aware of another subject in the
same way that I am aware of myself, there would be nothing
to distinguish that subject from myself. IEM holds with
respect to SAS precisely because there are no features to
distinguish one subject from another, and thus no question
of identity.
IEM is often used to support the claim that we are
aware of ourselves in more than one way, as SAS and SAO.
NSR gives a more complete story, and subsumes IEM as a
particular consequence of NSR. My intention is not to claim
that we should ignore IEM, but that we should recognize
IEM as an indicator of NSR. We can understand the
distinction as that between interesting phenomenon and
underlying psychological mechanism.
A useful parallel is the relationship between an optical
illusion and the psychological mechanism driving the
illusion. As cognitive scientists, we are ultimately interested
in understanding why we see the illusion and not the illusion
itself. We may use the illusion as an interesting example to
draw attention to the psychological story we want to tell, but
we wish to keep separate, if only for terminological clarity,
the illusion from the psychological mechanism driving the
illusion. We do not ignore the illusion, but acknowledge that
the illusion is indicative of a particular mechanism, perhaps
going so far as to incorporate the illusion into an
experimental study. Likewise, I do not propose to discard
IEM, but to recognize it as indicator of NSR, and potential
tool for empirical study of NSR. By isolating instances
where IEM applies and where it fails to apply, we may be
able to identify the psychological and even neural correlates
of NSR.

Conclusion
IEM remains a viable idea despite attempts to challenge
it via empirical means. The observation that certain
judgments are IEM, however, has overshadowed the
observation that reference to SAS is non-attributive—that it
does not depend on awareness of particular objects of
experience. NSR better explains the significance of the
SAS/SAO distinction as it relates to the study of underlying
psychological mechanisms than IEM can do by itself.
I do not mean to suggest that IEM should be ignored, to

be replaced wholesale by talk of NSR. The observation of
IEM has value as a tool for demarcating the boundaries of
our SAS-awareness. We should be able to exploit IEM
under experimental settings to help us identify correlated
mechanisms, which would allow insight into the underlying
structure of experience.
If the distinction between IEM and NSR seems a trifle
at this stage, it is due solely to the fact that we still know so
little about the psychological mechanism(s) of selfawareness, in particular SAS-awareness. This paper
represents only a small piece of a much larger project to
unravel the psychology of SAS. The claim that reference to
SAS is non-attributive raises a host of perplexing questions,
such as how it is possible to refer to self without attributing
anything to it, and other questions that I don’t have the
space to address here.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funds from Carleton
University, including the Hamlin Graduate Fellowship, the
David and Rachel Epstein Fund, and the Dr. Thomas Betz
Memorial Fund. I would like to thank Andrew Brook, Raj
Singh, and Frederique de Vignemont for providing me with
helpful comments and criticism on previous drafts.

References
Bennett, J. (1974). Kant’s Dialectic. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Botvinick, M. & Cohen, J. (1998) Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch
that eyes see. Nature, 391, 756.
Brook, A. (2001). Kant, self-awareness and self-reference.
In A. Brook and R. C. DeVidi (Eds.), Self-reference and
Self-awareness (pp. 9-30). Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Pub. Co.
Descartes, R. (1641/1996). Meditations on First Philosophy.
Trans. John Cottingham. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Evans, G. (1982). Self-identification. In Self-reference and
Self-awareness (pp. 95-141).
Fourneret, P. & Jeannerod, M. (1998). Limited conscious
monitoring of motor performance in normal subjects.
Neuropsychologia, 36, 1133–1140.
Jeannerod, M., & Pacherie, E. (2004). Agency, simulation
and self-identification. Mind & Language, 19(2), 113–
146.
Mizumoto, M., & Ishikawa, M. (2005). Immunity to error
through misidentification and the bodily illusion
experiment. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 12(7), 319.
Nielsen, T.I. (1963). Volition: a new experimental approach.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 4, 225–230.
Shoemaker, S. (1968). Self-reference and self-awareness. In
Self-reference and Self-awareness (pp. 81-93).
Wittgenstein, L. (1934/1960). The Blue and brown books.
New York: Harper & Row.

2509

