UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
In the Eyes of the Beholder: What Eye-Tracking Reveals About Analogy-Making Strategies
in Children and Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0q7658hk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre
French, Robert M.
Missault, Angelique
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

In the Eyes of the Beholder: What Eye-Tracking Reveals
About Analogy-Making Strategies in Children and Adults
Jean-Pierre Thibaut, Robert French, Angélique Missault, Yannick Gérard, Yannick Glady
{jean-pierre.thibaut, robert.french, yannick.gérard, yannick.glady}@u-bourgogne.fr; angel89100@hotmail.com
LEAD-CNRS, UMR5022, University of Burgundy, Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme
21065 DIJON. FRANCE
used geometrical shapes. In an A:B::C:D paradigm,
children were influenced by the type and number of
perceptual distractors. Thibaut, French, and Vezneva
(2010b) studied the role of the semantic association
strength between items making up the A-B and C-D pairs
with 4- and 5-year-old children. They hypothesized that
younger children, having more limited cognitive resources,
would have more difficulty solving problems in which the
A-B items and the C-Target pairs were weakly associated.
In a classic A:B::C: ? paradigm with four possible
responses, they compared weak and strong analogies (i.e.,
analogies in which the items of the A-B and C-D pairs
were weakly, or strongly, associated) and manipulated the
number of semantic distractors (1 or 3). Their results
revealed a difference between weak and strong analogies,
especially when the number of distractor items was high
(i.e., three). This is compatible with the idea that a greater
number of related distractors would be harder to inhibit
(and thus, ignore) than a single semantic distractor.
Interestingly, strong analogies were largely unaffected by
the number of distractors, most likely because the relations
between A- B and C-D item pairs were sufficiently strong
that they were not interfered with by the semantic
distractors. In contrast, when the problem involved weakly
associated items, mapping the A-B pair onto the C-D pair
requires more than simply accessing the obvious semantic
dimensions of the items.
For this reason, we consider analogy-making to be a
search through a space of features and potential relations.
The number of relations holding between any A-B pair is
potentially large because, depending on the context, any
number of different relations might be relevant (see
Murphy and Medin, 1985; Chalmers, French & Hofstadter,
1992; Hofstadter et al., 1995; French, 1995; Mitchell,
1993; Thibaut, 1991; 1997). As mentioned above, the
structure of the search space and the presence or absence
of competing non-analogical solutions have an effect on
the search, especially for young children, who have greater
difficulty handling the cognitive load associated with a
more elaborate search of the space of possible solutions.

Abstract
The present study uses eye-tracking technology to track
differences in how children aged 5 and 8, and adults explore
the space of possible answers to a semantic analogy problem.
The main results were that adults looked more to A and B
than to C and Target and that they start with A and B before
looking at C and D. For children, the pattern was very
different. They spent significantly more time than adults on C
and the Target item (or distractors) and less on A and B. In
addition, children start with an evenly distributed exploration
of the stimuli before progressively converging on the CTarget relation.
Keywords:
Analogy-making,
development,
strategies, eye tracking executive functions.

Introduction
Extensive work suggests that analogy-making, in the
sense of understanding and/or generating relations
between objects or situations in the world, is a cognitive
ability that develops only gradually (Gentner, 1988,
Goswami, 1992).
There are two main explanations of the development of
the ability to make analogies. First, analogy-making can be
explained in terms of the gradual increase of children’s
structured knowledge of the world (Goswami & Brown,
1990; Vosniadou, 1995; see Thibaut, 1999, for a general
overview of conceptual development). According to
Goswami (1992, 2001), it is only the lack of conceptual
knowledge in one of the domains involved in the analogy
that prevents children from deriving the correct analogies.
This view attaches little or no particular importance to
processing constraints.
An alternative explanation,
however, is based on the development of children’s
executive functions, and more particularly to their
inhibition capacities and their cognitive flexibility. This
explanation provides an explanation of observed analogymaking behavior for problems in which salient
associations come immediately to mind, but are, in fact,
irrelevant to the current analogy problem or when salient
distractors are present in the solution set (Richland,
Morrison, and Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut, French, &
Vezneva, 2010a and b).
In order to test the role of executive functions in
analogy-making in children, Richland, Morrison, &
Holyoak (2006) used scene analogy problems consisting
of pairs of scenes illustrating relations between objects.
When there were distractors perceptually similar to the
focal item in the base scene, children made more errors
than when the distractors were perceptually dissimilar
from the focal item. Thibaut, French, Vezneva (2010a)

Goals of the present paper
The purpose of the present contribution is to study the
development of analogy making with a combined set of
measures – namely, the percentage of correct answers, the
locus of the errors, and eye tracking measures – in a task
in which we manipulate the number of distractors and the
semantic strength in the A-B pairs and the C-D pairs (see
Thibaut et al. 2010b). By means of an eye-tracker, we
were able to record exactly where participants looked in
their quest for a solution, which allowed us to develop a
better idea of how a solution to a particular problem arose.

453

These measures of performance and eye-gaze position
are well suited to the study of cognitive control, in general,
and to the integration of the various sources of information
that are available during the task. Richland et al. (2006)
and Thibaut et al. (2008 or 2010b) used a “percentage
correct” measure to assess performance. They were not
able to directly address the question of how the search of
solution-space actually took place, that is its temporal and
dynamic dimensions. In Experiment 2 in Thibaut et al.
(2010a), the authors were able to make some progress on
this front by recording RTs, as well as percentage-correct
responses. However, eye-tracking was the tool needed to
study these search strategies correctly.
Most models of analogy making for problems of the
A:B::C:? type assume there is a mapping process between
items. It is often thought that they first have to find the
relation between A-B and then they search for a solution,
D, such that when this relation is applied to C, it produces
D. This is also described as mapping the A term onto the C
term and the B term onto a D term (see French, 2002;
Gentner & Forbus, 2010, for reviews).
It is clear that the knowledge approach (Goswami, 2001)
does not make explicit predictions regarding the processes
that are involved. Even the executive function approach
falls short of a good description of the temporal dynamics
of how an analogy is found, particularly the temporal
dynamics leading to a solution.
The temporal dynamics of children’s and adults’
explorations of solution-space during analogy-making
currently remain, to a large extent, unexplored. How the
mapping process is organized, how children explore the
set of stimuli that compose the task (i.e., the base, the
target and the other items composing the proposed solution
set) to come up with a solution, etc. are largely unknown.
In an eye-tracking study of analogy-making using scenes
from Richland et al. (2006), Gordon & Moser (2007)
found that adults initially focused on the actor-patient first
in the source image (analogous to our A and B items) and
then looked for the solution in the target image (analogous
to our C and D terms).
However, to the best of our knowledge, eye tracking has
not been used developmental studies of analogy making.
How long do participants study each type of stimulus
(Base, target, distractors)? Do children and adults have the
same looking profiles? Crucially, how much time is spent
on each stimulus with respect to the time course of a trial?
For example, do children first spend their time looking at
A-B before they analyze C and the potential solutions? As
mentioned above, it is often claimed that structure
mapping starts with the determination of the relation
holding between A and B which is later applied to C and
D. For example, for Leech, Mareschal & Cooper (2008),
solving an A:B :: C: ? analogy involves first extracting an
a priori relation, R, between A and B and then applying
this relation to find a D that goes with C. This so-called
“relational priming” view depends on the existence of
context-independent features and relations.
Eye-gaze transitions between stimuli (e.g., gaze focus on
item A followed by a gaze focus on item C) provide
crucial information regarding the organization, if any, of
the search. We recorded the eye movements of children
aged 5 and 8 and adults who were asked to solve semantic

analogies containing none or 1 semantically related
distractor. The idea behind the 0 distractor case was to
study the organization of the search when the solution
becomes more obvious. Analogies were constructed
around weakly or strongly semantically associated pairs.
For example, man-plate is a weakly associated pair
(people eat from plates) or bird-nest, a much stronger,
immediately accessible association.

Experiment
Participants
Seventy-one participants took part in this experiment: 26
5-year-old children (M = 5;7 months), 25 8-year-old
children (M = 8;8), and 20 adult university students (M =
21;7). Informed consent was obtained from parents for the
children.
Materials
The experiment consisted of 14 trials, divided into 2
practice trials and 12 experimental trials. A 2x2 design
was used with Association strength (Weak or Strong) x
Number of distractor (0 or 1).The design of each trial was
of the A:B::C:? type. There were three trials per condition.
Each trial consisted of 7 drawings: items A, B and C and
the solution set that was composed of a row of 4 drawings
that included the analogical match and three distractors.
There was either 1 distractor that was semantically related
to C and 2 unrelated distractors (1-Distractor condition) or
3 distractors that were semantically unrelated to C (0Distractor condition). We systematically varied the
positions of the solution and distractor items in the
solution set (see Figure 1).
The strength of the semantic association between pairs of
words and their corresponding picture was determined by
university students. They were asked to rate to what extent
each item of a pair made them think of the other. It was
stressed that the task was to rate how strongly the two
items were associated in their mind. The ratings were on a
1-to-7 scale. On the basis of these results, we were able to
construct pairs of stimuli that were either strongly related
or weakly related. In the strongly associated condition, the
semantic association strengths for the strong pairs (A-B,
C-D, C-semantic distractor) was significantly higher than
the corresponding strengths for the pairs in the weak
condition.
The experiment was run with E-prime software. We
used a Tobii T120 to record participants’ gazes.
Procedure
Two experimenters saw the children individually at their
school in a quiet room or at the university for the adults.
Participants were seated in front of the Tobii screen. For
each participant, the experiment started with a calibration
phase which followed the protocol specified for the
apparatus.
Each trial began when the experimenter pressed the
space-bar. The 7 stimuli for each trial were displayed
simultaneously. The A:B pair and the C item were shown
in an array with the first two items grouped together to the
left of the screen. The C item was alone on the right of the
screen and next to C there was a box with a question mark.
The four solution items were displayed on a separate row,
beneath the A B C ? row. Children were asked to point

454

to the item in the lower row that best completed the series
of items in the upper row (cf. Goswami & Brown, 1990).
The first two trials were training trials and children
received feedback: the experimenter explained in what
terms the Target was the correct solution and incorporated

the relation holding in the A-B pair in his/her
demonstration. The reaction times were recorded by the
experimenter who started timing at the beginning of each

Weak association/Semantic distractor

Strong association/semantic distractor

?

analogical

semantic

unrelated

?

unrelated

analogical

semantic

unrelated

unrelated

Figure 1: Example of strong and weak analogies with a semantically related distractor in the solution set . In the 0 distractor conditions,

the semantically related distractor was replaced by an unrelated foil.
trial. Participants were instructed that they were to point
to the stimulus on the screen corresponding to their choice
“as soon as they had found the solution”. They were told
that they were to point to only one stimulus per trial. The
experimenter stopped timing the participant when he/she
pointed to a solution.
Afterwards, children’s understanding of the semantic
relation between A and B and between C and D was
assessed. They were shown the A:B pairs and were asked
why the two items of each pair went together. The same
was true for the C-D pairs. This was done for the 12 trials
of the experiment.

correct. These results confirm previous results obtained by
Thibaut et al. (2010b) in which the presence of distractors
decreased performance. They also confirm that analogies
based on weaker associations between A and B and
between C and D were more difficult than analogies based
on strongly associated pairs.
In this experiment, we were primarily interested in the
distribution of looking times on the 7 stimuli composing
the task. First, the analyses that will be presented were
done only on “correct” trials (i.e., in which the correct
answer was given). Indeed, it is difficult to figure out what
happens in “error” trials: children might have failed
because they answered randomly, or ignored some of
items shown or whatever. In order to perform this analysis,
we first defined a criterion to include data in the analysis.
Indeed, there were a number of cases in which participants
looked away from the screen during a trial or in which
participants, especially 5-year-olds, were correctly looking
at the screen but their gazes were not recorded for various
reasons (reflections on glasses, body movements,
suboptimal orientation of the Tobii screen). These
difficulties are well known with this technique
(Duchowski, 2007). We discarded a trial from the data set
when more than 20% of looking times were missing for
this trial. With these criteria (correct trials and trials with
more 80% or more of looking times), we kept 8 five-yearolds, 15 eight-year-olds, and 19 adults. We lost many
young participants because they made more errors and had
more “20%-or-more” trials resulting in more empty
conditions.
We ran a 4-way mixed ANOVA on the resulting data
with Age (5, 8, adults) as a between factor and Association
Strength (weak, strong), Number of Distractors (0, 1), and
Items (A, B, C, Target, Distractor – semantically related in
the 1-distractor condition, absent in the 0-distractor
condition) as within factors. Of central importance are the
interactions between Age and the other factors.
There was a main effect of Association strength, F(2,
39)=11.15, p<.005,  2 = .22, with longer looks in the weak
condition than in the strong condition (M = 0.98s and .81s,
respectively). This is compatible with our hypothesis that

Results
We conducted several analyses: performance (number of
correct responses), looking times for each of the 7 stimuli
defining a trial, and the first-order transitions between the
stimuli (i.e., the time spent between the stimuli A and B or
between A and C).
Performance was measured as the percentage of valid
relational matches. As in previous papers (see Thibaut et
al., 2010b) we eliminated all trials in which either the
children did not understand the semantic relation between
the A and B items or between the C and D items. Indeed,
we wanted to avoid cases in which failure would result
from an absence of the relevant knowledge.
We ran a 3-way mixed ANOVA on the data with Age (5,
8, Adults) as a between factor and Association strength
(strong vs. weak) and Distractor-type (0 or 1 semantic
distractor) as within factors.
As expected there was a main effect of age, F(2, 68) =
37.58, p < .0001,  2 = .52, a main effect of number of
distractors, F(1, 68) = 78.2, p < .0001,  2 = .53, a main
effect of association strength, F(1, 68) = 5.4, p < .05,  2 =
.07, and an interaction between number of distractors and
age, F(2, 68) = 15.57, p < .001,  2 = .31. This interaction
results from the virtually perfect performance for the 3 age
groups in the 0-distractor condition compared to the much
worse performance (< 60% correct) in the 1-distractor
condition for 5- and 8-year-olds, whereas adults were 97%

455

in the weak case, the search is more open. There was a
main effect of Age, F(2, 39)=84.66, p<.0001,  2 = .81, of
Items, F(6, 234)=136, p<.00001,  2 = .78, an interaction
between Items and Age, an interaction between
Association strength and Items. Both were subsumed by a
triple interaction between Association strength, Age and
Items, F(12, 234)= 2.38, p<.01,  2 = .11 (see Figure 2).
There was also an interaction between association strength
and distractors and a triple interaction between
Association strength, number of distractors and Age, F(2,
39)=4.21, p< .05,  2 = .17. We will concentrate on the
triple interaction between Association strength, Items and
Age. Figure 2 shows that 5- and 8-year-olds spent much
more time on C and D than on A and B which is not the
case for the adults. This important result suggests a major
difference between children and adults while exploring the
stimuli. As Figure 2 shows this does not mean that
younger children spend less time on the A-B pair than
adults but, rather, that they tend to spend relatively more
time on C and D than on A and B, whereas the adults tend
the distribute their looking times more evenly on these two
pairs. This is consistent with the idea that they first try to
find the stimulus that goes with C and might be less
concerned with information regarding A and B. Note that
the difference between children and adults was not due to
the fact that adults did spend less time, overall, exploring
the stimuli. As mentioned above, there was no difference
between children and adults for A and B. Note also that
the 0-1 distractor conditions are fused in this interaction,
thus the value that is reported for D is a mean from 0 and 1
distractor trials.
Figure 2 also reveals that adults spend less time on the
unrelated distractors than younger children in the case of
weakly associated analogies. This is consistent with our
hypothesis that in this case, the search space is broader and
that children are required to explore it more thoroughly to
find a solution and take more time to reject these solutions
than adults who, very quickly disregard the unrelated
distractors.
We performed the same analysis as above, but divided
each trial into 3 time slices. The main purpose was to

time slice. In this particular analysis, we discarded the 5year-olds. Because of the missing data (due to the fact that
we concentrated on correct trials, less frequent in this
group, and because; also each empty cell, more frequent
for younger children, meant that the corresponding
participant was lost in the analysis), only 5 children
remained in the data set. However, overall their data
profile was very similar to that of the 8-year-olds. In order
to simplify the design, we also removed the unrelated
stimuli from the analysis and the no distractor condition.
The latter was done in order to concentrate on the conflict
between the Target solution and the semantically related
distractor. (The interested reader should contact the first
author to receive the complete analysis). We ran a 4-way
mixed ANOVA on the resulting data with Age (8, adults)
as a between factor and association strength (weak,
strong), items (A, B, C, Target, Distractor) and Slice (1st,
2nd, 3rd) as within factors. We were mainly interested
seeing if there was an interaction involving Age and Slice.
There was a main effect of Age, Slice, Items, five double
interactions (Slice x Age, Items x Age, Slice x Association
strength, Slice x Items, Association strength x Items). We
will not describe them here for the sake of brevity.
The main result was an Age x Slice x Items triple
interaction, F(8,176)=4.77, p < 0.001,  2 = .18. Figure 3
clearly shows one major difference between the two age
groups. Adults spend the majority of their time exploring
the A-B stimuli, then the time they devote to these two
stimuli decreased in favor of C and the Target in slices 2
and 3. By contrast, 8-year-olds distribute their lookingtime across the 5 items relatively evenly in the first slice,
and then they progressively converge on C and D, whereas
B and the distractor receive less of their attention. Adults,
by contrast, show two distinct peaks of attention, the first
one on A and B, and the second one on C and D.

Figure 3: Age x Items x Slice interaction. Items A, B, C and T
(Target) and D (Distractor).

Figure 2: Interaction between Age, Items and Association
strength. T, D and U stands for Target, Distractor and Unrelated
respectively.

Finally, we analyzed the first-order transitions between
items. For example the AB transition is the time spent
looking from A to B or the reverse. Note first that the

compare the age groups in terms of their allocation of
search time on each type of stimulus as a function of the

456

entire set of possibilities is a 7 x 7 matrix, that is 49
possibilities for each of the 4 conditions included in our
design (e.g., weak-no distractor condition, weak-1distractor condition). Most of these transitions occur very
rarely, if at all (e.g. a transition between A and an
unrelated distractor). Overall, the transition times were
much shorter than the looking times to the stimuli
themselves. In fact transitions correspond to saccades
between stimuli. Thus, more saccades means longer
looking times devoted to transitions. We decomposed the
problem into 2 separate analyses. In the first one, we
evaluated the number of AB, BC, CT transitions (T is the
Target item) as a function of Age, number of distractors,
and association strength. We ignored the AC and BT
transitions which rarely appeared in the data. The second
analysis was performed on transitions between stimuli in
the data set. We will not present these data. We ran a 4way mixed ANOVA on the data with Age (5, 8, adults) as
a between factor and Association strength (weak, strong),
number of distractors (0, 1), and Transitions (AB, BC, CT)
as within factors. Results revealed main effects of Age,

at the expense of the other items and, only later, do they
converge on the C-D pair. This transition is clear cut. By
contrast, children first allocate their attention evenly
across the various items and converge progressively on
C and the solution.
To recapitulate, performance measures in this
experiment confirm Thibaut et al. (2010b) which showed
that the presence of distractors decreased performance
and that “strong” analogies were easier to solve than
“weak” analogies. This result is not predicted by
Goswami and Brown’s (1990) purely knowledge-based
account of analogy-making. The strength of an
association should not matter, only the knowledge of it.
The eye-tracking results showed that adults did not
spend the same proportion of time on the different types
of stimuli as children did. In fact, adults spend much
less time on C and the Target item than children, which
is consistent with the idea that they first analyze the A-B
pair and generalize quickly on the basis of this analysis
(see Thibaut et al., 2010a for a similar proposal). It is
important to note that adults spend less time on the
unrelated distractors than 5-year-olds in the weak
analogy case (see Figure 2). This is compatible with our
idea that weak analogies define a broader space in which
solutions do not come to mind immediately.
Consequently, younger children must explore this space
more completely in order to find the solution (note that
this condition is more difficult for them than the strong
case). By contrast, adults do not need this exploration
time to discard the unrelated distractor items.
This was confirmed by our analysis of the time slices
(see Figure 3). At the beginning of a trial, children
distributed their time evenly across the five types of
items (A, B, C, T (target), semantic Distractor) and
converge progressively on the CT pair (slice 3). Slice 2,
compared to Slice 1, showed a more uneven profile for
the 8-year-olds compared to the Adults. Slice 3 shows
convergence on C and Target and less attention paid to A
and to the Distractor. The allocation of time in Slice 2
and 3 is not the same since only Slice 3 displayed the
peak on C and the Target. For adults, however, the
pattern of exploration is markedly different from that of
children. There is a sharp contrast between the large
amount of time allocated to A and B compared to the
time allocated to C, Target and distractor in slice 1.
Adults then converge sooner on C and the Target (slice
2) than children. This is consistent with the idea that
adults first try to interpret the relation between A and B
and map it later on C and Target. Children, by contrast,
explore the space more evenly, and converge
progressively on the C-Target pair. With children, we
did not find any evidence of the same clear cut “first A-B
then C-Target” pattern that we found in adults.
In addition, the analysis using transitions showed an
analogous pattern. Children allocated the same amount
of time to the 3 types of transition whereas adults had
more AB transitions than CT transitions. Again the latter
result is consistent with the idea that adults first try to
interpret A-B, and do not need many transitions to find
the Target that has the equivalent relation with C. This
was not the case for children (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Age x Transition interaction. The analysis was
restricted to the AB, BC and CT transitions (T = Target).

F(2, 68) =3.4, p < 0.05,  2 = .1, Transitions, F(2,
136)=14.9, p<.0001,  2 = .18, a significant Age x
Transitions interaction, F(4, 136)=12.7, p < .0001,  2 =
.27, and a significant Association strength x Transition
interaction, F(2, 136)= 7.1, p< .005,  2 = .09. The Age x
Transition interaction shows that adults spent more time
going from A to B than going from C to the Target (Figure
4). By contrast, children distribute the transitions more
evenly. Interestingly, the AB transition gets more attention
as age increases and the CT transitions less. Again, this is
compatible with the idea that adults first analyze the A-B
pair and once they have found the semantic relation
holding between them, they apply it very quickly to C and
T (target).

General discussion
The present experiment was the first attempt that we
are aware of to characterize the development of analogy
making with eye tracking measures. (Gordon & Moser,
2007, involved only adult participants.) We were able to
follow the unfolding of the search from the presentation
of the analogy problem to the decision itself. Our results
suggest that adults initially pay attention to the A-B pair

457

This pattern of results, we believe, is compatible with
the executive function account. The task that we used
here is a classical paradigm in the study of analogy
which focuses on C and the target but requires the
integration of A and B in the search process. This is
perfectly done by adults who seem to organize their
search around the relation between A and B. By contrast,
children seem to organize their search around C and D
(the central point in this task) and pay less attention to AB. Particularly, at the beginning, they are unable to focus
on particular stimuli and distribute their attention evenly
across stimuli. In other words, they are less able to
inhibit their attention to particular stimuli. At the end of
their exploration, they still pay more attention to C and
the distractor than adults who focus on the target.
How does this relate with models of analogy making?
Leech et al. (2008) recently proposed a “relational
priming” model in which analogy making in children is
explained in terms of a priming of the C-Target relation
by the AB relation. Interestingly, this model has been
devised to account for A:B::C:? data. While, at least for
strong analogies, the model might be applied to the adult
case, in the sense that they first analyze A and B and
apply the relation to C and Target (although we cannot
confirm that it is a priming phenomenon), we found no
evidence of such a “first find AB relation, then apply it
to C” pattern in children. By contrast, they pay more
attention to C and D at the beginning of the analogy
making process. We believe that the executive function
view provides a better framework to account for the data.
Children pay more attention to distractors or unrelated
stimuli than adults.
In conclusion, we have presented work that compare
children’s and adults search profiles in with different
types of analogy problems and found major differences
between adults and children. In the future, it will be
interesting to reconstruct more precisely the trajectories
of the different groups and to compare the patterns
obtained for correct and wrong answers.

Cambridge University Press.
Gordon, P.C., Moser, S. (2007). Insight into analogies:
Evidence from eye movements. Visual Cognition, 15,
20-35.
Goswami, 1992 Analogical reasoning in children,
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order
structure and relational reasoning: Contrasting
analogical and thematic relations. Cognition, 36, 207226.
Goswami, U., (2001). Analogical reasoning in children.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, and B. N. Kokinov
(eds.). The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from
Cognitive Science. Cambridge MA: The MIT
Press/Bradford Books. 437–470.
Hofstadter, D. R. & the Fluid Analogies Research
Group (1995). Fluid Concepts and Creative
Analogies. New York: Basic Books.
Leech, R., Mareschal, D. & Cooper, R. (2008) Analogy
as relational priming: A developmental and
computational perspective on the origins of a complex
cognitive skill. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31,
357-414.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception: A
Computer Model. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Mitchell, M. & Hofstadter, D. R. (1990). The emergence
of understanding in a computer model of concepts and
analogy-making. Physica D 42:322–34.
Murphy, G.L. and Medin, D.L., 1985. The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological
Review 92, 289–316.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J., (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning:
Insights from scene analogy problems. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Thibaut, J.-P. (1991). Récurrence et variation des
attributs dans la formation de concepts. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Liège, Liège.
Thibaut, J.-P. (1997). Similarité et catégorisation.
L'Année Psychologique, 97, 701-736.
Thibaut, J.-P. (1999). Développement conceptuel. In J.A.
Rondal & E. Esperet (Eds.). Manuel de psychologie de
l’enfant. Hayen: Mardaga.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010a).
The development of Analogy-Making in Children:
cognitive load and executive functions. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology. 106, 1-19.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010b).
Cognitive Load and semantic analogies: searching
semantic space. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
17, 569-574.
Vosniadou, S. (1995). Analogical reasoning in cognitive
development. Metaphor and Symbol, 10, 297-308.

References
Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M., & Hofstadter, D. R.
(1992). High-level perception, representation, and
analogy: A critique of artificial intelligence
methodology. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence 4:185-211.
Duchowski, AT (2007). Eye tracking methodology.
London, Springer-Verlag.
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
French, R.M. (2002). The computational modeling of
analogy-making. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 6,
200-205.
Gentner, D . (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational
shift.
Child
Development,
59, 47-59 .
Gentner, D., & Forbus, K.D. (2010) Computational of
analogy. WIREs Cognitive Science.
Gentner, D. and Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and
the Career of Similarity. In Perspectives on Thought
and Language: Inter-relations in Development, ed.
Susan A. Gelman and James P. Brynes. London:

458

