UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Incremental Learning of Target Locations in Visual Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47r0p8fj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dziemianko, Michal
Coco, Moreno I.
Keller, Frank

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Incremental Learning of Target Locations in Visual Search
Michal Dziemianko (m.dziemianko@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Frank Keller (keller@inf.ed.ac.uk)
Moreno I. Coco (m.i.coco@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Abstract
The top-down guidance of visual attention is one of the main
factors allowing humans to effectively process vast amounts of
incoming visual information. Nevertheless we still lack a full
understanding of the visual, semantic, and memory processes
governing visual attention. In this paper, we present a computational model of visual search capable of predicting the most
likely positions of target objects. The model does not require a
separate training phase, but learns likely target positions in an
incremental fashion based on a memory of previous fixations.
We evaluate the model on two search tasks and show that it outperforms saliency alone and comes close to the maximal performance the Contextual Guidance Model can achieve (CGM,
Torralba et al. 2006; Ehinger et al. 2009), even though our
model does not perform scene recognition or compute global
image statistics.
Keywords: visual search; contextual guidance; eye-tracking;
incremental learning.

Introduction
Virtually every human activity occurs within a visual context and requires visual attention in order to be successfully accomplished (Land and Hayhoe, 2001). When processing a visual scene, humans have to localize objects,
identify them, and establish their spatial relations. The eyemovements involved in these processes provide important information about the cognitive processes that unfold during
scene comprehension (Henderson, 2003).
Studies of free viewing (e.g., Einhauser et al., 2008) have
shown that scan patterns on visual scenes can vary greatly between subjects. On the other hand, the task that participants
have to perform has an influence on visual attention, resulting in fixated regions being relatively consistent across participants for the same experimental conditions (e.g., Torralba
et al., 2006).
A number of models have been proposed to predict eyemovements during scene comprehension; they can be broadly
divided into two categories. The first one consists of bottomup models exploiting low-level visual features to predict areas likely to be fixated. A number of studies have shown
that certain features and their statistical unexpectedness attract human attention (e.g., Bruce and Tsotsos, 2006). Moreover, low-level features are believed to contribute to the selection of fixated areas, especially in case of the visual input
that does not provide any useful high-level information (e.g.,
Peters et al., 2005). These experimental results are captured
by models that detect salient areas of visual input and predict
attention in a bottom-up fashion. The best-known example is

the model of Itti et al. (1998), which builds saliency maps
based on color, orientation, and scale filters inspired by neurobiological results.
The second group of models assume the existence of topdown supervision of attention which contributes to the selection of fixation targets. Various types of such supervision have been observed experimentally. Humans show the
ability to learn general statistics of the appearance, position,
size, spatial arrangement of objects, and their relationships
(e.g., Zelinsky, 2008). They also exploit visual memory during scene comprehension tasks (e.g., Shore and Klein, 2000).
Moreover, studies such as those of Chun and Jiang (1998)
show that participants benefit from learning spatial arrangement of the objects in consecutive searches.
A series of studies have also shown the importance of context in scene comprehension. Context not only provides information about scene layout and type (Schyns and Oliva, 1994;
Renninger and Malik, 2004), but also about object presence,
location, and appearance (e.g., Oliva and Torralba, 2007; Bar,
2004). A number of models have been proposed to capture
context effects on visual attention; a prominent example is
Torralba et al.’s (2006) Contextual Guidance Model, which
combines bottom-up saliency with a prior encoding global
scene information. A detailed description of the Contextual
Guidance Model can be found in the Background section below.
In this paper, we introduce a model of visual attention that
predicts fixation locations in visual search tasks. Our proposal
is conceptually similar to the CGM, but the top-down modulation of saliency in our model is based on the memory of
previously found targets, rather than on global scene properties. Moreover, we show that the knowledge of expected object locations can be learned incrementally, and that no prior
is needed to achieve satisfactory results in predicting fixation
positions. This avoids not only an expensive training phase,
but also enables fast adaptation to different data sets, tasks,
and experimental conditions.

Background
The Contextual Guidance Model (Torralba et al. 2006) combines saliency with a model of global scene information (gist)
in a Bayesian fashion. The central quantity computed by the
CGM is the probability that a target object O is present at

1729

Figure 1: The architecture of the CGM. First, a saliency map is computed for the image. It is then modulated with a contextual prior conditioned on global scene features. The resulting map is thresholded
to select the areas most likely to be fixated.

Figure 2: The architecture of the proposed MMS model. First, a
saliency map is computed for the image. It is then modulated with a
memory map estimated using fixations landing within the targets on
previously seen images. The resulting map is thresholded to select
the areas most likely to be fixated.

point X in the image:
p(O = 1, X|L, G) =

1
p(L|O = 1, X, G) ·
p(L|G)
p(X|O = 1, G)p(O = 1|G) (1)

Here, L is a set of local image features at X and G is a set of
1
global features representing scene gist. The first term p(L|G)
is
the saliency model. The second term p(L|O = 1, X, G) has the
effect of enhancing the features of X that belong to the target
object. The third term p(X|O = 1, G) is the contextual prior,
which provides information about likely target locations. The
fourth term p(O = 1|G) is the probability that O is present in
the scene. The model is illustrated schematically in Figure 1.
In Torralba et al.’s (2006) implementation, the second and
the forth terms are omitted, yielding:
S(X) =

1
p(X|O = 1, G)
p(L|G)

(2)

This describes contextually modulated saliency S(X) as the
combination of bottom-up saliency and a prior on the likely
location of the target, both conditioned on global features representing scene gist. These global features are computed by
pooling local features over 4 × 4 non-overlapping windows;
the resulting vectors are reduced using principal component
analysis.

Model
We propose the Memory Modulated Saliency (MMS) model
of eye-movements in scene comprehension. Like the CGM,
our model combines bottom-up saliency with a top-down estimate of likely target positions. In contrast to the CGM, our
model does not assume a correspondence between global representations such as scene gist and human behaviour. Instead,
we assume that to estimate likely target positions, viewers
rely on their memory of fixations in previous scenes. This information is then used to modulate a standard saliency model.
The architecture of the MMS model is shown in Figure 2.

As in the CGM, we approximate saliency as the probability
of the local images feature L in a given location based on the
global distribution of these features:
1

T Σ−1 (L−µ)]

p(L) ∝ e− 2 [(L−µ)

(3)

Here, with µ is the mean vector and Σ the covariance matrix
of the Gaussian distribution of local features estimated over
the currently processed image. The local features are computed as a set of Gabor filter responses computed over three
color channels for six orientations and four scales, totalling
72 values at each position.
The contextual component of our model is based on memorized information, without access to image statistics or global
scene representations. The MMS model learns a distribution
of target objects positions, and uses this distribution to modulate saliency. We make the simplifying assumption that this
distribution is Gaussian.1 An additional simplification is that
only the distribution of horizontal positions is considered,
while vertical position assumed to be uniform. This is similar to an assumption made by Torralba et al. (2006).
Even with these simplifying assumptions, the formulation
of the model is still challenging. The main issue is the memory depth, i.e., the number of previous images that are taken
into account during the estimation of the target distribution.
Moreover, the Gaussian distribution assumed can only capture the mean position of the targets. People are able to capture and exploit more specific information such as position of
interesting areas or the spatial arrangement of objects (e.g.,
De Graef et al., 1990; Chun and Jiang, 1998). Additionally,
memory decay effects and limited size of short term memory are not modelled by the MMS, even though they have
shown to have an effect on visual tasks (e.g., Davelaar et al.,
2005). Although there is ongoing discussion whether memory is present in visual search (see, e.g., Horowitz and Wolfe,
1 Although the histograms of target positions (see Figure 4) suggest that a simple mixture of Gaussians may be worth investigating.

1730

Figure 3: The process performed by the MMS model. The incoming
image is converted into a saliency map. The map is then modulated
with a bound calculated based on memorized target fixations. The
resulting map is thresholded to select likely fixation locations.

1998; Hollingworth, 2006) and our assumptions are not entirely consistent with current theories of memory, we believe
they are sufficient, as previous studies have either been conducted on artificial stimuli, or focused on a particular phenomenon rather than investigated memory as the top-down
supervision of low level attentional mechanisms.
Figure 3 presents an example of the computations performed by the model when fed a series of images. In the first
step of each cycle, the saliency map of the image is calculated and modulated with the learned target position distribution. The resulting modulated saliency map contains the
model prediction for the fixation locations. The distribution
of the target objects for the first images in the sequence is
assumed to be uniform. In the second step, the positions of
target objects found by the participant are estimated. As the
position of a target object can be specified in different ways,
this step requires more detailed explanation. A naive choice
would be to use the center of mass of the object as its position.
This however does not capture the fact that objects are often
relatively large, non-homogeneous entities, and several unrelated fixations can fall within their area. Moreover, this would
not use the information provided by saccades and fixations directly. Hence the position of the object is approximated using
following rules:
1. If a fixation falls within the object area, then the object
position is approximated by the fixation coordinates.
2. If more than one fixation falls into the object area, than
only the first one is taken into account, the other ones are
discarded.
3. If no fixations fall within the object area, then the fixations
within one degree of visual field are considered (with rules
1 and 2 modified appropriately).
4. If no position can be calculated using rules 1–3 then the object is assumed not to have been noticed by the participant,
and thus discarded.

Figure 4: Histograms of vertical coordinates of fixations in visual
search (left) and visual counting (right). The green bars depict percentages of fixations on the target objects; the red line shows percentages of all fixations.

The approximated target objects positions are used to update
the memorized distribution of the positions, which is then
used to modulate saliency for consecutive images. In the evaluation, we will also consider a variation of the model with
separate memories for animate and inanimate targets (dual
memory MMS), as there is some evidence that animacy affects visual attention (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2008; Coco and
Keller, 2009).

Evaluation Experiments
Method
We evaluate the performance of the MMS model on eyetracking data collected during a visual counting task. In this
task, 25 participants were asked to count the number of occurrences of a cued target object, which was either animate
(e.g., man, woman) or inanimate (e.g., bin). The data set consisted of in 72 photo-realistic scenes (both indoor and outdoor), containing zero to three instances of the target object.
The data was collected using a head-mounted eye-tracker
with a sampling rate of 500 Hz. The images were displayed
with a resolution of 1024 × 768 pixels, subtending a visual
field of approximately 34 × 30 degrees. The data set consists of 54,029 fixations. Moreover, in order to directly compare the performance of our model with the CGM, we used
the data set collected by Ehinger et al. (2009) in a visual
search task, where 14 participants were asked to locate an animate target object, i.e., a pedestrian, in 912 naturalistic urban
scenes, half of which containing the target. The data was collected using an eye-tracker with a sampling rate of 240 Hz,
the images were displayed with a resolution of 800 × 600
pixels, subtending a visual field of about 24 × 18 degrees.
This data set consists of 38,334 fixations.
Figure 4 gives histograms of the vertical coordinates of the
fixations in the two data sets. The histograms show percentages of all fixations (red lines) and percentages of fixations on
the target objects (green bars). We find that these distributions
are similar for both of the datasets. This finding confirms the
hypothesis that visual attention is efficiently allocated to regions which are contextually relevant for the task at hand.

1731

Analysis
We evaluate the performance of the MMS model against a
simple saliency model and a context oracle, which Ehinger
et al. (2009) suggest to be the upper bound of what can be
achieved with a context-based model such as the CGM. A
context oracle is created by using manually annotated groundtruth maps. Human participants are asked to mark on the yaxis the regions where the target object is likely to be found.
Then, these regions are blurred using a Gaussian filter, and
aggregated over the different participants to obtain a single
map for each image.2
In the Results and Discussion section below, we show how
the different models perform by using receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) plots, which indicate the sensitivity
(i.e., true positive rate vs. false positive rate) of a classifier as
its discrimination threshold varies. Moreover, in order to statistically compare model performance, we calculate the area
under the ROC curve (AUC) of each participant. The AUC
measures the probability that a classifier will rank a randomly
chosen positive instance higher than a randomly chosen negative one.3 We submit AUC means to an ANOVA analysis,
where we compare the performance of the different models
pairwise, e.g., saliency against MMSunrestricted. In the visual counting data set, we also test the impact of target animacy on model performance. In line with the visual cognition
literature (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2008), we expect models to
perform better on animate targets, as they are more quickly
and efficiently identified than inanimate targets. The identification of inanimate targets is further complicated by their
larger contextual variability (all animate object were of type
person).

Results and Discussion
Figures 5 and 6 show the ROC curves obtained by the different models for the two data sets. Overall, we find that MMS
models have a higher hit rate, i.e., proportion of fixations
on target areas, than saliency in both data sets. This finding
confirms that top-down knowledge is fundamental for model
performance in goal-directed tasks, such as search. Crucially,
we observe that MMS models with small memory perform
better than saliency, especially in the visual search data set,
where we find that both MMS3 (F(1, 13) = 27.8, p < 0.0001)
and MMS10 (F(1, 13) = 192.8, p < 0.0001) perform better
than saliency. We obtain similar results for the visual counting
data, where MMS3 is not significantly different from saliency
(F(1, 24) = 2.0, p > 0.1), but MMS with a memory of 10
fixations outperforms saliency (F(1, 24) = 26.6, p < 0.0001).
The difference observed between the two data sets is due to
the larger variability in the visual counting task, which is introduced by both the animacy of the targets and the variable
number of target occurrences per scene. Animate objects are
2 The context oracle information of Ehinger et al. (2009) was obtained from seven participants; for our data set we used five participants.
3 The AUC is equivalent to a Wilcoxon test of ranks, and closely
related to the Mann-Whitney U-test.

Table 1: The performance of the proposed models with respect to the
animacy of the target objects for visual counting task expressed as
mean percentage and standard deviation of the area under the ROC
curve for each experimental subject.

Model
saliency
MMSdual
MMSunrestricted
MMS10

Animate
81.16±1.58
84.74±1.23
85.13±1.44
84.61±1.51

Inanimate
80.67±2.23
82.92±1.95
82.43±1.98
81.84±1.90

All
80.91±1.68
83.83±1.38
83.78±1.52
83.22±1.47

often located at the bottom of the image, e.g., a pedestrian
on the cross-walk, whereas inanimate objects can be found at
a wide range of locations. Moreover, the possibility of having more than a single target causes participants to inspect
the scene longer, which increases the variability of visual responses.
When comparing the MMS models with the context oracle
(i.e., the upper bound of the performance of the CGM), we
find that only MMSunrestricted, i.e., the memory model using
all available fixations, is better than the context oracle, and
only on the visual search data set (F(1, 13) = 5.4, p = 0.02).
We observe an improvement on the visual counting data set
when we separate memories for animate and inanimate objects, i.e., MMSdual, however the difference with context oracle fails to reach significance (F(1, 24) = 2.9, p > 0.09). Any
model with smaller memory performs worse than the context
oracle on both data sets.
As argued above, the difference in model performance observed for the two data sets is due to the nature of the task,
as well as the variability of targets, both in terms of their animacy and the number of occurrences in the scene. In the visual search task, only a few fixations are needed to ascertain
the presence or absence of the single animate target. In visual counting, however, up to three targets can be present,
which results in longer and more widely distributed fixations.
Furthermore, the variability of visual responses in the visual
counting task is increased by the use of both animate and
inanimate targets. Animate targets are more quickly identified
than inanimate ones (Fletcher-Watson et al., 2008). Moreover,
inanimate targets have larger contextual variability, as all animate objects belonged to the same object class (i.e., person),
which was not the case for inanimate objects. Members of
different object classes vary more in their contextual associations and hence their likely locations.
These intuitions are confirmed when comparing at the performance of the different models for animate and inanimate
targets in the visual counting task; see Table 1 for AUC values. We observe that all models have a better performance on
animate targets than on inanimate ones (F(1, 24) = 40.8, p <
0.0001). The introduction of a dual memory improves the performance when compared to a model with memory of 10 fixations (F(1, 24) = 3.9, p = 0.05), but is not sufficient to outperform MMS with unrestricted memory (F(1, 24) = 0.7, p =
0.39). Further investigation with less types of inanimate ob-

1732

Figure 5: Prediction performance for the visual counting task for MMS with memory of 3, 10 and an unrestricted number of fixations
(MMS3, MMS10 and MMSunrestricted), MMS with a separate memory for animate and inanimate objects (MMSdual), the approximation
of a contextual upper bound (context oracle), and the saliency baseline.

jects and a larger number of images is needed to test whether
the dual memory model is able to improve performance above
the level of the other models presented.
Overall, our results demonstrate that a simple model of visual search based on the memory of previous fixations can
perform equally good, if not better, than a more complex
model such as the CGM, which integrates bottom-up saliency
with context information conditioned on global scene features.
It is also important to note that the MMS model performance does not degrade on a visual count dataset consisting
of different scenes with radically different context. Instead
the model still performs better than saliency and comparable
to the context oracle.

Conclusions
We presented a model that predicts fixation locations in visual
search. Our approach is conceptually similar to the Contextual Guidance Model of Torralba et al. (2006), which combines saliency with scene gist and top-down context information about likely target positions. To obtain the context
information, the CGM is trained on a large set of images
with manually provided object labels. The Memory Modulated Saliency model that we propose, on the other hand, does
not require offline training and does not involve the calcu-

lation of image or scene statistics. Instead, the MMS model
keeps the last few fixations the participant made in memory,
and uses them to predict likely positions of target objects.
The MMS model performs significantly better than
saliency on the experimental data sets, demonstrating the benefit of memory for the prediction of fixation locations. An
MMS model with unrestricted memory outperforms the theoretically possible upper bound of the CGM on the visual
search data (but not on the visual counting data). Unlike the
CGM, the MMS does not require training data, but incrementally learns likely target positions. This means that the model
can adapt easily to new data sets, tasks, and experimental conditions (while the CGM is sensitive to the nature of the training data).
On a more theoretical level, our results provide an alternative explanation for the tendency of experimental participants
to only fixate contextually appropriate regions. Rather than
using context information, it is conceivable that participants
simply memorize likely target locations from previous trials,
and use this information to guide their search on the current
trial.

Acknowledgments
The support of the European Research Council under award
number 203427 ”Synchronous Linguistic and Visual Process-

1733

Figure 6: Prediction performance for MMS for the visual search task.

ing” is gratefully acknowledged.
We would also like to thank the authors of Ehinger et al.
(2009) and Torralba et al. (2006) for sharing the image corpora and eye-tracking data used in their studies.

References
Bar, M. (2004). Visual objects in context. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5:617–629.
Bruce, N. and Tsotsos, J. (2006). Saliency based on information
maximization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 18, pages 155–162. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chun, M. and Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cueing: Implicit learning
and memory of visual context guides spatial attention. Cognitive
Psychology, 36:28–71.
Coco, M. I. and Keller, F. (2009). The impact of visual information
on reference assignment in sentence production. In Taatgen, N.
and van Rijn, H., editors, Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 274–279, Amsterdam. Cognitive Science Society.
Davelaar, E. J., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., Haarmann, H. J., and Usher,
M. (2005). The demise of short-term memory revisited: empirical
and computational investigation of recency effects. Psychological
Review, 112(1):3–42.
De Graef, P., Christiaens, D., and d’Ydewalle, G. (1990). Perceptual
effects of scene context on object identification. Psychological
Research, 52:317–329.
Ehinger, K., Hidalgo-Sotelo, B., Torralba, A., and Oliva, A. (2009).
Modeling search for people in 900 scenes: A combined source
model of eye guidance. Visual Cognition, 17(6/7):945–978.
Einhauser, W., Spain, M., and Perona, P. (2008). Objects predict
fixations better than early saliency. Journal of Vision, 8(14):1–
26.

Fletcher-Watson, S., Findlay, J., Leekam, S., and Benson, V. (2008).
Rapid detection of person information in a naturalistic scene. Perception, 37(4):571–583.
Henderson, J. (2003). Human gaze control in real-world scene perception. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7:498–504.
Hollingworth, A. (2006). Visual memory for natural scenes: Evidence from change detection and visual search. Visual Cognition,
(14):781–807.
Horowitz, T. and Wolfe, J. (1998). Visual search has no memory.
Nature, 394(6):575–577.
Itti, L., Koch, C., and Niebur, E. (1998). A model of saliency-based
visual attention for rapid scene analysis. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 20(11):1254–1259.
Land, M. and Hayhoe, M. (2001). In what ways do eye movements
contribute to everyday activities? Vision Research, 41:3559–
3565.
Oliva, A. and Torralba, A. (2007). The role of context in object
recognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(12):520–527.
Peters, R., Iyer, A., Itti, L., and Koch, C. (2005). Components of
bottom-up gaze allocation in natural images. Vision Research,
45:2397–2416.
Renninger, L. and Malik, J. (2004). When is scene identification just
texture recognition? Vision Research, 44:2301–2311.
Schyns, P. and Oliva, A. (1994). From blobs to boundary edges: Evidence for time- and spatial-scale-dependent scene recognition.
Psychological Science, 5:195–200.
Shore, D. and Klein, R. (2000). On the manifestations of memory in
visual search. Spatial Vision, 14:59–75.
Torralba, A., Oliva, A., Castelhano, M., and Henderson, J. (2006).
Contextual guidance of eye movements and attention in realworld scenes: The role of global features on object search. Psychological Review, 113:766–786.
Zelinsky, G. (2008). A theory of eye movements during target acquisition. Psychological Review, 115:419–433.

1734

