UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infants Use Social Signals to Learn from Unfamiliar Referential Cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n76z4dn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Wu, Rachel
Kirkham, Natasha
Swan, Kristen
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infants Use Social Signals to Learn from Unfamiliar Referential Cues
Rachel Wu (r.wu@bbk.ac.uk), Natasha Z. Kirkham (n.kirkham@bbk.ac.uk), Kristen A. Swan
(k.swan@bbk.ac.uk), Teodora Gliga (t.gliga@bbk.ac.uk)
Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development, Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK
Abstract

showed that 3-year-olds could use a replica cue (e.g., a
miniature version of a target container) to find stickers
hidden underneath the target container, but only if the
replica cue was presented with an engaging face. It is
therefore possible that the initial pairing of ostensivecommunicative cues and novel cues may be essential for
infants to learn the communicative message behind an
unfamiliar cue, leading to enhanced learning about the cued
events.
One way to test this hypothesis with infants is to use a
paradigm involving cues that can, on their own, successfully
orient attention but do not produce optimal learning about
the target of attention. For example, a bright light or loud
noise might drag attention to a particular location, without
communicating anything beyond itself. Indeed, in a recent
study when arbitrary attention cues were used, although 8month-olds’ attention was oriented successfully, learning of
the cued event was poor (Wu & Kirkham, 2010). The
present study investigated whether social communicative
signals can scaffold 8-month-olds’ learning of multimodal
events from a novel attention cue (e.g., bright red flashing
squares that surround the location of a target audio-visual
event). In order to test this scaffolding hypothesis, the
appearance of the flashing square cue was preceded by an
engaging face that addressed the infant and verbally
encouraged her to look at a specific event, but did not
provide any directional information (Social Scaffolding
condition). A recent study showed that infants are better at
extracting statistical rules from sequences of non-social
stimuli (e.g., tones) if they first heard those rules
instantiated in social stimuli (i.e., speech; Marcus,
Fernandes, & Johnson, 2007). Therefore, we made a further
prediction that infants in the Social Scaffolding condition
would continue learning from the novel cue even after the
face was no longer present. To show this, at the end of the
first part of the experiment (the Training phase), we
presented infants with a second series of audio-visual events
that were cued only with the flashing square (the
Generalization phase). To ensure that practice with flashing
squares could not account for the transfer learning effects,
we presented another group of infants with only flashing
square cues for both Training and Generalization phases
(the Extended Practice condition). Importantly, this study is
concerned with the product of attention – specific, accurate
learning in a busy multimodal environment, rather than
increased attention to the cued event. We predicted that
when paired with social signals, novel flashing cues would
elicit multimodal learning of cued rather than non-cued

Infants are bombarded with a bewildering array of events to
learn. In such an environment, referential cues (e.g., gestures
or symbols) highlight which events infants should learn.
Although many studies have documented which referential
cues guide attention and learning during infancy, few have
investigated how this learning occurs. The present eyetracking study provides clear evidence for a social scaffolding
process: When preceded repeatedly by communicative signals
(i.e., a face addressing the infant), 9-month-olds learned that
arbitrary cues predicted the appearance of an audio-visual
event. Importantly, the arbitrary cues continued to guide
learning of these events, even after the face disappeared from
the screen. A control condition confirmed that learning from
arbitrary cues alone was unsuccessful, and that eventual
success was not just due to extended practice. These results
are discussed in terms of a theory of cue scaffolding.
Keywords: attention cues; multimodal binding; infant eyetracking; cognitive development; social cues.

Introduction
Human adults use referential cues, such as gaze, pointing,
and arrows, to direct attention and communicate information
(Kita, 2002). By the first year, infants orient to the direction
of gaze and pointing fingers (e.g., Gredebäck, Melinder, &
Daum, in press; Hood, Willen, & Driver, 1998; Senju &
Csibra, 2008) and, more importantly, expect these cues to
communicate about something in the indicated location
(Gliga & Csibra, 2009; Tomasello, Carpenter, &
Liszkowski, 2007). It is not until three years of age,
however, that children can robustly use more arbitrary cues,
such as arrows, to find hidden objects (Leekam, Solomon, &
Teoh, 2010). How do we learn the communicative intent
underlying novel referential cues in order to use these cues
to learn about the world?
A number of studies have highlighted the importance of
ostensive-communicative signals (e.g., infant-directed
speech, eye contact, smiling) for the efficacy of referential
cues and for better learning during infancy. These signals
are necessary for referential gaze shifts to successfully
orient attention in 4- and 6-month-old infants (Senju &
Csibra, 2008; Farroni, Mansfield, Lai, & Johnson, 2003).
These signals also facilitate learning from referential cues
such as gaze (Wu, Gopnik, Richardson, & Kirkham, 2010;
Wu & Kirkham, 2010) and pointing (Yoon, Johnson, &
Csibra, 2008). Though these studies describe the importance
of pairing communicative cues with familiar cues, they do
not show whether communicative cues can scaffold learning
from novel cues during infancy. Leekam et al. (2010)

196

locations (similar to gaze cues paired with social signals,
Wu & Kirkham, 2010). Furthermore, we predicted that
infants can then continue learning from these novel cues
even when they are not paired with social signals later.
Without this initial pairing, we predicted that infants would
only learn about the locations of cues (e.g., flashing square
condition in Wu & Kirkham, 2010), and would show no
transfer of learning.

two locations were cued, and within a trial, two locations
contained objects that were paired with a particular sound
(Figure 2). During familiarization, we were interested in
how long infants looked to object and no-object locations
(relative to the multimodal information) and whether this
looking was mediated by novel flashing cues and social
signals. During test trials, only auditory stimuli were played,
so the locations were either matched or unmatched relative
to the objects paired with the sound presented during
familiarization. Stationary kaleidoscopic attention getters
with ringing sounds looped after every trial until the infants
re-engaged with the screen.

Methods
Participants Thirty-one 8- to 9-month-old infants
participated in one of two conditions: Social Scaffolding (N
= 16, 5 girls, 11 boys, M = 8 months, 14 days, range: 7;249;12) or Extended Practice (N = 15, 9 girls, 6 boys, M = 8
months, 21 days, range: 7;29-9;21). Two infants were
excluded from the final analyses (one from each condition)
due to fussiness (i.e., completing only 1 out of 8 blocks).
Infants were recruited via local-area advertisements and
given t-shirts for participating.
Stimuli and Procedure Infants sat in a car seat 50 cm
from a Tobii 1750 eye-tracker with a built-in 17” monitor,
while their caregivers sat behind them. All infants were
calibrated to at least 4 points before the experiment started.
In both conditions, infants were shown up to 8 blocks of
familiarization and test stimuli. The first four blocks
consisted of the Training phase, while the second four
blocks were the Generalization phase. During each phase
infants were familiarized with two audio-visual events.
These events were counterbalanced between participants
with half of the infants seeing the audio-visual animations
during Training that the other half saw during
Generalization. Each block consisted of six familiarization
trials and two test trials. For the Social Scaffolding
condition, the familiarization trials in the first four blocks
showed a central face that looked at the infant and said, “Hi
baby, look at this!” This portion of the clip lasted 4 seconds.
Then, the face froze with a smile while identical animations
appeared in diagonally opposite corners within white
frames. The animations during training were one of two
sets: 1) two cats making bloop sounds and two buses
making whoosh sounds or 2) two ducks making brring
sounds and two dogs making boing sounds. A red flashing
square was presented around the white frame in a lower
corner, containing one of the animations. The trial ended 5
seconds later. Infants in the Extended Practice condition did
not see the face during Training, only the flashing cues and
audio-visual events. The Generalization phase of both
conditions displayed the other two sets of audio-visual
events with only the red flashing square cues (Figure 1). The
test trials (5 s) were identical in both phases across both
conditions and displayed four blank white frames (where
objects previously had appeared), while playing sounds that
were associated with a particular pair of objects. These
blank test trials asked infants to predict where the associated
objects would appear. Throughout an experimental session,

Figure 1: Schematic of one block of Familiarization and
Test trials from the Social Scaffolding condition (Training
and Generalization phases). The presentation of
familiarization events was pseudo-randomized among
infants, and test trial order was counterbalanced. All stimuli
were in full color on a black background. The gray box
around a frame represents a red flashing cue.
Data Reduction and Analyses Four regions of interest
(ROIs) were manually delimited around the four corners
where animations were played for both Familiarization and
Test trials. We measured the accumulated looking time
within each of these locations for the entire duration of
every trial (see Figure 2). Only fixations longer than 100ms

197

partial η2=.62). Infants looked longer to cued rather than
non-cued object-present locations (Training: t(15) = 5.37, p
< .001, Generalization: t(15) = 5.09, p < .001).

were considered in the final analyses. For each region of
interest (ROI), we reported the proportional looking time,
which was calculated in each trial for every infant by
dividing the total looking time in that ROI by the total
looking time in all four ROIs.

Social Scaffolding condition (Test trials):
Training phase Critically for our hypothesis, we found a
significant interaction between Cued and Location during
Test, F(1,15) = 9.01, p = .009, partial η2=.38. Infants
looked longer to cued rather than non-cued matched
locations, t(15) = 3.37, p = .004.
Generalization phase Again, as predicted, there was a
significant interaction during test between Cued and
Location, F(1,15) = 6.08, p = .02, partial η2=.29. Infants
looked longer to cued rather than non-cued matched
locations, t(15) = 2.43, p = .028, which suggests that infants
continued to learn from the flashing square in the absence of
the scaffolding social signals.

Figure 2: Regions of interest (ROIs) delineated for
Familiarization and Test trials.

Results
For each condition (Social Scaffolding and Extended
Practice), we first describe infants’ looking behavior during
the Familiarization trials, followed by the behavior during
the Test trials.
A 2 (Cued: Cued or Non-Cued location) x 2 (Location:
Object present or No Object) repeated-measures ANOVA 1
was used to examine the effects of cue and audio-visual
information on infants’ looking distribution during
Familiarization. During Test, when infants had to match a
sound to now empty locations, the factors of interest were
Cue (previously Cued or Non-cued location) and Location
(Matched or Unmatched to the sound). A significant Cue x
Location interaction for Familiarization trials was taken as
evidence that infants followed the cue to objects, and a Cue
x Location interaction during Test indicated that infants
associated the test sound to only the previously cued
matched animation. When a Cue x Location interaction was
found, planned t-tests were conducted to confirm that
infants looked longer to cued rather than non-cued object
present or matched locations.

Social Scaffolding condition (Familiarization
trials):
As expected, infants looked predominantly towards the
Cued, Object present locations during the Familiarization
trials in both the Training and Generalization phases (see
Table 1). This was indicated by highly significant Cue x
Location interactions (Training: F(1,15) = 28.43, p < .001,
partial η2=.66; Generalization: F(1,15) = 24.43, p < .001,
1

Though analyzing non-independent looking times violates a
basic assumption of ANOVA, including the results from all four
locations is the best way for us to conclude that infants show
learning within the test trials (e.g., infants look longer in the
cued object location than the other locations).

Figure 3. Familiarization and Test trials for Social
Scaffolding and Extended Practice conditions. All stimuli
were in full color on a black background. *p < .03

198

A 2 (Condition: Social Scaffolding or Extended Practice)
x 2 (Cued locations) x 2 (Object locations) ANOVA did not
reveal a significant interaction for Familiarization trials,
F(1,60) = .44, p = .51, partial η2 < .01, showing that the
looking distribution during these trials was not affected by
the presence of the face in the Social Scaffolding group.
Moreover, there was no total looking time difference (in
seconds) in the Cued Object present ROI between the
Extended Practice condition (M = 51.82, SE = 4.93) and the
Social Scaffolding condition (M = 49.55, SE = 5.17),
t(29)=.32, p=.75. The ANOVA revealed a significant
interaction during Test, F(1,59) = 12.93, p = .001, partial η2
=.18, confirming that infants learned better in the Social
Scaffolding condition.

General Discussion
The present study provides the first evidence for a cuescaffolding process during infancy that is dependent on the
presence of social communicative signals. Importantly, this
process elicits better learning about the cued events rather
than just better attention to them. The measure of learning
used was infants’ anticipatory looks to the cued location of
the target event. When the novel flashing cue was paired
with a communicative social signal (e.g., an engaging face
that maintained mutual gaze), 8-month-olds predicted events
would appear in the correct cued locations, even though the
face never turned or changed eye gaze. In the absence of
these social signals, flashing squares produced only general
spatial learning. After initial training that paired flashing
squares with communicative signals, infants continued
learning from these cues even when the face was no longer
present. Critically, this learning effect was not due to more
practice with the flashing square cue. Without the initial
pairing, infants displayed no learning at this later stage
(perhaps losing interest in the cues but being unable to learn
about the objects without them, Wu & Kirkham, 2010),
suggesting that initial exposure to social signals is necessary
to elicit and maintain specific learning from novel attention
orienting cues at this age.
In human adults and rats, repeated consistent pairing of
cues has been shown to lead to acquired equivalence, where
the properties of one cue are generalized to its paired cue
(Honey & Hall, 1989; Liljeholm & Balleine, 2010). In the
early learning environment, social communicative signals
(e.g., eye contact or calling someone’s name) often precede
referential cues (especially eye gaze and pointing; see
Corkum & Moore, 1998). Infants could therefore transfer
previously acquired knowledge about such social signals
(i.e., communicative intent about an upcoming interesting
event) to novel referential cues (similar to infants’ ability to
transfer perceptual grouping rules from one domain to
another, Quinn & Bhatt, 2009). In the present study, we
propose the infants generalized the knowledge they had
about the communicative intent implied by ostensive signals
(e.g., mutual gaze, infant-directed speech, smiling face) to
the novel attention cues (e.g., flashing squares). Our results

Extended Practice condition (Familiarization
trials):
As in the Social Scaffolding condition, infants looked
predominantly towards the Cued, Object present location
during the Familiarization trials in both the Training and the
Generalization phases (see Table 1). There was a highly
significant Cue x Location interaction (Training: F(1,14) =
40.78, p < .001, partial η2 =.74; Generalization: F(1,14) =
14.46, p = .002, partial η2=.51), and infants looked longer to
cued rather than non-cued object-present locations
(Training: t(14) = 5.79, p < .001, Generalization: t(14) =
3.84, p = .002).

Extended Practice condition (Test trials):
Training phase Contrary to the Social Scaffolding
condition, no interaction between Cue and Location was
found in the absence of social signals during training
(F(1,14) = 1.07, p = .32, partial η2=.07). There was only a
main effect of cued location (F(1,14) = 6.93, p = .02, partial
η2=.33), where infants looked longer to cued locations than
non-cued locations regardless of matching multimodal
information (Mcued=.33, SEcued=.03, Mnon-cued=.17, SEnoncued=.03) (Figure 3).
Generalization phase There were no main effects or
interactions during test trials from this phase, suggesting
that longer exposure to the novel flashing cue was not
responsible for the learning effects observed in the Social
Scaffolding condition (Figure 3).

199

provide evidence for a social scaffolding mechanism
explaining how infants learn to learn from novel cues. This
mechanism may help infants eventually learn to use
pointing gestures or arrows, cues they do not understand
earlier in life.
Other mechanisms have been proposed to explain how
infants learn to follow referential cues. For example, it has
been proposed that infants can be trained to respond to
referential cues through reinforcement learning (e.g.,
reinforcing appropriate gaze following with an interesting
object in the cued location; Corkum & Moore, 1998). Such
reinforcement learning is similar to learning the
contingencies between cues and upcoming target locations
(Johnson, Posner, & Rothbart, 1991; McMurray & Aslin,
2004; Ristic & Kingstone, 2009). The present study,
however, goes two steps further, not only showing that
infants can learn to use the novel cue in the absence of a
more reinforcing target (an equally-salient distracter item
was present in all trials), but also showing that cue training
supports better learning of the target events.
This mechanism is fast and resistant to distractions, and
therefore well adapted to function in the infant’s noisy
environment. Future studies will have to determine the exact
contextual requirements for this scaffolding mechanism to
occur, e.g., which of the many social communicative signals
that we used are necessary? Acquired equivalence models
highlight the role of the consistent repeated pairing of the
familiar and the novel cue. Follow-up studies should also
measure the extent of the “referential” function of the paired
novel cue in a variety of contexts (infants can learn many
different types of events from referential cues). We believe
the present findings provide an important first step towards
elucidating an emerging ability to use various referential
cues to support, enhance, and mediate learning, going
beyond documenting which referential cues guide attention
and learning during infancy to proposing a mechanism for
how this learning occurs.

Gliga, T., & Csibra, G. (2009). One-year-old infants
appreciate the referential nature of deictic gestures and
words. Psychological Science, 20, 347–353.
Gredebäck, G., Melinder, A.M.D., & Daum, M. (in press).
The development and neural basis of pointing
comprehension. Social Neuroscience.
Honey, R. C., & Hall, G. (1989). Acquired equivalence and
distinctiveness of cues. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 15, 338-346.
Hood, B. M., Willen, J. D., & Driver, J. (1998). Adults’
eyes trigger shifts of visual attention in human infants.
Psychological Science, 9, 131–134.
Johnson, M. H., Posner, M. I., & Rothbart, M. K. (1991).
Components of visual orienting in early infancy:
Contingency learning, anticipatory looking, and
disengaging. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 335–
344.
Kita, S. (Ed.) (2002). Pointing: where language, culture,
and cognition meet. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Leekham, S. R., Solomon, T. L., & Teoh, Y.-S. (2010).
Adults’ social cues facilitate young children’s use of signs
and symbols. Developmental Science, 13, 108-119.
Liljeholm, M., & Balleine, B. W. (2010). Extracting
Functional Equivalence From Reversing Contingencies.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 36, 165–171.
Marcus, G. F., Fernandes, K. J., & Johnson, S. P. (2007).
Infant Rule Learning Facilitated by Speech.
Psychological Science, 18, 387-391.
McMurray, B. and Aslin, R. N. (2004). Anticipatory eye
movements reveal infants' auditory and visual categories.
Infancy, 6, 203-229.
Quinn, P. C., & Bhatt, R. S. (2009). Transfer and
scaffolding of perceptual grouping occurs across
organizing principles in 3- to 7-month-old infants.
Psychological Science, 20, 933-938.
Ristic, J., & Kingstone, A. (2009). Rethinking attentional
development: Reflexive and volitional orienting in
children and adults. Developmental Science, 12, 289–296.
Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2008). Gaze following in human
infants depends on communicative signals. Current
Biology, 18, 1–4.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., & Liszkowski, U. (2007). A
new look at infant pointing. Child Development, 78, 705722.
Wu, R., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2010). No two cues are alike:
Depth of learning during infancy is dependent on what
orients attention. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 107, 118-136.
Wu, R., Gopnik, A., Richardson, D. C., & Kirkham, N. Z.
(in press). Infants learn about objects from statistics and
people. Developmental Psychology.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105, 13690–13695.

Acknowledgments
We thank Paul Quinn and Victoria Southgate for helpful
comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. Thank you
to Leslie Tucker and Marian Greensmith for help with data
collection. This research was supported by a grant to RW
and NZK from the University of London Central Research
Fund and a grant to Mark Johnson from the UK Medical
Research Council, G0701484. Presentation of this
proceeding was supported by the British Academy Overseas
Conference Grant awarded to RW.

References
Corkum, V., & Moore, C. (1998). The origins of joint visual
attention in infants. Developmental Psychology, 34, 2838.
Farroni, T., Mansfield, E. M., Lai, C., & Johnson, M. H.
(2003). Infants perceiving and acting on the eyes: Tests
of an evolutionary hypothesis. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 85, 199–212.

200

