UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferring Conceptual Structure from Cross-Language Data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5zr0h8gv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Regier, Terry
Khetarpal, Naveen
Majid, Asifa

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferring Conceptual Structure from Cross-Language Data
Terry Regier* (terry.regier@berkeley.edu)
Naveen Khetarpal† (khetarpal@uchicago.edu)
Asifa Majidǁ (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
*

Department of Linguistics, Cognitive Science Program, UC Berkeley
†
Department of Psychology, University of Chicago
ǁ
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen

Keywords: semantic universals; conceptual
language and thought; semantic maps.

structure;

Semantic categories vary across languages, but this
variation is constrained: many logically possible semantic
categories are not attested, and similar categories often
appear in unrelated languages. This pattern suggests a
universal conceptual basis to the variation, such that
different languages provide different snapshots of the same
conceptual terrain. A semantic map is a means of capturing
this idea. Formally, a semantic map is a graph in which
vertices represent different semantic uses or functions, and
edges connect closely related uses. It is assumed that the
graph structure is universal, and that language-specific
categories always pick out connected subgraphs of the
universal graph. A semantic map thus compactly represents
what patterns of variation one may and may not expect to
find in a given semantic domain, in terms of presumptively
universal conceptual structure. Semantic maps have been
widely used; for recent reviews see Haspelmath (2003),
Croft (2003), and Cysouw et al. (2010) plus other papers in
the same volume.
The structure of the graph is generally determined by a
cross-language dataset of semantic categories: edges are
added so that each category in the dataset is connected. The
task of constructing a semantic map in this manner is
generally done by hand, and the task can be time-consuming
and potentially error-prone. It would therefore be useful to
automate this process. However the computational problem
of inducing the optimal semantic map from cross-language
data has not previously been formally addressed. Croft and
Poole (2008: 6-7) conjectured that this problem may be
computationally intractable, and they considered this
potential intractability to be a shortcoming of semantic maps
as a representational tool in semantic typology. Here, we
address this issue by casting the semantic map induction
problem in formal terms. We note that this problem is
formally identical to a problem that superficially appears
unrelated: inferring a social network from disease outbreaks
in a population. Angluin et al. (2010) have recently shown
that this social network inference problem is
computationally intractable (specifically: hard to
approximate, e.g. Trevisan, 2004; Vazirani, 2001, ch. 29),
but that an efficient algorithm exists that approximates the
optimal solution nearly as well as is theoretically possible.

It follows that both the computational intractability and the
applicability of the approximation algorithm hold of
semantic map induction. We apply this algorithm to the
cross-language data of Haspelmath (1997) on indefinite
pronouns, and obtain a simpler map than the published one.
We apply the same algorithm to the data of Levinson et al.
(2003) on spatial categories, and obtain a map that
accommodates categories from a new language, as novel
connected subgraphs of the induced graph structure. We
conclude that presumptively universal conceptual structure
consistent with cross-language data can be straightforwardly
inferred, that the issue of computational intractability, while
real, need not deter researchers, and that formalization of
problems in semantic typology can highlight useful
connections to structurally related problems elsewhere.

Acknowledgments
We thank Martin Haspelmath, Stephen Levinson, and
Sérgio Meira for sharing their data. This work was
supported by NSF under grant SBE-0541957, the Spatial
Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Angluin, D. et al. (2010). Inferring social networks from
outbreaks. In Hutter, M. et al. (Eds.), Algorithmic Learning
Theory 2010, LNCS 6331 (pp. 104-118). Berlin: Springer.
Croft, W. (2003). Typology and universals: Second edition.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Croft, W. & Poole, K.T. (2008). Inferring universals from
grammatical variation: Multidimensional scaling for typological
analysis. Theoretical Linguistics 34, 1–37.
Cysouw, M. et al. (2010). Introduction to the special issue
“Semantic maps: Methods and applications”. Linguistic
Discovery, 8.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). Indefinite pronouns. Oxford.
Haspelmath, M. (2003). The geometry of grammatical meaning:
Semantic maps and cross-linguistic comparison. In Tomasello,
M. (Ed.), The new psychology of language, vol. 2 (pp. 211-242).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Levinson, S. et al. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in the spatial
topological domain—adpositional meanings in crosslinguistic
perspective: An exercise in semantic typology. Language, 79,
485-516.
Trevisan, L. (2004). Inapproximability of combinatorial
optimization problems. Technical report TR04-065, Electronic
Colloquium on Computational Complexity.
Vazirani, V. (2001). Approximation algorithms. Springer.

1488

