UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating the Horizontal and Vertical Cultural Transmission of Novel Communication
Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40t7578c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Theisen-White, Carrie
Kirby, Simon
Oberlander, Jon

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating the Horizontal and Vertical Cultural Transmission
of Novel Communication Systems
Carrie Theisen-White (carrietheisenwhite@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Yeshiva University
2495 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, NY 10033, USA

Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, University of Edinburgh
Dugald Stewart Building, 3 Charles Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK

Jon Oberlander (jon@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Informatics Forum, 10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Abstract

words for similar items shared syllables) through the
generations.
Garrod, Fay, Lee, Oberlander, and MacLeod (2007)
showed how the horizontal transmission of signs back and
forth between participants in a closely interacting dyad can
lead to the emergence of arbitrariness. Each round, one of
the participants (the “Drawer”) has an ordered list of items
and the other (the “Matcher”) has an unordered list of the
same items. The Drawer takes each of the items in turn and
produces a signal for it on a virtual whiteboard the two
share, so that the Matcher can identify the item. Participants
can draw whatever they like but may not write anything,
such as letters or numbers. Pairs play for a number of
blocks, so that each item is drawn and identified several
times over the course of the game. Among other measures
of how the signals for the items changed with interaction,
Garrod et al. (2007) found that graphical complexity
(roughly, the amount of virtual ink used) decreased. They
argued that this complexity is a measure of iconicity – all
else equal, the less information there is in the signal, the less
the signal can resemble its meaning – thus showing that
signs become more arbitrary with interaction.
These two studies are quite representative of the field.
Most experimental semiotics studies thus far have involved
either horizontal transmission of signs (i.e. a closed set of
individuals, usually a dyad, producing signs for each other)
or vertical transmission of signs (i.e. chains of individuals or
groups of individuals, in which the first produces signs for
the second, the second produces signs for the third, and so
on). Recent reviews (Galantucci & Garrod, 2010, 2011;
Scott-Phillips & Kirby, 2010) have noted this dichotomy
and identified the understanding of the relative contribution
of the different types of cultural transmission as a key goal
for future work.
Fay, Garrod, Roberts, and Swoboda (2010) and Garrod,
Fay, Rogers, Walker, and Swoboda (2010) began to bridge
the gap between horizontal and vertical transmission by
pitting them as competing theories of the evolution of
language. For example, Garrod et al. (2010) present a

In recent experimental work on the emergence of novel
communication systems, the cultural transmission has tended
to be either horizontal or vertical. We present an experiment
that integrates the two. Results show that both methods of
transmission do some work.
Keywords: horizontal transmission; vertical transmission;
iterated learning; systematic compositionality; systematicity;
compositionality.

Introduction
A new field which may be called ‘experimental semiotics’
(Galantucci, 2009) involves the experimental investigation
of novel forms of human communication. These studies
have examined how the negotiation, repeated use, and
transmission of a communication system between
individuals through a process of 'iterated learning' (Kirby &
Hurford, 2002) leads to adaptation of that system. This work
has shed light on how language might have evolved to have
its unique features such as systematic compositionality and
arbitrariness.
For example, Kirby, Cornish, and Smith (2008)
demonstrated how systematic compositionality could
emerge from the vertical transmission of communication
systems through generations of participants. Each
participant learned an ‘alien language’ and then was tested
on it. The language consisted of words for a highly
structured set of items (27 items, where each was one of
three shapes, was one of three colors, and had one of three
motions). The words that the first participant learned were
randomly generated strings of syllables. Each subsequent
participant learned the words that the previous participant
produced during his or her test. There was a catch: each
participant was trained on only half of the language but
tested on the whole language. (Participants were unaware of
this.) Kirby et al. (2008) found that the languages became
increasingly systematically compositional (i.e. increasingly,

956

graphical communication task with two conditions: one
implementation of vertical transmission and one
implementation of horizontal transmission. They found that,
of these implementations, only the horizontal transmission
led to simplification of signs (i.e. to arbitrariness).
We propose that integrating horizontal transmission and
vertical transmission in one experiment would be
informative as well. In fact, it may even be necessary. Even
if it could be shown that horizontal transmission resulted in
a communication system with all the crucial features of
language, the story cannot end there – the communication
system must be transmitted beyond the closed set of
individuals who developed it, and work has shown that this
is far from straightforward (Galantucci, Theisen, Gutierrez,
Kroos, & Rhodes, in press). Similarly, even if it could be
shown that vertical cultural transmission resulted in a
communication system with all the crucial features of
language, the story cannot begin there – unless we want to
assume that one individual invented a communication
system on his own and transmitted it to the next generation,
we must allow that horizontal transmission shaped at least
the beginning of language. In addition, it is clear that in the
real world, generations are not neatly divided and
populations are not static, so both processes are undoubtedly
in operation.

each item the first time that item appeared in the game for
them) were also significantly more systematically
compositional than mixed initial sets. Further, the
systematic compositionality of pairs’ signs did not increase
significantly over the course of their games. Rather, it
seemed that systematic compositionality spontaneously
arose in pairs’ sets of signs and was maintained through
their games.

Current Work
Our previous work (Theisen, Oberlander, & Kirby, 2010)
is a good start to integrating horizontal and vertical
transmission. In it, we showed that systematic
compositionality spontaneously arises from horizontal
transmission. Pairs of participants played a Pictionary-style
game much like that of Garrod et al. (2007). There were two
main differences. First, the set of items to be communicated
was structured: each item could be thought of as one of five
entity types (such as person or building) that relates to one
of ten themes (such as education or agriculture). This was to
allow systematic compositionality to emerge. Second,
neither participant in a pair learned in advance what items
they would communicate about; the items simply appeared
in the game. This was to ensure that the game introduced no
direct pressure for systematic compositionality. Figure 1
shows a subset of one pair’s final signs, i.e. what was drawn
on the whiteboard for each item the last time that item
appeared in the game.
Notice how systematically
compositional they are – signals for similar items share an
element. For example, the signals for activities all include
rows of squiggly lines. In fact, the systematic
compositionality of the pairs’ final sets of signs was
significantly higher than the systematic compositionality of
‘mixed final’ sets we constructed – sets of final drawings
taken from different pairs of participants – showing that
pairs’ final drawings of items systematically re-use drawing
elements more than can be attributed to a tendency across
pairs to draw these items a certain way. Interestingly, pairs’
initial sets of signs (what was drawn on the whiteboard for

Figure 1. A subset of the signs developed by one pair in the
experiment reported in Theisen et al. (2010). Italics
distinguish which participant was drawing. The sets of signs
were systematically compositional – signals for similar
items (e.g., activities) shared an element (e.g., rows of
sqiggly lines).
It can be hard to imagine how this could happen. As
discussed in Theisen et al. (2010), the shared interaction
history between partners in a pair seems to play a large role.
Consider the drawings of school bus in Figure 2. For
pairs A – D, school bus was the first primary education
item to be drawn, so the drawings reflect what people draw
for school bus when uninfluenced by previous drawings
of primary education items – roughly, what motivated
signals (i.e. signals that have an inherent connection to their
meanings) for school bus look like. In contrast, Pair E
drew school bus after they had already drawn another
primary education item: teacher. Their drawing of
school bus appears to re-use elements from their
drawing of teacher, i.e. to be strongly influenced by
signs in the pair’s shared interaction history. In particular,
note that a chalkboard in a drawing for school bus is not
strongly motivated – none of the uninfluenced drawings of
school bus include a chalkboard. While one might
expect that the first time someone draws school bus
with their partner, they would draw it no differently than if
they were drawing with a new partner, instead it appears

957

that the history of interaction shared by two people
influences even new signs they create for use with each
other.
teacher

hypothesized that, in addition to the effect of horizontal
transmission on systematic compositionality seen in Theisen
et al. (2010), we would see an effect of vertical transmission
on systematic compositionality. The alternative hypothesis
is that, given the effectiveness of horizontal transmission on
systematic compositionality, there is no role for vertical
transmission to play.

school bus

Pair A

Method
Participants 24 University of Edinburgh students, both
male and female, participated in exchange for £12. All were
native British English speakers. Participants who played
together did not know each other.

Pair B

Apparatus Partners were seated in separate soundproof
booths with computers. The game was run using the Pigeon
software (Healey, Swoboda, & King, 2002), which
presented the item to draw each trial and provided a shared
online whiteboard. Participants guessed and corrected their
partners’ guesses in an MSN Messenger chat window.

Pair C

Pair D

Game The items about which the participants
communicated were chosen to share salient semantic
features; each item can be thought of as one of five entity
types (such as person or building) that relates to one of ten
themes (such as education or agriculture). There were 26
core items, no more than one of each entity-theme
combination.
The items appeared with different
frequencies, between three and eight times every 126 trials.
Additionally, there were 14 filler items, occurring just once
per game, intended to prevent participants from assuming
that their set of items was closed. The items occurred in
random order. Participants knew nothing about the items in
advance. In particular, they were never exposed to a list of
the items.
Each trial, one participant was the Drawer and other was
the Guesser. The Drawer saw an item (such as
professor) on his screen and was allowed to draw
immediately. The Drawer drew with a mouse, had only
black ink, and could not erase anything. The Guesser saw
everything the Drawer drew immediately, on her screen.
The Guesser did not see the Drawer's mouse movements
when he was not drawing, and could not draw herself. When
she was ready, the Guesser guessed by typing into a chat
window. The Drawer stopped drawing immediately and
either confirmed or corrected the guess in the chat window.
Players advanced themselves to the next trial. Every six
trials, the participants switched Drawer and Guesser roles.
The participants played for two hours.
A pair was allowed just one guess per trial. A pair won 1
point for every correct guess but lost 1 point for any
incorrect guess or drawing that included a pre-existing
symbol or convention (including writing). The goal was to
win as many points as possible in the two hours of play.
Participants from the three top-scoring pairs were entered
into a prize draw for an additional £20.

Pair E
Figure 2. The first drawings of school bus from five
different pairs. For pairs A – D, each was the first primary
education item to be drawn in their game. In contrast, Pair E
drew another primary education item (teacher) before
drawing school bus. Their drawing for school bus
appears to re-use elements from their drawing for
teacher, viz. the chalkboard.
The aim of the current work was to integrate horizontal
and vertical transmission in one experiment. Since we knew
that systematic compositionality can emerge from vertical
transmission (Kirby, et al., 2008) or horizontal transmission
(Theisen, et al., 2010), we added vertical transmission to the
design of our previous experiment and measured systematic
compositionality. In particular, a pair played a Pictionarystyle game for a period of time. The next pair played the
same game but before starting was taught a subset of the
signs the first pair used at the end of their game, the third
pair was taught a subset of the signs the second pair used at
the end of their game, and so on. Four such chains of four
generations (pairs) each were formed.
This design allowed us to isolate the effect of horizontal
transmission from that of vertical transmission. We could
identify any effect of horizontal transmission by simply
looking at the first generation’s signs and by comparing
each generation’s initial signs with their final signs. We
could identify any effect of vertical transmission by seeing
whether anything changes over the four generations. We

958

Observation Participant pairs were organized into four
chains of four generations each. The first generation of each
of the four chains was chosen at random from the 12 games
of the experiment reported in Theisen et al. (2010). These
pairs played the same exact game described above but did
not observe anyone else’s drawings before playing.
Generation 1’s final drawings were observed by Generation
2, Generation 2’s final drawings were observed by
Generation 3, and Generation 3’s final drawings were
observed by Generation 4.
Pairs observed the previous pair’s signs for 15 minutes.
Each participant in a pair saw screenshots of what was
drawn for the last 30 trials of the previous generation’s
game, in the order they occurred in the original game. In
practice, this amounted to observing the signs for 15 – 20
(M = 18.25) of the 26 core items from the previous
generation. For each screenshot, the subjects read what the
item was, who drew it, and what the Guesser guessed for it.
The participants studied each screenshot and its associated
information for 20 seconds each.

category was observed. Of course, there can be no element
shared across drawings in this case, so these drawings were
also excluded from the systematic compositionality
analysis. This happened just six times, in just four sets of
signs.
Each drawing was inspected twice – once as a member of
its row and once as a member of its column. Thus, except
for a few cases of observed sets (as noted above), each set of
drawings could receive a total score of 52. The total score
divided by 52 (or the total score possible, in the case of the
observed sets) is our systematic compositionality score.
The sets were coded blind and in random order. In
addition, the full sets were coded before any of the observed
subsets, to prevent the coder from inadvertently looking for
sign elements she marked in the subsets while coding the
full sets. Reliability of this coding procedure was
established in Theisen et al. (2010).

Results
Figure 3 shows the final drawings for fire engine and
fire station for the four generations in one chain.
Generation 1’s signs for fire engine and fire
station do not share an element with each other.
However, generation 2 changed the signal for fire
station to include an element from fire engine:
what looks like a ladder. Generations 3 and 4 maintained
this. Changes like these occurred across pairs’ sets of signs.

Procedure Participants read instructions, which described
the basics of both the game and the observation phase.
Importantly, participants read that observing others’ signs
might or might not help them in their own game and that
their task when drawing was to do whatever would get their
partner to guess correctly and quickly (i.e. not necessarily to
copy signs they had observed). Pairs observed the previous
generation’s signs for 15 minutes, played the game for 2
hours, and then were debriefed.

fire engine

Analysis

fire station

Gen. 1

The experimenter coded each pair’s initial set of signs,
their final set of signs, and the set of signs they observed
from
the
previous
generation
for
systematic
compositionality.
An initial set of signs or final set of signs consists of one
signal for each of the 26 core items. Observed sets consisted
of fewer items. When an observed set included more than
one drawing for a core item, we coded the last drawing,
reasoning that it would be most salient to the pair.
Each set of drawings was printed on a page in a table,
organized so that rows and columns contained drawings for
similar items. The coder examined each row and each
column for any element shared among two or more
drawings. The coding instructions stated that the coder
should mark an element only if there appeared to be a
special understanding between the players to draw certain
things certain ways. If there was a shared element, the
coder marked which of the drawings in that row or column
included it. For the observed sets, if the drawings in a
category shared an element that was prohibited (e.g., the
cross for medical items), those drawings were excluded
from the analysis. This is because the next generation was
not allowed to copy a prohibited element. This only
happened once. In addition, because the set of items
observed was random, sometimes only one item in a

Gen. 2

Gen. 3

Gen. 4
Figure 3. Final drawings of fire engine and fire
station from the four generations of one chain.
Generation 2 changed the signal for fire station to
include an element from fire engine. Changes like
these occurred across the pairs’ sets of signs, leading to an
increase in systematic compositionality over generations.
Figure 4 shows the systematic compositionality in each
pair’s final set of signs, organized by chain and generation.

959

Systematic
Compositionality

The graph suggests that systematic compositionality is
increasing over generations within a chain. Page’s Trend
Test confirmed this (L = 111, p < 0.05).

0.20	  

suggests that this is where the increase in systematic
compositionality occurs.
We already knew that systematic compositionality
spontaneously arises through horizontal transmission in
pairs in the game. (Theisen, et al., 2010) These new results
show that vertical cultural transmission then increased the
systematic compositionality. Thus, the communication
systems were shaped by both interaction between members
of a closed group and the transmission of a communication
system from some individuals to others.

0.00	  

Discussion

0.80	  
0.60	  
0.40	  

1	  

2	  

3	  

4	  

It is important to emphasize that it is highly unlikely that,
if the first generation of pairs had played for four times as
long, the systematic compositionality would have increased
as much as it did over four generations. Recall that
systematic compositionality did not increase over the course
of the pairs’ games – the systematic compositionality of the
pairs’ initial signs was not significantly different from their
final signs. This held both for the pairs reported in Theisen
et al. (2010), from which the generation 1 pairs were drawn,
and the pairs reported here.
It is interesting to notice that the trend of an increase in
systematic compositionality over generations is significant
but the increase in systematic compositionality from the set
of signs a pair observed to the initial set of signs they
produce is not quite significant. In fact, this can be
understood as a feature of cumulative cultural evolution, in
which possibly very small changes at the generational level
are amplified. (Kirby, Dowman, & Griffiths, 2007)
What particular features of each type of transmission
were responsible for the systematic compositionality? As
discussed above and in Theisen et al. (2010), for the pairs in
generation 1, the shared interaction history between
participants in a pair seemed to play a large role in the
appearance of systematic compositionality (which was
immediate) – the new signs that partners created for use
with each other tended to re-use elements from signs they
already shared. As for vertical transmission, we noted above
that the increase appears to originate from the set of signs a
pair observed to the initial signs the pair produces. The point
of transmission gives each subsequent generation the
opportunity to replace some idiosyncratic signs with signs
that make the set more systematically compositional. This
could be because the observing pair did not observe a signal
for a particular item or because they did observe it but did
not adopt it (because the participants couldn’t remember it,
it didn’t make sense to the participants, or the participants
rejected it for some other reason). Interestingly, then, one
could argue that it is the same thing responsible for the
systematic compositionality in both the horizontal
transmission and the vertical transmission cases: a demand
for novel signs.
We set out in this paper to integrate horizontal and
vertical transmission in one experiment, answering the call
of several recent reviews. We did this, and found that both
horizontal transmission and vertical transmission had an

Generation
Figure 4. Systematic compositionality of final sets of signs
by generation. Each line represents a chain. There is a trend
for systematic compositionality to increase over generations.
There are a few possibilities for where the increase in
systematic compositionality originated. It could happen that
pairs’ final sets of signs were less systematically
compositional than the subsets of them observed by the next
generation. Specifically, by chance, the idiosyncratic signs
(signs that do not share elements with other signs) might not
have been observed. Since our systematic compositionality
measure is a proportion, this would make the systematic
compositionality of the observed subset greater than that of
the final set. This turns out not to be the case. A Wilcoxon
Signed-Rank Test found no significant difference between
the systematic compositionality scores of final sets of signs
and that of their associated observed subsets (MFinal = .415,
SD = .165; MObserved = .364, SD = .196, p= 0.945).
It could also happen that systematic compositionality
increased during each generation’s game, but this is not the
case either. As in the experiment reported in Theisen et al.
(2010), pairs did not increase the systematic
compositionality from their initial signs to their final signs –
a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test found no significant
difference between the systematic compositionality of pairs’
initial sets of signs and that of their final sets of signs.
(MInitial = .441, SD = .128; MFinal = .4501, SD = .171, p =
0.40)
The third candidate for the increase in systematic
compositionality is from the set of signs a pair observed to
the initial signs the pair produced. A Wilcoxon Signed-Rank
Test showed that this too was below significance (MObserved
= .364, SD = .196; MInitial = .441, SD = .130, p = 0.065).
However, comparing this with the other two possibilities
1

This mean is slightly different than the mean reported in the
previous paragraph because that was the mean systematic
compositionality of the final sets of signs produced by pairs who
had observed another pair’s set. The current mean is the mean
systematic compositionality of the final sets of signs produced by
all pairs (including the first generation, who did not observe
anyone’s signs).

960

effect on systematic compositionality. This result lends
strong support to our argument above that the full history of
a communication system must include both its horizontal
transmission between members of a closed set of individuals
and its vertical transmission beyond them through
generations of individuals. We hope that future work will
not ignore this.

model. In A. Cangelosi & D. Parisi (Eds.),
Simulating the evolution of language (pp. 121148): Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
Scott-Phillips, T., & Kirby, S. (2010). Language evolution
in the laboratory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
14(9), 411-417.
Theisen, C., Oberlander, J., & Kirby, S. (2010).
Systematicity and arbitrariness in novel
communication systems. Interaction Studies, 11(1),
14–32.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European Union
Integrated Project JAST (Joint Action Science and
Technology), grant FP6-IST2–003747. The third author
also gratefully acknowledges the support of the JAMES
project (Joint Action for Multimodal Embodied Social
Systems), grant FP7-ICT-270435.

References
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010). The
Interactive Evolution of Human Communication
Systems. Cognitive Science, 34(3), 351-386.
Galantucci, B. (2009). Experimental semiotics: A new
approach for studying communication as a form of
joint action. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2), 393410.
Galantucci, B., & Garrod, S. (2010). Experimental
semiotics: A new approach for studying the
emergence and the evolution of human
communication. Interaction Studies, 11(1), 1-13.
Galantucci, B., & Garrod, S. (2011). Experimental
Semiotics: A Review. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 5(Article 11).
Galantucci, B., Theisen, C., Gutierrez, D., Kroos, C., &
Rhodes, T. (in press). The Diffusion of Novel
Signs Beyond the Dyad. Language Sciences.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of Representation: Where
Might Graphical Symbol Systems Come From?
Cognitive Science, 31(6), 961-987.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Rogers, S., Walker, B., & Swoboda, N.
(2010). Can iterated learning explain the
emergence of graphical symbols? Interaction
Studies, 11(1), 33–50.
Healey, P., Swoboda, N., & King, J. (2002). A tool for
performing and analysing experiments on graphical
communication. People and Computers, 55-68.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An
experimental approach to the origins of structure in
human language. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105(31), 10681–10686.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(12), 5241–5245.
Kirby, S., & Hurford, J. (2002). The emergence of linguistic
structure: an overview of the iterated learning

961

