UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction between Body and Environment in Insight Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sr7b9gb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Abe, Keiga

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction between Body and Environment in Creative Thinking
Keiga Abe (kabe@irc.aoyama.ac.jp)
Aoyama Gakuin University, Information Science Research Center,
5-10-1 Fuchinobe, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan
Abstract

ability but also on environmental factors. For example, Csikszentmihalyi (1996) pointed out that changing the environment rather than individual efforts is more effective for improving creativity. However, the environmental factors suggested by previous studies implied not the physical environment but cultural or social factors.
Recent studies on embodied and situated cognition suggest
that complex behavior does not necessarily emerge from a
complex mechanism. Recent studies on cognitive science and
artificial intelligence try to explain some intelligent behavior
from the standpoint of situated cognition and embodied cognition.
In perception studies, many researchers have pointed out
the importance of the relationship between the agent and the
environment. Gibson (1979) suggested that people acquire
the information through their perception and motor action.
He termed the information affordance. It is defined as information on an object and an environment that allows an
individual to perform an action in the environment. An affordance that an agent obtains depends on the relationship
between the agent’s body and the environment. For instance,
if you face a puddle on the way home and you do not want to
spoil your shoes, you can choose various actions. If the puddle was smaller than your stride, you could step over the puddle. If the puddle was twice as large as your stride, you could
jump across it. If the puddle was more than twice the size of
your stride, you could try a different route. Such decisions
depend not only on the structure of the environment (in this
case, the size of the puddle) but also on the agent’s body (size
of agent’s stride). Both factors affect the decision. For example, Warren (1984) showed that the height of a climbable
step is up to 0.88 times the persons’ leg length. It was reported that the width between obstacles that persons can pass
through without rotating their shoulder is more than 1.3 times
the persons’ shoulder (Warren & Whang, 1987). Mishima reported that persons stride across a hurdle if the height of the
hurdle is lower than 1.07 times their leg length. However, if
the height of the hurdle is greater than the length, the persons
go under the hurdle (Mishima, 1994).
These previous studies make two important suggestions.
First, complex behavior can be explained by simple sensorymotor coordination. Second, such behavior is supported by
the interaction between the environment in which the agents
behave and the persons’ body. Because our basic behavior
is characterized by such features, this paper considers that
even human behavior, including creative thought, may not be
an exceptions. This paper hypothesizes that creative thought
depends on the interaction between the thinker’s body and
the physical environment in a problem situation. This study

The purpose of this study is to examine the effects of the interaction between body and environment on the creative thinking
process, mainly with regard to insight problem solving. Previous studies have focused on the factors that provide impetus
for insight and creativity, and their components. In order to
clarify the cognitive mechanism behind insight and creativity,
researchers have used psychometric approaches. Some case
studies describe the performance of outstanding artists and scientists. On the other hand, some studies have pointed out that
creativity depends not only on one’s ability but also on environmental factors. However, the environmental factors that
the previous studies suggested were cultural or social factors.
They did not imply the physical environment.
Recent studies on embodied and situated cognition suggest that
complex behavior does not necessarily emerge from a complex mechanism. Complex behavior may be explained by simple sensory-motor coordination. Human behavior, including
creative thought, is no exception. This paper hypothesizes
that creative thought depends on the interaction between the
thinker’s body and the physical environment in the problem
situation.
To test this hypothesis, the “buttonhole puzzle” which is a task
to test creativity was employed in this study. In the experiments, participants were provided with objects of one of three
different sizes (7 × 7 cm, or 12 × 12 cm, or 14 × 14 cm), and
were asked to solve the problem. Then, the participants’ hands
were measured.
The results of the experiment indicate that the size of the hands
of the participants that solved the problem differed with the
given object size. This suggests that the performance of insight
problem solving is influenced by the physical environment and
the thinkers’ body.
Keywords: insight problem solving; affordance; embodied
cognition

Literature Review
Many researchers interested in the insight problem-solving
process have focused on the mechanisms of insight (“aha”
experience) because of the drastic and dramatic change that
characterize it. In previous studies, some researchers surveyed the performances by outstanding scientists and artists,
and latent factors related to the ability to gain insight were
explored using multivariate analyses (Gilhooly and Murphy,
2005). Recent studies have proposed theories that can explain
the cognitive processes of insight problem solving (Suzuki &
Hiraki, 1997; Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, & Rhenius, 1999;
MacGregor, Ormerod, & E.P. Chronicle, 2001) and computational models that can replicate insightful problem-solving
behaviors(Terai & Miwa, 2006). Using neuroimaging, the
role of the right hemisphere of the brain in the creative process was clarified (Bowden & Jung-Beeman, 2003 ).
On the other hand, previous studies have pointed out that
creativity and insightful thinking depend not only on one’s

728

B) Typical Error in Impasse

C) Appropriate Approach

Figure 1: The Buttonhole Puzzle
examines the hypothesis by conducting psychological experiments.

The plastic plate is 0.4 mm thick. This was the minimum
thickness for the plate so that it did not bend by the weight of
the chain and stick.

First, the buttonhole puzzle, which is a kind of an insight
problem, is employed. In the initial state of this problem, a
plastic plate is chained to a plastic stick. The goal of the task
is to separate the plate and the stick. This task may seem very
easy. However, many participants could not solve the puzzle
in 10 minutes without hints (see experiments 1 and 2). To
separate the plate and the stick, the plate has to pass through
the chain. However, the length of the chain is too small for the
plate to pass through. The key to the problem is to bend the
plate. The participant could pass the plate through the chain
if they bent the plate.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants The participants were 34 undergraduate students.
Materials and Procedure Participants were given the 14
cm buttonhole puzzle and were told to solve the puzzle for 10
minutes. They were told to take apart the puzzle in any way,
without breaking the chain.
After the problem-solving task, both the hands of all participants were measured. First, the participants were told to
open their forefinger and thumb as wide as possible and put
their fingerprints across a line. The participants placed their
forefinger and thumb firmly over the line on a recording paper and marked the fingerprints on the line using an ink pad.
Second, the distance from the forefinger to the thumb was
measured and was determined as the hand size. In this study,
the hand size is defined as the maximum distance between the
edge of the fingerprint of the forefinger and that of the thumb.

How can participants realize the solution? When do participants try to bend the plate? This paper hypothesizes that
both the size of the puzzle (environmental factor) and the size
of the participants’ hands (the physical factor) affect the performance of the task. If the plate is bigger than the participants’ hands, the participants will have to use both hands in
order to bend the plate. If the plate is smaller than the participants’ hands, the participants can bend the plate with either
one hand or both hands. In other words, if the puzzle properly
fits into the participants’ hands, the participants could identify
the “bend” affordance more easily. The more there are ways
to bend the plate, the more possible it is for the participants
to realize that the plate needs to be bent.

Results and Discussion
Twelve out of 34 participants solved the puzzle in 10 minutes. The average hand size of the participants was 17.48
cm. A comparison of the hand sizes of the participants
who solved the puzzle and of those who did not showed
that both groups were not significantly different (t(31) =

In order to examine this hypothesis, two psychological experiments were conducted. In experiment 1, the buttonhole
puzzle was used. This puzzle consists of a 14 cm square plastic plate, a 14 cm long plastic stick, and a 24 cm long chain.

729

Figure 2: The method for measuring participants’ hand size

Experiment 2

Time(Sec)

600

Method
Participants and Design The participants were 61 undergraduate students. Thirty-four participants were the same as
those who participated in experiment 1. Twenty-seven participants were assigned to the 7 cm group.

100

10

Materials and Procedure Participants were assigned to
one of two groups: 14 cm group and 7 cm group. In the 14
cm group, the participants were given the 14 cm version of the
buttonhole puzzle and told to solve the puzzle for 10 minutes.
In the 7 cm group, the participants were told to solve the 7 cm
version of the buttonhole puzzle for 10 minutes. The participants were told to take apart the puzzle in any way they could,
without breaking the chain. The 7 cm version consists of a 7
cm square plastic plate, a 7 cm long plastic stick, and a 10
cm long chain. The plastic plate is 0.4 mm thick in the 14cm
version. The plastic plate is 0.2 mm thick in the 7cm version.
After the problem-solving task, both the hands of all participants were measured in the same manner as in experiment
1.

0
14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Hand Size(cm)

Figure 3: Participants’ hand size and time taken to solve the
puzzle in experiment 1

0.52, n.s.E f f ectSize = 0.092). Figure 1 shows the relationship between the hand size and the time taken to solve the
puzzle. The results show that not only participants whose
hands were small but also those whose hands were large did
not solve the puzzle.

Results and Discussion
Table 1 shows the number of participants who solved the puzzle and the average hand size. According to the results of a t
test, the hand sizes in both groups were not significantly different (t(59) = 1.22, n.s., E f f ectSize = 0.145). To analyze
the problem-solving performance, the percentages of correct
answers by both groups were compared. In the 14 cm group,
12 of the 34 participants solved the puzzle in 10 minutes on
their own. In the 7 cm group, 3 participants solved the puzzle. The percentages of correct answers by both groups were
significantly different (χ2 (1) = 4.746, p < 0.05,Cramer′ sV =
0.28). This result implies that if the participants’ hands were
relatively larger than the size of the puzzle, it became hard to
solve the puzzle. However, the 7 cm version of the buttonhole
puzzle was considered to be too small for the participants to
manipulate it easily. The percentage of correct answers in the
7 cm group may be because of the difficulty in handling the

It is probable that the size of the plate is so small that participants cannot acquire the affordance of bending the plate.
As in the prior example, who would bother to jump across a
tiny puddle when one could step over it? Though it is dangerous to jump across a huge and deep puddle, it is safe, but
unnatural, to jump across a tiny puddle. Mishima (1994) reported that there were few participants who bothered to go
under a hurdle whose height was small enough to allow one
to stride over. This result indicates that body sizes that can
acquire affordances from objects may have a lower limit and
an upper limit. Thus, We hypothesized that if the size of the
puzzle is small, the hand size of the participants who notice
the appropriate approach is correspondingly small.

730

Time(Sec)

Table 1: Results of expeirment 2
group
hand size of participants
number of resolvers

14 cm
17.48 cm
12(n = 34)

600

7 cm
17.11 cm
3(n = 27)

100

Table 2: Results of experiment 3
group
hand size (total)
hand size (resolvers)
number of resolvers

14 cm(n = 34)
17.48
17.61
12

10

12 cm(n = 35)
16.92
16.09
13

14cm Group
12cm Group

0
14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Hand Size(cm)

plate. Following these points, in experiment 3, the 12 cm version of the buttonhole puzzle, which was slightly smaller than
the 14 cm version, was employed.

Figure 4: Hand size of participants and time taken to solve
the puzzle in experiment 3

Experiment 3
of participants who solved the 12 cm version of the buttonhole puzzle. In addition, the hand sizes of the participants who solved the puzzle in the 12 cm group were significantly smaller than that of the participants in the 14 cm group
(t(23) = 4.367, p < 0.01, E f f ectSize = 0.673, see Figure 4).
These results suggest that the hand sizes of the participants
who found the appropriate approach to the puzzle differed
depending on the size of the puzzle.

Method
Participants and Design The participants were 69 undergraduate students. Thirty-four participants were the same as
those who participated in the experiment 1. Thirty-five participants were assigned to the 12 cm group.
Materials and Procedure Participants were assigned to
one of two groups. In the 14 cm group, the participants were
given the 14 cm version of the buttonhole puzzle and were
told to solve the puzzle for 10 minutes. In the 12 cm group,
the participants were told to solve the 12 cm version of the
buttonhole puzzle for 10 minutes. The participants were told
to take apart the puzzle in any way, without breaking the
chain. The 12 cm version consists of a 12 cm square plastic plate, a 12 cm long plastic stick, and a 20 cm long chain.
The plastic plate in both versions is 0.4 mm thick. After the
problem-solving task, both the hands of all participants were
measured in the same manner as in experiment 1.

General Discussion
In this paper, the hypothesis that both the size of the puzzle
(environmental factor) and the size of the participants’ hands
(physical factor) affects the performance of the task was examined by three psychological experiments using a buttonhole puzzle. The results of experiment 1 did not support the
original hypothesis. They showed that those with large hands
could not always find a creative solution in the buttonhole
puzzle. Following the results, the hypothesis was modified
and examined in experiment 2. The modified hypothesis was
that body sizes that can acquire an affordance from objects
have a lower and upper limit; thus, if the object size is small,
the hand size of the participants who find the appropriate approach is correspondingly small. The results of experiments
2 and 3 supported this modified hypothesis. According to
the results of the experiments with the various versions of the
buttonhole puzzle, it is not necessary that participants with
particular hand sizes find it easy to solve any type of the buttonhole puzzle. On the other hand, it is not necessary that
there is a buttonhole puzzle of a particular size that is easy for
any participant to solve. The performance on the puzzle depended on the relationship between the size of the puzzle and
that of the participants’ hands. These results suggest that the
participants’ body and given objects affect creative thinking.

Results and Discussion
Table 2 shows the number of participants who solved the puzzle and the average hand size. The percentages of correct answers by both groups were compared. In the 12 cm group, 13
out of 35 participants solved the puzzle in 10 minutes on their
own. The percentage of correct answers was not significantly
different (χ2 (1) = 0.025, n.s.Cramer′ sV = 0.02). According
to the results of the t test, the hand sizes of both groups were
not significantly different (t(67) = 1.854, n.s., E f f ectSize =
0.221).
In the 12 cm group, the hand sizes of the participants
who solved the puzzle successfully were significantly smaller
than that of the participants who failed to solve the puzzle
(t(33) = −3.239, p < 0.01, E f f ectSize = 0.491). This result suggests that there is an upper limit to the hand sizes

731

Conclusions

Japanese Journal of Psychology (in Japanese), 64, 469475.
Pfeifer, R., & Scheier, C. (1999). Understanding intelligence.
MA:MIT Press.
Schwartz, D., & Black, T. (1999). Inferences through imagined actions: Depictive models. Cognitive Psychology, 30,
154-219.
Terai, H., & Miwa, K. (2006). Sudden and gradual processes
of insight problem solving: Investigation by combination
of experiments and simulations. In Proceedings of 28th annual meeting of the cognitive science society (p. 834-839).
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Warren, W., & S.Whang. (1987). Visual guidance of walking through apertures: Body-scaled information for affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13, 371-383.
Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances: Visual guidance of stair climbing. Journal of Experimental Pschology:
Human Perception and Performance, 10, 683-703.

The participants’ body and the size of a given object affect
the performance in a creative problem-solving task. The findings of this study suggest the following: First, creativity is
not simply determined by prior knowledge and mental ability.
The measurement of creativity on the basis of questionnaire
responses cannot evaluate the influences of the participants’
body and of the surrounding environment.
Second, these results suggest the factors that provide impetus to creativity. Where does a creative idea come from? We
tend to consider that it is necessary to search for materials in
long-term memory in order to formulate a creative idea. The
results of experiments show that some participants bent the
given flat plate into other shapes and searched for new ideas
on the basis of the bent plate. This implies that the transformation of the object inspired the participants to formulate
novel ideas. It depended on the probability of the plate being
bent, which in turn depended on the size of the participants’
hands and the size of the object. This implies that our body
influences the accessibility to external objects and the environment.

References
Bowden, E., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Aha! insight experience correlates with solution activation in the right hemisphere. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 730-737.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention. New York: HarperCollins.
Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., & Problanc, C. (1991). The timing of mentally represented actions. Behavioral Brain Research, 34, 35-42.
Gibson, J. J. (Ed.). (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gilhooly, K. J., & Murphy, P. (2005). Differentiating insight from non-insight problems. Thinking & Reasoning,
11, 279-302.
Guilford, J. (1967). The nature of human intelligence. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Hiraki, K., & Suzuki, H. (1997). Constraint relaxation in
the processes of insight. In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference of the cognitive science society (p. 950).
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D. (1999).
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1534-1555.
MacGregor, J., Ormerod, T., & Chronicle, E. (2001). Information processing and insight: A process model of performance on the nine-dot and related problems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 176-201.
Mishima, H. (1994). Perceiving affordances for switching
two actions, “stepping-over” and “passing-under”. The

732

