UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating how infants learn to search in the A-not-B task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fd1b3v5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Popick, Hanna
Dye, Melody
Kirkham, Natasha
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating how infants learn to search in the A-not-B task
Hanna Popick,1 Melody Dye,1 Natasha Kirkham2 & Michael Ramscar 1
Department of Psychology,
Stanford University

Department of Psychological Sciences
Birkbeck College, University of London

1

2

Abstract

Piaget (1954) first described what are often called “Anot-B errors” in infants: 8- to 12-month infants will
generally search successfully for an object in one location
(A), but then fail to search for it when it is conspicuously
hidden in a new location (B). Subsequent studies have
confirmed that in actively searching for hidden objects,
infants robustly make prototypical A-not-B errors, ignoring
the most recent location of objects when they search for
them after a switch (Marcovitch & Zelazo, 1999; Wellman,
Cross, Bartsch, & Harris, 1986). In seeking to explain this,
accounts often focus on the possibility that infants’ errors
stem from problems associated with implementing a correct
search, such as limited working memory and inhibitory
control, or from weak memory traces for the object and
hiding location (e.g. Baillargeon, Graber, Devos, & Black,
1990; Diamond, 1988; Diamond, Cruttenden, & Neiderman,
1994; Munakata, 1997; Thelen, Schöner, Scheier, & Smith,
2001).
In what follows, we explore an alternative, though
complementary approach. Rather than assuming that a child
already understands how to search, we consider what might
be expected if a child were learning how to search. As noted
above, in learning how to successfully seek out objects,
children have to figure out that some things may be more
likely to be where they were last seen, and others where
they are most often seen, and they have to learn which
strategy is most appropriate in each context.
How might children learn search strategies, and their
appropriate application?
One way to consider these
questions is within the framework provided by formal
learning theories (e.g. Rescorla & Wagner, 1972), which see
learning as the process of acquiring information about the
relationship between events (outcomes) in the environment,
and the cues that allow them to be predicted. From this
perspective, children learn to search via a process of trial
and error, strengthening or weakening the value of cues
depending on their predictive successes and failures. This
takes time. Infants must make, and learn from, more or less
successful predictions before they can “master” search, and
begin to match search strategies to context. As we shall
show, while to an adult, children’s search behavior may
appear to be erroneous (“perseverative”) from this
perspective, a child’s A-not-B “errors” can be seen as a
rational, inevitable part of the process of learning to search.

In searching for hidden objects, infants younger than 12
months frequently commit the classic “A-not-B error,” in
which they successfully search for an object in one location
(A) and then fail to search for it when it is conspicuously
hidden in a new location (B). The question is why they fail to
make the switch and perseverate at the first location. While
these errors have often been attributed to cognitive limitations
or stages of neurological development, we propose that they
are consistent with the early stages of learning. We present a
context-learning model of “A-not-B” search, in which
learning to adopt the appropriate search strategy involves
attending to appropriate contextual cues. We then present the
findings of an eye-tracking experiment with 9 month-olds that
behaviorally supports the predictions of our learning model.
Keywords: A-not-B, Learning
Modeling, Causal Reasoning

Theory,

Computational

Introduction
It’s Monday morning. You haven’t seen your car keys
since Friday. How do you find them? In an ideal world, you
might just go look where you last saw them. You’ve
learned, after all, that keys don’t usually move on their own,
and that what best predicts a key’s location is the
conjunction of a given spot and you having last seen the key
at that spot. (So you might even attempt this search pattern
if that “last spot” is a very strange place for keys to be.) But
what if the world is less than ideal—what if you’re not sure
where you last saw the keys? You may have other memories
of them—clear recollections of them hanging on the hook
reserved especially for your car keys, for example—which
might compete with your memories from Friday. Indeed, if
you aren’t sure where you last saw them, you may still
check the hook first, because you know that searching at a
location where the keys are seen frequently can be a
successful search strategy.
This characterization of adult “expertise” when it comes
to looking for keys sheds light on the task facing a child
learning how to find things in the world. A child must learn
that things are likely to be at the location they were last
seen, that things are also likely to be at the location they are
most often seen, and that a successful search will involve
weighing these considerations against what the child can
remember about the last and most likely locations of an
object. From this perspective, “perseverative errors,” in
which a child searches for an object in a likely location
rather than in the hiding location they just witnessed might
be seen as a misapplication of what in other circumstances
might be a completely rational strategy.

The A-not-B Task
In the classic A-not-B task (Piaget, 1954), 7 to 12-monthold children search for a small object in one of two identical
hiding spots. The object is first hidden in plain view of the

970

infant in one of the locations (A), and after a short delay, the
infant usually searches successfully for the object at A.
This is repeated for a few trials, after which the object is
hidden at location B, and the infant is again given the
opportunity to search for the object. At this point, infants
often continue to reach perseveratively to the previously
correct location (A).
Infants also perseverate when they learn other novel
relationships between objects and locations. For example,
Aguiar & Baillargeon (2000) showed infants two towels,
one with a toy on it (A), and one with a toy behind it (B).
The infants learned that pulling towel A enabled them to
obtain and play with the toy. When the towel / toy
relationships were switched, so that B now brought the toy,
7 month-old infants continued to perseveratively pull towel
A rather than switch to towel B. This suggests that the
perseverative response has to do with the process of learning
predictive relationships between actions and outcomes, and
is not solely contingent on particular properties of the
objects themselves, or the specific hiding events of the task
(for similar findings, see Marcovitch & Zelazo, 2006;
Smith, Thelen, Titzer, & McLin, 1999).
However, infant behavior in these tasks is still, in many
ways, context-dependent. For instance, while many 9 month
old infants can successfully complete the towel pulling task
(Aguiar & Baillargeon, 2000), they still fail the standard Anot-B task (Piaget, 1954), even though these tasks appear
structurally similar. Further, Adolpho (2000) found that
what an infant learns in one context does not always extend
easily to another (see also Thelen, Schoner, Scheier, &
Smith, 2001; Smith & Thelen, 2003). Thus, infants do not
initially appear to learn abstract, generalized “search.”
Rather, infant search learning is sensitive both to kind
(pulling, reaching, etc) and context.
On the available evidence then, A-not-B errors cannot be
attributed to motor perseveration alone: infants can make
the switch when outcomes and locations change (as in
Aguiar & Baillargeon, 2000). Nor do these errors result
from difficulties in conceptualizing objects: infants can
search successfully at the first location. Given that it seems
that infants understand the task, and can switch, what needs
to be explained is why they initially fail to search correctly
after a switch in location. Why don’t they adopt the
appropriate search strategy right away?

vanish down the garbage disposal, never to be seen again.
Given that the relationship between hiding an object at a
specific location, and later finding that object in the same
location is not universally warranted, it seems likely that
infants will need to learn the situations in which it is
appropriate, and in which it is not.
To formally illustrate our description of the role context
might play in search, and how children might learn the
appropriate search strategy for the A-not-B task, we
simulated this learning process using the Rescorla-Wagner
(1972) model, modeling the learning of cues that
represented each location, and the changing strength of their
predictive relationship with the object.i The simulations
assume that in the task, an infant learns about two locations
(A and B), that on each trial infants will search at the
location that they most strongly associate with the object’s
potential location, and that the outcome of those searches
will be incorporated into further learning. To reflect the fact
that infants will most likely spend more time looking
towards the location at which they expect objects to
reappear, the saliency of the unattended location was set
lower than that rate for the attended location. This allowed
the model to reflect the likelihood that infants would learn
less quickly about location B when they were still primarily
attending to A. (This also suggests that as a consequence of
their attending to A, infants are initially slow to learn about
hiding events at B.) Figure 1 shows these associative
strengths developing across A-not-B training trials.

Figure 1. Rescorla-Wagner simulation of cue competition between
cues representing the two hiding locations and the association each
has with the hidden object across two trials at location A, followed
by four trials at location B. Note that although the association
between the object and A decreases following the first two trials, it
remains at a higher value than the association between the object
and B for the first few hiding events at B.

Information Structure in Learning
Successfully searching for an object involves weighing a
number of clues to its possible location: Where was it last
seen? Where is it usually seen? As adults, we can assess
these clues within the frame of the search task at hand.
However, while it may seem patently obvious that infants
should assume that “if the object is hidden at A, search A; if
B, then B,” this relationship is not universal in an infant’s
experience: for example, people and animals will often
appear and disappear at ‘random’ (out of one door, back
through another); batter ‘hidden’ in the oven will reappear
as a cake; and one fine summer day, mommy’s ring will

As can be seen from Figure 1, at the outset of A-not-B
learning, the relationship between a location (A) and a
specific outcome (finding the object) is repeatedly
reinforced. The infant learns that location A strongly
predicts the reappearance of the object (in the simulation,
this is illustrated by an increase in the predictive strength of
location A). Then a new relationship is introduced, this
time between a different location (B) and the same outcome

971

(finding the object). Given that the infant has no prior
experience of finding objects at B, and given that location A
is already a strongly learned cue to finding objects, the
infant’s best guess, initially, ought to be that the object will
continue to reappear at A.
However, if the infant goes on to see more objects hidden
at B, and being found at B, two things will happen: First, the
infant will learn that location B also predicts the
reappearance of the object, and the strength of this
predictive relationship will strengthen over B-trials.
Second, error resulting from incorrect searches at A during
B-trials will weaken the relationship between A and the
reappearing object, reducing A’s predictive value.
This simple model makes an intriguing empirical
prediction about infants in the A-not-B task: namely, that if
we extend the number of B trials, infants will gradually
unlearn the value of A before switching their search to B.
However, this model also implies is that infants will use the
“most frequent location” strategy in all situations, such that
if hiding were to revert to A after a number of B trials, B
would need to be unlearned prior to switching back to A.
Given that children do learn to search in appropriate
locations, this fails to explain how young children come to
learn to switch flexibly between locations and succeed at the
task.
The answer to this puzzle lies in the different ways adults
go about searches: Children must learn that in search,
context counts. If infants are to learn to weigh an object’s
last location over its most frequent location, they need to
learn that the conjunction of an object and its last location is
the appropriate cue to where that object is most likely to be
found. Accordingly, Figure 2 shows the results of an
extended simulation to which this kind of “contextual”
conjunctive cue has been added to the simple location cues.

Initially, there is little to distinguish the performance of
the two models, because during the initial hiding events at
A, the value of search at A is there is to be learned.
However, after the switch in locations, the associative
strengths of the simple location cues weaken relative to the
conjunctive cue, because the simple cues suggesting the
“search at the most frequent location” response generate
error when hiding locations are switched. Because both
locations are always present in the A-not-B task, on any
given search, the cue value of one (successful) location will
be strengthened, while the other will lose value. However,
since a child will only see an object hidden in one place, the
contextual cues that support searching at the place the object
was hidden will prove more accurate, and will therefore
strengthen relative to the simple cues over time. In this
way, the infant can gradually learn to match an appropriate
search strategy to the task at hand.
This process takes time; the model we present suggest
that infants will need experience of making more and less
successful predictions before they can learn appropriate
contextual search strategies, and, importantly, unlearn their
tendency to simply search in the most likely location.

Experiment
Though the standard A-not-B task generally involves
infants reaching for hidden physical objects, if our
hypothesis about the need for infants to unlearn
inappropriate search strategies is correct, we would expect
the same perseverative pattern of behavior to be apparent in
all search strategies, regardless of modality of measurement
(see also Diamond, 1990; Hofstadter & Reznick, 1996; Bell
& Adams, 1999). Thus to examine our account of learning
to search, we conducted a study of the visual search
behavior of infants in the A-not-B paradigm using eyetracking. Taking a more continuous measurement of
children’s visual search enabled us to examine whether
children’s pattern of perseverative searching after an initial
switch trial simply reflected a belief that the object was in
the incorrect location, or whether it was consistent with the
gradual unlearning process predicted by our simulations.

Participants
32 9-month-old infants successfully completed our testing
procedure (range 8 months 17 days to 9 months 17 days,
median 9 months 7 days; with equal gender distribution).
Data from an additional 18 infants are not reported due to
poor calibration (9), fussiness during the experiment (7),
and equipment failure (2). Participants were recruited from
a volunteer pool, which reflects the properties of the
community surrounding Stanford University.

Figure 2. A Rescorla-Wagner model of cue competition between
two simple cues representing location alone, and two conjunctive
cues using information about where the object was last hidden
along with location. The model shows associations with the
hidden object across two trials at A, followed by four trials at B (a
fairly standard A-not-B task), and then makes predictions for how
the associations would change if the task were extended with
alternating trials at A and B.

Stimuli
The infants watched animated movies of a set of colorful
keys that were accompanied by musical sound effects
played at equal volumes from speakers on both sides of the
screen. As part of familiarization, the keys were first shown

972

Keys shown

Keys
hidden

Distracter (3s)

moving up and down and rattling in the center of the screen,
and were then shown moving across the screen and
disappearing into a bucket on one side. An identical bucket
was also present on the other side.
Following the hiding of the keys, a pinwheel
accompanied by new music appeared in the center as a
distracter for three seconds, and then disappeared. For the
following four seconds only the buckets were visible, while
the music that accompanied the keys played to encourage
searching. After this four-second search period, the keys
reappeared from the same bucket into which they had
disappeared, before moving back towards center screen and
then moving off the top of the screen. The pinwheel
animation then reappeared in the center and was displayed
until the infants’ attention to the center of the screen was
confirmed, at which point the keys reappeared in the center
to begin the next trial. Figure 3 depicts the stimuli and the
sequence of events.

Search (4s)

Keys shown

location A during A-trials would later continue to search for
the keys there, but we did not expect children to learn about
hiding events that occurred at a location to which they were
not looking. Concomitantly, given that the location of the
keys was the only aspect of the scene we presented to
infants that varied across the trials, we did not expect to see
the same pattern of unlearning in children who had not
watched the hiding events.

Results
Analysis confirmed that infants varied in how much they
looked towards location A during the initial hiding at A
trials, with 17 infants (accurately) looking more at location
A, and another group of 15 infants looking more at location
B. Looking within the defined ROIs was considered
“searching” behavior. An analysis of variance (ANOVA)
comparing the searching patterns between these two groups
of infants revealed the predicted difference in the patterns of
infants’ looking across the study, F(2,90)=34.597, p<.001.
Accordingly, the children were separated for remaining
analyses: an ‘attenders’ group of children who looked more
to A during the initial search trials, and a ‘non-attenders’
group who looked more to B during the initial search trials,
even though the keys were hidden at location A.
A further omnibus ANOVA, including attending status as
a variable, revealed an overall ‘side’ x ‘time’ interaction,
F(1,92)=2.622, p=.022, and a ‘side’ x ‘attending status’
interaction, F(1,92)=5.435, p<.001 (Figure 4). These results
revealed an overall change in where the infants were
looking during the search period across trials, showing that
this change was driven by the attenders, who searched first
at A and then slowly changed their locus of search over
time, as more hiding events occurred at B. Importantly, the
non-attenders did not change their searching behavior
throughout the study.

Figure 3 (pictured above). A screenshot of one trial of the visual
search A-not-B task presented to the infants. This display is shown
with two hiding events in one location, followed by four trials of
hiding events in the other location.

Procedure and design
Participants sat on a caregiver’s lap during testing, facing
a 152cm projection screen, which was approximately 180cm
from them. An Applied Science Laboratories (ASL) Model
504 corneal reflection eye tracking system collected eye
movement data as infants were shown the stimulus displays.
A computer script translated the gaze coordinates recorded
by the system into gaze durations to regions of interest
(ROI) defined around each of the hiding wells during the 4second search period after each hiding event.
Infants were shown the key-hiding sequence six times: the
keys were hidden twice in the bucket on one side of the
screen, and then four times in the bucket on the other side of
the screen, mimicking the sequence of a typical A-not-B
task. Side of initial presentation was counterbalanced across
participants.
Although the display shown to the infants was intended to
mimic manual A-not-B search, it was not infant-controlled,
as is often the case in manual studies. In a manual search
task, the toys can continue to be hidden at location A until
the infant has reached a success criterion for searching at
that location, ensuring that the infant has been attending to,
and learning about, the hiding events; however, in the
current visual search task, the sequence shown was the same
for all infants without any contingency based on where the
infant looked during the search period.
Because our task did not require success at location A
prior to the switch trial to B, we predicted noticeable
differences between subjects depending on whether or not
they actually attended to location A during A-trials.
Specifically, we predicted that infants who had looked to

Figure 4. A plot of the difference in looking time to A and B
across the six trials of the A-not-B task (first two at A, and then
four at B) for the two groups, those who searched more at A during
trials at that location than those who didn’t.

An analysis of the visual search of the attenders revealed
a change in looking bias across the trials, with decreasing
looking to location A, F(1,49)=14.057, p<.001. Despite this
trend however, there was still a main effect of side in the

973

study, F(1,49)=29.468, p<.001, with significantly more
looking to A (M=2038 ms) than B (M=1192 ms),
t(1,50)=4.611, p<.001 (despite the fact that there were twice
as many hiding events at B than at A over the course of the
study). This finding is noteworthy because it is consistent
with the perseverative trend seen in the typical A-not-B task
with manual search.
We hypothesized that infants’ perseverative search at A
would gradually lessen as the cues that predict A were
weakened following hiding events at B, but that the rate of
learning to search at B would be negligible until the value of
the cues directing attention to A were unlearned. Individual
differences in rate of the incremental trend away from
looking to A in the attenders provided evidence of precisely
this pattern of unlearning, with a regression showing that
the extent of the searching bias A events “predicted” the
extent of bias on early B-trials, p=.018, a relationship that
was not significant for non-attenders (see Figure 5 for a
comparative plot of search behavior at each location for the
attenders).

Children who initially learned about an object hidden at
one location continued to search visually at that location
even after the object was hidden in a new location, but
showed an incremental shift in their search behavior away
from the initial location and towards the new location. This
pattern of data is consistent with the idea that children have
to learn to search, and that unlearning, as a consequence of
prediction error, is a key part of that process (Ramscar et al.,
2010; Ramscar & Dye, 2009; Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). If
infants initially learn that hidden objects are to be found at
A, they will perseverate in that response until the balance of
evidence (learning) favors the prediction that the objects’
will be found at B. The correlation between the attenders’
bias during A trials and the early B trials—but not the later
B trials—further supports the idea that the initial bias
towards A must be unlearned, and that this will happen only
as more hiding / appearance events are shown at location B
(see also Diedrich, Thelen, Smith, & Corbetta, 2000). This
gradual change in looking preference over time is consistent
with our hypothesis that search is something children have
to learn, and that success or failure at different kinds of
search may be, to a degree, a reflection of experience.
While there is much to explain with regards to the
development of children’s ability to search—and not least
how the learning of conjunctive cues over extended trials
might impact performance on a modified A-not-B task—we
believe that there is insight to be gained from seeing infants’
behavior in the A-not-B task in terms of learning to search,
and the patterns of behavior that accompany such learning,
rather than simply as a failure to search correctly. Not only
does this approach offer some insight into the often puzzling
behavior of children as they learn to search, but we believe
that the combination of eye-tracking and computational
modeling methods used in the current study offer a helpful
formal framework for other work in this area.

Figure 5. For the attenders, looking time (in ms) to each of the two
locations across the six trials of the task.

The non-attenders, who did not learn about location A or
the hiding events that occurred there, were not expected to
behave in the same way the attenders were. These infants
simply showed a main effect of side across the six trials,
F(1,42)=10.979, p=.002, which resulted from more overall
looking to location B, t(1,43)=7.282, p<.001. Given that the
non-attending infants initially looked to the side where
nothing was happening, and that later hiding events did take
place (meaning that B became more interesting as the
experiment progressed), it is perhaps unsurprising that the
non-attenders did not change their looking bias over the
course of the trials in different locations, F(1,42)=.378, ns.;
moreover, given that the non-attenders do not change their
bias over time, it suggests that pattern shown by the
attenders is not simply a result of their regressiing to the
mean (a possible concern, because groups were split based
on early search behavior), but rather that these data reflect
different patterns of learning over time in the two groups.

Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by NSF Grant Nos.
0547775 and 0624345 to MR. Many thanks to Daniel
Richardson for programming Experiment 1.

References
Adolph, K. (2000). Specificity of learning: Why infants fall over a
veritable cliff. Psychological Science, 11, 290-295.
Aguiar, A., & Baillargeon, R. (2000). Perseveration and problem
solving in infancy. In H. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child
development and behavior (Vol. 27, pp. 135-180). New York:
Academic Press.
Ahmed, A., & Ruffman, T. (1998). Why do infants make A-not-B
errors in a search task, yet show memory for the location of
hidden objects in a nonsearch task. Developmental Psychology,
34(3), 441-453.
Baillargeon, R., Graber, M., Devos, J., & Black, J. (1990). Why do
young infants fail to search for hidden objects? Cognition, 36(3),
255-284.
Barlow H. (2001). Redundancy reduction revisited, Network, 12,
241-253

Discussion

974

Bell, M. A., & Adams, S. E. (1999). Comparable performance on
looking and reaching versions of the A-not-B task at 8 months
of age. Infant Behavior and Development, 22(2), 221–235.
Diamond, A. (1988). Abilities and Neural Mechanisms Underlying
AB Performance. Child Development, 59(2), 523-527.
Diamond, A. (1990). The development and neural bases of
memory functions as indexed by the AB and delayed response
tasks in human infants and infant monkeys. In A. Diamond
(Ed.), The development and neural bases of higher cognitive
functions (pp. 267-309). New York: New York Academy of
Sciences Press.
Diamond, A., Cruttenden, L., & Neiderman, D. (1994). AB with
multiple wells: 1. Why are multiple wells sometimes easier than
two wells? 2. Memory or memory+ inhibition. Developmental
Psychology, 30(2), 192–205.
Diedrich, F. J., Thelen, E., Smith, L. B., & Corbetta, D. (2000).
Motor memory is a factor in infant perseverative errors.
Developmental Science, 3(4), 479-494.
Hofstadter, M., & Reznick, J. S. (1996). Response Modality
Affects Human Infant Delayed-Response Performance. Child
Development, 67(2), 646-658.
Johnson, M. H., Posner, M. I., Rothbart, M. K. (1994). Facilitation
of saccades toward a covertly attended location in early infancy.
Psychological Science, 5, 90-93.
Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (1999). The A-Not-B Error:
Results from a Logistic Meta-Analysis. Child Development,
70(6), 1297-1313.
Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The influence of number
of A-trials on 2-year-olds' behavior in two A-not-B type search
tasks: A test of the hierarchical competiting systems model.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 7, 477-501.
Munakata, Y. (1997). Perseverative reaching in infancy: The roles
of hidden toys and motor history in the AB task. Infant Behavior
and Development, 20(3), 405–416.
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child (M.
Cook, Trans.). New York: Basic Books, Inc.
Ramscar, M., & Dye, M. (2009) Expectation and negative
evidence in language learning: the curious absence of mouses in
adult speech. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K. & Thorpe, K.
(2010). The Feature-Label-Order Effect in Symbolic Learning.
Cognitive Science, 34(7).
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A Theory of Pavlovian
Conditioning: Variations in the Effectiveness of Reinforcement
and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.),
Classical Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory (pp. 6499). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Rescorla, R. A. (1988) Pavlovian conditioning: It’s not what you
think it is. American Psychologist, 43(3), 151-160.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E., Titzer, R., & McLin, D. (1999). Knowing
in the context of acting: the task dynamics of the A-not-B error.
Psychol Rev, 106(2), 235-260.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001). The
dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant perseverative
reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(01), 1-34.
Topal, J., Gergely, G., Miklosi, A., Erohegyi, A., & Csibra, G.
(2008). Infants' perseverative search errors are induced by
pragmatic misinterpretation. Science, 321, 1831-1834.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., Bartsch, K., & Harris, P. L. (1986).
Infant Search and Object Permanence: A Meta-Analysis of the
A-Not-B Error. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 51(3).

i

The effects of learning were simulated using the RescorlaWagner model, a widely used learning rule that has been applied
to numerous learning effects in animals and humans, and for which
there is strong neurobiological evidence (Waelti, Dickinson &
Schultz, 2001; Schultz, 2006). The Rescorla-Wagner model
simulates changes in the associative strengths between individual
cues and an outcome as the result of discrete learning trials. If the
presence of a cue or outcome X at time t is defined as present(X, t),
and its absence as absent(X, t), then the predictive value V of a cue
i for an outcome O after a learning event at time t + 1 can be stated
as:

while the change (∆) in the predictive value of i after t can be
defined as:

Learning is thus governed by a discrepancy function where λj
is the value of the predicted event (the maximum amount of
associative strength that an event j can support) and Vj is the
predictive value for j given the set of cues present at time t.
In trials in which there is positive evidence – i.e., in which
expected outcomes do occur – the Rescorla-Wagner learning rule
produces a negatively accelerated learning curve (the result of
events being better predicted, which reduces the discrepancy
between what is expected and what is observed) and asymptotic
learning over repeated trials (as events become fully predicted).
Conceptually, this happens because the model embodies the idea
that the function of learning is to align our expectations with
reality, and the better that alignment becomes over time, the less
we need to learn.
In trials in which there is negative evidence – i.e., in which an
expected outcome fails to occur – λj (the expected outcome) takes
a value of zero because it didn’t occur. In such cases, the
discrepancy function (λj – Vj) produces a negative value, resulting
in a reduction in the associative strength between the cues present
on that trial and the absent outcome j. Conceptually these
prediction errors can be thought of as violations of expectation that
allow the model to learn from the negative evidence.
The total amount of predictive (cue) value any given outcome
can support in learning is finite. (Informally, we can think of this
as capturing the idea that if predictive confidence keeps rising, it
must eventually reach a point of certainty.) As a result, cues
compete with one another for relevance, and this produces learning
patterns that often differ greatly from those that would arise by
simply recording the correlations between cues and outcomes (i.e.,
simply tracking base rates – a common misconstrual of learning;
Rescorla, 1988).
Notably, the amount of learning that occurs on any given trial is
determined by two factors: the overall learning rate βj (where 0 ≤
βj ≤ 1), and the individual saliency of cues, denoted by a parameter
αi (where Ci 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1). These parameters establish the rate at
which the discrepancy between λj and VTOTAL reduces. In the
simulation we conducted, we set λ = 100% for a location when the
keys are visible there, or 0% when not visible, αi=0.05 for attended
stimuli and 0.075 for unattended stimuli, and βj=0.5. The model is
similar to, and consistent with, models of representational strength
of latent versus active memory traces (e.g., Munakata, 1998).

975

