UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is Evoking Negative Meanings the Unique Feature of Adjective Metaphors? :Through the
Comparison with Nominal Metaphors and Predicative Metaphors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hn1z2tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sumihisa, Miho
Tsukurimichi, Hiroya
Utsumi, Akira
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is Evoking Negative Meanings the Unique Feature of Adjective Metaphors?
Miho Sumihisa (m_sumihisa@edu.hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Human Communication, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Hiroya Tsukurimichi (h.tukurimichi@edu.hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Akira Utsumi (utsumi@se.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Maki Sakamoto (sakamoto@hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Abstract
Previous metaphor studies have paid much attention to
nominal and predicative metaphors and little attention has
been given to adjective metaphors. Although some studies
have focused on adjective metaphors, they have only
examined how the acceptability of adjective metaphors can
be explained by the pairing of adjective modifier’s and
head noun’s modalities and little attention has been given
to meanings evoked by adjective metaphors. Sakamoto &
Utsumi (2009) showed that adjective metaphors, especially
those modified by color adjectives, tend to evoke negative
meanings. Thus, our study examines whether evoking
negative meanings is the unique feature of adjective
metaphors through the comparison with nominal and
predicative metaphors for the Japanese language. Our
psychological experiments revealed that meanings of
metaphors are basically affected by meanings of vehicles.
However, when a vehicle itself has the neutral meaning,
negative meanings are evoked more frequently for
adjective metaphors among the other types of metaphors.
Keywords: adjective metaphors; nominal metaphors;
predicative metaphors; Japanese language; negative
meanings.

Introduction
Metaphor studies in the domain of cognitive science have
paid much attention to nominal metaphors such as “My
job is a jail” (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Glucksberg,
2001) and predicative metaphors such as “He shot down
all of my arguments” (e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1980;
Martin, 1992). Previous metaphor studies, however, have
paid little attention to adjective metaphors such as “sweet
touch” and how they are comprehended. Some models
have been proposed to explain the mechanism of
metaphor comprehension in cognitive science. One theory
that can explain the mechanism of metaphor
comprehension would be the comparison theory proposed
by Bowdle & Gentner (2005). This theory argues that
metaphors are processed via a comparison process
consisting of an initial alignment process between the
source and the target concepts followed by a process of
projection of aligned features into the target concept. On
the other hand, Glucksberg and his colleagues
(Glucksberg, 2001; Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990) propose

categorization theory. This theory addresses mainly
nominal metaphors and argues that people understand
nominal metaphors by seeing the target concept as
belonging to the superordinate metaphorical category
exemplified by the source concept. These two theories
target nominal metaphors and predicative metaphors. As
for the mechanism of adjective metaphors, Utsumi &
Sakamoto (2007) propose a two-stage categorization
theory and argue that the comprehension process of
adjective metaphors could be explained as a two-stage
categorization process. The intuitive idea behind
two-stage categorization is that correspondences between
the properties literally expressed by the adjective and the
properties to be mapped onto the noun would be indirect,
mediated by an intermediate category, rather than direct
as predicted by the categorization theory.
Our study focuses on adjective metaphors and compares
their semantic features with those of nominal and
predicative metaphors.
Many studies focusing on adjective metaphors;
including Werning, Fleischhauer, & Beşeoğlu (2006),
have examined how the acceptability of adjective
metaphors can be explained by the pairing of adjective
modifier’s and head noun’s modalities. Ullmann (1951),
in a very early study on adjective metaphors, proposes a
certain hierarchy of lower and higher perceptual
modalities. He claims that qualities of lower senses
should preferentially occur in the source domain, while
qualities of higher senses should be preferred in target
domain. His thesis of directionality thus asserts that a
metaphor with a source domain lower in the hierarchy of
sense modalities than the target domain should tend to be
cognitively more accessible than a metaphor with the
reverse direction of domains. After Ullmann, Williams
(1976) makes a more differentiated claim of directionality,
in which a similar order of sense modalities is proposed.
Recently, Yu (2003) highlights cross-linguistic differences,
when he makes different directionality claims for
different languages (English as compared to Chinese).
Werning, Fleischhauer, & Beşeoğlu (2006) explore the
factors that enhance the cognitive accessibility of
adjective metaphors for the German language. Very few
studies, however, have attempted to explore meanings
evoked by adjective metaphors.
Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) is one of the few studies
which have explored meanings evoked by adjective
metaphors. They compare the actual semantic changes

2655

observed through their psychological experiments with
the semantic changes predicted by Abstract Performance
Grammar (APG) model. APG proposed by Osgood
(1980) states the crucial rules to evoke semantic changes
through fine semantic interactions in the processing of
linguistic expressions.

Figure 1: Profile of semantic differential of metaphor
constituents: topic:○, vehicle:△, and metaphor topic:□.
As for the metaphorical expression in Figure 1, certain
properties of “EYE” as a topic are characterized by “a
lake” as a vehicle. As a result, certain meanings of
metaphorical expressions are evoked.
158 Japanese adjective metaphors were used for their
psychological experiment. Participants were asked to rate
the assigned expressions against 15 SD scales such as
“uncomfortable – comfortable”, “dark – light”, “ugly –
beautiful”, “dull – sharp”, and “coarse – delicate”. The
ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging from -3
through 0 to +3. The value -3 was regarded as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole. For example, “comfortable” is positive
semantic pole and “uncomfortable” is negative semantic
pole. All the mean values of vehicles and topics rated on
the 15 SD scales were classified into T=V, T<V, T>V.
Using t-test (two-tailed, the alpha level .05), the cases
which have no significant difference between the mean
value of T and V were regarded as T=V.
The other codes such as T<V and T>V fall to the cases
which have significant differences between the mean
values of T and V. The total number falling under each
classification is given as ‘sum’ in the far right column of
Table 1. In order to compare the actual semantic changes
resulting from their experiment with the semantic changes
predicted by APG model, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009)
classified the actual semantic changes resulting from their
experiment as show in Table 1. Using t-test (two-tailed,
the alpha level .05), they regarded the cases which have
no significant difference between the mean values of T
and metaphors as ‘no change’ (0) and the cases which
have significant differences between them as changes
either to the negative pole (-) or to the positive pole (+).
Table 1 shows the comparison between the predicted
semantic changes and the actual semantic changes
observed through their experiment.
Table1:Comparison between predicative semantic
changes and actual semantic changes
actual change
Sum
semantic
predicted
intensity
change
0
+
T=V
0
331 17 261 609
T<V
+
366 230 76
672
T>V
119 9
961 1089
Sum
816 256 1298 2370
numbers = cases of SD scales
In order to see the tendency for adjective metaphors to
evoke positive or negative meanings, Sakamoto &
Utsumi (2009) classified all the cases showing different
changes from the APG prediction either into positive

meaning or negative meaning. The cases showing no
change as against the prediction of changing to - were
regarded as evoking a weakly positive meaning, and were
classified into the positive meaning category in the same
way as those which changed to + against the prediction of
changing to -. The cases showing no change against the
prediction of changing to + were regarded as evoking
weakly negative meaning, and were classified into the
negative meaning category in the same way as those
which changed to – against the prediction of changing to
+. As a result, 848 cases which showed changes different
from the APG prediction were classified into 145 positive
meanings and 703 negative meanings. A Chi-square test
showed that the cases showing negative meanings were
significantly more frequent than those showing positive
meanings, χ2 (1, N=848) = 367.175, p < .001. Based on
this result, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) suggest that
adjective metaphors tend to evoke negative meanings.
In addition, Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009) analyze the
tendency of evoking negative meanings among the types
of adjective metaphors. They classified the number of
cases either into positive meaning or negative meaning.
Table 2 shows comparison among the 5 types of adjective
metaphors.
Table 2: Comparison among the 5 types of adjective
metaphors
positive effect negative effect sum
Color
4
312
316
Touch
47
84
131
Sound
41
64
105
Taste
19
145
164
Smell
34
98
132
Sum
145
703
848
numbers = cases of SD scales
Chi-square tests with Bonferroni correction (the alpha
level .05) were conducted among five types of adjective
metaphors. The results showed that adjective metaphors
created from adjectives denoting ‘color’ evoked the most
negative meaning and they evoked significantly more
negative meanings than the other four types of adjective
metaphors.
Although their results are interesting, Sakamoto &
Utsumi (2009) did not analyze whether evoking negative
meanings is the unique feature of adjective metaphors.
Thus, in this paper we compare adjective metaphors with
nominal metaphors and predicative metaphors.

Pre-experiment
SD scales
Since we aim to examine whether evoking negative
meanings is the unique feature of adjective metaphors,
first we attempted to find appropriate scales to see
whether metaphorical expressions evoke negative
meanings. We conducted a pre-experiment using the
following 32 SD scales, which are frequently used for
psychological experiments.
SD scales:“dislike – like”, “uncomfortable – comfortable”,
“ugly – beautiful”, “dark – light”, “sad – glad”, “bad –
good”, inelegant – elegant”, “not interesting – interesting”,
“unclear – clear”, “not appropriate – appropriate”, “dull –
sharp”, “persistent – tidy”, “low – high”, coarse –
delicate”, “not bright – bright”, “unnecessary –
necessary”, “small – big”, “heavy – light”, “not salient –

2656

salient”, “moist – dry”, “shallow – deep”, “temporary –
eternal”, “big-little”, “square – circular”, “demonstrative
– cover”, “not mysterious – mysterious” “moveless –
moving”, “relieved - anxious”, “fearful - benign”, “low high”, “free - constrained”, and “new-old”.
10 Japanese males and females, aged 21 – 35,
participated for the pre-experiment. Participants were
asked to choose SD scales for which they can easily see
one of semantic pole as positive and the other semantic
pole as negative. As a result, we decided to use 7 SD
scales, chosen by nine or more participants.
Table3 : List of SD scales used for the experiment

Topics with neutral meanings
We selected topics and vehicles to make Japanese
metaphorical expressions. Topics were selected from
nouns which were categorized in the highly abstract
semantic level in a Japanese thesaurus (yamaguchi, 2003).
From those nouns, we selected nouns with high
familiarity (Amano & Kondo (1999)). In this study we
want to see how semantic interactions between topics and
vehicles of three types of metaphors function to shift the
meanings of nouns as topics to the positive pole or
negative pole. Thus, we selected nouns with neutral
meanings to be used as topics. We conducted another
pre-experiment to find nouns with neutral meanings.
Participants in the pre-experiment rated the meanings of
the following 54 nouns;
Table 4 : List of

Nouns used for the pre-experiment

In the pre-experiment, 15 Japanese males and females,
aged 20 – 24, were asked to rate 54 words against 7 SD
scales. The ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging
from -3 through 0 to +3. We regarded the value -3 as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole.
We conducted t-tests (two-tailed, the alpha level .05) and
regarded the words which have no significant difference
between the mean semantic values of the words and “0”
as topics with neutral meanings. As a result, the following
4 nouns were selected as topics to be used for our
experiment; smell (‘nioi’), moment (‘genzai’), footstep
(‘ashioto’), and pose (‘shisei’).

Vehicles
Vehicles of three types of metaphors were also selected
from the Japanese thesaurus (yamaguchi, 2003). We
selected adjectives, nouns and verbs which were easily

combined with topics selected above and made
metaphorical expressions. We selected the following
vehicles.
Adjectives: shallow (“asai”), light (“karui”), far (“tooi”),
deep (“hukai”), much (“ooi”), circular (“marui”), big
(“ookii”), small (“chiisai”), heavy (“omoi”), long
(“nagai”), short (“mijikai”), white (“shiroi”), red (“akai”),
black (“kuroi”), blue (“aoi”), large (“hiroi”), narrow
(“semai”), near (“chikai”), minor (“sukunai”).
Nouns: life(1) (“jinsei”), music (“ongaku”), world
(“sekai”), life(2) (“inochi”), adventure (“bouken”),
destiny (“unmei”), legend (“densetu”), dream (“yume”),
joke (“joudan”), literature (“bungaku”), philosophy
(“tetugaku”), rusticity (“soboku”), heart (“kokoro”),
image (“ime-ji”), intuition (“chokkan”).
Verbs: float (“ukabu”), flow (“nagareru”), drift
(“tadayou”), circle (“mawaru”), roll (“korogaru”), tower
(“sobieru”), quake (“hurueru”), swell (“takamaru”), flip
(“hikkurikaeru”), fly around (“tobimawaru”), break away
(“kakedasu”), shake (“yureru”), swirl (“uzumaku”), wave
(“namiutu”).

Experiment
Metaphorical expressions
We explore whether evoking negative meanings is the
unique feature of adjective metaphors through the
comparison with nominal metaphors and predicative
metaphors. Therefore, we conducted a psychological
experiment in which participants evaluate the meaning of
metaphors (e.g. nominal metaphors: smell of dream
(“yume no nioi”), predicative metaphors: rolling smell
(“korogaru nioi”), adjective metaphors: white smell
(“shiroi nioi”)). These metaphors were made by
combining topics and 3 types of vehicles, namely nouns,
verbs, and adjectives, which were selected through the
pre-experiment. Based on the results of the experiment
we analyze whether the semantic interaction between
vehicles and topics (the topics with neutral meanings
were selected through the pre-experiment) causes the
neutral meanings of topics to change to the negative
meaning or positive meaning. In the psychological
experiment, participants were asked to evaluate the
meaning of metaphorical expressions. In the experiment,
60 Japanese males and females, aged 20 – 28, were
classified into 2 groups. 90 metaphorical expressions
were assigned to each group. Participants were asked to
rate the assigned expressions against 9 SD scales (7 SD
scales given in Table 3 and additional scales ‘difficult –
easy’ and ‘unfamiliar - familiar’). The ratings were made
on a 7-point scale ranging from -3 through 0 to +3. We
regarded the value -3 as the negative semantic pole and
the value +3 as the positive semantic pole.

Vehicles
In our study, we focus on the metaphorical meanings
evoked by the semantic interaction between topics and
vehicles. The topics with neutral meanings were given by
the pre-experiment and meanings of the metaphorical
expressions were given by the experiment explained
above. We also need meanings of vehicles of their own
which were used to make metaphorical expressions above.
Thus we conducted another psychological experiment in
which participants were asked to rate meanings of
vehicles only. We used the 7 SD scales given in Table 3.
In the experiment, 30 Japanese males and females, aged
20 – 24, were asked to rate 49 words against the 7 SD
scales. The ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging
from -3 through 0 to +3. We regarded the value -3 as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole.

2657

Result
Classification of vehicles and metaphors
We regarded mean values in 7 SD scales (Table 3) as
meaning evaluation values of metaphorical expressions
and vehicles. First, we
made sure whether the
metaphors used in the experiments were not
incomprehensible and unusual as well as not too much
conventional. We confirmed all the metaphors were from
-2.0 to +2.0 in accessibility scale and conventionality
scale.
After this procedure, we classified metaphorical
expressions into the cases showing no semantic change,
those showing the change to the positive semantic pole,
or those showing the change to the negative semantic pole.
We conducted t-test (two-tailed, the alpha level .05) to see
semantic changes evoked by the semantic interaction
between topics and vehicles. Since only the topics with
neutral meanings were selected through the
pre-experiment, metaphorical expressions which have no
significant difference between their mean value and value
0 were regarded as metaphors showing no semantic
change (0). And metaphorical expressions which have
significant difference between their mean values and
value 0 were classified into either metaphors showing the
change to the positive semantic pole or those showing the
change to the negative semantic pole.
We also classified vehicles into those with neutral
meanings, those with positive meanings, or those with
negative meanings. Using t-tests (two-tailed, the alpha
level .05), vehicles which have no significant difference
between their mean value and value 0 were regarded as
vehicles with the neutral meaning (0). And vehicles which
have significant difference between their mean value and
value 0 were classified into either vehicles with the
positive meaning or those with the negative meaning.
We assume that meanings of metaphors result from the
semantic interaction between vehicles and topics. Since
meanings of the topics in our study are neutral, we
classify all the metaphorical expressions into those using
vehicles with neutral meanings, those using vehicles with
positive meanings or those using vehicles with negative
meanings.

= (1, N = 78) = 2.513, p > .05 (0 vs. -).
As for nominal metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the neutral meaning was the highest.
The result of Chi-square tests showed that the
metaphorical expressions (0) were significantly more than
the other expressions, χ² = (1, N = 19) = 15.211, p < .01
(0 vs. +); χ² = (1, N = 25) = 4.840, p < .05 (0 vs. -).
As for predicative metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the neutral meaning was the highest.
The result of Chi-square tests showed that the
metaphorical expressions (0) were significantly more than
the metaphorical expressions (+), χ² = (1, N = 19) = 0.154,
p < .01 (0 vs. +), and there was slightly significant
difference between the number of metaphorical
expressions (0) and that of (-), χ² = (1, N = 26) = 3.846, p
= .05 (0 vs. -).
As for adjective metaphors, on the other hand, the
proportion of the metaphors showing the negative
meaning was the highest. The result of Chi-square tests
showed that the metaphorical expressions (-) were
significantly more than the metaphorical expressions (+),
χ² = (1, N = 18) = 14.222, p < .01 (- vs. +). However,
there was no significant difference between the number of
expressions (0) and that of (-), χ² = (1, N = 27) = 1.815, p
> .05 (0 vs. -).
These results show that nominal metaphors and
predicative metaphors are basically affected by the
meaning of vehicles and tend to show neutral meanings,
while adjective metaphors show negative meanings.
The purpose of our study is to explore whether evoking
negative meanings is unique to adjective metaphors
through the comparison with nominal metaphors and
predicative metaphors. Thus we classified the metaphors
either into metaphors showing negative meanings or the
others and compared among the three types of metaphors,
as shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Number of expressions showing negative
meanings and the other meanings
+ or 0
sum
nominal metaphors
7
19
26
predicative metaphors
8
19
27
adjective metaphors
17
11
28
sum
32
49
81

Metaphors using vehicles with neutral meanings
Table 5 shows the number of metaphors which show the
positive, negative or neutral meanings when vehicles are
neutral.
Table 5: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are neutral
+
0
sum
nominal metaphors
1
7
18
26
predicative metaphors
1
8
18
27
adjective metaphors
1
17
10
28
Sum
3
32
46
81
As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their own have
neutral meanings, the proportion of the metaphors
showing the neutral meanings was the highest. As for the
total number, a chi-square test was conducted among the
expressions showing +, -, and neutral (0) meanings. As a
result, metaphorical expressions showing neutral
meanings (0) were observed significantly more frequently
than the metaphorical expressions showing positive
meanings (+), χ² = (1, N = 49) = 37.735, p < .01 (0 vs. +).
However, there was no significant difference between the
number of metaphorical expressions (0) and that of (-), χ²

Chi-square tests were conducted among the three types of
metaphors. The result showed that adjective metaphors
showed significantly more frequently negative meanings
than the other two types of metaphors, χ² = (1, N = 54) =
6.234, p < .05 for adjective metaphors vs. nominal
metaphors; χ² = (1, N = 55) = 5.357, p < .05 for adjective
metaphors vs. predicative metaphors.
The analyses of metaphors using vehicles with neutral
meanings showed that nominal metaphors and predicative
metaphors basically tend to show neutral meanings,
while adjective metaphors tend to show negative
meanings. The tendency that adjective metaphors show
negative meanings was clearly noticed by the Chi-square
tests among the three types of metaphors. Therefore, the
results of our analyses suggest that, unlike predicative and
nominal metaphors, adjective metaphors evoke negative
meanings when vehicles of their own have neutral
meanings.

Metaphors using vehicles with positive meanings
Table 7 shows the number of metaphors which show the
positive, negative and neutral meanings when vehicles are
positive.
As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their own

2658

have positive meanings, the proportion of the metaphors
showing positive meanings was the highest. As for the
total number, chi-square tests were conducted among the
expressions showing +, -, and neutral (0) meanings. As a
result, metaphorical expressions showing positive
meanings (+) were observed significantly more frequently
than the other metaphorical expressions, χ² = (1, N = 46)
= 28.174, p < .01 (+ vs. -); χ² = (1, N = 60) = 8.067, p
< .01 (+ vs. 0)
Table 7: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are positive
+
0
Sum
nominal metaphors
25
1
8
34
predicative metaphors
8
1
5
14
adjective metaphors
8
3
6
17
Sum
41
5
19
65
As for nominal metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the positive meaning was the highest.
The result of Chi-square tests showed that the positive
metaphorical expressions (+) were significantly more
than the other expressions, χ² = (1, N = 26) = 22.154, p
< .01 (+ vs. -); χ² = (1, N = 33) = 8.758, p < .01 (+ vs. 0).
As for predicative metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the positive meaning was the highest.
However, there were no significant difference among the
other types of metaphors, χ² = (1, N = 14) = 5.286, p
> .05.
As for adjective metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the positive meaning was the highest.
However, there was no significant difference among the
other metaphors, χ² = (1, N = 17) = 2.235, p > .05.
Furthermore, we classified all the metaphors either into
metaphors showing positive meanings or the others and
compared among the three types of metaphors, as shown
in Table 8.

showing negative meanings was the highest. As for the
total number, Chi-square test were conducted among the
expressions showing +, -, and neutral (0) meanings. As a
result, metaphorical expressions showing negative
meanings (-) were observed significantly more frequently
than the other metaphorical expressions, χ² = (1, N = 27)
= 23.148, p < .01 (- vs. +); χ² = (1, N = 33) = 10.939, p
< .01 (- vs. 0).
Table 9: Number of metaphors showing positive, negative
and neutral meanings when vehicles are negative
+
0
sum
nominal metaphors
0
0
0
0
predicative metaphors
1
14
4
19
adjective metaphors
0
12
3
15
sum
1
26
7
34
As for nominal metaphors, we couldn’t find metaphors
using vehicles which were rated negative by the
participants of the experiment.
As for predicative metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the negative meaning was the highest.
The result of Chi-square tests showed that the negative
metaphorical expressions (-) were significantly more than
the other expressions, χ² = (1, N = 15) = 11.267, p < .01 (vs. +); χ² = (1, N = 18) = 5.556, p < .05 (- vs. 0).
As for adjective metaphors, the proportion of the
metaphors showing the negative meaning was the highest.
The result of Chi-square tests showed that the negative
metaphorical expressions (-) were significantly more than
the other expressions, χ² = (1, N = 15) = 5.400, p < .05 (vs. 0).
We further classified all the metaphors either into
metaphors showing negative meanings or the others and
compared between predicative metaphors and adjective
metaphors, as shown in Table10.
Table 10: Number of expressions showing negative
meanings and the other meanings
+ or 0
sum
nominal metaphors
0
0
0
predicative metaphors
14
5
19
adjective metaphors
12
3
15
sum
26
8
34

Table 8: Number of expressions showing positive
meanings and the other meanings
+
- or 0
Sum
nominal metaphors
25
9
34
predicative metaphors
8
6
14
adjective metaphors
8
9
17
Sum
41
24
65
Although the proportion of nominal metaphors showing
positive meanings was the highest, Chi-square tests
showed that there was no significant difference among
nominal metaphors and the other metaphors, χ² = (1, N =
58) = 1.239, p > .05 for nominal metaphors vs.
predicative metaphors; χ² = (1, N = 51) = 3.477, p > .05
for nominal metaphors vs. adjective metaphors.
The results show that, as for vehicles with positive
meanings, the three types of metaphors tend to show
positive meanings. This result suggests that metaphors
using vehicles with positive meanings tend to be affected
by the meaning of vehicles. This tendency is consistent
with nominal and predicative metaphors using vehicles
with neutral meanings.

Metaphors using vehicles with negative meanings

Table 9 shows the number of metaphors which show the
positive, negative and neutral meanings when vehicles are
negative.
As for the metaphors in which vehicles of their own
have negative meanings, the proportion of the metaphors

The result of a Chi-square test showed that there was
no significant difference between predicative metaphors
and adjective metaphors, χ² = (1, N = 34) = .186, p > .05.
This result suggests that metaphors using vehicles with
negative meanings tend to be affected by the meaning of
vehicles. This tendency is the same with nominal and
predicative metaphors using vehicles with neutral
meanings and all the metaphors using vehicles with
positive meanings.

Discussion
In the study we analyzed whether evoking negative
meanings is the unique feature of adjective metaphors
through the comparison with nominal metaphors and
predicative metaphors. We revealed that meanings of
metaphors are basically affected by meanings of vehicles
and all types of metaphors using vehicles with positive
meanings tend to evoke positive meaning and all types of
metaphors using vehicles with negative meanings tend to
evoke negative meanings. However, as for the metaphors
in which vehicles of their own have neutral meaning,
adjective metaphors evoked negative meaning

2659

significantly more frequently than nominal metaphors and
predicative metaphors. Thus, our result was consistent
with Sakamoto & Utsumi (2009).
Furthermore, the result of our experiment indicates that
nominal metaphors tend to evoke meanings of vehicles of
their own more easily than the other metaphors. When
nominal metaphors evoke neutral meanings,, it may
difficult to judge whether
vehicles influence the
meanings of the nominal metaphors. However, when
vehicles have positive or negative meanings, nominal
metaphors tend to evoke respective meanings. Therefore,
we believe that nominal metaphor tend to be influenced
by the meanings of vehicles rather than topics.
We suggest that those differences among the three types
of metaphors come from different comprehension
processes of the three types of metaphors. Glucksberg and
his colleagues (Glucksberg, 2001; Glucksberg & Keysar,
1990) argue people comprehend nominal metaphors via a
categorization process. In the categorization process,
people understand nominal metaphors by seeing the target
concept as belonging to the superordinate metaphorical
category exemplified by the source concept. Supposing
that nominal metaphors are understood via a
categorization process, our result that nominal metaphors
tend to evoke meanings of vehicles of their own seems to
be reasonable, because in the categorization process
metaphorical meanings belong to the category
exemplified by meanings of vehicles. In other words, in
nominal metaphors using vehicles with neutral meaning,
metaphorical expressions evoke neutral meanings because
topics belong to category that was created by vehicles.
On the other hand, as for the mechanism of adjective
metaphors and predicative metaphors, Utsumi &
Sakamoto (2007) argue that the comprehension process of
adjective metaphors and predicative metaphors can be
explained as a two-stage categorization process. In the
case of “red voice” created from the neutral vehicle “red”,
for example, the adjective “red” first evokes an
intermediate category “red things” to which “blood”,
“fire”, “passion”, “apple” and “danger” typically belong.
Then exemplars relevant to the noun “voice” are selected
and they evoke a final abstract category of property like
“scary”, “screaming” and “dangerous”. In this way,
adjective metaphors and predicative metaphors are
understood by not be directly mapped onto the topics
from ad hoc category of vehicles but mediating to an
intermediate category. Therefore, supposing that adjective
metaphors and predicative metaphors are comprehended
in the two-stage categorization process, it seems to be
reasonable that, meanings of vehicles of those metaphors
do not directly affect meanings of metaphors and these
two metaphors, unlike nominal metaphors, have more
chances to evoke different meanings from meanings of
vehicles of their own.
However, the question why only adjective metaphors
tend to evoke negative meanings when meanings of
vehicles of their own have neutral meanings is left
unsolved. When meanings of adjective metaphors are
processed in the two-stage categorization process,
exemplars with negative meanings might be selected
among various exemplars belonging to the intermediate
category evoked by adjectives as vehicles.
Tsukurimichi, Sakamoto, Utsumi, & Nakamura (2010),
conducted a psychological experiment in which
participants were asked to choose words related to
meanings of adjective metaphors among those associated
from vehicles and topics. The result showed that words
selected as those related to meanings of metaphors tend to
have negative meanings. Therefore, their result suggests
that, even if there are negative and positive exemplars in
an intermediate category, exemplars with negative

meanings tend to be selected to process meanings of
adjective metaphors.
We still do not know why exemplars with negative
meanings are used to process meanings of adjective
metaphors. It is more mysterious that adjective metaphors
created from adjectives denoting ‘color’ evoke the most
negative meaning, which was shown by Sakamoto &
Utsumi (2009).

Conclusion
In this paper, we analyzed whether evoking negative
meanings is the unique feature of adjective metaphors
through the comparison with nominal metaphors and
predicative metaphors. We revealed that meanings of
metaphors were basically affected by meanings of vehicle.
However, as for the metaphors created from vehicles with
neutral meaning, adjective metaphors evoked negative
meaning significantly more frequently than nominal
metaphors and predicative metaphors. Our research raised
an interesting question why only adjective metaphors,
especially color metaphors, evoke negative meanings.

References
Amano, S., & Kondo, T. (1999). NTT database series
Nihongo-no Goi-Tokusei (Lexical properties of
Japanese) Vol. 1, Tokyo: Sanseido. (in Japanese).
Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychogical Review, 112(1), 193-216.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative
language: From metaphors to idioms. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychogical Review, 97, 3-18.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Martin, J. (1992). Computer understanding of
conventional metaphoric language. Cognitive Science,
16, 233-270.
Osgood, C. E. (1980). The cognitive dynamics of
synesthesia and metaphor. In R. P. Honeck & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds.), Cognition and figurative language (pp.
203-238). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sakamoto, M., & Utsumi, A. (2009). Cognitive effects of
synesthetic metaphors evoked by the semantic
interaction. In Proceeding of the 31st Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, 1593-1598.
Tsukurimichi, H., Sakamoto, M., Utsumi, A., Nakamura,
T. (2010). Experimental investigation of reasons why
synesthtic metaphors evoke negative meanings. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Japanese
Cognitive Science Society, 502-507.
Ullmann, S. (1951). The principles of semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Utsumi, A., Sakamoto, M. (2007). Computational
evidence for two-stage categorization as a process of
adjective metaphor comprehension. In Proceeding of
the 2nd European Cognitive Science Conference, 77-82.
Werning, M., Fleischhauer, J., & Beşeoğlu, H. (2006).
The cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors.
In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2365-2370.
Williams, J. M. (1976). Synesthetic adjectives: A possible
law of semantic change. Language, 52(2), 461-478.
Yamaguchi, T. (2003). Nihongo Dai-Thesaurus (Japanese
Thesaurus), Tokyo: Taishukan Shoten. (in Japanese).
Yu, N. (2003). Synesthetic metaphor: A cognitive
perspective. Journal of Literary Semantics, 32(1),
19-34.

2660

