UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is enriching static-simultaneous visualizations with motion-indicating arrows helpful for
learning about locomotion patterns?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5c7422b4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Imhof, Birgit
Scheiter, Katharina
Edelmann, Jorg
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is enriching static-simultaneous visualizations with motion-indicating arrows
helpful for learning about locomotion patterns?
Birgit Imhof (b.imhof@iwm-kmrc.de)
Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Jörg Edelmann (edelmann@gris.uni-tuebingen.de)
Julian von Ulardt (julian.von-ulardt@student.uni-tuebingen.de)
Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
In the current study, multiple static-simultaneous
visualizations were combined with motion-indicating arrows
and were compared either to multiple static-simultaneous
visualizations without arrows, which proved to be effective in
former studies concerning static visualizations, or to a single
static visualization enriched with motion-indicating arrows.
Seventy-one students were randomly assigned to the three
conditions. Learning outcomes were measured by pictorial
tests at three difficulty levels. Contrary to our expectations the
results showed that the combined condition (multiple staticsimultaneous visualizations with arrows) was worse than both
other conditions on the critical intermediate tests. Therefore,
it seems that multiple static-simultaneous visualizations
without any further enriching components and single static
visualizations with motion-indicators have their own
facilitating effects on fostering mental animation. These
effects are possibly caused either by supporting comparisons
among simultaneously presented multiple pictures or by
showing the dynamic information (more) explicitly and
thereby stimulating and guiding mental imagery of the
movements, respectively.
Keywords:
learning;
multiple
static-simultaneous
visualizations; enriching static visualizations; motionindicating arrows; spatial ability.

Learning about Locomotion Patterns
Learning about biological locomotion patterns is a task that
addresses a highly dynamic process rendering it essential to
acquire a correct understanding of the continuity of different
movements. Recognizing locomotion patterns is essential
for human beings, since a prolific interaction with the
environment relies on fast, exact interpretations of objects
and their movements (Chatterjee, Freyd, & Shiffrar, 1996).
The use of dynamic visualizations seems to be an
appropriate strategy to convey knowledge about locomotion
patterns (i.e., dynamic processes; e.g., Höffler & Leutner,
2007; Tversky, Bauer-Morrison, & Bétrancourt, 2002). The
option to explicitly depict changes over time and space in
dynamic visualizations offers learners the possibility to
directly observe the continuity of these changes (Lowe,
2003). Thus, there is no need for learners to infer changes,

as it would be the case with static pictures (cf. mental
animation; Hegarty, 1992). On the other hand, dynamic
visualizations may impose high perceptual and cognitive
demands onto learners. First, these demands are caused by
the transience of dynamic visualizations, where learners
have to keep previously shown information in memory to
integrate it with later information (e.g., Hegarty, 2004;
Lowe, 1999). Moreover, there are often several things going
on at the same time in dynamic visualizations and therefore
learners have to divide their attention among multiple
locations in the display. This is particularly a problem, if the
relevant aspects are not the most salient ones, because then
learners almost automatically may be distracted by other
salient, but irrelevant dynamic aspects (Lowe, 2003).
For these reasons, dynamic visualizations may sometimes
yield equal performance compared to static visualizations or
under specific circumstances static visualizations may even
prove to be superior (e.g., Mayer et al., 2005). One may
argue that static visualizations can be helpful for
understanding continuous changes, despite the fact that they
do not show these changes explicitly, if they are designed in
a way that facilitates mental animation (e.g., Paas, Van
Gerven, & Wouters, 2007). There are, at least, two different
possible solutions to facilitate mental animation in static
visualizations. Firstly, depicting multiple states by means of
multiple static pictures seems to be an adequate strategy to
present information in static visualizations in a way that
facilitates mental animation, because with multiple pictures
different positions of objects relevant for mentally
reconstructing the movements can be shown explicitly (e.g.,
Imhof et al., 2010). Information on these different positions
is likely to be required to infer the continuity by means of
interpolation between the depicted states of relevant objects
and their positions. Secondly, another strategy to facilitate
mental animation in static visualizations is to enrich them
with motion-indicating arrows (e.g., Münzer, Seufert, &
Brünken, 2009). This can be helpful to indicate the
continuous changes in static visualizations. Instead of
interpolating between different states, learners are
encouraged to extract and process the information of the

1176

arrows and to build a mental model concerning the indicated
dynamic processes.

Multiple Static(-Simultaneous) Visualizations
When using multiple static pictures one has to decide upon
their presentation format. One important issue is that the
static visualizations can vary with respect to the pictures’
sequentiality (cf. Lowe, Schnotz, & Rasch, 2010): They
may be presented either (a) sequentially, that is, one after
another at the same position on the screen so that earlier
pictures are replaced by later ones, or (b) simultaneously,
that is, all pictures next to each other together on one page.
The latter presentation format is the typical way of
presenting visualizations in static media such as textbooks.
In a static-simultaneous presentation the depicted
information remains visible on the screen. Therefore, this
presentation format allows for an interpolation between
states that is based on an external representation, where
comparisons among discrete steps are enabled. These
comparisons can be used to infer the changes between the
different positions of relevant objects, thereby potentially
facilitating mental animation. Moreover, in a staticsimultaneous presentation learners can regulate the pacing
of their cognitive processing by deciding when to move
their attention from one picture to another. However, no
spatial alignment of relevant objects is given in staticsimultaneous visualizations, which would be the case in
static-sequential visualizations because the relevant
elements are presented at almost identical spatial positions.
Former research showed that the sequentiality of multiple
static pictures influences how well mental animation is
supported by the respective visualizations. Multiple staticsimultaneous visualizations were shown to be as good for
learning a task that requires the correct understanding of
dynamic processes (i.e., locomotion pattern classification)
as dynamic ones, whereas learners with multiple staticsequential visualizations performed worse than those
studying dynamic visualizations (e.g., Imhof et al., 2010).
Moreover, the same results were shown in a mechanical
domain by Boucheix and Schneider (2009). Both findings
can be explained by the aforementioned benefits of multiple
static-simultaneous visualizations for supporting mental
animation. However, for tasks that do not require the correct
understanding of the dynamic processes (e.g., sorting tasks,
verbal comprehension tests) static-sequential visualizations
might be likely sufficient or even superior, as shown by
Lowe et al. (2010) or Kim et al. (2007). Nevertheless, our
previous research findings show that presenting multiple
static pictures simultaneously is an adequate strategy to
foster the task of classifying visual test stimuli in the
domain of learning about locomotion patterns.

Motion-Indicating Arrows
As aforementioned, a second compelling candidate for
conveying changes over time in static visualizations consists
in the provision of arrows (Heiser & Tversky, 2006).
Arrows add extra information to visualizations (Tversky et

al., 2008) and are often used to guide learners’ attention
(i.e., attention cueing; e.g., DeKoning et al., 2009).
However, arrows may not only function as pointers towards
specific elements in visualizations, but they can also be used
to convey information concerning motion of relevant
objects (translations; e.g., Bétrancourt, 2005). Tversky et al.
(2008) state that to indicate motions of objects an arrow is
the best alternative. This strategy of depicting arrows to
indicate the movements of the relevant objects can be
applied to static visualizations, thereby enriching static
visualizations with additional information (Münzer et al.,
2009). Motion-indicating arrows can stimulate the mental
animation process and also serve as guidance “through” the
motion that has to be processed. Potentially, once arrows are
provided, even single static pictures may be suited to
convey information concerning the motion of objects. In the
study of Münzer et al. (2009) enriched multiple static
visualizations outperformed static visualizations without
arrows as motion-indicators (particularly for learners with
high spatial abilities) in tests on process knowledge in a
biological domain. In line with this finding, we investigated
whether mental animation of locomotion patterns can be
supported by presenting motion-indicating arrows.
Furthermore, we directly investigated whether a
combination of multiple static-simultaneous visualizations
with motion-indicating arrows is even more effective than
enriching a single static visualization.
Beyond these design issues, recent research on learning
from visualizations has also shown that learner prerequisites
can affect the effectiveness of visualizations during learning
about locomotion patterns. In particular, learners’ spatial
ability may play a role, because the understanding of
biological locomotion patterns requires the processing of
spatial information and the processing of this information
requires spatial abilities.

The Role of Spatial Ability
Hegarty (1992) proposed that learners’ spatial ability plays a
role for the process of mental animation. Her empirical
evidence showed that learners with stronger spatial abilities
were better able to infer the motion of a pulley system based
on a single static visualization than learners with weaker
spatial abilities. These findings are confirmed by a recent
meta-analysis revealing that learners with higher spatial
abilities outperform learners with lower spatial abilities
during learning with visualizations (Höffler, 2010).
Accordingly, for the current study high spatial ability
learners were expected to outperform low spatial ability
learners in all three conditions.
Moreover, there is some evidence that spatial abilities
may moderate the effectiveness of learning with different
visualization formats. For instance, Hays (1996) showed in
a physics domain that low spatial ability learners
particularly benefited from learning with dynamic
visualizations compared to static ones or no visualizations
suggesting that these learners have fewer abilities to
mentally animate the dynamics based on static pictures.

1177

This also implies that learners with higher spatial ability
may compensate for “poor” instructions (i.e., visualizations
that do not support mental animation well), whereas learners
with lower spatial ability suffer from such instructions (cf.
ability-as-compensator hypothesis, Mayer & Sims, 1994;
see also Boucheix & Schneider, 2009; Höffler, 2010).
Accordingly, we assumed that benefits in favour of the
condition that combined multiple static-simultaneous
visualizations with arrows would be more pronounced for
learners with lower rather than higher spatial abilities during
learning how to recognize locomotion patterns.

Hypotheses
We assumed that the combination of multiple (staticsimultaneous) visualizations with (motion-indicating)
arrows would lead to superior learning outcomes than both
multiple (static-simultaneous) visualizations without
(motion-indicating) arrows, as well as single (static)
visualizations with (motion-indicating) arrows. Moreover,
we assumed that higher spatial ability would be associated
with better learning outcomes than lower spatial ability.
Furthermore, we assumed that benefits in favour of the
combined condition would be more pronounced for learners
with lower rather than higher spatial abilities during
learning how to recognize locomotion patterns, whereas we
did not hypothesize such a differentiation for the two other
conditions (multiple visualizations without arrows and
single visualization with arrows).

We developed highly realistic 3D-models of fish
performing the four to-be-learned locomotion patterns based
on which animations were rendered that were standardized
in terms of the spatial orientation, the background, and the
position of the fish and that included no miscellaneous
movements. A domain expert extracted the static pictures
used in this study from these animations to ensure that the
key states in the movement cycles are presented.
We varied the presentation format of the visualizations as
independent variable. In the multiple visualizations without
arrows condition nine static key pictures depicting the
whole movement cycles were presented in parallel in two
rows (cf. Imhof et al., 2010; see Figure 1 for an example).
They were arranged corresponding to the two important
phases of the locomotion patterns. To facilitate the
transition from the first to the second row, the fifth picture
was depicted twice, once as the last picture of the upper row
and once as the first picture of the lower row. The pictures’
sizes in the multiple visualization conditions (with and
without arrows) were 240 x 180 pixels. This size ensured
that all pictures fitted on the screen at once and thus, there
was no need to scroll a page.

Method
Participants and Design. We randomly assigned 71
university students (average age: 23.79 years, SD = 4.59; 46
female) from a German university to one of three
visualization conditions: multiple visualizations without
arrows vs. multiple visualizations with arrows vs. single
visualization with arrows. The students participated for
either payment (10 Euro) or course credit.
Materials. Participants were asked to learn how to classify
fish according to their locomotion patterns based on
visualizations. These locomotion patterns differed in terms
of the used body parts that generate propulsion (i.e., the
body itself or several fins) and also in the manner of how
these body parts are moving (i.e., wave-like or paddle-like).
The following four locomotion patterns were used in this
study: 1. subcarangiform: undulation of the body as a
whole; 2. balisitiform: undulation of the dorsal and anal
fins; 3. tetraodontiform: oscillation of the dorsal and the
anal fins (and possibly undulation of the pectoral fins); and
4. labriform: oscillation of the pectoral fins. One of the
major challenges in identifying these locomotion patterns is
that fish may deploy a variety of other movements in
addition, for instance, for navigation. These navigational
movements used by a fish displaying a specific propulsion
locomotion pattern can easily be confused with movements
used for propulsion in another locomotion pattern.

Figure 1: Spatial arrangement of the multiple staticsimultaneous pictures (positions indicated by numbers).
In the single visualization with arrow condition only the
first static key picture of each movement cycle was
presented and augmented with motion-indicating arrows
(see Figure 2). Undulating movements were indicated by
wavelike arrows above/below the respective body parts.
Oscillating movements were indicated by bent arrows,
whereby the bending corresponded to the trajectory of the
moving elements. The pictures’ size in the single static
visualization condition was 480 x 360 pixels.

Figure 2: Single static visualizations of the four to-belearned locomotion patterns with motion-indicating arrows
(from left: subcarangi-; balisti-; tetraodonti-; labriform).
In the combined condition (multiple visualizations with
arrows), we added the motion-indicating arrows to the first
picture (see Figure 3 for an example). The arrows were
depicted only on the first picture of the multiple

1178

visualizations to stimulate mental animation without
overloading the visual display.
During learning the participants saw visualizations for
each of the four to-be-learned locomotion patterns in a
predefined order within a multimedia learning environment.
The presentation was system-controlled and accompanied
by narration. The narration explained the locomotion pattern
in terms of conceptual characteristics: body parts involved,
kind of movements executed (undulation versus oscillation),
parameters of the movements (e.g., amplitude), maximum
velocity, and typical fish using this locomotion pattern. It is
important to note that the narration conveyed many aspects
that were not visible in the visualizations (e.g., maximum
velocity) and that would not have been sufficient to help
classify a fish according to its locomotion alone.

Figure 3: Multiple static-simultaneous visualization with
motion-indicating arrow on the first picture.
Measures. Learners’ spatial abilities were assessed with
two different tests, namely the mental rotation test (MRT,
Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978), and a shortened version of the
paper folding test (PFT, Ekstrom et al., 1976). Both
measures were used in the analyses as continuous factors.
Learning outcomes were assessed with a locomotion
pattern recognition test with 28 pictorial multiple-choice
items consisting in underwater videos of real fish
performing the locomotion patterns that had to be correctly
recognized. The dynamic test items differed from the static
learning materials with respect to fish species, color, and
body shape. Therefore, learners could not rely on these
characteristics to give the correct answer. Moreover,
because the test items consisted in videos of real fish, they
also contained irrelevant information and sometimes
miscellaneous movements of the fish that were not relevant
for propulsion. To choose for each item the kind of
locomotion pattern that was depicted, learners had to
identify the body parts relevant for propulsion and their way
of moving. Possible answers were the correct terms of the
four locomotion patterns and the additional answer “I don’t
know” (see Figure 4 for an example). Each item was
awarded one point for the correct answer (max. 28 points).
The recognition test items were categorized by two
independent domain experts into items with low (8 items),
intermediate (11 items), and high task difficulty (9 items).
Their decisions were based on the visibility of movements
relevant for propulsion as well as on the absence or presence
of miscellaneous movements that could have been mistaken
as being relevant for propulsion (cf. Imhof et al., 2010).

Figure 4: Screenshot of a recognition test example item
(correct answer: balistiform).
Procedure. Though participants worked on all parts of the
study individually, they were tested in groups of two to
seven persons. They were separated by partition walls. After
completing the MRT, PFT, and a demographic
questionnaire (all paper-based), participants read an
introduction, which was followed by the computer-based
learning phase, in which the participants heard the narration
via headphones. Finally, learners worked on the computerbased pictorial recognition test. One experimental session
lasted about one hour.

Results
Performance in the three recognition subtests was analyzed
by a MANCOVA with presentation format (multiple
visualizations without arrows versus multiple visualizations
with arrows versus single visualization with arrows), the
MRT, and the PFT as independent variables (for adjusted
means and standard errors see Table 1). Because of space
limitations, statistical values are only reported for
significant results.
Table 1: Adjusted means (and standard errors) for
recognition performance (in percent correct) as a function of
presentation format and task difficulty.
Presentation Format
multiple
multiple
single
visualizations visualization
Task
visualizations
Diffiwithout arrows
with arrows
with arrows
culty
(n = 24)
(n = 24)
(n = 23)
85.78
76.87
84.98
low
(4.02)
(3.94)
(4.06)
inter76.98
60.86
81.39
mediate
(4.31)
(4.23)
(4.35)
68.38
59.40
67.09
high
(4.58)
(4.48)
(4.62)
There was a marginal overall effect for presentation
format (Wilks λ = .82; p < .10) and for the PFT (Wilks λ =
.96; p < .10). Subsequent ANCOVAs revealed that there
was a main effect of presentation format only for items with
intermediate task difficulty (F(2,62) = 6.26, p < .01, η2 =
.17), which also were the items that proved to be the most
sensitive ones in former studies (Imhof et al., 2010).

1179

Contrary to our expectations, Bonferroni tests showed that
learners in the combined condition (multiple visualizations
with arrows) performed worse than both the multiple
visualizations without arrows condition (p < .05) and the
single visualizations with arrows condition (p < .01). There
were no differences between the latter two conditions.
Subsequent ANCOVAs revealed further that for
recognition tasks with low and intermediate task difficulty
higher performance in the PFT was associated with better
recognition (low difficulty: F(1,62) = 6.27, p < .05, η2 = .09;
intermediate difficulty: F(1,62) = 4.00, p < .05, η2 = .06).

Discussion
Contrary to our hypothesis that the combination of multiple
static-simultaneous visualizations with motion-indicating
arrows (combined condition) would lead to superior
learning outcomes than both other conditions we found that
both the multiple visualizations without arrows condition as
well as the single visualization with arrows condition were
better for learning about locomotion patterns than the
combined condition – as evident in the performance on
tasks with intermediate difficulty. Therefore, it seems that
the multiple visualizations without arrows as well as the
single visualization with arrows have their own facilitating
effects with respect to fostering mental animation.
In particular, the positive effects of the multiple
visualizations without any further enriching components and
the single visualizations with motion-indicating arrows for
tasks with intermediate difficulty might be caused either by
supporting comparisons among simultaneously presented
multiple pictures or by showing the dynamic information
(more) explicitly and thereby stimulating and guiding
mental imagery of the movements, respectively.
However, when combining these two approaches to foster
mental animation during learning about locomotion
patterns, interferences between competing processes seem to
occur, which may explain why learners in the combined
condition showed worse performance. Probably, learners
were somehow overloaded when they were stimulated by
the instructional materials to compare different key states in
multiple visualizations and to mentally imagine the
movements on the basis of an arrow at the same time. Eyetracking research on mental imagery shows that learners
tend to follow the imagined trajectories with their eyes (e.g.,
Johansson, Holsanova, & Holmqvist, 2006). But in doing
so, a learner can not switch his/her attention forth and back
at the same time on the relevant pictures for visual
comparison processes. Following Beck (1991) instructional
designers have to be careful when composing different
cueing strategies, because such combinations will not
always aid learning by complementing each other, even if
both strategies proved to be facilitating in isolation. The
results of our study suggest that this holds not only true
when combining different cueing strategies, but also when
combining cueing strategies with other instructional
approaches. Even though the arrows and the set of multiple
visualizations in principle convey the same information,

they do it differently and learners therefore might have had
problems to integrate these two elements of the visual
materials. An alternative explanation might be that the
learners did not notice that the arrows depicted the same
movements as the set of multiple visualizations even though
they were told about this fact in the instruction beforehand.
Interestingly, single visualizations with arrows – that is the
most parsimonious representation format – achieved the
same performance level as multiple static-simultaneous
visualizations. Accordingly, learners – when stimulated to
mentally animate an object by a motion-indicating arrow –
seem to be well able to achieve an understanding of the
dynamics even based on sparse information only.
However, this result pattern was only present for the tasks
with intermediate difficulty. For items with low task
difficulty a ceiling effect might have occurred. These items
seemed to be so clearly identifiable that learners from all
three experimental conditions achieved rather good results.
On the contrary, for items with high task difficulty the
locomotion patterns were not clearly identifiable based on
the perceptual input alone according to the experts’
opinions. Rather conceptual knowledge that might have
been acquired from the narration, which were identical in all
experimental conditions, had to be used to answer these
items. Thus, these items might not be sufficiently responsive
for manipulations of the perceptual input.
Our hypothesis that learners’ spatial ability would be
positively correlated with task performance was at least
partially confirmed, that is, for spatial abilities as measured
by the PFT, but not the MRT. This finding is well in line
with the recent meta-analysis by Höffler (2010). However,
the low spatial ability learners might have relied strongly on
the narration (particularly if they are challenged by the
visual inputs) to understand which elements are relevant for
propulsion. Thus, they had to infer from the visual input
only how these elements move. This might have helped
them to perform relatively well in all three conditions.
Accordingly, contrary to our expectations and former
results, we were not able to find the moderating effect of
learners’ spatial abilities concerning the effectiveness of
different presentation formats of visualizations. Therefore,
the assumed ability-as-compensator hypothesis that higher
spatial ability learners may compensate for “poor”
instructions (i.e., visualizations that do not support mental
animation well), whereas lower spatial ability learners suffer
from such instructions, could not be confirmed. It is worth
noting that the results suggest that the visualizations that
support mental animation well seem to be, contrary to our
expectations, the multiple visualizations without arrows and
the single visualization with arrows. Regarding the results,
the combined condition is the “poor” instruction in our data.
Seen from this angle, the combined condition does not
benefit from especially high spatial abilities as in the study
of Münzer et al. (2009). However, as the ability-ascompensator hypothesis has been shown in former research
exclusively for dynamic visualizations, it might not be too
surprising that we did not find evidence in this direction.

1180

To conclude, this study demonstrates that there are
several effective strategies, based on mental animation
facilitation, to stimulate perceptual processing of static
visualizations to support knowledge acquisition about
biological locomotion patterns. However, using more than
one supporting strategy might stimulate competing
processes, resulting in interferences that hinder learning.
Therefore, in further research one should put effort into
research on how to optimize the single strategies, instead of
combining these two approaches.

Acknowledgments
The study is part of a research project on the “resourceadaptive design of visualizations for supporting the
comprehension of complex dynamics in the Natural
Sciences” funded by the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft.

References
Beck C. R. (1991). Strategies for cueing visual information:
research findings and instructional design implications.
Educational Technology, 31, 16-20.
Bétrancourt, M. (2005). The animation and interactivity
principles. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), Handbook of
Multimedia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boucheix, J.-M., & Schneider, E. (2009). Static and
animated presentations in learning dynamic mechanical
systems. Learning and Instruction, 19, 112-127.
Chatterjee, S. H., Freyd, J. J., & Shiffrar, M. (1996).
Configural processing in the perception of apparent
biological motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 22, 916-929.
De Koning, B. B., Tabbers, H. K., Rikers, R. M. J. P., &
Paas, F. (2009). Towards a framework for attention
cueing in instructional animations: Guidelines for
research and design. Educational Psychology Review, 21,
113-140.
Ekstrom, R., French, J., Harmon, H., & Derman, D. (1976).
Manual for Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests.
Princeton: Educational Testing Service.
Hays, T. A. (1996). Spatial ability and the effects of
computer animation on short-term and long-term
comprehension. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 14, 139-155.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion
from static diagrams of mechanical systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18, 1084-1102.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning:
Getting to the difficult questions. Learning and
Instruction, 14, 343-351.
Heiser, J., & Tversky, B. (2006). Arrows in comprehending
and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science,
30, 581-592.
Höffler, T. N. (2010). Spatial ability: Its influence on
learning with visualizations—a meta-analytic review.
Educational Psychological Review, 22, 245-269.

Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional
animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis.
Learning and Instruction, 17, 722-738.
Imhof, B., Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Edelmann, J. (2010).
The role of dynamic visualizations and spatial layout of
static visualizations for learning how to classify
locomotion patterns. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 2039-2044). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Johansson, R., Holsanova, J., & Holmqvist, K. (2006).
Pictures and spoken descriptions elicit similar eye
movements during mental imagery, both in light and in
complete darkness. Cognitive Science, 30, 1053–1079.
Kim, S., Yoon, M., Whang, S., Tversky, B., & Morrison, J.
(2007). The effect of animation on comprehension and
interest. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 23, 260270.
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an
animation during complex visual learning. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: Selective
processing of information in dynamic graphics. Learning
and Instruction, 13, 157-176.
Lowe, R. K., Schnotz, W., & Rasch, T. (2010). Aligning
affordances of graphics with learning task requirements.
Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
n/a.
doi:
10.1002/acp.1712
Mayer, R. E., Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., & Campbell, J.
(2005). When static media promote active learning:
Annotated illustrations versus narrated animations in
multimedia
learning.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 11, 256-265.
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture
worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual-coding
theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 86, 389-401.
Münzer, S., Seufert, T., & Brünken, R. (2009). Learning
from multimedia presentations: Facilitation function of
animations and spatial abilities. Learning and Individual
Differences, 19, 481-485.
Paas, F., Van Gerven, P. W. M., & Wouters, P. (2007).
Instructional efficiency of animation: Effects of
interactivity through mental reconstruction of static key
frames. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 21, 783-793.
Tversky, B., Bauer-Morrison, J., & Bétrancourt, M. (2002).
Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Tversky, B., Heiser, J., Lozano, S., MacKenzie, R., &
Morrison, J. (2008). Enriching animations. In R. K. Lowe
& W. Schnotz (Eds.), Learning with animation: Research
and design implications. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations,
a group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.

1181

