UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
It’s around here: Residential history and the meaning of ‘Midwest’

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/831077mk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kapatsinski, Vsevolod
Janda, Richard

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

It’s around here: Residential history and the meaning of ‘Midwest’
Vsevolod Kapatsinski (vkapatsi@uoregon.edu)
Department of Linguistics, 1290 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403 USA

Richard Janda (rjanda@indiana.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Abstract
Even speakers of American English who think they grew up
in the Midwest do not agree on its boundaries. So what
determines the meaning of 'Midwest' to a given speaker? We
argue that the meaning of a geographical term like ‘Midwest’
is based in part on one's experience with locations that one
knows to be part of the region. This exemplar-based
knowledge causes the perceived location of the Midwest to
shift depending on where in the Midwest a respondent has
lived and to remain fixed in space over time despite changes
in features of exemplar locations. Nonetheless, regression
analyses suggest that exemplar knowledge, when available,
coexists with more abstract definitional knowledge. We
believe that empirical studies of meanings of geographical
terms can shed light on the nature of human semantic
categories and the role of specific exemplars in semantic
representation.
Keywords: Semantics, cognitive maps, exemplar models,
vernacular regions, perceptual geography.

Introduction
Every American English speaker has heard of the Midwest.
It is visited by politicians, discussed by pundits and weather
forecasters, and even appears commonly in cognitive
science articles on “students at a Midwestern university”.
Yet, the location of the region is surprisingly elusive. The
question we ask is what determines the location of the
Midwest for a particular speaker. Why does the meaning of
'Midwest' vary across speakers and what factors account for
this variation?
The classical approach to lexical semantics, dating back
to Aristotle, has maintained that word meanings can be
defined using necessary and sufficient conditions.
According to this view, semantic categories have distinct
boundaries. This, at the time dominant, view of semantics
was explicitly challenged in the seventies by several
linguists and psychologists, including Labov (1973),
McCloskey & Glucksberg (1978), and Rosch (1973), who
showed that category boundaries of natural concepts can be
fuzzy. For instance, Labov (1973) found that there is no
agreed-upon ratio of width to height at which cups become
mugs. McCloskey & Glucksberg (1978) demonstrated that
uncertainty about category boundaries can also hold within
speakers. These studies have been extremely influential in
initiating a shift from feature-based descriptions of semantic

categories to exemplar, prototype, and connectionist models
(see Murphy 2002, Taylor 1995 for reviews).
In recent work, it has become apparent that categories
vary in the fuzziness of their boundaries depending, in
particular, on whether the category consists of artifacts or
organisms (Diesendruck & Gelman 1999, Estes 2003). We
believe that the range of lexical meanings under discussion
in the psychological and linguistic literatures has been
unduly restricted. Differences between categories of
organisms and categories of artifacts are interesting but
difficult to explain because organisms differ from artifacts
in a myriad ways.
An interesting additional class of concepts to consider is
the class of locations/regions, such as “the Midwest”, or
“the neighborhood”. Categories of locations vary greatly in
how they are acquired and defined, with some having clear
boundaries (e.g., the United States), and others having very
fuzzy ones (e.g., the Midwest). Thus, boundary fuzziness is
not a property of domains (pace Diesendruck & Gelman
1999 and Estes 2003) but rather a property of individual
concepts, likely due to how these concepts are acquired and
how much hinges on getting the boundary right. If a
category is acquired completely implicitly through the
accumulation of exemplars, its boundaries are likely to be
fuzzy, whereas a category that is learned by memorizing a
definition can have clear boundaries (as long as the defining
attributes of the category are easily identifiable, cf.
Armstrong et al. 1983). Furthermore, multiple sources of
knowledge can combine, resulting in a concept that is
neither completely exemplar-based nor completely featurebased. We argue that the meaning of “Midwest” for a given
listener can be influenced by his/her experience with
specific exemplar Midwestern locations, the literal
interpretation of the word, and the official definition of the
region. Geographical terms offer distinctive advantages in
exploring the relationship between experience and concept
formation because people are aware of the locations they
have lived in and can easily describe them (unlike the
specific artifacts or organisms they have seen).
While never discussed in linguistics or psychology, the
perceived locations of geographical regions have been
studied by cultural geographers, starting with Brownell
(1960). Jordan (1978: 293) defines perceptual or vernacular
regions as “those perceived to exist by their inhabitants and
other members of the population at large… Such regions are

2983

composites of the mental maps of the population.” Brownell
(1960) and Shortridge (1985, conducted in 1980) studied the
perceived location of the Midwest by asking postmasters in
and around the traditional Midwest (Brownell) and college
students across the United States (Shortridge) to mark the
Midwest on a map, the method we also rely on.

Methods
Each student in our introductory linguistics classes was
asked to distribute blank maps of the 48 contiguous states
with state boundaries to three of his/her acquaintances. They
were asked to only distribute the materials to native English
speakers who grew up in the US. The respondents were
asked: “Write an M in any state that is at least partly in the
Midwest; then circle any of these M’s that are in a state
which is completely in the Midwest.” The students were
instructed to give the same instructions to all respondents
and to avoid being drawn into a discussion of where the
Midwest is (supposed to be). After a respondent has marked
up their map (and possibly list of states), the students
collected from them states s/he has lived in for more than a
year and the state(s) s/he grew up in.
Complete datasets were collected from 470 acquaintances
of students at Indiana University and 458 acquaintances of
students at the University of Oregon. We were concerned
that the observed variation may to some extent be due to the
respondents being unable to locate states on a map.
Therefore 294 Oregon respondents were presented with both
a map and an alphabetic list of states (formatted in two
columns). Some (N=163) respondents filled out the map
first, while others (N=131) filled out the list first. Each
student was instructed to use each order of presentation with
at least one respondent. The data were analyzed using R (R
Core Development Team, 2008). The maps are generated
using the ‘maps’ package in R.

Where Should the Midwest Be?
The Official Midwest
Officially, the Midwest has clear boundaries, which are
defined by the Census Bureau as shown in Figure 1
(http://www.census.gov/geo/www/us_regdiv.pdf).

Figure 1: The official definition of Midwest according to the
US Census Bureau.

The Self-Identified Midwest
Reed (1976) introduced the idea of locating perceptual
regions by searching telephone directories of various cities
for businesses named after the region (e.g., Midwest Auto
Body), which was applied to the Midwest by Zelinsky

(1980). The crucial assumption is that there is no reason to
name a business, e.g., Midwest Plumbing, if one does not
believe it to be located in the Midwest.1 This provides a way
to find a kind of “ground-truth definition” of the Midwest
by locating the places whose inhabitants believe themselves
to live in the Midwest, and to determine whether or not this
belief is shared by our respondents.
For most states, we took the largest city. For Oklahoma,
we took Tulsa rather than Oklahoma City because a suburb
of Oklahoma City is called “Midwest City” so using it
would have inflates Midwesternness of Oklahoma, which is,
in any case, higher than official definitions suggest. In the
case of New York and Pennsylvania, we took the western
cities of Buffalo and Pittsburgh rather than New York City
and Philadelphia because Pittsburgh and Buffalo are
suggested by some to be in the Midwest. Nonetheless, New
York and Pennsylvania clearly did not fall into the Midwest
category. For Texas, we took Dallas, which is closer to the
official Midwest than Houston or Austin.
Since larger cities are expected to have more businesses,
and some states have larger cities, we needed some way to
normalize the counts. We tried three ways: 1) searching for
“businesses loc: <city name>” on Google maps
(http://maps.google.com), 2) retrieving city population
estimates from Wikipedia (http://wikipedia.org), and 3)
retrieving the number of businesses containing the name of
the city in their name from yellowbook.com. The three ways
of normalizing produced similar results (with rank
correlations between .92 and .94). The main difference
concerns northern plains states that do not have big cities:
Montana, Wyoming and the Dakotas. These states receive
high Midwesternness scores with normalization by
population or number of businesses on Google maps but
relatively low scores with normalization by number of
businesses containing the city name.
We were able to find a natural cut-off (one that
corresponds to a clear break in the distribution) on
proportion of business names featuring the word Midwest
that corresponds quite closely to the official definition of the
region, with a few exceptions (Figure 2). One exception is
Oklahoma, which is not officially part of the Midwest but
appears to belong to the Midwest as much as do Ohio,
Kansas or Michigan based on the business directory (also
Brownell 1960). The other exception is Kentucky: the major
city of Kentucky, Louisville, is just across the river from
officially Midwestern Indiana, and clearly seems to consider
itself as much a part of the Midwest as does Detroit, which
is officially in the Midwest. Taking the converse
perspective, Midwestern identity appears to be much less
prominent in Michigan and Ohio than in more western
states of the official Midwest (in agreement with Zelinsky
1980). These data already suggest that the boundaries of the
Midwest are fuzzier than they appear on the Census map. As
Midwesterners settle the neighboring regions, they bring the
1

We are assuming that the prestige of all things Midwestern is
not high enough for those outside of the Midwest to pursue an aura
of Midwesternness in naming their businesses.

2984

Midwest with them, expanding the region whose inhabitants
think of themselves as being in the Midwest.

Figure 2: Left: Proportion of businesses with Midwest in the
name relative to the number of business names containing
the local city name (YellowBooks nromalization). These are
the scores we used in regressions. Right: The smallest set of
states with the highest proportion of Midwest names that
includes all officially Midwestern states.

Midwest for Hoosiers
Figure 3 shows the data for our Indiana respondents
(Hoosiers). More than 90% of the respondents agree that
Indiana and Illinois are at least partially in the Midwest.
Agreement rates are much lower for the other states,
indicating a high degree of variation: the Midwesternness
rate is 70% for Ohio, Missouri and Iowa, 60% for Michigan
and Wisconsin, and 50% for Kentucky, which officially
does not belong to the Midwest (though, according to our
business directory data as well as Brownell 1960, its
inhabitants that live near the Indiana border appear to
disagree). The other officially Midwestern states have even
lower Midwesternness scores. Thus the meaning of Midwest
for Hoosiers does not correspond to the official definition of
Midwest and appears to center on Indiana, which the
respondents know to be in the Midwest.

Residential History Effect
Figure 4 compares the meanings of Midwest for those who
have grown up in Indiana (N=284), Illinois (N=51), and
Ohio (N=13). Comparing those who grew up in Illinois to
those who grew up in Indiana, we can note that the states
that border Illinois but not Indiana (Iowa, Missouri and
Minnesota) are darker/more Midwestern for respondents
who grew up in Illinois while Ohio and Kentucky, which
border Indiana but not Illinois, are considered more
Midwestern by those who grew up in Indiana. Ohioans, who
come from the very east of the Midwest, have a rather
different notion of the Midwest in that the most prototypical
Midwestern states for them are Indiana and Ohio rather than
Illinois, unlike for those who grew up in Illinois or Indiana.
Western Midwest states, like Iowa and Missouri are
assigned to the Midwest by Ohioans much less often than by
Hoosiers and especially Illinoisans.

IN:

IL:

OH:
Figure 4: The Midwest for Hoosiers who have grown up in
Indiana (IN), Illinois (IL), and Ohio (OH).

Figure 3: The Midwest for Hoosiers. Top: taking ‘partially
in the Midwest’ = 0.5, ‘completely in the Midwest’ = 1, ‘not
in the Midwest’ = 0. Bottom: Red = “completely in the
Midwest”; Blue = “only partially in the Midwest”; Black =
“not in the Midwest”.

We can test the effect of residential history on the
meaning of Midwest by comparing perceived differences in
Midwesternness between states that are around the
respondents’ residences. Thus, we ask: if residential history
had the expected effect, which states would be more likely
to be assigned to the Midwest by, for instance, Ohioans
compared to Illinoisans and which ones would be more
likely to be assigned to the Midwest by Illinoisans? For
Ohioans we took this to be Ohio and the states that are
adjacent to Ohio but not Illinois while for Illinoisans it
would be Illinois and states that are adjacent to Illinois but
not Ohio. Then we can compare Ohioans to Illinoisans on
the differences in perceived Midwesternness scores between

2985

states expected to be more Midwestern for Illinoisans and
states expected to be more Midwestern for Ohioans:
(MWness{IL;MO;IA;MN}-MWness{OH;MI;WV;PN})IL
(MWness{IL;MO;IA;MN}-MWness{OH;MI;WV;PN})OH. For Ohio vs.
Illinois, we obtain t(17)=6.22, p=.000008; for Indiana vs.
Illinois, we obtain t(86)=5.44, p=.0000005; for Ohio vs.
Indiana, t(13)=3.52, p=.004. This provides strong evidence
for the hypothesis that one’s notion of the Midwest depends
on where in the Midwest one has lived.

travels on the edge of the Midwest. The map predicted by
our model is shown in Figure 5. As seen in Figure 5,
residential history is especially helpful in predicting the high
Midwesternness of Kentucky and Indiana and the relatively
low scores for states in the west of Midwest.

Modeling Midwesternness
We modeled Midwesternness of a state as judged by
Hoosiers using a linear combination of 1) whether the state
is officially in the Midwest, 2) the proportion of businesses
that have Midwest in the name; 3) overlap with the middle
third of the West (Mississippi to the West Coast) of the US
in the East-West direction; 4) overlap with the middle third
of the West in the North-South direction; 5) for officially
Midwestern states, the number of respondents who have
lived in the state; and 6) for states that are either officially
Midwestern or neighboring a Midwestern state, the number
of respondents who have lived in adjacent officially
Midwestern states. The regression accounts for 94% of the
variance in scores among states. Predictors having to do
with the official and “ground truth” notions of the Midwest
(1, 2) are highly significant: t(1,41)=5.15, p<.00001 and
t(1,41)=3.7, p=.0006 respectively. Overlap with the middle
of the West is relatively unimportant: East-West centrality
has no significant effect (t(1,41)=-1.21). North-South
centrality tends towards significance but is at most a minor
effect (t(1,41)=1.96, p=.056).
The residential history variables (5, 6) are very important,
improving the predictiveness of the model (F(2,41)=46.31,
p=.00000000004) from 79% of the variance accounted for
to 94% (t(1,41)=4.64 and 8.34 respectively, both p<.0001).
These results confirm the strong influence of residential
history on whether or not a state is assigned to the Midwest:
officially Midwestern states tend to be assigned to the
Midwest if the respondent has lived in that state; officially
non-Midwestern states may be assigned to the Midwest if
the respondent has lived in a neighboring Midwestern state.
Importantly, replacing the number of respondents that have
lived in neighboring Midwestern states with an indicator of
whether or not the state neighbors officially Midwestern
states does not work as well (the resulting model accounts
for 80% of the variance, barely more than the 79%
accounted for by the model that does not include the “is the
state neighbor to Midwestern states” variable).
Again, the location of the Midwest for Midwesterners is
based on where in the Midwest they have lived. It is also
encouraging that our objective measure of state
Midwesternness contributes to explaining the subjects’
judgments: their judgments appear to be based not simply
on the official definition of the Midwest but are also in
agreement with the “ground truth”, which the respondents
may discover in their interactions with people from various
locations at the edges of the official Midwest and in their

Figure 5: The Midwest for Hoosiers as predicted by
residential history of the respondents alone (top), the other
predictors alone (middle) and the full regression model
(bottom).

Midwest for Oregonians
What then would one’s notion of the Midwest be like if one
has not lived in the Midwest? Figure 6 shows what the
Midwest means for Oregonians. Oregon, being on the West
Coast, is not considered to be part of the Midwest by
Oregonians (Portland, the main city of Oregon, has no
businesses with Midwest in the name). Figure 6 shows data
both for subjects who were presented with a blank map (like
the Hoosiers) and those presented with a list of states (in
alphabetical order). The maps are markedly different from
the ones obtained for Hoosiers: the entire Midwest is shifted
west, with the most Midwestern state being Iowa, rather
than Illinois or Indiana. The much flatter distribution of
darkness across states indicates lower certainty about which
states are vs. are not part of the Midwest. Both uncertainty
and the westward shift are especially high for respondents
who have not lived in the Midwest. The results do not
appear to result from the respondents being unable to locate
states on the map because respondents presented with a list
show qualitatively very similar behavior. The maps are
almost identical to the one reported by Shortridge (1985) for
New Yorkers. Thus the westward shift appears to be
characteristic of non-Midwesterners, rather than WestCoasters.

2986

minority are in agreement with where the Midwest is
“supposed to be”.

A

C

B

D
PC1 < -1

-1 < PC1 < 1.8

Figure 6: The Midwest for Oregon respondents who have
not lived in the Midwest (A-B) and Oregon respondents
who have lived in the Midwest (C-D). Data from map
marking (A, C) and list marking (B, D).
The location of the Midwest for an Oregonian who has lived
in the Midwest also depends on where in the Midwest s/he
has lived. The fit of the linear regression model is improved
from an R2 of 88% to 96% by inclusion of the residential
history variables (F(2,41)=20.07, p=.0000008). However,
the alternative model that excludes residential history but
includes whether or not a state borders officially
Midwestern states accounts for 94% of the variance in the
Oregonian data, suggesting that the role of residential
history for the Oregonians is, though significant
(F(1,41)=18.4, p=.0001), relatively minor, compared to the
role of residential history for Midwesterners (accounting for
2% vs. 14% of the variance).
The official location of the Midwest is influential for
Oregonians (t(1,41)=4.78, p=.00002 for all Oregonians,
t(1,41)=6.71, p=.000006 for those who have lived in the
Midwest), like for Hoosiers. However, unlike in the Indiana
data, there is a tendency to locate the Midwest in the middle
of the West, especially for Oregonians who have not lived
in the Midwest (overlap with middle third of the region East
to West, t(1,41)=5.37, p=.000003 for all Oregonians;
t(1,41)=2.53, p=.015 for those who have lived in the
Midwest; North to South, t(1,41)=4.06, p=.0002 for all
Oregonians, t(1,41)=4.56, p=.00005 for those who have
lived in the Midwest). Finally, Oregonians who have not
lived in the Midwest do not display sensitivity to the
“ground truth” definition of the Midwest (t(1,41)=2.08,
p=.04 for Oregonians who have lived in the Midwest,
t(1,41)=1, p=.32, n.s. for all Oregonians). Thus, only those
who have lived in the Midwest are sensitive to whether
residents of places at the edges of the official Midwest
consider themselves a part of it.
Unlike for Hoosiers, there are distinct groups of
Oregonians with different Midwests. Individual differences
among them are well described by a single principal
component, which shows distinct clustering (Figure 7).
Respondents low on the principal component seem to
interpret the Midwest as the middle of the West, the vast
majority of Oregonians treat all states that are not on a coast
or in the Old South as being Midwestern, while a small

PC1 > 1.8

Figure 7: Top: Oregonians fall into distinct groups of
respondents. Some locate the Midwest in the middle of the
west, some off the coast, and some where it is officially.

The Changing Midwest
While not drawing attention to the cognitive implications of
the findings, Shortridge (1985) addressed the location of the
Midwest using similar methods (by asking college students
to circle the Midwest on a map of the US showing state
names and boundaries). Like us, Shortridge (1985) observed
that the location of the Midwest varies for respondents from
different locations. In particular, “Respondents from…
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota,
South Dakota, and Wisconsin saw themselves at the core of
the Middle West…” (Shortridge 1985: 50).2 This is
consistent with our finding that the Midwest for a
Midwesterner tends to be centered on one’s home state.
However, in 1980, “residents of… Indiana, Michigan, and
Ohio… included their states within the Middle West region
but… accorded equal or greater Middle West status to states
farther west. Indiana and Michigan residents indicated that
the regional core lay several hundred miles beyond their
western borders; Ohio people displaced the core about 500
miles” (Shortridge 1985: 51). This is no longer the case
(Figure 4).
Shortridge (1985: 49) attributes the relatively low
Midwesternness of Indiana, Ohio, and Michigan to a
mismatch between prototypical features of Midwestern
locations, rural life and farming, and the relatively high
population density and industrialization of the eastern
2
Cf. also a quote from a Missouri postmaster reported by
Brownell (1960: 84): "We resent people from Ohio and Indiana
referring to themselves as 'Midwesterners' as actually they are
'Mideasterners'..."

2987

Midwest: “eastern sections became heavily urbanized and
industrialized. Rather than changing a valued regional
image to fit this reality… people have shifted the regional
core westward.”3
In the past thirty years, the Midwestern identity of home
locations has been reasserted for residents of eastern
Midwest. This suggests that the features of a prototypical
Midwestern location are not as important as the labels
attached to the locations one is familiar with. This is
expected on an exemplar account of the term’s semantics,
where it is experience with the features of specific
Midwestern locations that gives rise to one’s idea of the
Midwest. As features of familiar locations known to be part
of the Midwest change, the prototypical Midwest changes.
The seeds of change are in fact already observable in
Shortridge’s data: residents of eastern Midwest reported
industry to be characteristic of the Midwest while residents
of the Great Plains reported the Midwest to be
predominantly rural, with outsiders being in between the
two groups of Midwesterners (Shortridge 1985: 53).

Conclusion
Geographical terms, like Midwest, provide a valuable
window on the nature of lexical semantic representations,
and should be taken into account by theories of
semantics/conceptualization. In particular, they allow the
investigator to easily examine the influence of experience
with specific exemplars of a category (locations) on the
mental representation of the category (region) itself.
The present data suggest that exemplars play a powerful
role in semantic representations when they are available. At
least for geographical terms (and perhaps, terms that don’t
have overtly negative connotations), the exemplar category
assignments can remain stable across generations while the
features of those exemplars change. Stability of exemplarcategory mappings coupled with the possibility of change in
exemplar features results in changes in prototypical features
of the category. In the case of the Midwest, different
speakers of English experience very different exemplars of
Midwestern locations, resulting in very different notions of
where typical Midwestern locations are and what
Midwestern locations are like. Speakers are like blind men
exploring an elephant: those who are close to the trunk may
think an elephant is like a snake while those close to a leg
may think it’s like a tree.
As important as exemplars are, they are not all there is to
the semantic representation of a regional term. Regression
analyses indicate that Midwest is not completely exemplarbased for any of the speaker populations we studied.
Finally, those from outside of the region, lacking experience
with exemplars of the Midwest have to rely on interpreting
the word literally or on identifying Midwestern locations by
matching their perceived features to those thought to be
characteristic of the Midwest. This highlights that
3
Note that Shortridge (1985) actually had no evidence for a
“shift” since his data were entirely synchronic.

characteristics of semantic representations can vary
drastically even within a domain depending on how the
concept is acquired. In fact, the meaning of the very same
word can be exemplar-based to different degrees for
different speakers of the same language.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to the students in Fall 2009 Linguistics 103 at
Indiana University, Winter 2010 Linguistics 390 and Spring
2010 Linguistics 150 at the University of Oregon for
collecting the data, Prakaiwan Vajrabhaya for assigning the
data collection to her class, Grant Smith for coding some of
the data, and Melissa Redford for helpful feedback.

References
Armstrong, S. L., L. R. Gleitman, & H. Gleitman. (1983).
What some concepts might not be. Cognition, 13, 263308.
Brownell, J. (1960). The cultural Midwest. Journal of
Geography, 59, 81-85.
Diesendruck, G., & S. A. Gelman. (1999). Domain
differences in absolute judgments of category
membership: Evidence for an essentialist account of
categorization. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 33846.
Estes, Z. (2003). Domain differences in the structure of
artifactual and natural categories. Memory & Cognition,
31, 199-214.
Jordan, T. G. (1978). Perceptual regions in Texas.
Geographical Review, 68, 293-307.
Labov, W. (1973). The boundaries of words and their
meanings. In C. J. Bailey & R. Shuy (Eds.), New ways of
analyzing variation in English. Washington: Georgetown
University Press.
McCloskey, M. E., & S. Glucksberg. (1978). Natural
categories: Well-defined or fuzzy sets. Memory &
Cognition, 6, 462-72.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
R Core Development Team. (2008). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Reed, J. S. (1976). The heart of Dixie: An essay in folk
geography. Social Forces, 54, 925-39.
Rosch, E. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and
semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive
development and the acquisition of language. New York:
Academic Press.
Shortridge, J. R. (1985). The vernacular Middle West.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 75,
45-57.
Taylor, J. R. (1995). Linguistic categorization: Prototypes
in linguistic theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zelinsky, W. (1980). North America’s vernacular regions.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 70,
1-16.

2988

