UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Joint Action Theory and Pair Analytics: In-vivo Studies of Cognition and Social Interaction in
Collaborative Visual Analytics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wh394vp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Arias-Hernandez, Richard
Kaastra, Linda T.
Fisher, Brian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Joint Action Theory and Pair Analytics: In-vivo Studies of Cognition and Social
Interaction in Collaborative Visual Analytics
Richard Arias-Hernandez (ariasher@sfu.ca)
Simon Fraser University, SIAT, 250 - 13450 – 102 Avenue
Surrey, BC, V3T 0A3 CANADA

Linda T. Kaastra (lkaastra@magic.ubc.ca)
University of British Columbia, MAGIC, FSC 3640 - 2424 Main Mall,
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4 CANADA

Brian Fisher (bfisher@sfu.ca)
Simon Fraser University, SIAT, 250 - 13450 – 102 Avenue
Surrey, BC, V3T 0A3 CANADA
Abstract

Imagine a scenario in which two data analysts share a
computer screen and jointly work on the analysis of air
traffic data. The layout of the screen contains several
frames. Each one with a different visual representation of
data for a commercial airline: a map, a table, and a bar
graph. One of the analysts notices a salient bump in the bar
graph and the following interaction unfolds:

Herbert H. Clark’s Joint Action Theory (JAT) has been
groundbreaking for understanding the social and cognitive
mechanisms that allow people to effectively coordinate joint
actions in conversational, face-to-face settings. Using a
method we call “Pair Analytics,” we have extended the
application of JAT to the study of analytical reasoning in
computer-mediated, human-to-human interactions. Pair
analytics (PA) sets a naturalistic scenario in which the social
and cognitive role of human-human and human-computer
interactions can be studied. In this paper, we support the
claim that coupling JAT and PA is an effective research
strategy to capture and study three socio-cognitive
phenomena in collaborative visual analytics: (1) structuring
and navigation of joint analysis; (2) management of joint
attention; (3) and signaling of cognitively demanding tasks.

Ben: Look at this [Ben moves the mouse and places it on the bar in the
chart that corresponds to “December”]
Anna: well, it’s December. You would expect a peak in air traffic.

Keywords: Joint Action Theory, Pair Analytics, Visual
Analytics, Analytic Reasoning.

Introduction
Joint Action Theory, Herbert H. Clark’s theory of language
in use (Clark, 1996), is a well-established psycholinguistic
framework that has been very effective in bridging social
and cognitive understandings of human communication.
One of its basic tenets is that conversational, face-to-face,
interaction is the foundation of human communication and
language. Clark strongly criticizes theories of language that
depart from this foundation by overemphasizing unilateral,
cognitive, technological, or computational accounts that do
not build upon the basic social structure of interaction that
allowed language to emergence: face-to-face interaction.
From a strong foundation on this theory of language, we
have begun to expand the scope of Joint Action Theory
from human-to-human interaction toward computermediated, human-to-human interaction. Our emphasis is on
the use of Graphical User Interface (GUI) objects and
Human-Computer Interactions (HCI) as gestures by which
people mean things for others (Clark, 2005). The best way
to illustrate this is with one example.

In this interaction, Ben uses a deictic expression (“this”) that
requires attention to a specific referent on one of the visual
representations of the data. In regular face-to-face
conversation, deictic expressions are commonly used by
speakers, along with non-verbal signals, such as finger or
head pointing, to direct the attention of listeners to the
referent implicit in the utterance (Clark, 2003). In our
example, Ben uses the mouse as a pointing device to
visually direct the attention of Anne to the exact place in the
GUI where the object of the deictic expression can be
identified without ambiguity. This behavior, equivalent to
finger pointing, makes use of the mouse as a communicative
on-screen gesture rather than as an input device of a humancomputer interaction. In fact, the smaller size of the mouse
pointer makes it more effective than using finger pointing to
direct attention to a specific bar on a common 23-inch
computer screen. The mouse-pointer is small enough not to
block the general view of the bar graph or to point to more
than one bar at a time. According to Clark’s theory, this
specific behavior uses an object of the GUI, the mouse, as a
“material signal” (Clark, 2005), or as we refer to it in this
paper, as a communicative “on-screen gesture.” We claim
that on-screen gestures are some of the most effective
linguistic mechanisms that humans use to coordinate
collocated,
computer-mediated,
human-to-human
interactions. On-screen gestures, just as body gestures
(Clark & Brennan, 1991), reduce the number of words and
interactions that otherwise would be needed to communicate

3244

Pair Analytics

the same idea making communication less ambiguous and
more effective.
This understanding of HCI in the context of human-tohuman communication makes evident that interactive GUI
components can potentially serve psycho-linguistic
functions that have not been explored and are not currently
well understood in the visual analytics domain. This paper
presents an initial attempt to breach this gap by exploring
the role of on-screen gesturing in three socio-cognitive
phenomena of collaborative visual analytics: (1) structuring
and navigation of joint analysis; (2) management of joint
attention; (3) and signaling of cognitively demanding tasks.

Joint Action Theory and Pair Analytics
Joint Action Theory
Joint Action Theory (JAT) is a structured, socio-cognitive,
theory of “language in use” developed by Herbert H. Clark
(1996). For Clark, language use is an instantiation of a
broader class of human practices: joint actions. In joint
actions, individual participatory actions have to be
coordinated to produce the intended effect. This implies
coordinating content –what the participants intend to do, and
coordinating process –how the participants effectively
coordinate their individual actions to produce the desired
joint effect. From this perspective, language in use is
understood as a social process rather than as a mere
exchange of information between speakers and listeners. For
example, as a social process, the design of utterances is
better approached as a participatory process that does not
depend solely on the individual cognition and actions of the
speaker but also on the cognition and gestures produced by
the listener. When a speaker detects a facial gesture from the
listener indicating confusion in the middle of an utterance,
the speaker proceeds to elaborate or rephrase her wording
without even waiting for an explicit, verbal request. Thus
the construction of the utterance is better approached as a
joint action between speaker and listener rather than the
solely action of a speaker (Clark & Krych, 2004). The
mechanisms that allow communication to be effective and
reduce ambiguity and confusion are the result of a sociocultural evolution of human language that has selected the
most effective ones. Clark argues that humans constantly
employ these mechanisms to solve coordination problems in
joint actions (e.g. turn-taking, accounting for delays,
navigating joint actions, mutual monitoring of
understanding, sustaining joint attention, etc). Since
collaborative visual analysis is an instance of a joint action,
our starting theoretical point to apply joint action theory to
visual analytics is that: humans will use language and will
work together to solve coordination problems in
collaborative, visual analytics.

In order to capture uses of language to solve coordination
problems in collaborative, visual analytics, we have
designed a method called “pair analytics” (Arias-Hernandez
et al., 2011). Pair analytics (PA) is a method that generates
verbal data about thought processes in a naturalistic humanto-human interaction with visual analytic tools. This method
is loosely based on “pair programming” from “extreme
programming” software development methods (Gallis,
Arisholm & Dyba, 2003). Pair analytics requires a dyad of
participants: one Subject Matter Expert (SME) and one
Visual Analytics Expert (VAE). The dyad is given one
analytical task, one data set, and one multi-screen computer
with several visual analytics (VA) tools. The VAE has
technical expertise in the operation of a suite of VA tools,
but may lack the contextual knowledge that would be
required to conduct meaningful analysis of the data set s/he
is working on. The SME, on the other hand, has expertise in
a specific analytic domain, but no knowledge of the VA
tools. The pairing of SME and VAE is designed to generate
a human-to-human dialog that makes explicit the mental
models and cognitive processes of the SME and VAE
during their collaborative visual analysis. For example,
during the analytic interaction, the SME may provide expert
knowledge to suggest visual comparison of relevant
variables, detect patterns, and generate or test hypotheses.
The interaction of the dyad with the VA tool also generates
a human-artifact dialog in which machine-models interact
with human mental models. For example, visualizations
created by the dyad may result in unexpected outcomes that
do not fit into existing mental models due to the way the VA
tool handles the data. The analytical task and the dataset for
pair analytics are selected from previous fieldwork studies
of analytical work in the specific domain of expertise of the
SME. Selecting a currently relevant analytical task and
familiar datasets create a more naturalistic setting for
observations of analytical reasoning. Interactions between
participants, as well as between VAE and visual analytics
tool are captured in video and screen capture.
There are several advantages that PA offers to cognitive
science research in visual analytics with respect to other
commonly used methods, such as protocol analysis
(Ericsson & Simon, 1993) or ethnographic methods
(Schneiderman & Plaisant, 2006). First, it is a non-intrusive
method that takes advantage of the natural and continuous
flow of speech necessary to coordinate joint actions (Clark,
1996). Since communication between participants flows
continuously in PA there is no need for a researcher to
prompt participants to keep talking, as they would do in
think-aloud, protocol analyses. This addresses one of the
limitations of “thinking-aloud” protocols in which once
participants get immersed in the task, reduce or stop their
verbalizations demanding the researcher to interrupt
participants to resume their “thinking-aloud” (Trickett et al.,
2000), affecting reasoning processes such as insight
generation (Schooler et al.,1993). Thus, PA provides more

3245

complete data about analytical reasoning with less external
intervention. Second, PA provides an empirical entry point
to study not only individual cognitive processes but also
social processes used to coordinate joint actions (e.g. use of
gestures to signal delays in cognitive processes). In this
aspect, PA gets closer to what could be achieved by
ethnographic, studies of cognition “in the wild” (Hutchins,
1995). Similar to field studies, PA is conducted in-situ, in
collaborative settings where domain experts normally
conduct their analytical work. Thus, socio-cognitive
behaviors that occur in collocated, collaborative work
settings also occur in pair analytics. An advantage with
respect to ethnographic field studies of cognition is that PA
maximizes the richness of the data being captured for
content analysis by using screen and video capture.

Using JAT to analyze PA data
We use the video and screen data collected in the PA
sessions to transcribe and code all conversations, joint
actions and HCIs. First, we focus on transcribing all of the
speech, verbal and non-verbal gestures used by participants
of pair analytics. Second, using screen capture data, we
complement the initial transcription with all of the humancomputer interactions. Finally, we separate the transcription
as sequences of joint actions, the basic analytical unit in
JAT. Clark’s methodology requires human-to-human
conversation to be structured as a succession of hierarchical
joint actions; each one with an entry, a body, and an exit
(Clark, 1996; Bangerter & Clark, 2003). After organizing
the transcripts in the hierarchical structure of joint actions,
we move to a coding phase.
From an extensive review of the literature on JAT, we
drafted an initial coding scheme to capture three sociocognitive phenomena in collaborative visual analytics:
navigation of joint actions between different analytical
phases, coordination of joint attention, and use of gestures
to signal delays in joint actions produced by cognitive
workload (Arias-Hernandez et al., 2011). Using the coding
scheme, we code several pair analytic sessions and analyze
the results.

Pilot Study
To test and refine this theoretical and methodological
approach for the study of psycho-linguistic mechanisms
used by analysts to solve coordination problems in
collaborative, visual analytics, we conducted a pilot study.

Setting:
Our study involved four subject matter experts (SMEs) in
aircraft maintenance engineering and two visual analytics
experts (VAEs) from our laboratory. In collaboration with
the SMEs, we agreed to work on a real analytical task that
the aircraft maintenance analysts were struggling with at the
time. The analytical task was open-ended and loosely

structured. The objective was to generate and test
hypotheses that could explain differences of unscheduled
aircraft downtime by models of aircrafts in a commercial
fleet. The maintenance dataset to be used for the analysis
was structured and contained 45 fields and over 90,000
records. One pair analytics session was arranged for each
SME, for a total of four sessions. Pair analytic sessions
were conducted in-situ, over a period of four weeks in
September and October, 2009, and sessions had an average
duration of 2 hours. Tableau®, a visual analytics tool, was
chosen by the visual analytics experts to be used in the pair
analytic sessions. Since the visualizations generated by
Tableau® during the sessions are mostly line and bar charts,
no especial training was required for the SMEs to
understand the visual representations of data. However a
general introduction about the structure of the data and
Tableau® was provided to each subject matter expert at the
beginning of each session.

Results
Our results showed that in effect, communication between
participants flowed continuously during the pair analytics
sessions, and there was no need for a researcher to prompt
participants to keep talking about their strategies, methods,
or findings. We observed no decreasing in the amount of
verbalizations, even when participants were engaged in
cognitively demanding tasks.
The analysis of the JAT-informed coding scheme was
organized around three socio-cognitive phenomena:
Ad-hoc structuring and navigation of the pair analysis:
One classic study by Bangerter & Clark (2003)
demonstrated that in American English people structure and
navigate joint activities by using vertical and horizontal
markers. “Vertical markers” are verbal gestures, such as
“okay,” and “all right,” that signal transitions between joint
activities. “Horizontal markers,” such as “yeah” and
“mhmm,” on the other hand, are used to signal continuation
within a singular joint activity (Bangerter & Clark, 2003).
By using vertical and horizontal markers, people create adhoc structures of joint actions and navigate through them in
an orderly fashion. In our analysis of the pair analytics
sessions, we found ample evidence of the use of vertical and
horizontal markers to navigate pair analytics (AriasHernandez et al., 2011). Moreover, we also found that the
resulting structure being produced by the use of markers
clearly distinguished the different analytical strategies,
methods, and findings of the analysis. Using these markers,
we were able to map all of the different lines of reasoning
being pursued by the participants. We called these lines of
reasoning that corresponded to distinctive joint activities:
“analytical paths.” Each analytical path corresponded to a
complete form of joint action, with markers to signal its
entry, its body, and its exit. The structure of analytical paths
corresponded to a tree-like structure.

3246

Figure 1. Using “placing-for” gestures in
Tableau®.
During the analysis of human-computer interactions, we
also found that participants accompanied verbal, vertical
markers with non-verbal, on-screen gestures. For example,
Tableau® provides a history feature that allows users to
create a visual timeline of different views that have been
generated during the course of the analysis. Every time
users want to save a view for later recall, they create a
snapshot of the current screen by either generating a new
worksheet or duplicating the currently active worksheet.
This action saves the current state of the analysis and
generates a new thumbnail representing the next analytical
project (Fig. 1). This interaction with the tool is functional,
since its purpose is to save the state of the analysis and
create a linear, visual history of several states saved.
However, during our analysis we found that the VAE
consistently produced this behavior in response to uses of
vertical markers, such as “so,” and “okay,” visually
signaling a vertical transition between different analytical
paths. In doing so, her interaction also had a communicative
effect. By producing the interaction on a visually shared
space and by timing it with vertical transitions, the VAE
communicated to the SME her tacit understanding that a
vertical transition was in effect, and that she was ready to
move to a next phase of analysis. We conceptualized this
“placing-a-new-thumbnail-in-the-history” behavior as an
“interactive marker,” or a computer-mediated marker.
Interactive markers are a subclass of on-screen gestures, and
non-verbal gestures, whose purpose is similar to that of
vertical and horizontal markers. According to Clark (2003,
2005), this particular interactional marker corresponds to the
sub-category of “placing-for” gestures, since it visually
“places” a new snapshot in the history line. Its use
demonstrated that participants of pair analytics extended
their repertoire of body-centric vertical markers to
incorporate human-computer interactions and GUI elements
as “material signals” (Clark, 2005) to help them navigate
their joint analysis. Whether an insight was generated in the
conclusion of an analytical path, or a dead point was
reached, this on-screen gesture, “placing-a-new-thumbnailin-the-history,” served to communicate the tacit
understanding that a milestone in the analysis had been
reached and that a new analytical path was about to begin.
Management of joint attention: Coordinated joint
attention is a pre-requisite for successful participation in a

joint activity. Since participants in joint activities
continuously propose joint projects to each other, the
attention of each participant needs to monitor the continuous
flow of signals. If attention is not focused on the relevant
signal, then the intention behind the signal will not be
communicated and the joint action will fail (Clark, 1996). In
face-to-face settings, participants establish that joint
attention is in place through the use of salient perceptual
phenomena, perceptual co-presence, and gestural indications
such as tone of voice, mutual gaze, finger pointing, and
verbal markers (Clark, 2003). One of the results of our
analysis of on-screen gesturing was that participants used
“mouse pointing” as an extension of more traditional faceto-face mechanisms, either to direct the attention of the
listener or to confirm to the speaker that attention was in the
right place. In both cases, “mouse pointing” was used as a
“directing-to”(Clark, 2003) kind of signal. While in both
cases the mouse was in the hands of the VAE, it was used
for different purposes. In the first case, the VAE, acting as
the speaker, used the pointer to direct the attention of the
listener (SME) to a visual object on the screen. On the other
hand, in the second case, the VAE, acting as the listener,
used the pointer to direct the attention of the speaker (SME)
to the visual object on the screen where the attention of the
VAE had been directed to by SME’s speech.
The first case is equivalent to finger pointing or head
pointing in face-to-face interaction. Its purpose is to indicate
the location of a referent mentioned in speech. In all of its
instances it was executed by the VAE as speaker. Attention
to this signal and proper identification of the object being
signaled was necessary to eliminate ambiguities in the use
of demonstrative pronouns (e.g. this, that) and adverbs (e.g.
here, there) when referring to visible objects in the GUI. In
all of these gestures, the mouse was used to communicate
rather that trigger events in the visual analytics tool. In other
words, “mouse pointing” corresponded to a computermediated human-to-human interaction rather than a humancomputer interaction. Thus, it was better understood as an
on-screen gesture.
The following is an excerpt taken from the transcript of one
of the sessions that illustrates this first kind of “directing-to”
use of mouse pointing:
SME: okay
VAE: [clicks on the orange section of the bar "HOU"]
lots leaving from Houston
SME: So, that's interesting
VAE: yeah ... [clicks on the orange section of "DAL"]
lots leaving from Dallas [clicks on label of the bar
"DAL" on the X-axis]
SME: yeah

The second case of mouse pointing is observed when the
VAE is the listener, not the speaker. Its purpose is to
provide confirmation that the listener’s attention is directed
to the location or object where the speaker intends it to be.
In face-to-face interaction, gaze and body position fulfill a

3247

similar function. When the speaker points to an object in her
speech, she expects the listener to orient her body and gaze
towards the object. This provides visual confirmation that
joint attention is in place (Monk & Gale, 2002). However,
in our pair analytics data, we found that mouse pointing
provided a more nuanced and a more precise visual
confirmation than that provided by gaze or orientation.
When the speaker (SME) was referring to an object on the
screen (sometimes pointing at it, sometimes not) the listener
(VAE) would use the mouse to point at the object being
discussed. This “confirming” behavior produces a visual cue
that informs exactly where the listener’s attention is located
on the visual display. Gaze and orientation provide a more
general, but less precise, visual cue. Due to the many visual
features, objects, and the size of the screen, gaze and
orientation do not afford the same precision as mouse
pointing, which confirms exactly the object to where
attention is directed. The following excerpt illustrates an
instance of “confirming” joint attention with the mouse:
SME: so ... looking at that ... let's see the ... 200s are the
orange
VAE: [moves the mouse over one of the bars with a
visible orange stack] [inclines his head to read the
vertical labels] yeah, so ...

“Self-talk” and on-screen gestures inform about
cognitively demanding tasks: During our data analysis, we
noticed that some of the joint activities were temporarily
paused by one of the participants. The pauses, however,
were characterized not by participant reducing their
verbalizations, but rather by participants switching to “selftalk.” Once the pause was finished, the participant would
resume her participation in the joint activity. For example,
occasionally the VAE would get a request from the SME to
create a non-trivial view of the data. In response, the VAE
would interact with the computer in solo mode, using selftalk, and conducting several steps to produce the intended
view. Once done, the VAE would resume conversation with
the SME. The SME, on the other hand, also engaged in
similar kinds of behavior. When observing a new view of
the data, the SME would stop interacting with the VAE to
observe features of the view, use self-talk, and return to
conversation afterwards. The following excerpt from one of
the sessions illustrates the VAE using self-talk in one pause
that lasted almost 11 seconds (self-talk in bold):
VAE: why? [unchecks “300” from the checkbox of filters, leaving only
“700” checked. The colors change to purple from green but the view
remains unaltered. Checks and unchecks “300” twice more] (9 sec) …
why those [using his palm to cover his face] overlap like that? (2 sec)

It is important to note that these pauses are not interruptions
in the activity since both participants are still on-task and
advancing the joint activity. These pauses are better
conceptualized as delays caused by the cognitive demands
on participants generated by the ongoing task (Smith &
Clark, 1993). As Smith and Clark (1993) have noted, the
social substratum of joint actions demands that participants
inform each other about problems that they encounter in

their interaction, such as cognitively demanding tasks (e.g.
retrieving information from memory, understanding difficult
questions, etc). When faced with these cognitively
demanding challenges, participants delay their response to
the other participant’s original request. However, due to the
social context in which interaction occurs, the timing of
response is crucial. Any delay in responding is open to
several interpretations by the requester, some of which
could undermine the responder’s self-presentation
(Goffman, 1978). In order to “save face” (Goffman, 1978),
people normally resort to the use of fillers, such as “uh” and
“um” to account for shorter delays, and self-talk to account
for longer delays (Smith & Clark, 1993). According to
Smith and Clark (1993), self-talk is a strategy used in
conversational settings to (1) inform about delays and (2)
inform about engagement in the joint action. Based on this
rationale, we coded for “self-talk” moments in our data and
mapped the activities that participants were doing during
these moments (e.g. task and duration of the task). We
found that most of these activities participants were engaged
with during self-talk corresponded to human-computer
interactions. So, we decided to categorize, time and analyze
each of these by participant.
We found that different than Smith and Clark’s studies on
answering questions, human-computer interactions in pair
analytics during self-talk have the additional advantage of a
shared visual space (i.e. the interface) that provides
additional information about the progression of the task
while the delay is still in place. Every human-computer
interaction that co-occurred with self-talk, visually informed
the requester about the progression of a cognitively
demanding task that was being executed by the responder.
In other words, the combination of self-talk and HCI, not
only served the two purposes theorized by Smith and Clark,
but also served another function: (3) to visually inform
about the progression of the cognitively-demanding task
that originated the delay.
Our analysis also showed that all of the VAE activities
during self-talk involved HCIs. For example, in one instance
of an activity that we coded as: “confronting anomalies in a
generated view,” the VAE had created a bar graph with
information about air traffic in origin and destination
airports. On the x-axis of the bar graph, the VAE plotted
data by origin and destination airports (two variables), and
on the y-axis, she provided a count of annual flight from one
specific origin to one specific destination (one variable).
The SME asked the VAE to sort the bar graph by origin city
(request), and the VAE proceed to select the view and
clicked on the “sort descending” button (initiates response).
However, the resulting view did not corresponded to the
expected sorted result triggering the VAE to initiate self-talk
(delay) while figuring out what was going on:

3248

VAE: I don't know how it is sorting it there [clicks on the Y-Axis,
selects the whole graph, clicks on sort-descending icon, updates the
view, gets the same result] (7-sec delay)

Our analysis showed that this unexpected result occurred
because two variables had been plotted on the x-axis
creating sub-groups of bar graphs: first, by destination city,
then, by origin city. In effect, sorting was occurring, but its
expected visual result (gradually decreasing bars) was not
visibly salient. In this case, the tool was sorting by the total
values of the first variable (destination city), in a
visualization that had this variable disaggregated by a
second variable (origin city). In other words, sorting was
occurring at the aggregated level of destination city (not
visible), and not at the more disaggregated level of origin
city (visible). One of the visual advantages of sorting simple
bar graphs is that visual perception quickly processes the
differences in size between bars, reducing the cognitive load
of trying to determine the same differences in a non-sorted
bar graph. However, in this case, sorting views with more
than one variable per axis in bar graphs did not produce
“visually-salient” and “intuitively-sorted” bar graphs,
creating confusion and generating a delay. Here, the
unexpected visual outcome of the sorting process and the
consequential interactions to “fix it” were adding more
cognitive load rather than reducing it. This example
illustrates how analyzing the human-computer interactions
that co-occur with self-talk can point out to concrete
instances in which the visual analytic tool is not reducing
the cognitive demands of the task at hand, but rather
creating or increasing these demands.

Conclusion
Joint Action Theory (JAT), the Pair Analytics method (PA),
and the results of the pilot study presented in this paper
show that the JAT/PA research strategy provides a novel
and original approach to understanding some of the psycholinguistics mechanisms that analysts deploy to solve
coordination problems in collocated, collaborative visual
analytics. Future research using the JAT/PA research
strategy will address more directly the specific kinds of
affordances that visual analytics tools offer to enable users
to navigate analytical paths and mark milestones in their
analysis (e.g. structured history of the analysis process
marking precise moments of insights). We will also
continue to explore the role of “self-talk” events during pair
analytics as indicators of cognitive demanding tasks and to
differentiate between cognitive load caused by the demands
of the analytic task from those caused by poor interface
design. Experimental studies will also be conducted to test
the efficacy of pair analytics in comparison to protocol
analysis for keeping constant the flow of verbalization, even
during cognitively intensive tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSERC STPGP 336506
“Visual Analytics for Safety and Security,” MITACS
ACCELLERATE BC “Program to Evaluate and Improve
Visual Analytic Processes for Analyzing Maintainability,

Reliability and Safety Data,” and “Boeing Support for
Visual Analytics in Canada” (Fisher subgrant).

References
Arias-Hernandez, R, Kaastra, L.T., Green, T.M. & Fisher,
B. (2011). "Capturing Reasoning Processes in
Collaborative Visual Analytics," Proc. HICSS-44 (CDROM), Computer Society Press (2011), 10 pages.
Bangerter, A. & Clark, H.H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27 (2), 195225.
Clark, H.H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H.H. (2003). Pointing and placing. In: Kita, S. (ed.)
Pointing: Where language, culture, and cognition meet,
Psychology Press, 243-268.
Clark, H.H. (2005). Coordinating with each other in a
material world. Discourse studies, 7 (4-5), 507-525.
Clark, H.H. and Brennan, S.E. Grounding in
communication. (1991). In: Resnick, L.B., Levine, J.M.
and Teasley, S.D. (eds.) Perspectives on socially shared
cognition, Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 127-149.
Clark, H.H. and Krych, M.A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50 (1), 62-81.
Ericsson, K.A. and Simon, H.A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Rev. ed.). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gallis, H., Arisholm, E. and Dyba, T. (2003). An initial
framework for research on pair programming. Proc.
ESEM, IEEE Computer Society.
Goffman, E. (1978). Response cries. Language, 54 (4), 787815.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Monk, A.F. and Gale, C. (2002). A look is worth a thousand
words: Full gaze awareness in video-mediated
conversation. Discourse Processes, 33 (3). 257-278.
Schooler, J.W., Ohlsson, S. and Brooks, K. (1993).
Thoughts beyond words: When language overshadows
insight, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 122 (2),
166-183.
Shneiderman, B. and Plaisant, C. (2006). Strategies for
evaluating information visualization tools: multidimensional in-depth long-term case studies. Proc. AVI
2006, ACM Press, 7-12.
Smith, V.L. and Clark, H.H. (1993). On the course of
answering questions. Journal of Memory and Language,
32, 25-38.
Trickett, S.B., W.T. Fu, C.D. Schunn and J.G. Trafton,
(2000). From dipsy-doodles to streaming motions:
Changes in representation in the analysis of visual
scientific data. Proc. CogSci 2000. Erlbaum.

3249

