UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning by Observing Tutorial Dialogue versus Monologue Collaboratively or Alone

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4f05w7h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Muldner, Kasia
Dybvig, Keith
Lam, Rachel
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning by observing tutorial dialogue versus monologue collaboratively or alone
Kasia Muldner, Keith Dybvig, Rachel Lam & Michelene T. H. Chi
(katarzyna.muldner,kdybvig,rachel.lam,mtchi@asu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Arizona State University Tempe, AZ 85287 USA
Abstract
We report on a study with 65 middle-school students who
learned about the concept of diffusion through observation.
We manipulated two factors: the number of observers, solo
vs. dyad, and the type of video students observed, tutorial
dialogue vs. monologue. Our findings show that dyad
observers learn significantly better than solo observers, and
that for certain types of questions, observing dialogue results
in better learning gains, as compared to observing monologue.
Keywords: vicarious learning; collaboration; monologue vs.
dialogue; emergent phenomena.

Introduction
Although there are many contexts in which learning can
occur, traditionally, students learn by watching and listening
to teachers and by doing various assignments. A less
available, but more beneficial way to learn is through oneon-one tutoring, which has repeatedly been shown to be
superior to group instruction (Cohen, Kulik & Kulik, 1982).
Of course providing a tutor for every student is not feasible
and so there have been various efforts to find other
strategies that afford students the benefits of personalized
tutoring. Recently, a promising new paradigm was
proposed: learning by observing others learn, also referred
to as vicarious learning (Chi, Roy & Hausmann, 2008).
In particular, Chi et al. (2008) showed that observing
tutoring dialogues can be as powerful an intervention as
being tutored. In that study, some students (referred to as
tutees) were videotaped solving Newtonian physics
problems while interacting with an expert tutor. Other
students, in pairs or alone, then merely watched the videos
of these tutoring sessions while solving the same physics
problems as the tutees. One of the key findings was that
there was no difference in learning outcomes between the
tutees and the observers who watched the tutorial dialogue
videos. As predicted, this finding was only true if pairs of
students observed the videos collaboratively (students who
observed alone did not learn as well as the tutees). Since
dyad observers have opportunities to be interactive with
each other, much as the tutees have opportunities to be
interactive with the tutor, the interpretation made was that a
large part of the tutoring advantage is due to interaction per
se.
The benefits of collaboration are demonstrated by
various studies (e.g., (Johnson & Johnson, 2009)), findings
from which are encapsulated by the active-constructiveinteractive framework (Chi, 2009). This framework
differentiates learning activities according to levels of
student engagement, and proposes that a student who

collaborates with a peer will, in general, learn better than a
student working alone. This is because collaboration offers
the opportunity for joint construction, which requires, for
instance, eliciting responses from a partner, integrating a
partner’s contribution, and explaining one’s perspective. It
is important to note, however, that the prediction regarding
the beneficial impact of collaboration is based on the
condition that students are interactive, i.e., do not merely sit
quietly, each working on his or her own. In fact, some prior
work on vicarious learning did not find that dyad observers
learned better than solo ones (Craig, Driscoll & Gholson,
2004), because the observers were not very interactive.
The goal of this project is to both replicate and extend the
original Chi et al. (2008) study. In replicating, we forgo
comparing tutees to observers, and focus instead on
comparing observing collaboratively versus observing
alone, but in a new domain and with a new population.
Specifically, while the original study used a procedural
domain, we embed our target learning activity in a
conceptual domain, and involve middle school instead of
college students. Replicating in this new domain and age
group will generalize and validate the Chi et al. (2008)
findings.
In extending the 2008 study, we compare the
effectiveness of dialogue versus monologue. Doing so can
guide subsequent efforts on instructional material
development. Currently, materials are often monologuebased, e.g., instructional videos with a “talking head”
(Caspi, Gorsky & Privman, 2005; Zhang, Zhou, Briggs et
al., 2006). However, prior work comparing observation of
monologue and dialogue videos does provide some clues
that dialogue may be better (Craig, Chi & VanLehn, 2009;
Driscoll, Craig, Gholson et al., 2003; Fox Tree, 1999;
Muller, Sharma, Eklund et al., 2007). For example, Craig et
al. (2009) found some evidence that naturally-occurring
tutorial dialogue fosters better learning. In that study,
students observed a dialogue or a monologue video while
working with an intelligent tutor that provided both
feedback for correctness and hints. Thus, it is important to
analyze if and how the benefits of naturally-occurring
dialogue transfer to situations where students do not receive
such additional scaffolding. There are, however, studies that
did not find a difference between observing dialogue and
monologue media (Fox Tree & Mayer, 2008; Muller,
Bewes, Sharma et al., 2008), although some of these
focused on simple puzzle tasks (Fox Tree & Mayer, 2008).
In general, more work is needed for understanding the effect
of each (monologue, dialogue).
The predominant approach for comparing dialogue to
monologue has been to script the content, while varying a

1340

as that the molecules stop moving when the solution appears
a uniform unchanging color (Meir et al., 2005).
The collective attribute requires understanding of ratio
and proportion. For instance, in the context of the dye
example, the overall changes in concentration of dye
relative to water cause the visible dye flow pattern. Thus,
students need to understand proportion-related concepts to
fully comprehend diffusion. There are numerous studies
showing that these notions are very difficult for students
(e.g., (Smith, Carey & Wiser, 1985)), further adding to the
complexity of learning about diffusion.

Study details

Figure 1: Dialogue video with tutor + tutee (top) and
corresponding simulations (bottom)
factor of interest (e.g., (Craig et al., 2004; Craig, Sullins,
Witherspoon et al., 2006; Driscoll et al., 2003; Muller et al.,
2008; Muller et al., 2007)). For instance, the scripting
approach was used to study the impact of including
misconceptions (Muller et al., 2007) or questions that
precede certain utterances (Craig et al., 2006). With the
current very preliminary understanding of the benefits of
tutorial dialogues, scripting may be premature since it may
miss important nuances that occur in naturally-driven
interactions. For this reason, we have chosen to use
naturally-occurring tutorial dialogue and monologue.

The domain: emergent processes & diffusion
Our target domain corresponds to a conceptual science topic
– diffusion. This is a highly misconceived and challenging
topic for students (Chi, Roscoe, Slotta et al., in press; Meir,
Perry, Stal et al., 2005), because it requires understanding of
two very difficult concepts: emergent processes and
proportionality. Emergent processes are defined through the
attributes and features that characterize these processes
(Chi, 2005). To illustrate, suppose a drop of dye is dropped
into water. This diffusion of dye throughout the water is an
emergent process because:
- (disjoint attribute) the dye and water molecules and/or
their interactions and the visible flow pattern of the dye
can behave in disjoint ways;
- (collective attribute) the flow pattern is caused by the
collective summing of all the molecular interactions;
- (random feature) the molecular interactions are random.
There are a total of 10 emergent attributes and features - for
a full list, see (Chi et al., in press). The two attributes listed
above are classified as inter-level because they require
students to reason about both the visible macro-level pattern
(flow of dye) and the underlying micro-level interactions
(movement of molecules). Doing so is very challenging and
so students hold many misconceptions about diffusion, such

Materials. The study involved the following materials
related to diffusion: (1) a two-page text, (2) pre- and posttests, (3) two simulations and (4) two instructional videos.
Materials 1-3 were based on ones used in an earlier study
(Chi et al., in press). The text was designed to provide the
necessary foundations for diffusion-related concepts. The
pre- and post-tests assessed students’ diffusion knowledge,
and did include some questions that probed understanding
of emergent aspects of diffusion, but without explicitly
mentioning emergence. For instance, to assess the interlevel disjoint attribute, one question asked “As the dye
diffuses away from where it was originally dropped into the
water, can some dye molecules bounce back towards this
original place?” The pre-test included 19 multiple-choice
questions, while the post-test included the same 19
questions and six extra questions for a total of 25 questions
(the six extra questions were added to avoid the retest effect,
i.e., increased learning due to identical pre and post tests).
To help students understand inter-level concepts, the
simulations showed diffusion occurring on the visible level
(macro simulation) and at the molecular level (micro
simulation; see the left and right panel of the lower half of
Figure 1 for the macro and micro simulation, respectively).
The simulations were interactive (for instance, clicking the
“start” button in the micro simulation resulted in molecules
bouncing and colliding), and were used in both the
instructional videos and by the observers (as described
below).
Two instructional videos were created in our lab: a
dialogue (tutor + tutee) and a monologue (tutor only). The
tutor, used for both videos, had extensive tutoring
experience and received domain training so that he was very
familiar with the target concepts. An eighth-grade student
was chosen to be the tutee in the dialogue video, based on
the guidelines that (1) observers learn better when the tutee
they are observing does not have ideal knowledge and so
generates some errors (Schunk, Hanson & Cox, 1987), and
(2) the tutee has some knowledge and so is able to answer a
subset of the tutor’s questions (Chi et al., 2008). This was
the case with our tutee, who obtained a pre-test score of
61%. The tutee first read the diffusion text, took the pre-test
and then discussed diffusion with the tutor for about 20
minutes.

1341

During both the dialogue and monologue session, the
tutor was asked to cover the key topic areas outlined before
hand, including concentration and the 10 emergent features
and attributes operationalized within the topic of diffusion.
Both sessions (dialogue, monologue) involved the two
simulations, which were used to illustrate the topics
discussed and were shown on a laptop available to the tutor
(and tutee for the dialogue). All laptop actions were
recorded using screen capture software and the sessions
were video taped. The final videos were a “split screen”,
where the tutor and tutee (dialogue) or tutor (monologue)
were shown on the top portion of the screen, and the
simulations and the users’ actions in them were
simultaneously shown on the bottom portion of the screen
(see Figure 1).
In neither the dialogue or monologue session did the tutor
adhere to a pre-defined script, because we wanted to keep
the sessions as natural as possible. Moreover, scripting has
the potential to miss key events since as mentioned above, it
is not yet clear which dialogue or monologue features are
needed for optimal observer learning. We did, however, aim
to standardize a number of factors between the two videos.
First, both were comparable in length (22:56 minutes and
21:10 minutes). Second, the tutor was instructed to cover
the same concepts in both sessions.
Participants. The participants were local middle-school
eighth-grade students, who engaged in the study as part of
their standard classroom activities.
Design. The study included two independent variables:
video-type (monologue, dialogue) and number-observers
(solo, dyad); thus, there were four conditions. The
participants came from four different classes. To avoid any
class effects, students within each class were randomly
assigned to evenly fill the four conditions (i.e., a given
condition had subjects from all four classes).
Procedure. The study took place in the school. Students
had not been taught about diffusion prior to the study. For
each of the four classes participating, two 60 minute class
periods were used on two consecutive school days (all
classes were done with the study within three school days).
On the first day, students were introduced to the research
process (5 min.) signed the assent forms (10 min.), read the
diffusion text (15 min.), and took the pre-test (15 min.).
Students were also introduced to subsequent activities: a
researcher used a smart board to explain the protocol for the
next day (10 min.). On the second day, students watched an
instructional video in a computer lab (experimental
intervention, ~30 min.), and took the post-test (20 min.).
During the experimental intervention, each student (solo
condition) or pair of students (dyad condition) used a
computer to (1) watch an instructional video (the dialogue in
Figure 1 or a monologue, not shown) and (2) interact with
the micro and macro simulations. Thus, students could both
see how the tutor (and tutee) interacted with the simulation
in the video and could also interact with their own
simulations. A subset of the dyad subjects were audio
recorded and these recordings were transcribed.

Table 1: Subject information: pre-test % (# subjects)
N=65
monologue
dialogue

dyad
50.4% (N=19)
45.6% (N=15)

solo
47.4% (N=16)
59.6% (N=15)

Results
The results are based on the 65 students who completed all
phases of the study and who each provided a parental
consent and student assent form. Although subjects were
randomly assigned to the study conditions, there were slight
differences between the groups (see Table 1 - the difference
in group sizes is the result of student absences and/or lack of
consent). In such a situation, the appropriate analysis to use
is an ANOVA with specially-adjusted gain scores,
advocated in (Crouch & Mazur, 2001):
0 if pre-test % equals 100%, otherwise
adjusted-gain =
(post-test
% – pre-test %) /
score
(100 – pre-test %)
Thus, a student’s gain score is adjusted according to the
pre-test so that students who start out with a high pre-test
score obtain an adjusted, higher gain than students who start
with a lower pre-test score (e.g., a student who moves from
20% to 60% between pre and post test is assigned the same
gain as a student who shifts from 80% to 90%). The
rationale behind this adjustment is that it is more difficult to
improve given a high pre-test score, as compared to a low
pre-test score. In our study, the pre-test average for all the
groups was below 60%, so students were not at ceiling.
A complimentary analysis to use is an ANCOVA with the
pre-test % as the covariate and post-test % as the dependent
variable. This analysis adjusts the post-test score through
the covariate, thereby accounting for any differences in pretest scores. While we conducted both types of analyses, the
ANCOVA confirmed the adjusted-gain ANOVA, and so for
brevity, we only report results from the former.

Analysis 1: effect of number-observers and videotype on adjusted-gain score
An ANOVA was conducted with the adjusted-gain score
considering all pre- and post-test questions (19 and 25,
respectively). As mentioned above, the post-test included an
additional six questions to avoid the re-test effect. The posttest scores on these questions were very similar to the 19
matched post-test scores (62% vs. 59%); thus these
questions were not significantly easier or harder. The mean
adjusted-gain score for each group is shown in Figure 2.
Overall, dyad observers learned significantly better than
solo observers (F(1,61)=5.9, p=0.018; mean adjusted-gain
score for dyad vs. solo observers: 21.0% vs. 5.5%; Cohen’s
effect is medium to large: d=.6). Moreover, we replicated
the earlier result showing that dyad observers perform better
than solo observers when given dialogue (Chi et al., 2008)
(see Figure 2, t(28)=28, p=0.02; large effect, Cohen’s d=.9).

1342

Figure 2: Adjusted-gain scores for each group (N=65)
The active-constructive-interactive framework (Chi, 2009)
predicts that these findings are due to students being
interactive and thus constructive.
In addition to examining the effect of number-observers,
our second goal was to explore how middle-school students
learn from dialogue and monologue. The ANOVA showed
that video-type did not have a significant effect on adjustedgain score (p=.5). This finding was somewhat unexpected,
given that as we mentioned above, there is some evidence of
dialogue being superior to monologue. There are a number
of possibilities for why we did not find such an effect here.
One is that the post-test contains some extremely difficult
transfer questions assessing misconceptions related to
proportionality and/or inter-level concepts. Accordingly, the
next analysis addressed this issue.

Analysis 2: effect of number-observers and videotype on different types of post-test questions
To determine if the difficulty of some test questions was
obscuring the results, we divided the questions into explicit
and implicit ones. The explicit subset corresponded to posttest questions that the instructional materials addressed
explicitly (there were nine such questions and six
corresponding pre-test questions). To illustrate, consider the
post-test question “After the clamp is removed, the dye
appears to flow from Beaker #1 to Beaker #2. Can a dye
molecule that is now in Beaker #2 move backwards into
Beaker #1?”. The fact that molecules can go “back” was
explicitly addressed in both the monologue and dialogue
videos, as illustrated below from an excerpt from the
dialogue video:
T: which way is the dye overall going to end up moving?
S: to the left side [some discussion left out for brevity]
T: And what are they [molecules] going to sometimes do?
S: They’ll bounce off and…
T: go to the …
S: other side
T: other side right. And once they go to the other side can
they ever come back?
S: yes
T: yeah – they can come back.

Note that the explicit questions may still require students to
abstract some details and so they certainly were not trivial.
The implicit subset included post-test questions requiring
the observers to make inference(s) much beyond that what
was stated in the videos (there were 15 such post-test
questions and 12 corresponding pre-test questions). For 11
of the post-test questions, that inference involved switching
contexts. For instance, one of the post-test questions asked
students to select a choice that characterized the reason for
oxygen and carbon molecules moving across a cell
membrane. The correct choice reflected the fact that the cell
does not pull in the beneficial oxygen and push out the
harmful carbon dioxide, but rather that the corresponding
molecules move randomly across the cell membrane. While
this context was never mentioned explicitly in the text or the
videos, these materials did describe random molecular
movement, and so a student could answer this and other
implicit questions by generating additional inferences. In a
sense, 11 of the implicit test questions were transfer
questions. The other four questions involved a context
similar to one in the instructional materials, probing interlevel and proportionality concepts.
To label a question as explicit or implicit, two researchers
coded the questions with respect to how the instructional
materials addressed the two types of questions. Agreement
was substantial (Kappa = .73); disagreements were resolved
through discussion. There were no differences between the
monologue and dialogue videos with respect to how they
addressed the two types of questions except for one post-test
question. This question was excluded from the subsequent
analysis. Of the remaining 24 post-test questions, all but two
questions were explicitly or implicitly addressed by the
videos (two explicit post-test questions were addressed only
in the diffusion text). The subsequent analysis computes the
adjusted-gain score (see formula above) for the explicit and
the implicit questions.
Although our primary goal with this current analysis was
to determine whether a video-type effect exists for certain
questions, we also included the number-observers factor in
the ANOVA to check if the above finding that dyads
perform better than solo applies to each question subset, and
to account for any interaction effects.
For the implicit questions, the ANOVA did not find
significant effects of video-type or number-observers on
adjusted-gain score. This lack of significance is likely due to
the fact that the implicit questions all required many
additional inferences and/or transfer, something that is
notoriously difficult for students to achieve. The difficulty
of these questions is confirmed by the corresponding low
adjusted-gain scores, as compared to the explicit questions
(mean adjusted-gain score: implicit=2%, explicit=31%).
Thus, the subsequent discussion is focused on the explicit
questions.
Results from analyzing adjusted-gain score for the
explicit questions. For the explicit questions, we first
replicated the above finding that dyad observers gain more

1343

Figure 3: Adjusted-gain scores for each group for the
explicit questions only (N=65)
than solo observers ((F(1,61)=6.8, p=0.01; mean adjustedgain score for dyad and solo observers: 41% vs. 21.8%,
respectively; medium to large effect: d=.6).
Moreover, video-type also had a significant effect on
adjusted-gain score (F(1,61)=4.6, p=0.036, medium effect:
d=.5), with observers given a dialogue video performing
better than those given a monologue video (mean adjustedgain score for dialogue and monologue: 39.3% vs. 23.6%,
respectively, individual group means shown in Figure 3).
Thus, in contrast to the analysis above that included implicit
and explicit questions and did not find a difference between
dialogue and monologue, when the implicit questions were
excluded because students were unable to answer them,
dialogue was superior to monologue.

Some conjectures for why dialogue fostered larger
learning gains
In this section, we contemplate why observing tutorial
dialogue might trigger more learning than observing
monologue. Since various studies show that interest
improves cognitive functioning and performance (Lepper,
1988), one possibility relates to motivation. Anecdotally,
our transcripts show that students were more interested in
observing tutorial dialogue (e.g., one student expressed this
by stating “single person is way more boring”). This effect
should be particularly true for students in the solo condition,
since they did not experience the potentially motivating
effect of having a partner to interact with. Students in the
solo condition did indeed gain significantly more on the
explicit questions when given a dialogue video, as compared
to monologue (t(29)=2.7, p=0.01; large effect: d=1.0). In
contrast, while dyad observers did gain more when given
the dialogue video, as compared to monologue, this
difference was not significant, possibly because the effect of
collaboration overpowered any video-type effects.
Compared to monologue, observing dialogue may also
be more motivating because the tutee provides a so-called
coping model (Schunk et al., 1987). In particular, observers

do not yet have perfect domain knowledge, and so can relate
to the tutee struggling or “coping” in the video. Such a
model is clearly not present in a monologue since the tutor
does not express doubt and does not commit errors. Schunk
et al. (1987) did indeed find that observers’ self-efficacy,
which is related to motivation, improved more after viewing
videos in which tutees struggled while solving problems, as
compared to videos in which tutees did not.
Related to the last point, in contrast to a monologue, in a
dialogue tutees may express misconceptions that are shared
by observers. This is important not only because that
misconception is subsequently refuted by the tutor, but also
because the tutee’s perspective is more likely to be aligned
to an observer’s than a tutor’s, and so the misconception is
expressed in a manner to which an observer can relate.
When we analyzed gains on individual explicit test
questions, one question in particular stood out (“Why does
the dye spread from where it was originally added to the
water?”). For this question, the average gain was twice as
high for the dialogue observers, compared to ones given
monologue (on average, 0.47 vs. 0.26 gain out of a total
possible gain of 1). When we checked the instructional
videos related to this question, it corresponded to the tutee
expressing an incorrect explanation in response to a tutor
question:
T: Does anything force them … all the molecules… or
some of the molecules to go to the other side?
S: I think… yes…
T: What forces them to go to the other side?
S: The pressure from (shrugs)…
In fact, this was the only instance in the video where the
tutee explicitly expressed a misconception (i.e., that
pressure makes the molecules to go to the other side). There
were other places in the video that confusion occurred, or a
simple “not sure”, but here the tutee expressed an
alternative viewpoint through her misconception. Prior work
on scripted dialogue has shown no difference in terms of
learning between monologue and dialogue if both contain
misconceptions (Muller et al., 2008). In contrast, although
our monologue did include misconceptions expressed by the
tutor (e.g., “you might think that…”), we did find a
difference in learning gains between monologue and
dialogue. However, our dialogue was naturally occurring, so
the embedded misconceptions were expressed from the
tutee’s perspective. This may explain the difference between
our findings and prior work, and highlights the importance
of studying the effects of video-type with naturally
occurring content, at least until we have a better
understanding of the impact of the various factors.

Discussion and future work
Our analysis showed a consistent effect of collaboration,
with dyad observers learning more than the solo observers.
Although this effect is predicted by other work (e.g., (Chi,
2009)), in our study it was not a given that dyads would in
fact be more constructive than the solo observers, since little
scaffolding was provided for the overall processes. For

1344

instance, a form of scaffolding could correspond to giving
students a worksheet to fill in as they watch the videos, as in
(Chi et al., 2008). This type of activity encourages
collaboration, since students have a specific task to work on.
In our study, observers did not have any specific tasks, but
did have the simulations, and this may have provided the
catalyst for interaction. Students did indeed discuss the
simulations: when we analyzed the transcripts for
simulation-related utterances, on average students referred
to the simulation 16.9 times per session (and 13.1 of those
references were clearly to the simulations students could
manipulate, as opposed to the ones they could merely
observe in the video).
As far as the effect of dialogue versus monologue is
concerned, observing dialogue was better than observing
monologue for subsequently answering the explicit test
questions. This was the first study to show this effect for
middle school students. We did not find that dialogue was
better than monologue for answering implicit questions,
likely because questions such as these require transfer,
something that is notoriously difficult to achieve. We
provided some interpretations and found some clues for why
dialogue was better than monologue, related to motivation
and presence of misconceptions. In the future we plan to
analyze these factors in more detail, as well as enlist more
tutees to compare being tutored against observing tutoring.

Acknowledgements
The work was funded under the Spencer Foundation Grant
Program, award number 200800196. The authors thank
Johnathan Scheibenpflug and Brittany Gianiorio for helping
prepare some of the study materials and the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments.

References
Caspi, A., Gorsky, P. & Privman, M. (2005). Viewing
comprehension: Students’ learning preferences and
strategies when studying from video. Instructional
Science, 33, 31-47.
Chi, M. T. H. (2005). Common sense conceptions of
emergent processes: Why some misconceptions are
robust. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 161-199.
Chi, M. T. H. (2009). Active-contructive-interactive: a
conceptual framework for differentiating learning
activities. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 73-105.
Chi, M. T. H., Roscoe, R., Slotta, J., Roy, M. & Chase, M.
(in press). Misconceived Causal Explanations for
Emergent Processes. Cognitive Science.
Chi, M. T. H., Roy, M. & Hausmann, R. G. M. (2008).
Observing tutoring collaboratively: Insights about
tutoring effectiveness from vicarious learning. Cognitive
Science, 32(2), 301-341.
Cohen, P. A., Kulik, J. A. & Kulik, C.-L. C. (1982).
Educational outcomes of tutoring: A meta-analysis of
findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19,
237-248.

Craig, S., Driscoll, D. & Gholson, B. (2004). Constructing
Knowledge from Dialog in an Intelligent Tutoring
System: Interactive Learning, Vicarious Learning, and
Pedagogical Agents. Journal of Educational Multimedia
and Hypermedia, 13(2), 163-183.
Craig, S., Sullins, J., Witherspoon, A. & Gloslon, B. (2006).
The Deep-Level-Reasoning-Question Effect: The Role of
Dialogue and Deep-Level-Reasoning Questions During
Vicarious Learning. Cognition and Instruction, 24(4),
565-591.
Craig, S. D., Chi, M. T. H. & VanLehn, K. (2009).
Improving Classroom Learning by Collaboratively
Observing Human Tutoring Videos While Problem
Solving. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(4), 779789.
Crouch, C. H. & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer Instruction: Ten
Years of Experience and Results. American Journal of
Physics 69, 970-977.
Driscoll, D. M., Craig, S. D., Gholson, B., Hu, X. &
Graesser, A. (2003). Vicarious Learning: Effects of
Overhearing Dialog and Monologue-like Discourse in a
virtual tutoring session. Journal of Computing Research,
29(4), 431-450.
Fox Tree, J. (1999). Listening in on monologues and
dialogues. Discourse Processes, 27, 35-53.
Fox Tree, J. & Mayer, S. A. (2008). Overhearing single and
multiple perspectives. Discourse Processes, 45, 160-179.
Johnson, D. W. & Johnson, R. T. (2009). An Educational
Psychology Success Story: Social Interdependence
Theory and Cooperative Learning. Educational
Researcher, 28(5), 365–379.
Lepper, M. (1988). Motivational Considerations in the study
of Instruction. Cognition and Instruction, 5(4), 289-309.
Meir, E., Perry, J., Stal, D. & Klopfer, E. (2005). How
Effective Are Simulated Molecular-level Experiments for
Teaching Diffusion and Osmosis? Cell Biology
Education, 4, 255-248.
Muller, D. A., Bewes, J., Sharma, M. D. & Reimann, P.
(2008). Saying the wrong thing: improving learning with
multimedia by including misconceptions. Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning, 24, 144-155.
Muller, D. A., Sharma, M. D., Eklund, J. & Reimann, P.
(2007). Conceptual change through vicarious learning in
an authentic physics setting. Instructional Science, 35,
519-533.
Schunk, D. H., Hanson, R. A. & Cox, P. D. (1987). PeerModel Attributes and Children's Achievement. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 79(1), 54-61.
Smith, C., Carey, S. & Wiser, M. (1985). On differentiation:
A case study of the development of the concept of size,
weight, and density. Cognition, 21, 177–237.
Zhang, D., Zhou, L., Briggs, R. O., Nunamaker, J. F. &
(2006). Instructional video in e-learning: Assessing the
impact of interactive video on learning effectiveness.
Information & Management, 43, 15-27.

1345

