UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Let’s Go for a Run: Planning Routes to Remember

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4322f3hg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Taylor, Holly A.
Tenbrink, Thora
Sorrows, Molly E.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Let’s Go for a Run: Planning Routes to Remember
Holly A. Taylor (holly.taylor@tufts.edu)
Department of Psychology, Tufts University
490 Boston Ave., Medford, MA02155 USA

Thora Tenbrink (tenbrink@uni-bremen.de)
Department of Linguistics and Literary Sciences, Cartesium 1,059
Enrique-Schmidt-Straße 5 28359 Bremen GERMANY

Molly E. Sorrows (msorrows@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Tufts University
490 Boston Ave., Medford, MA 02155 USA
Abstract
Research shows that people handle the complexity of
environments by cognitively simplifying them using spatial
schemas and heuristics. Such simplification strategies can be
seen in route planning situations, such as the Travelling
Salesperson Problem (TSP) and tour planning. The present
study extends this work by examining a situation where
memory demands must be considered during route planning -planning a running route through an unfamiliar area. Results
of routes planned on maps in grid-like and non-grid-like
environments suggest that the planned routes reflect aspects
of cognitive simplification to meet memory demands. This
was evident in both global and local features of the routes.
Globally, route trajectories tended towards simple shapes in
accord with the affordances of the environment. Locally,
changes of direction were preferably chosen at landmarks.
More demanding (non-grid) environments led to an increase
in simplification strategy use, such as relying on major roads,
and avoiding complex decision points.
Keywords: route planning, memory, spatial cognition.

Introduction
A Cognitive Science Conference attendee decides to hit the
streets of Boston for an early morning run. Being unfamiliar
with Boston, she checks an on-line map to plan a route. She
knows she wants the route to begin and end at her hotel and
be approximately 3 miles long. She also knows that while
she could carry a concierge-provided map, she prefers to
remember the route so as not to interrupt the flow of her run.
Will her planned route through this unfamiliar environment
reflect the cognitive demands of remembering it? The
present experiment explores this question. Using running
routes as a route-planning task provides an excellent
naturalistic context for exploring how anticipated memory
demands may influence the route planning process.
People commonly plan routes through unfamiliar cities
with the aid of a map and then embark on their route
without the map, sometimes successfully and other times
not. Maps reflect the information rich nature of the
environments in which we consistently engage. The
information-richness, however, means we cannot remember
everything about them. Instead, we extract what information
we need (or think we need), sometimes schematizing it for

later use (Freksa, 1999; Tenbrink & Winter, 2009; Tversky,
2001). The question in the current research is whether and in
what ways people account for memory demands when
planning routes. Furthermore, we address the extent to
which route planning strategies are influenced by the
structure of the environment.
One route-planning situation examined extensively is the
Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP). The TSP is an
optimization problem wherein one devises an itinerary to
visit a given number of cities, visiting each one once, while
minimizing travel costs, and ending at the starting point.
While hypothetical, the TSP is not unlike planning the best
route to complete a set of errands. From a computational
viewpoint the TSP is complex. Indeed, an efficient
computational algorithm for the TSP has not been identified
(Applegate et al., 2007). Yet, humans solve it relatively
efficiently (e.g., MacGregor & Ormerod, 1996; Tenbrink &
Wiener, 2009), most likely by employing some type of
cognitive simplification or heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974) that focuses on the global spatial properties of the
problem (Ormerod & Chronicle, 1999). Little work has
applied findings based on the TSP to everyday navigation
(Wiener & Tenbrink, 2009), apart from some studies on
urban activity planning (e.g., Gärling et al., 1986).
Planning running routes to remember in unfamiliar cities
differs from the TSP in interesting ways. First, the success
of completing a running route in an unfamiliar area may
depend on knowing the details. This is particularly true in
areas without predictable structure (as in some areas in
Boston). Predictable structure (e.g. roads forming a grid,
symmetric city organization, etc.) affords more tolerance for
divergence from the planned route. Second, running routes
often have no particular sub-goals and instead focus on
global goals of distance or time. In contrast to the TSP,
route efficiency is not the primary emphasis. Planning a
holiday or sightseeing tour bears similarity to running route
planning in this way. Tenbrink and Seifert (2011) examined
tour planning by having participants plan a 14-day island
tour for a friend. They found that people approached this
planning task by systematically simplifying its complexity
(Freksa, 1999) in similar ways as in the TSP. For example,
paths were coherent and circular rather than random

2758

(indicating planners' attention to trajectory shape), and the
spatial organization was further managed by focusing on
clusters of goal locations or sub-regions (e.g., eastern and
western parts of an island). Both of these techniques are
known from earlier research on human TSP solving
(Ormerod & Chronicle, 1999; Graham et al., 2000). Thus,
people deal with complexities of route planning using basic
cognitive simplification strategies that are flexibly adaptable
across tasks. Third, running routes differ because they are
ideally committed to memory, whereas the TSP and tour
plans are not (but see Wiener, Ehbauer, & Mallot, 2009).
Memory demands should further promote use of heuristics
and simplification strategies. However, to our knowledge,
no previous work has explored how known memory
demands influence the route planning process in a task
involving no sub-goals.
Route selection, as opposed to planning, research suggests
possible simplification strategies. More decision points
increase memory load, thus people should select routes that
decrease decision points. Any decision point, such as an
intersection, requires a decision about reorientation.
Bailenson, Shum, and Uttal (2000) support this contention,
showing that people tend to choose routes that are initially
long and straight (see also Hochmair & Karlsson, 2005).
Similarly, Christenfeld (1995) showed that people choose
the last possible turn to a destination, even holding distance
constant. Deviating from the destination increases
orientation demands, thus people should select routes that
show either minimal or systematic deviations. Bailenson,
Shum, and Uttal (1998) support this prediction showing a
preference for routes that do not deviate globally from a
destination (Hochmair & Karlsson, 2005).
Another likely strategy is to rely on perceptually available
patterns in the street network when looking at the map.
When thinking about and navigating in space, humans rely
heavily on whatever structure the environment provides
(Golledge, 1999; Tversky, 2003). Davies & Pederson (2001)
demonstrate the effects of urban grid patterns on orientation,
memory, and features of sketch maps drawn by participants.
Clear gridlike structures in the environment, then, can be
expected to affect route planning particularly in the case of
memory demands.
Route planners are also likely to use the salience of
landmarks in their routes (Klippel & Winter, 2005; Sorrows
& Hirtle, 1999). Landmarks serve an organizing role in
memory for environments (Gollege, 1999), not unlike that
of spatial categories (Maddox, Rapp, Brion, & Taylor, 2008;
McNamara, Hardy, & Hirtle, 1989).
In the present study, participants planned a 2 to 3 mile
running route using one of two maps, knowing they would
have to remember the route. The maps depicted areas that
intuitively should differ in memorability, due to the extent
to which spatial schemas could be applied to them (Moar &
Bower, 1983). One map represented a region with streets
arranged roughly in a grid while the other showed a region
without the structure provided by a grid. We expected
evidence of memory-based planning to be evident in two

ways. First, the routes should, in general, exhibit
characteristics of simplification in relation to baseline
characteristics of the environment. For one example, routes
would use landmarks at decision points at a rate exceeding
the general availability of landmarks in the environment.
Second, a grid pattern should support simple trajectory
shapes, such as squares or rectangles, which are not
available with a non-grid pattern. In contrast, the routes in
the non-grid environment should show increased evidence
of simplification heuristics due to the environment’s
increased complexity. In this case, the increased complexity
comes about because a regularized pattern that a grid
imposes is unavailable.

Experiment
Methods
Participants. Thirty-four participants, who had responded
to advertisements seeking joggers and runners, completed
the study. Prior to coming to the experiment, each
participant completed a running experience questionnaire
asking about gender, running frequency (times per week),
and average distance per run. Using this information, we
assigned participants to one of the two route map areas, thus
equating participants planning in these areas for gender,
running frequency, and running distance. Data from one
participant (assigned to Map 1) was eliminated from
analyses due to computer recording error. In this study,
participants were asked to plan a running route as if they
would run it, but they were not actually asked to run.
Materials. We used a commercially available web-site
(www.mapmyrun.com). We selected three map areas such
that participants would not be highly familiar with the area,
but it was within driving proximity of Tufts University.
One area served as a training map. The two experimental
areas differed such that one had streets forming primarily a
regular grid pattern and the other was perceptually ungridlike, i.e., showed a less clearly structured pattern. Although
differing in adherence to a grid structure, the two areas did
not differ substantively in complexity. We determined
complexity by coding environment characteristics of two
overlapping circular regions (0.75 mile diameter and 1.5
mile diameter) centered on the designated starting point for
route planning. The diameters of the regions represented the
most likely area used for route planning of a 2 to 3 mile run
if participants planned a loop course (0.75 mile) and if they
planned an out-and-back course (1.5 mile).
Characteristics coded included road segments (road
between intersections), distinguishing between major and
minor roads, intersections, distinguishing number of
branches and prototypicality, and landmarks. Landmarks
consisted of park boundaries, main road intersections, and
atypical road properties (e.g., traffic circles; cf. Lynch,
1960). See Table 1 for characteristics of these environments,
and Figures 1 (grid) and 2 (nongrid) for screenshots with
example routes.

2759

Table 1: Baseline map area characteristics
Map
(diameter)
Grid
(0.75)
Non-grid
(0.75)
Grid
(1.5)
Non-grid
(1.5)

Minor
Road
Segments
83%

Prototypical
DP
82%

2 to 4way
DP
98%

Landmarks

81%

77%

99%

40

93%

81%

98%

214

88%

75%

99%

219

48

Figure 1: Grid environment with example route. The
green dot (south) marks the designated start- and endpoint.

Figure 2: Non-grid environment with example route. The
green dot (north) marks the designated start- and endpoint.
Procedures. Participants first planned a route on
www.mapmyrun.com in the practice area to familiarize
themselves with technical aspects of marking a route on the
map. They started at the designated starting point, marked
with a green circle. The experimenter pointed out how to
undo parts of the route if the participant changed their mind
and how to complete the route at the end. After completing
the practice route, the participant saw a different browser

window with the assigned mapping area and starting point
visible. The experimenter informed participants that they
should plan a 2 to 3 mile running route that they would be
able to later recall. Participants then planned their route by
marking it on the map with the web-site tools. After the
participant had completed their route, the experimenter
saved the route via a screen capture.

Results
Data Coding and Analyses. Coding of the planned routes
involved two approaches, a local and a global approach.
For the local approach, initial coding involved the first
author marking segments on each planned route. A segment
started at a decision point (e.g., beginning of route,
intersection) and included the path until the next decision
point. A decision point was defined by whether the segment
changed direction (as defined by Klippel et al., 2004) and
whether an alternative direction existed. In some cases
direction change at a decision point involved a change in
street name. If the street name did not change, a new
decision point was defined only in the case of a minor road,
and only if a sharp corner existed at an intersection. Major
and minor roads differed on the map by color. The second
author reviewed all coding and disagreements were resolved
through discussion. Number of segments served as one of
the dependent measures of route complexity.
A trained research assistant coded each segment of the
planned routes for characteristics of the decision point and
of the path. Characteristics of the decision point included
number of direction options, prototypicality, direction of
turn (sharp, prototypical, or veer, cf. Klippel et al., 2004),
and available landmarks (e.g., parks, complex intersections,
major roads encountered along the way; cf. Lynch, 1960).
Characteristics of the paths included street name, major or
minor road, whether path was retraced during the route or a
decision point was crossed for the second time, and the
number and type of intersections (potential other decision
points) along the path. One final variable coded how path
name interacted with direction choices at a decision point,
i.e., whether one could have gone more than one direction
on the same road at the decision point.
The global approach involved visual inspection of the
routes and coding of features related to shape and extent of
the routes.
Analyses consisted of two types of t-tests, those
comparing route characteristics to the baseline occurrence of
these characteristics in the environment (see Table 1) and
those comparing characteristics of the planned routes as a
function of the different map areas (grid vs. non-grid).
General Characteristics of Planned Routes. The
planned routes had on average 9.82 segments. Planned
routes had more of a loop than an out-and-back pattern. This
fact was confirmed initially by visual inspection of the
routes. Of the 33 maps analyzed, only one (grid
environment) followed an out-and-back path. Two others

2760

(one from each environment) followed an out-and-back with
a loop at the turn around, sometimes called a lollipop course
by runners. The looped structure was confirmed statistically
by examining the proportion of route segments not
overlapping with any other part of the route (95%), (t(32) =
27.7, p <.001). Not a single route involved a crossing of the
trajectory, which would mean using an intersection twice
without retracing any associated segment of the route. In
other words, no routes resembled the shape of an 8, or the
like.
Analysis of turn direction also confirmed the tendency to
plan routes that made a loop. Routes involved turns in a
single direction more often than would be predicted by
chance (M = 73%; t(32) = 11.49, p < .001). The proportion
of turns of a particular direction (e.g., right turns) did not
differ statistically from chance (p > .05), but showed a slight
preference for left turns (58%).
Other segment-based features of the routes showed that as
a whole, the planned routes utilized major and minor roads
in proportions similar to those in the environments, as
indicated by the baseline environment coding (p > .95).
Further, planned routes made heavy use of landmarks (63%
of time) at decision points. This landmark use exceeds the
baseline proportion (30%) of landmarks to decision points
(t(32) = 10.706, p <.001).
Characteristics Differing by Environment. The planned
routes did not differ between map areas in terms of the total
number of segments (p > .80), with an average of 9.75
segments for the grid area and 9.88 segments for the nongrid area. Similarly, use of landmarks at decision points did
not differ as a function of map area (p > .65).
Analyses focusing on characteristics of the decision
points themselves showed differences as a function of map
area. The number of direction choices at a decision point
differed by map area (t(31) = 3.047, p < .01), with routes in
the grid environment (M = 3.56 choices) having somewhat
more complex directional choices than those in the non-grid
environment (M = 3.34 choices). The greater complexity of
directional choice at decision points could also be seen in
use of decision points where one could turn in more than
one direction on the same road (t(31) = 3.46, p < .005. Use
of these types of decision points occurred more in the grid
environment (70% of decision points) than in the non-grid
environment (49% of decision points). Participants also
differed in the types of turns they would use as a function of
environment. Although the two environments did not differ
overall in the proportion of prototypical (close to 90-degree)
intersections (see Table 1), participants included more turns
classified as "veer" in the non-grid environment (41%)
compared to the grid environment (17%) and to baseline
occurrence in the environment (t(31) = -4.392, p < .001).
Use of turns classified as "sharp" also occurred more in the
non-grid (12%) than in the grid environment (2%), t(31) = 4.694, p < .001, but less than predicted by occurrence within
the environment.

Characteristics of path segments also differed as a
function of map area. Although overall the routes used
major and minor roads proportionally similar to their
presence in the environments, within this proportional range
the use of major roads differed by map area. Routes in the
grid environment (12% of segments) utilized major roads to
a lesser extent than those in the non-grid environment (27%
of segments). Routes in grid environments stayed on the
same path longer (passing an average of 4.04 possible
decision points) than those in non-grid environments
(passing an average of 2.76 possible decision points; t(31) =
2.395, p < .05).

Discussion
When planning a running route in an unfamiliar city, one
generally has in mind some desirable properties of that run.
Regardless of any other properties, a key one is being able
to return to the start, whether it be to one’s car or hotel. To
do so effectively requires remembering the planned route.
Although the role of memory in this context is clear, does
one incorporate this role in planning the running route? The
present study explored whether and in what ways people
account for memory demands when planning running
routes. We manipulated memory demands through
characteristics of the environments, using one grid-like
environment and one non-grid environment. While cultural
experiences and expectations about urban areas guide use of
environment grids (Davies & Pederson, 2001), regardless of
this experience a grid does provide a predictable structure
that then allows some cognitive off-loading.
The overall structure of the planned routes provides some
evidence of simplification. Considering the full range of
route structures, the range would seem to be the least
complex out-and-back option to an intermediately complex
loop course to the most complex random or unstructured
course. The vast majority of participants (30 of 33) planned
a loop course. While evident through visual inspection, this
overall structure was confirmed by the absence of trajectory
crossings, the low proportion of segment overlap, and the
high proportion of turns in a single direction occurring
within a route. Thus, generally route trajectories
corresponded to shapes also known to be preferred in human
solutions to the Traveling Salesperson Problem (Ormerod &
Chronicle, 1999) and tour planning involving a set of goals
(Tenbrink & Seifert, 2011). In the TSP, avoiding line
crossings is clearly a useful strategy in order to find the
shortest route (Van Rooij et al., 2003). Apparently,
however, this goal is not the only driving force for such a
strategy, since this same type of route efficiency is not a
primary emphasis in running route planning. The complete
avoidance of line crossings found in our study may thus
seem surprising, also in light of the fact that the holiday tour
plans reported by Tenbrink and Seifert (2011) did involve a
number of path crossings. However, a simple general
trajectory certainly supports the memory demands involved
in our study but not in tour planning and as such may reflect
efficiency in this context.

2761

Only a few participants (a total of three) adopted
strategies to wholesale minimize memory demands. Only
one participant took an out-and-back course. An out-andback course minimizes the different road names traversed
and allows a strategy for remembering directions at decision
points, namely “reverse the direction used on the way out.”
This participant also noted specifically planning an out-andback course to minimize memory load. Two other
participants planned lollipop routes, characterized by outand-back courses with a loop at the turn around. The small
number of these “memory saving” strategies suggests that
while memory may be important in route planning, other
factors also play a role. Some of these reasons, although not
explored in the current study, might be more aesthetically,
emotionally, or motivationally based.
While memory or cognitive demands may not account for
all aspects of running route planning, we argue that our
results, without having given participants explicit
instructions about memory, point to cognitive influences in
route planning. Running route planners appeared to support
their memory by relying on landmarks to a much greater
extent than would be expected in the environment.
Participants used decision points with landmarks at rates
more than doubling the baseline occurrence. This finding
reflects the vast earlier literature highlighting the importance
of landmarks in spatial representations (Sorrows & Hirtle,
199) and wayfinding (e.g., Lynch, 1960; Evans et al., 1984).
Our finding also extends more typical definitions of
landmarks. Unlike typical definitions of landmarks,
including buildings, statues, parks, etc., the landmark
information available to participants included those evident
on a typical map. While maps do note parks and some
buildings, the more common map landmarks emerge from
the street network’s structural elements. This is consistent
with Claramunt and Winter’s (2007) finding that people do
engage the street network’s structural elements as
landmarks. Our finding also extends work showing
landmark salience in memory for environments, as seen in
maps and descriptions (Klippel & Winter, 2005; Taylor &
Tversky, 1992), to route planning situations. To our
knowledge there is no evidence so far for the role of
landmarks in a scenario involving a general trajectory
resembling that of a TSP task. Our results thus provide first
evidence for a compatibility of an orientation to landmarks
with a loop-based route plan.
Evidence of simplification can also be seen when
comparing route characteristics between the grid and nongrid environments. As predicted, routes in the non-grid
environment showed greater evidence of simplification
strategies. Routes through the non-grid environment used
major roads to a greater extent, and used less complex
decision points. Additionally, routes through non-grid
environments reduced the need to remember the direction of
turns. These routes tended to use decision points where a
road name corresponded to a single possible travel direction.
However, routes in grid environments stayed on the same
path longer, similar to known simplification heuristics in

path selection tasks (Bailenson et al., 2000; Christenfeld,
1995).
One suggestion to explain the difference in evidence of
simplification strategies as a function of environment
structure (grid versus non-grid) lies in the affordances of the
environment. Participants clearly planned routes that
followed a loop, starting and ending at the same point but
having little to no overlap, and no crossings. The shape of
the loop, however, appeared to differ. In the non-grid
environment, the planned routes made much more use of
turns that changed direction (veer). This might reflect an
(often rather unsuccessful) attempt to form a circular path,
similar to the aesthetically pleasing TSP solutions found by
Vickers et al. (2001). Such an attempt would make little
sense in a grid pattern environment, which suggests itself
much more to a square or rectangular pattern. Aiming to
achieve a square-like structure would lead to the observed
effect of passing more decision points: the traveller would
tend to continue straight ahead until the next corner of the
square, rather than veer to one side to achieve a curved
trajectory.
While the behavioral data in this study alone do not
capture all aspects of participants' actual underlying aims,
our results are consistent with the assumption that
participants chose trajectories that utilized the environment's
spatial characteristics as optimally as possible for their
running route. Simple geometric figures such as circles and
squares may provide substantial cognitive support in this
regard. Additionally, the strength of the current study’s
findings lie in its direct applicability to real-world behavior.
Our paradigm closely matches an activity in which people
commonly engage, planning the route they themselves
might run in an unfamiliar city. The observed parallels of
our findings to those of TSP and other related studies
suggest shared cognitive processes of route planning across
situation contexts. Simplification appears to be decisive in
each case, adapted to the task with its specific requirements
as well as to the features of the environment involved.

Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support of the HanseWissenschaftskolleg (HWK), Delmenhorst, Germany for its
fellowship opportunity to Holly A. Taylor, thereby making
this collaborative work possible. Funding by the DFG,
SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, project I6-[NavTalk] is
appreciated. Funding by the NRSDEC U.S. Army Natick
Soldier Research, Development, & Engineering Center,
Cognitive Science division, is also appreciated.

References
Applegate, D. L., R. E. Bixby, V. Chvátal & Cook, W. J.
(2007). The Traveling Salesman Problem: A
Computational Study. Princeton University Press.
Bailenson, J. N., Shum, M. S., & Uttal, D. H. (2000). The
initial segment strategy: A heuristic for route selection.
Memory & Cognition, 28(2), 306-318.

2762

Christenfeld, N. (1995). Choices from identical options.
Psychological Science, 6(1), 50-55.
Claramunt, C., & Winter, S. (2007). Structual salience of
elements of the city. Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 34, 1030 -1050.
Davies, C. & Pederson, E. (2001). Grid patterns and cultural
expectations in urban wayfinding. In D.R. Montello (Ed.):
Conference on Spatial Information Theory (COSIT 2001).
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Evans, G. W., Skorpanich, M. A., Gärling, T., Bryant, K. J.,
& Bresolin, B. (1984). The effects of pathway
configuration, landmarks and stress on environmental
cognition. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 4(4),
323-335.
Freksa, C. (1999). Spatial aspects of task-specific
wayfinding maps: A representation-theoretic perspective.
In J.S. Gero & B Tversky (Eds.) Visual and spatial
reasoning in design, Sydney: Key centre of design,
computing and cognition.
Gärling, T., Säisä, J., Böök, A. & Lindberg, E. (1986). The
spatiotemporal sequencing of everyday activities in the
large-scale environment. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 6, 261-280.
Golledge, R. G. (1999). Human wayfinding and cognitive
maps. In R. G. Golledge (Ed.), Wayfinding Behavior:
Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial Processes.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins.
Graham, S.M., Joshi, A., & Pizlo, Z. 2000. The Traveling
Salesman Problem: a hierarchical model. Memory &
Cognition 28, 1191-1204.
Hochmair, H. H., & Karlsson, V. (2005). Investigation of
preference between the least-angle strategy and the initial
segment strategy for route selection in unknown
environments. Lecture Notes in Computer Science:
Spatial Cognition IV—Reasoning, action, and interaction,
3343, 79-97.
Klippel, A., Dewey, C., Knauff, M., Richter, K.-F.,
Montello, D. R.,Freksa, C., et al. (2004). Direction
concepts in wayfinding assistance. In J. Baus, C. Kray &
R. Porzel (Eds.), Workshop on Artificial Intelligence in
Mobile Systems 2004 (AIMS'04). Saarbrücken:SFB 378
Memo 84.
Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route descriptions. In A. G. Cohn & D. M.
Marks (Eds.) Spatial information theory (COSIT ’05),
Lecture notes in computer science, 3693, 347-362.
Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. Cambridge, MA:
The Technology Press and the Harvard University Press.
MacGregor, J. N., & Ormerod, T. (1996). Human
performance on the traveling salesman problem.
Perception & Psychophysics, 58, 527-539.
Maddox, K. B., Rapp, D. N., Brion, S., & Taylor, H. A.
(2008). Social influences on spatial memory. Memory &
Cognition, 36(3), 479-494.
McNamara, T. P., Hardy, J. K., & Hirtle, S. C. (1989).
Subjective hierarchies in spatial memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &

Cognition, 15, 211-227.
Moar, I., & Bower, G. H. (1983). Inconsistency in spatial
knowledge. Memory & Cognition, 11(2), 107-113.
Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P. (1999). Global
perceptual processing in problem solving: The case of the
traveling salesperson. Perception and Psychophysics,
61(6), 1227-1238.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of
landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa &
D. M. Marks (Eds.), Spatial information theory:
Cognitive and computational foundations of geographic
information science (COSIT ’99). Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 1661, 38-50.
Taylor, H. A., & Tversky, B. (1992). Descriptions and
depictions of environments. Memory & Cognition, 20,
483-496.
Tenbrink, T. & Seifert, I. (2011). Conceptual Layers and
Strategies in Tour Planning. Cognitive Processing
12:109–125.
Tenbrink, T., & Wiener, J. (2009). The verbalization of
multiple strategies in a variant of the traveling salesperson
problem. Cognitive Processing, 10(2), 143-161.
Tenbrink, T. & Winter, S. (2009). Variable granularity in
route directions. Spatial Cognition and Computation 9, 64
– 93.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124-1131.
Tversky, B. (2001). Spatial schemas in depictions. In M.
Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas and abstract thought, MA:
MIT Press.
Tversky, B. 2003. Structures of mental spaces – how people
think about space. Environment and Behavior 35(1), 6680.
Van Rooij, I., Stege, U., & Schactman, A. (2003). Convex
hull and tour crossings in the Euclidean traveling
salesperson problem: implications for human performance
studies. Memory & Cognition, 31(2), 215–220.
Vickers, D., Butavicius, M., Lee, M. D., & Medvedev, A.
(2001). Human performance on visually presented
traveling salesman problems. Psychological Research, 65,
34-45.
Wiener, J. M., Ehbauer, N. N., & Mallot, H. A. (2009).
Planning paths to multiple targets: Memory involvement
and planning heuristics in spatial problem solving.
Psychological Research, 73, 644-658.

2763

