UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Looking at the Social Dynamics of Viewpoint
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04m062v5
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Greenwood, Michelle D.
Matthews, Justin L.
Matlock, Teenie
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                      Looking at the Social Dynamics of Viewpoint
                                            Michelle D. Greenwood
                                           University of California, Merced
                                              Justin L. Matthews
                                           University of California, Merced
                                                 Teenie Matlock
                                           University of California, Merced
                                               Michael J. Spivey
                                           University of California, Merced
Abstract: Allocentric perspectives are more common when describing spatial scenes when affordances and language
facilitate taking such a point of view (Greenwood et al., 2010). People tend to feel ”close” to friends and ”distant”
from strangers in both a metaphoric and physical sense (Matthews & Matlock, 2010). This work examines the
relationship between perspective taking and social distance in a simulated school setting.
   Participants imagined attending a meeting with two other students: Mary and John. John’s friendship with the
participant was varied across conditions. Participants viewed a scene of a table and chairs where each member’s
location was labeled, then described where Mary was sitting. Egocentric frames of reference were more common
when participants were familiar/friends with John and less common when participants and John were unfamiliar
with one another.
   Many factors influence an individual’s perspective, and these results suggest that information regarding social
relationships can also influence perspective-taking.
                                                          777

