UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Simulation of Spatial Perspective during Sentence Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03m7c8c1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schwarzkopf, Sarah
Weldle, Helmut
Muller, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Simulation of Spatial Perspective during Sentence Comprehension
Sarah Schwarzkopf1,2 (s.schwarzkopf@gmail.com), Helmut Weldle2, Daniel Müller2, Lars Konieczny2,3
1

Department of Psychiatry, University of Cologne, Kerpener Str. 62
50924 Cologne, Germany
2
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
79098 Freiburg, Germany
3
Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Freiburg, Albertstr. 19
79104 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
We present an experiment, in which the Action-Sentence
Compatibility Effect (ACE, Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002) was
reversed when the perspective was changed by using first
person pronouns as the agent or patient of the sentence. The
results suggest that participants prefer to take the perspective
of the first person protagonists – independent of their
grammatical and semantic roles and the direction implicated
by the action verb. We also discuss how mental simulations
may work in sentences with only third person protagonists.
Keywords: Perspective taking;
models; ACE; sentence processing

embodiment;

situation

Introduction
When processing language, comprehenders generate a
mental model with an inherent perspective on the described
situation (Zwaan, 2004). Our goal is to find out how
linguistic units, such as the verb or grammatical markers,
influence the mental simulation during language processing.
According to the embodied cognition hypothesis, language
comprehension amounts to the mental simulation of the
action involved, i.e. the activation of perceptual schemata
and motoric programs. Empirically, the embodiment
hypothesis received support from a vast body of evidence
from both behavioral and neurofunctional studies (e.g. AzizZadeh, Wilson, Rizzolatti & Iacoboni, 2006; Pulvermüller,
Härle & Hummel, 2001; Zwaan, Stanfield & Yaxley, 2002).
Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) reported the ActionSentence Compatibility Effect (ACE): participants who had
to respond to action-sentences, such as "You open the
drawer", by performing an arm-movement either directed
towards their own body or in the opposite direction showed
increased response latencies whenever the required direction
of the arm movement was incompatible with the direction of
the movement inherent in the sentence (sentence direction).
Hence planning and execution of an incompatible
movement appear to be inhibited while compatible
movements are facilitated (Glenberg & Robertson, 1999).
Processing sentences describing directed actions thus trigger
the execution of corresponding real actions.
To integrate the diversity of findings, Zwaan (2004)
proposed the Immersed Experiencer Framework, which
conceives language comprehension as situation simulation
from the perspective of an observer who her/himself has a
specific position in the situation model. According to this
view, language comprehenders mentally simulate the

reference situation as if they perceived a real-life situation
(Zwaan, 2004). While doing so, they can follow the
perspectives of protagonists in the story. Therefore it is
easier to recall objects and events, if they are relevant for
the protagonist than if they are not (Morrow, Bower &
Greenspan, 1989). Perspective taking plays a crucial role in
interpreting words (Black, Turner & Bower, 1979; Morrow
& Clark, 1988; Pustejowsky, 1995; Sanford & Garrod,
1998) and texts (MacWhinney, 2008). In the sentence "The
mouse approached the fence" the distance between agent
and fence and the distance from which the situation is
perceived by the observer (or simulated by the recipient) are
both smaller than in the sentence "The tractor approached
the fence" (Morrow & Clark, 1988). This difference
indicates that different words suggest different perspectives.
MacWhinney (2005) claims that discourse comprehension
in general amounts to tracking multiple perspectives, a
cognitive skill that has evolved from adaptations that
supported the tracking of visual perspectives. Languages
have evolved to provide perspective tracking devices, such
as subjecthood in sentences (MacWhinney, 1987).
Applying this idea to the ACE, one might expect that
there is a strong tendency to simulate the action from the
sentence subject's perspective, which happens to coincide
with the agent inherent in the verbs. Since the verb is the
linguistic element in a sentence that encodes these actions
and a single verb can also implicate directions and evoke
action simulations (Black, Turner & Bower, 1979; Chen &
Bargh, 1999; Tseng & Bergen, 2005), it seems obvious that
the implicated spatial direction of its described action (verb
direction) controls which sentence direction is simulated by
the reader during language processing. However, language
processing is more than just word processing. So it is
important to understand the link between the processing of
content words and grammatical constructions (Bergen &
Wheeler, 2010). Thus, the question arises how verb
direction can be set in relation to the sentence and its reader.
When looking at the ACE we find shorter reaction times
when the action performed by the participants is compatible
with the action described in the sentence. Since usually the
acting person in a sentence is the subject and the participant
her/himself is also acting, it seems to be the easiest
alternative to take the subject's perspective.
However, it remains an open question whether the
simulated perspective is dominated by the perspective of the
action's subject, the topic of the sentence, whether it is verb-

937

driven (which would be the agent's perspective), or whether
it is influenced by the whole situation model. In order to
find out, we manipulated the grammatical and semantic
roles of two interacting 3rd person protagonists in a previous
study (Schwarzkopf, Müller, Weldle & Konieczny, 2008)
instead of using pronouns as Glenberg and Kaschak (2002)
did. While Bergen and Wheeler (2005) argued that motor
processes are engaged in language comprehension even if
the reader is not addressed in the sentences, we could not
replicate the ACE with these materials. The assumption that
the simulated direction is always the verb direction is also
inconsistent with the findings of Glenberg and Kaschak
(2002) in which the sentence direction seems to be reversed
by directly addressing the reader by 2nd person pronouns.
One possible explanation is that the simulated movement is
not only implicated by the action verb, but by its
relationship to the protagonists and their semantic or
grammatical roles. Another question that remained unclear
in their work is why 2nd person pronouns evoke a 1st person
perspective taking and whether 1st person pronouns evoke a
1st or 2nd person perspective taking. 1st person perspective
taking could be expected, because readers articulate the 1st
person pronouns silently in inner speech (Abramson &
Goldinger, 1997). 2nd person perspective taking (Reddy,
2008) could be expected, because when reading or hearing a
1st person personal pronoun in natural contexts the utterance
usually comes from an interacting partner.

Experiment
The goal of this study is to investigate the perspectives that
comprehenders take in their mental simulations of action
sentences. More specifically, we want to know whether the
ACE only reflects the direction implicated by the action
verb, or whether the direction can be changed by other
factors. Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) used the 2nd person
singular pronoun you to establish the sentence direction:
participants simulated the perspective of the 2nd person
protagonists. They analysed their data only with regard to
sentence type, but not to the grammatical roles of the
pronouns. In our experiment we manipulate this factor
systematically using the ACE-paradigm and varying the
roles of protagonists in action sentences. The experimental
setup is kept as close as possible to the original work by
Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) but with German materials. In
our target items, the pronoun perspective either coincides at
the same time with the subject's, the topic's and the agent's
perspective or with the object's and the patient's perspective.
Instead of 2nd person pronouns we use 1st person pronouns
interacting with 3rd person protagonists. Our main interest
concerns the question, whether 1st person pronouns evoke a
1st or 2nd person perspective taking. On the one hand they
might lure readers into identifying with the 1st person
protagonist and take over her/his perspective. Otherwise
mentioning a protagonist with a 1st person pronoun could
evoke a 2nd person perspective, which is usually taken
during interactions with other persons.

We include sentences with two 3rd person protagonists in
order to find out whether the (non-) effect of verb direction
shown in Schwarzkopf et al. (2008) can be replicated.

Materials and design
Three types of sentences were constructed by varying the
use of 1st person pronouns and 3rd person noun phrases: 3rd
person subject and object (1), 1st person subject and 3rd
person object (2), and 3rd person subject and 1st person
object (3). This variation established the factor sentence type
(or perspective) used in the experiment.
(1) 3rd/3rd person – sentences:
Der Zuschauer schiebt/zieht den Fußgänger.
The spectator pushes/pulls the pedestrian.
(2) 1st person agent – sentences:
Ich schiebe/ziehe den Fußgänger.
I push/pull the pedestrian.
(3) 1st person patient – sentences:
Der Zuschauer schiebt/zieht mich.
The spectator pushes/pulls me.
Half of the verbs denoted actions with an inherent
movement directed towards the agent's body (e.g. pull), the
other half directing away from it (e.g. push). Since we had
no hypothesis about how the two verb directions themselves
might affect response latency other than by interacting with
the direction of the required response, data for the two verbtypes were collapsed into a single factor level. The second
experimental factor was established by varying the required
response direction such that it was either compatible with
the verb-inherent direction, or incompatible. In half of the
trials the correct response to the target was in one direction,
the other half in the other. Again, we were not interested in
effect of arm movement direction in itself, but only in its
interaction with verb direction. The experiment was hence
built according to a 2×3 design with the factors sentence
type and compatibility of response and verb direction.
In a pretest, 87 transitive action verbs, each denoting an
interaction between two protagonists, were rated with
respect to their inherent movement direction towards or
away from the agent's body. Similarly, 131 possible
protagonists were rated with respect to commonness and
how easy it is to take their perspective. The 96 protagonists
and the 48 verbs that were rated best were selected for the
target sentences of our study. 24 of the action verbs convey
a concrete or abstract movement towards the agent's body;
the other 24 express a movement away from the body.
From each of these 48 verbs three sentences were
generated according to the factor sentence type as illustrated
in (1)-(3). The resulting 132 items were distributed over
three lists according to a latin square design, such that each
sentence occurred in each list only in one version, and each
condition occurred 16 times in each list.
144 fillers of various types were added to each list. 48 of
them were meaningful, so that there were 96 meaningful
and 96 meaningless items in each list (all target sentences

938

were meaningful). 48 of the meaningless fillers had the
same sentence structure as the target sentences. The
meaninglessness was established by impossible actions.

Hypotheses
If comprehenders simulate the agent's/subject's/topic's
perspective, and the 1st person perspective does not
influence the ACE at all, compatible responses should be
faster than incompatible responses for all three sentence
types. The same result is expected, if only verb direction is
simulated. If the 1st person perspective contributes to the
ACE, we expect that in sentences with 1st person subjects,
latencies for compatible responses are smaller if verb and
response directions are compatible, compared to the 3rd/3rd
person sentences in which two 3rd person protagonists
interact with each other. When the 1st person pronoun is in
object position, its perspective differs from the subject's,
topic's and agent's perspective. If all perspectives compete
with each other, we expect elevated response latencies. If,
however, the 1st person pronouns lure participants to adopt a
2nd person perspective, the 3rd/3rd person sentences should
still show the ACE. The other sentences should either show
no effect, if participants do not simulate the perspective of
one of the protagonists, or there could be an effect for both
sentence types, if the verb direction or the agent's/subject's/
topic's perspective still directs the simulation regardless of
the 2nd person pronoun.

Participants
Twenty-five students (10 female, 15 male) of the University
of Freiburg voluntarily participated in the experiment. All
participants were German native speakers, two grew up
bilingually, one with English the other one with Italian as
the second native language. The participant's age ranged
between 23 and 36 years, the mean age was 26.5 years.

Procedure
Participants were instructed to read the sentences on a
computer screen and to decide whether they were
meaningful or not. They had to indicate their judgment by
pressing one of two buttons as quickly as possible. We used
a computer keyboard (see Figure 1) where all keys were
removed except for three that were located in line, such that
the middle button, the Z-key1, was equally far from the
other two buttons. The outer buttons were replaced by a 3x3
cm styrofoam top piece with the symbols '*' and 'o' to make
them easier to press. The keyboard was turned by 90° so
that the short side pointed towards the participant. Since the
participant's index finger was placed on the Z-key during
the presentation of the sentences, they had to stretch their
arms away from their bodies to reach the o-button and had
to move the arm towards their body to reach the *-button.
The keyboard was placed to the right of the participants for
right-handed, and to the left for left-handed participants.
1

Note that the Z-key is in the middle of the German keyboard
on the position where the Y-key is on an English keyboard.

After half of the trials, the direction of the correct
response was inverted, so that compatible and incompatible
responses had to be given in both directions. Also, half of
the participants started with the o-button and continued with
the *-button for the meaningful-judgment, half of the
participants vice versa. Furthermore, all target items were
distributed to the lists in a way that each item was tested in
both directions. Hence, any potential interaction of armmovement direction that cannot be attributed to
compatibility was eliminated.

Figure 1: Vertical three-button-keyboard
Participants were instructed in detail about the procedure
of the experiment. Each trial started with a fixation cross in
the center of the screen. Participants had to press the Zbutton to start the sentence presentation and had to hold it
down until the end of the trial. Sentences were presented in
a stationary window word-by-word, using a rapid serial
visual presentation (RSVP) paradigm implemented in
DMDX (Forster & Forster, 2003). Each word was presented
for 200 ms plus 28 ms for each character. At the end of each
sentence - marked by “***” - participants were instructed to
respond as quickly as possible by indicating whether the
presented sentence was meaningful or not. In order to do so,
they had to release the middle button and press either the
button located closer to their body or the button further
away from their body.
When participants released the Z-key before the end of
the sentence, presentation was stopped and participants were
reminded to wait until the end of the sentence. No data were
recorded for these trials. After accepting this notification by
button press, they had to start the presentation of the next
sentence by pressing the Z-key again. At the beginning of
both parts of the experiment five training items were
presented. After each training item, but not after
experimental items, a feedback message was presented on
the screen indicating the response the participant gave.
When participants released the Z-key before the end of the
sentence during training, the training run was extended. The
whole experiment ran about 30 minutes.

Results
One of the participants rated less than 50% of the target
sentences as meaningful and was excluded from analysis.
Data of 24 participants were analyzed. 15% of the original
data points were eliminated, because of technical errors or
because they had been rated as not meaningful. Extreme

939

values in the remaining data were excluded separately for
each condition. Thereby, we removed 4% of the data.
The data were submitted to a 2x3 analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with the factors compatibility (compatible/
incompatible) and sentence type (3rd/3rd person / 1st person
agent / 1st person patient). Separate analyses were conducted
with participants (F1) and items (F2) as random variables.
The dependent variable was the time between sentence
offset and the time the Z-key was released. The main effect
for sentence type was marginally significant only for items
[F12;51,7 < 1, n.s.; F22;117,1 = 2,44, p<0,1]. The main effect for
compatibility was not significant [F11;23,8 < 1, n.s.; F21;67,9 <
1, n.s.]. The interaction between compatibility and sentence
type was highly significant for items [F12;51,5 = 1,16, n.s.;
F22;97,5 = 9.34, p<.001]. There was a highly significant main
effect for participants [F123;13,7 = 11,54, p< 0,001], but not
for items [F247;5,6 = 2.28, n.s.].
In order to identify the origin of the interaction, each two
of the three levels of the factor sentence type were analysed
pairwise in a theoretical 2x2-design. When the analysis
included level 1 (3rd/3rd person) and level 2 (1st person
agent), the interaction between sentence type and
compatibility was not significant [F11;24,5 = 1.17, n.s.;
F21;46,7 < 1, n.s.]. When the analysis included level 1 (3rd/3rd
person) and level 3 (1st person patient) the interaction was
significant only for items [F11;25,0 < 1, n.s.; F21;47,8 = 6.42,
p<.05]. When the analysis included level 2 (1st person agent)
and level 3 (1st person patient) the interaction was
marginally significant for participants and highly significant
for items [F11;24,8 = 3,46, p< 0.1; F21;48,9 = 26.42, p< .001].

3rd/3rd person sentences [F11;27,5 < 1, n.s.; F21;51,2 = 1.66,
n.s.]. The compatibility effect in the 1st person agent
sentences is marginally significant for participants and
highly significant for items [F11;28,9 = 3,22, p<.1; F21;54,3 =
9.94, p<.01]. Participants were significantly faster when the
verb direction was compatible with the movement direction.
There was a significant compatibility effect in the 1st person
patient sentences, however only by items [F11;35,6 < 1, n.s.;
F21;52,4 = 13,56, p<.01]. Participants were significantly
slower when the verb direction was compatible with the
movement direction.

Discussion
The results indicate that the simulated action direction is
clearly dependent on the perspective that is induced by the
1st person pronoun. The hypothesis that participants prefer
to take the perspective of the 1st person protagonists
regardless of their grammatical or semantic roles within the
sentence was confirmed by the interaction between sentence
types (2) and (3). When the 1st person pronoun is in
patient/object position, it clearly overrides the agent's/
subject's/topic's perspective as well as a potential simulation
of the verb direction, and participants adopt the patient's/
object's perspective.
The lack of an ACE during the processing of sentences
with two interacting 3rd person protagonists (3rd/3rd person)
suggests that verb-inherent perspective alone might not be
sufficient to trigger an effective simulation. However, if a
perspective is induced by indexical pronouns, clear
compatibility effects arise. These effects interact with
sentence perspective, i.e. whether the 1st person protagonist
is the agent or patient of the action, and seem to be
independent of the direction implicated by the action verb.
We did not find evidence in any of the conditions that the
verb direction itself or the perspective of the agent, the
subject or the topic of the sentence is simulated by language
comprehenders. For sentence type (1) no evidence for
simulation could be shown at all whereas the pronoun
directed perspective taking in sentence types (2) and (3).

General Discussion

Figure 2: Mean reaction times depending on the factors
sentence type and compatibility (error bars denote
confidence intervals)
As illustrated in Figure 2, the 3rd/3rd person sentences did
not show an ACE, while both 1st person sentence types did.
However, the ACE was reversed for the two 1st person
sentence types. There was no compatibility effect in the

Our results confirm that participants also adopt the 1st
person protagonist's perspective if the protagonist is in
patient/object position. Interestingly, this is compatible with
the finding of Glenberg and Kaschak (2002) with 2nd person
personal pronouns. Our results show that 1st and 2nd person
(indexical) personal pronouns seem to work similar: they
draw the comprehender into their perspective. This supports
the results of Brunyé, Ditman, Mahoney, Augustyn and
Taylor (2009). They also tested perspective taking
preferences during language processing, but pre-activated
the visual modality and thereby visual simulation by using a
sentence-picture matching task. The pictures and
correspondingly the perspectives are predetermined in their
paradigm. With our paradigm we show that the same
perspective taking processes take place even if only the
language system is involved in the task and no image

940

processing or -matching is required. This indicates that the
effects are task-independent.
Our results suggest that the sentence direction is defined
not only by the verb direction but also by the verb's
relationship to the protagonists. While the general direction
may still be encoded by the verb, personal pronouns seem to
define the location of the comprehender within the space of
her/his situation model. Instead of rigidly taking over the
agent's perspective, she/he seems to be drawn into the
perspective of a 1st or 2nd person protagonist – regardless of
whether or not the protagonist is the agent of the action. The
identification with different protagonists in different
grammatical roles changes the perspective on the spatial
direction of the action verb and therefore also changes the
activated motion direction. This confirms the idea that
content words encode what – whereas grammatical
constructions modulate how it is mentally simulated
(Bergen & Wheeler, 2010).
Our results show that 1st person pronouns do not evoke
the taking of a 2nd, but – same as 2nd person pronouns – of a
1st person perspective within the situation model. This is an
interesting finding, because in directed speech
comprehenders generally are addressed only by 2nd person
pronouns. 1st person pronouns are in a way ambiguous: they
describe the speaker's perspective and although in our study
participants are not speakers but comprehenders they seem
to simulate the speaker's perspective. Another explanation
includes the reader's use of inner speech (Abramson &
Goldinger, 1997): the 1st person pronouns are silently
articulated as they are in directed speech and therefore
evoke a 1st person perspective taking. In this case it should
be more difficult to simulate a 1st person perspective with
2nd person pronouns, because the perspective has to be
switched by the comprehender. Both accounts predict that
the 2nd person's perspective will be taken, if a 2nd person
interacts with a 3rd person. But if the 2nd person is the only
protagonist in the sentence, the personal pronoun may not
trigger perspective taking, because it is – and this is in
contrast to sentences with only one 3rd person protagonist –
not obvious for the comprehender that she/he isn't in an
interactional context with the producer of the sentence. The
weakness of Glenberg and Kaschak's (2002) results with
imperative sentences supports this explanation.
Future research has to show, whether 1st and 2nd person
pronouns still evoke a 1st person perspective taking if
comprehenders do not read but listen to sentences – this is
probably closer to a real-life interaction, because the voice
articulating the stimuli obviously belongs to another person.
Another possibility to test if these results can be generalized
and participants usually take the 1st person perspective when
reading 1st or 2nd person pronouns is to present written
stimuli within an interactional context, e.g. in a letter.
Other studies have shown that usually many aspects of a
3rd person protagonist's perspective are simulated
automatically (Bergen & Wheeler, 2005; Bower, 2000;
Horton & Rapp, 2003; Morrow, Bower & Greenspan, 1989;
Rinck & Trabasso & Suh, 1993; Zwaan, 1996). One study

even documented slower reaction times if the direction of
action verbs does not correspond with the perspective from
which the protagonist perceives the movement (Black,
Turner & Bower, 1979). It is therefore somewhat surprising
that our sentences with two interacting 3rd person
protagonists did not evoke an ACE in the present study. We
expected to replicate the ACE in the 3rd/3rd person sentences
with 3rd person agents and patients, because in these
sentences nothing prevented participants from simply
simulating the verb direction. Additionally one of the two
protagonists was the sentence topic, the subject and the
agent at the same time. However, we did not find an ACE.
This non-effect is an accurate replication of the non-effect
reported by Schwarzkopf et al. (2008). As other studies
found comparable results with other paradigms (e.g. Brunyé
et al., 2009) we'll discuss why there eventually may be no
effect.
If there is actually no effect, it seems that participants
may not simulate any protagonist's perspective, if there are
two interacting 3rd person protagonists. It remains unclear,
why that could be the case and how this finding should
influence our understanding of the role of embodiment in
language processing. The contextual factors definitively
seem to play a more important role for embodied
simulations than expected. We can assume that the tested
sentences were well-understood by the participants, because
at least their meaningfulness was rated correctly - but if they
are not perceptually simulated, the results seem to suggest
that mental simulation is not a necessary condition for
language comprehension. Is the ACE a fragile effect? Is it
just a special case calling for a better interpretation? May it
not be possible to show the embodied character of language
comprehension in all kinds of sentences? Further work will
be required to clarify these issues.
On the other hand, the measuring of action simulation
could simply be sensitive to the method. In this case the
ACE paradigm could only evoke the effect using a
'perspectivation', e.g. via an interaction between personal
pronoun perspective and the verb (or agent's) perspective. In
most of the studies mentioned above, in which 3rd person
perspective taking was shown, there was just one 3rd person
protagonist used in the target items, mostly interacting with
a non-animated object – only two studies used sentences
with two interacting 3rd person protagonists (Black, Turner
& Bower, 1979; Horton & Rapp, 2003). In both of them,
one protagonist was described in detail at the beginning of a
story, while the other one just dropped by at one point to
interact with the first protagonist within the existing
reference situation. In this context our results may suggest
that during the construction of a situation model, the
protagonist's perspective is only simulated if not more than
one protagonist appears or if one specific perspective is
suggested. In order to suggest a perspective to the reader, 1st
or 2nd person pronouns can be used or the perspective of one
of the protagonists can be described in detail.
Another possible interpretation of the replicated noneffect is that the reference situation is simulated from a

941

perspective that was not investigated in this study. Possibly,
the reference situation is simulated from a by-standing
perspective, from which the interaction of the protagonists
in the reference situation can be observed. This observer
perspective would not evoke a movement towards or away
from the body but a movement from the left to the right or
vice versa (Maas & Russo, 2003). If such a horizontal armmovement is pre-activated, the simulation contains not only
a model of the action, but also a spatial discourse model.
This question remains to be addressed in further research.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks go to Peter Baumann, Sascha Wolfer and Simon
Büchner for helpful discussions and crucial feedback.

References
Abramson, M., & Goldinger, S. D. (1997). What the reader's
eye tells the mind's ear: Silent reading activates inner
speech. Perception & Psychophysics, 59(7), 1059-1068.
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S., Rizzolatti, G., & Iacoboni, M.
(2006). Congruent Embodied Representations for
Visually Presented Actions and Linguistic Phrases
Describing Actions. Current Biology, 16(18), 1818-1823.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (2005). Sentence understanding
engages motor processes. Proceedings of the TwentySeventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 238-243). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Bergen, B., & Wheeler, K. (2010). Grammatical aspect and
mental simulation. Brain & Language 112, 150-158.
Black, J. B., Turner, T. J., & Bower, G. H. (1979). Point of
view in narrative comprehension, memory, and
production. Journal of verbal learning and behaviour, 18,
187–198.
Brunyé, T. T., Ditman, T., Mahoney, C. R., Augustyn, J. S.,
& Taylor, H. A. (2009). When You and I Share
Perspectives: Pronouns Modulate Perspective Taking
During Narrative Comprehension. Psychological Science
14(4), 27-32.
Chen, M., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). Consequences of
automatic
evaluation:
Immediate
behavioral
predispositions to approach or avoid the stimulus.
Personality and social psychology bulletin, 25, 215–224.
Forster, K. I., & Forster, J. C. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
35(1),116–124.
Glenberg, A., & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558–565.
Glenberg, A. M., & Robertson, D. A. (1999). Indexical
understanding of instructions. Discourse processes, 28(1),
1-26.
Horton, W., & Rapp, D. N. (2003). Out of sight, out of
mind: Occlusion and the accessibility of information in
narrative comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10(1), 104–110.

Maas, A., & Russo, A. (2003). Directional Bias in the
Mental Representation of Spatial Events: Nature or
Culture? Psychological Science 14(4), 296-301.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). Toward a psycholinguistically
plausible parser. In S. Thomason (Ed.), Proceedings of
the Eastern States Conference on Linguistics (pp. 1-8).
Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University.
MacWhinney, B. (2005). Language evolution and human
development. In B. Ellis & D. Bjorklund (Eds.), Origins
of the social mind. New York: Guilford.
MacWhinney, B. (2008). How mental models encode
embodied linguistic perspectives. In R. Klatzky, B.
MacWhinney & M. Behrmann (Eds.), Embodiment, Egospace, and Action. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Morrow, D. G., Bower, G. H., & Greenspan, S. L. (1989).
Updating
situation
models
during
narrative
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 28,
292–312.
Morrow, D. G., & Clark, H. H. (1988). Interpreting words in
spatial descriptions. Language and Cognitive Processes,
3, 275–291.
Pulvermüller, F., Härle, M., & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking
or talking?: Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates
of action verb processing. Brain and Language, 78, 143–
168.
Pustejowsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Reddy, V. (2008). How infants know minds. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Rinck, M., & Bower, G. H. (2000). Temporal and spatial
distance in situation models. Memory & Cognition, 28(8),
1310–1320.
Schwarzkopf, S., Müller, D., Weldle, H., & Konieczny, L.
(2008). Grammatical person controls perspective taking in
embodied simulation semantics. Proceedings of the
Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing
(AMLaP) Conference (p. 144), Cambridge, UK.
Trabasso, T., & Suh, S. (1993). Understanding text:
Achieving explanatory coherence through on-line
inferences and mental operations in working memory.
Discourse Processes, 16, 3–34.
Tseng, M. J., & Bergen, B. K. (2005). Lexical processing
drives motor simulation. Proceedings of the TwentySeventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 2206-2211). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Zwaan, R. A. (1996). Processing narrative time shifts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 1196–1207.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168-171.
Zwaan, R. A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: Toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. Psychology
of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and
Theory, 44, 35-62.

942

