UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mind the Gap: Dispositional Agency Facilitates Toddlers’ Causal Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5cv528tw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Muentener, Paul
Bonawtiz, Elizabeth
Horowitz, Alexandra
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mind the Gap: Dispositional Agency Facilitates Toddlers’ Causal Representations
Paul Muentener (pmuenten@mit.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Elizabeth Bonawitz
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94708 USA

Alexandra Horowitz
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305 USA

Laura E. Schulz
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Abstract
Toddlers readily learn predictive relations between events (A
predicts B); however, they intervene on A to cause B in few
contexts (e.g., when an agent initiates the event.) The current
studies look at whether toddlers’ failures are due to the
difficulty of initiating interventions or to constraints on the
events they causally represent. Toddlers saw a block slide
towards a base, but an occluder prevented them from seeing
whether the block contacted the base; after the block
disappeared, a toy did or did not activate. We predicted if
toddlers construed the events causally, then they would
expect contact when the toy activated but distance when the
toy did not activate. In Experiment 1 toddlers predicted the
contact relations only when an agent was potentially present.
Experiment 2 confirmed that toddlers believed a hidden agent
was present. These findings suggest that dispositional agency
facilitates toddlers’ ability to represent causal relationships.
Keywords: causal reasoning;
agency; looking-time measures.

prediction;

dispositional

Human adults recognize that events that predict each other
sometimes cause each other. This allows us to generate
novel actions to cause an event (hereafter referred to as
“interventions”), distinguish spurious associations from
genuine causes, and engage in effective exploration (see
Glymour, Spirtes, and Scheines, 2001; Gopnik et al., 2004;
Pearl, 2000; Schulz, Gopnik & Glymour, 2007; Woodward,
2002, 2007). However, many researchers have speculated
that this recognition might emerge relatively late in both
phylogeny and ontogeny (see Bonawitz et al., 2010; Gopnik
et al., 2004; Meltzoff 1995; Meltzoff & Blumenthal, 2007;
Waisman, Cook, Gopnik & Jacobs, 2009a, 2009b;
Woodward, 2007). There is no evidence that non-human
animals spontaneously intervene after observing novel
predictive relationships (see Tomasello & Call, 1997) and
surprisingly, there is some evidence that this insight may be
absent even in early childhood: Although preschoolers
readily move from observing predictive relationships among
physical events to trying causal interventions, toddlers do
not (Bonawitz et al., 2010).

Specifically, in a study upon which the current work is
based, children were familiarized to a predictive event in
which (1) a block moved across a stage and contacted a
base, and (2) a spinning toy airplane, connected by a visible
wire to the base, immediately activated upon contact.
Preschoolers (mean: 47 months) and toddlers (mean: 24
months) were equally successful at learning the predictive
relationship: in a catch trial, in which the toy did not
activate, virtually all children spontaneously looked to the
toy. However, when asked to make the toy go, although
almost all the preschoolers pushed the block towards the
base and looked to the toy, none of the toddlers did so.
That is, no toddler spontaneously intervened, and when
prompted to do so, all toddlers pushed the block to the base
but none then predictively looked to the toy.
These results were not due to the toddlers’ unwillingness
to interact with the block (all of them engaged in objectdirected play) nor their disinterest in the plane (all of them
did so repeatedly when later shown how). Rather, Bonawitz
et. al (2010) found that the presence of a dispositional agent1
appeared to affect toddlers’ ability to move from prediction
to intervention. If instead of the block moving by itself
during the familiarization phase, the experimenter pushed
the block into the base, toddlers performed the action
themselves and anticipated the outcome.
Given the wealth of research documenting the
sophistication of children’s causal reasoning (for review, see
Schulz, Kushnir, & Gopnik, 2007), toddlers’ failure in the
non-agentive context may seem surprising. However,
previous developmental studies of causal reasoning have
almost always included dispositional agents (puppets or
people). Thus, little is known about whether children
spontaneously recognize the possibility that non-agentive

1

By dispositional agent we mean an agent capable of intentional
action. We use the term dispositional agent rather than just “agent”
in order to distinguish dispositional from causal agents (which
include objects or forces). We use the term dispositional rather
than intentional agent because our experiments do not specifically
test the distinction between the intentional and accidental actions.

1801

predictive relations are causal.2 By contrast, the importance
of dispositional agency to infants’ causal representations has
been widely documented. Infants represent dispositional
agents, but not objects, as potential causes of both object
motion and change of state events (Muentener, under
review; Muentener & Carey, 2010; Saxe, Tenenbaum, &
Carey, 2005; Saxe, Tzelnic, & Carey, 2007; but see Sobel &
Kirkham, 2007 for potential evidence against this claim).
Arguably then, in the absence of dispositional agency,
toddlers, like infants, might fail to represent predictive
relations as potentially causal.
Alternatively, toddlers’ failure to intervene and anticipate
the outcome of their interventions might not be due to any
difficulty representing non-agentive events as causal but to
the difficulty of initiating causally relevant actions.
Researchers have suggested that intentional action might, in
general, lag behind predictive looking either because the
demands of planning and executing motor responses
interfere with children’s ability to access task-relevant
information (Baillargeon et al, 1990; Diamond & GoldmanRakic, 1989; Thelen & Smith, 1994), or because stronger
representations might be necessary for acting than for
looking (see Munakata, 2001 for review). Although there
are important theoretical distinctions between these claims,
they are united in suggesting that a gap between children’s
ability to make successful predictions and their ability to
perform effective actions might reflect changes not in
children’s conceptual understanding but in their ability to
manifest their knowledge under complex task demands. If
so, any additional information that strengthens the
representation of a causal relationship might boost
performance. That is, toddlers may recognize deliberate
actions by dispositional agents as likely causes, and
therefore may identify sequences involving agent actions as
causal relations. Thus, the presence of a dispositional agent
in Bonawitz et. al. (201) may have improved toddlers’
performance because it provided information about the type
of action that could be performed with the block at the time
the toddler encoded the predictive relation.
By assessing toddlers’ causal understanding independent
of their ability to initiate actions, we can learn whether
dispositional agency merely facilitates children’s ability to
move from prediction to intervention, or whether it affects
children’s underlying representations.
In order to
distinguish these accounts, we look at children’s expectation
that physical causation requires contact between causal
agents and patients (e.g., Ball, 1973; Kotovsky &
Baillargeon, 2000; Leslie & Keeble, 1987; Oakes & Cohen,
1990). For example, research suggests that infants expect
objects to move when contacted and not to move when not
contacted (Kotovsky and Baillargeon, 2000). Recently,
these findings have been extended to non-motion state
2

Michottean launching events, where one object strikes another
and sets it in motion, are an important exception. Many
researchers however, have suggested that causal perception of
launching events is distinct from other causal inference (e.g.,
Scholl & Tremoulet, 2000). See General Discussion.

change events, such that infants expect a hand to have
contacted the box when it breaks but not when it does not,
but they do not have these expectations when the candidate
cause is not an agent (Muentener & Carey, 2010).
In the current study, we look at whether dispositional
agency affects toddlers’ causal representations by using a
violation of expectation looking-time paradigm. Inspired by
previous work (Bonawitz et al., 2010), we show children a
block that slides towards a base; a toy connected to the base
either does or does not activate. An occluder prevents
children from seeing whether the block contacts the base.
On test, we remove the occluder and measure looking time.
If toddlers form causal representations of non-agentive
events and the failure to intervene suggested by previous
work (Bonawitz et al., 2010) is due only to the difficulty
involved in initiating motor responses, then children should
both (1) expect contact when the effect occurs, and (2)
expect a gap when the effect does not occur. By contrast, if
toddlers require dispositional agents to represent the events
as causal, they should make differential predictions about
contact causality in the presence of these cues, but not in
their absence. This paradigm thus allows us to investigate
whether developmental change occurs merely at the level of
performance or at the level of conceptual representations.

Experiment 1
We predicted that toddlers would expect contact causality
for events initiated by a dispositional agent, but have no
expectations for otherwise identical non-agentive events.
However, because toddlers might selectively attend to
events initiated by dispositional agents, we compared two
closely matched conditions: one in which a block began to
move spontaneously (the Spontaneous Motion condition)
and one in which a block emerged from off-stage already in
motion (the Inferred Agent condition). We were inspired by
previous research (Saxe et al., 2005) suggesting that infants
posit hidden agents when an object emerges in motion. If
for instance, a beanbag emerges from the right side of a
stage, 7-month-olds look longer when a previously hidden
hand is revealed on the left side of the stage than the right.
If toddlers similarly represent hidden agents when objects
emerge in motion and represent agent-initiated but not
spontaneously occurring events as causal, they should
expect spatial relations consistent with contact causality in
the Inferred Agent but not the Spontaneous Motion
condition.

Methods
Participants Ninety-six toddlers (mean: 24.1 months, range
–18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum.
An additional 9 toddlers were recruited but not included in
the final sample due to: inability to complete the session (n
= 3), parental interference (n = 1), or failure to predictively
look during the familiarization trials (n = 5). 12 toddlers
were assigned to each of eight conditions crossing three
factors: Agency (Inferred Agent or Spontaneous Motion),
Activation (Toy On or Toy Off), and Spatial Relation

1802

Figure 1: Procedure for Experiment 1. In the Inferred Agent condition, toddlers viewed 6 familiarization trials (3 On, 3 Off,
in alternation) in which a block emerged from behind the right side barrier and travelled towards the base, disappearing
behind the screen. Toddlers then viewed only one of four test events. Following the initial motion of the block, as during
the Familiarization trials, the experimenter removed the screen to reveal the block in contact or at a distance from the base,
and the toy either on or off. The Spontaneous Motion condition followed the same procedure, except that the right side
barrier was not present during any portion of the experiment.
(Contact or Gap). There were no age differences across
conditions (F (1, 88) = 1.08, p > .05).
Materials All events occurred on a white stage (60 cm2 x 50
cm) that blocked a confederate from view. A barrier was
positioned to the far right of the stage. (See Figure 1.) An
orange block (the base) and a purple block (both 6 cm3)
were on opposite ends of the stage. The purple block was
attached to a stick extending through the floor of the stage,
allowing the hidden confederate to surreptitiously move the
block across the stage to the base. A toy airplane, visibly
attached to the base by an orange wire, was located on the
back stage wall. During familiarization, a screen (22x28 cm)
occluded the spatial relationship between the block and
base.
Procedure
Familiarization The block began at the far right of the
stage in the Spontaneous Motion condition and behind the
right side barrier in the Inferred Agent condition. The
experimenter drew the toddlers’ attention to the stage
saying, “Watch my show.” Toddlers viewed an On trial and
then an Off trial. In the On trial, the block moved towards
the base and disappeared behind the screen. Once the block
disappeared, the airplane began to spin. At the end of the
trial the stage was covered by a curtain and the scene was
reset. The Off trials were identical, except that the airplane
did not spin. The length of the familiarization trials were

experimenter-controlled. The experimenter ended the trial
after the airplane spun for 3 s (On trial) or (Off trial) after
the toddler predictively looked towards the airplane or 3 s,
whichever came first. This procedure was repeated twice,
for a total of 6 familiarization trials. In order to proceed to
the test phase, toddlers had to predictively look to the
airplane on at least one Off trial.3
Test The start of each test event was identical to the
familiarization: the block moved towards the base,
disappearing behind the screen. Toddlers either saw events
in which the airplane activated during the test event (On
conditions) or did not (Off conditions). The experimenter
then said, “Look at this!” and removed the screen, revealing
the block either touching (Contact conditions) or at a
distance (Gap conditions) from the base. The length of the
test trial was toddler-controlled. The experimenter ended
the trial when he judged that the child looked away for 2
consecutive seconds.
Two coders, blind to the test event, coded from video
toddlers’ looking times after the experimenter said “Look at
this!”. Inter-rater reliability, conducted on 1/3 of the
toddlers’ looking time, was high, r > .9.

3
For all experiments, there were no significant differences
across conditions in the number of toddlers who were dropped
from subsequent analysis because they failed to predictively look
during one of the Off familiarization trials.

1803

contrast, when the block moved spontaneously, toddlers had
no differential expectations. These results are consistent
with the hypothesis that dispositional agency facilitates
toddlers’ ability to represent predictive relations as causal.
However, while consistent with this possibility, we have
no positive evidence that toddlers’ success in the Inferred
Agent condition in Experiment 1 was due to inferring the
presence of a hidden agent. To test this, we present the
same familiarization events in Experiment 2 as in
Experiment 1 but at test, we remove the barrier on the right
of the stage to reveal a person’s hand. Following the logic
of Saxe, Tenenbaum, & Carey (2005), if toddlers expect a
hidden agent only when the block emerges in motion, then
toddlers in the Spontaneous Motion condition should look
longer at the hand than those in the Inferred Agent
condition.

Figure 2: Looking time (±1 SD) to the final test
events in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2

Results
To evaluate toddlers’ looking time to the test events (see
Figure 2), we conducted an analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with Agency (Inferred Agent vs. Spontaneous Motion),
Activation (On vs. Off), and Spatial Relation (Contact vs.
Gap) as between-subjects factors. This analysis yielded a
main effect of Activation, F(1, 88) = 32.69, p <.0001.
Toddlers looked longer at the test event when the airplane
moved (9.19 s) than when it did not (3.58 s). There was
also a 3-way interaction between the factors, F(1, 88) =
4.19, p = .044, which was qualified by a 2-way interaction
between Activation and Spatial relation, F(1, 88) = 8.88, p =
.004. There were no other main effects or interactions.
We conducted separate ANOVAs in each condition to
follow-up this analysis. In the Inferred Agent condition,
there was a main effect of Activation; F(1, 44) = 28.95, p <
.0001. Toddlers looked longer when the airplane moved
(11.22 s) than when it did not (4.35 s). There was also an
interaction between Activation and Spatial Relation, F(1,
44) = 14.94, p < .0001. This interaction reflected the fact
that toddlers looked longer at the gap event when the
airplane moved, t(22) = 3.00, p = .007, but longer at the
contact event when the airplane did not move, t(22) = 3.00,
p = .007.
A different pattern emerged in the Spontaneous Motion
condition. There was a main effect of Activation, F(1, 44) =
8.53, p = .005. Toddlers looked longer when the airplane
moved (7.2 s) than when the airplane did not (2.8 s). No
other main effects or interactions approached significance.
In the Spontaneous Motion condition, toddlers did not
discriminate among the test events.

Discussion
These results suggest that only toddlers in the Inferred
Agent condition represented the block as the cause of the
airplane’s motion. These children looked longest when the
test event violated contact causality: (1) when the block
stopped short of the base but the toy activated or (2) when
the block contacted the base but the toy did not activate. By

Methods
Participants Twenty-four toddlers were recruited at a
Children’s Museum.
An additional 2 toddlers were
recruited but were not included in the final sample due to:
inability to complete the session (n = 1), or failure to
predictively look during the familiarization trials (n = 1).
Toddlers were assigned to an Inferred Agent (mean age:
22.18 months, range: 18 – 30 months) or a Spontaneous
Motion condition (mean age: 23.22, range: 18 – 30 months).
There were no differences in age (t(22) = .6, p > .05).
Materials The same materials used in the Inferred Agent
condition of Experiment 1 were used in this experiment.
Procedure In the Inferred Agent condition, the block
emerged from off-stage already in motion.
In the
Spontaneous Motion condition, the block began moving
spontaneously. Toddlers viewed 6 familiarization events
identical to those in Experiment 1.
Following
familiarization, all toddlers viewed the same test event. The
block moved across the stage towards the base, disappearing
behind the occluder. Then, the experimenter said, “Look at
this!” and lowered the far right barrier, revealing a hand at
rest, palm facing towards the block. Two coders, blind to the
test event, coded toddlers’ looking times from video. Interrater reliability, conducted on 1/3 of the toddlers’ looking
time, was high, r > .9.

Results
An analysis of toddlers’ looking time to the test event
revealed that toddlers looked significantly longer in the
Spontaneous Motion (17.62 s) than the Inferred Agent
condition (9.96 s), t(22) = 3.43, p = .002.

Discussion
Toddlers inferred that there was a hidden dispositional agent
when the block emerged in motion but not when it moved

1804

spontaneously. This is consistent with our hypothesis that
toddlers represented the events causally in the Inferred
Agent condition of Experiment 1 because they believed that
a dispositional agent initiated the events.
Strikingly
therefore, merely occluding the onset of the block’s motion
allowed toddlers to make predictions about contact causality
that they failed to make when the onset of motion was
visible.

General Discussion
The current study suggests that toddlers have expectations
consistent with contact causality when they can infer the
presence of a dispositional agent. Prior research (Bonawitz
et al., 2010) showed that dispositional agency facilitates
toddlers’ ability to spontaneously intervene on predictive
relations. Together with the current findings, it appears that
dispositional agency affects not merely whether toddlers
initiate causal interventions, but whether they represent
events causally.
Why did toddlers fail to make differential predictions in
the Spontaneous Motion condition? We have suggested that
toddlers do not readily represent objects as potential causes;
they thus failed to represent the non-agentive event causally.
However, the spontaneous movement of the block itself
violated the expectation that physical objects move only
when they are contacted (Kotovsky & Baillargeon, 2000).
Thus, the initial spontaneous movement of the block might
have confused the toddlers and disrupted any further
expectations they might have had. Mitigating against this
possibility, note that there was no difference between
conditions in the number of toddlers who met the inclusion
criteria (i.e,. who predictively looked to the plane during the
familiarization phase). This suggests that children did not
find the spontaneous movement of the block particularly
disruptive.
However, if, as we have suggested, the absence of a
dispositional agent, rather than the presence of spontaneous
movement, interferes with children’s expectations of contact
causality, then even in the face of spontaneous movement,
children should represent contact causality given other cues
to the causal relationship. Previous research (Bonawitz et
al., 2010) suggests that causal language acts as such a cue.
When spontaneously occurring events are described
causally, toddlers intervene and anticipate the target
outcome. Recent work from our lab suggests that toddlers
also have expectations consistent with contact causality only
when events are described with causal language
(Muentener, Bonawitz, Horowitz, & Schulz, under review;
Bonawitz, Horowitz, Ferranti, & Schulz, 2009). Therefore,
considering that toddlers' succeeded in these causal
language conditions, when the blocks spontaneous
movement was identical to the spontaneous condition here,
we believe this provides additional support ruling out the
hypothesis that toddlers' failure in the Spontaneous Motion
condition was due to the block's unexpected spontaneous
motion.

The results from the current study are consistent with
previous research showing that infants accept dispositional
agents, but not objects, as candidate causes of physical
motion (see Saxe & Carey, 2006, for review) and change of
state events (Muentener & Carey, 2010). Michottian
launching events remain an important exception; infants as
young as 6-months distinguish causal agents and causal
patients in launching events, even though no dispositional
agents are present (e.g., Leslie & Keeble, 1987). However,
such “perceptual causality” depends on the precise spatiotemporal properties of the events (Scholl & Tremoulet,
2000), suggesting it might be encapsulated from other kinds
of causal reasoning (Blakemore et al., 2001; Leslie &
Keeble, 1987; Michotte, 1947; Schlottman, 2000; Scholl &
Tremoulet, 2000; though see Saxe & Carey, 2006). The
current findings suggest that, outside of arguably modular
processes, children might not represent the causal structure
of non-agentive events until relatively late in development.
Prior research suggests that infants use a variety of cues to
recognize an entity as a dispositional agent, ranging from
the presence of a face or hand to the demonstration of selfpropelled motion. In the current paradigm, Bonawitz et al.
(2010) used the full presence of a human, and we used
toddlers’ inference that entities seen already in motion are
typically caused to move by an external agent. The extent
to which other agency cues facilitate toddlers’ causal
representations merits further investigation.
Finally, we note that the use of infant looking time as a
measure of conceptual understanding has been subject to
debate (e.g. Haith, 1998; Kidd, Piantadosi, & Aslin, 2010;
Munakata, 2001). This study establishes a convergence
between looking time measures (used here) and the action
measures used in closely matched previous work (Bonawitz
et. al., 2010).
This convergence may help validate
sensitivity to contact causality as an index of causal
understanding in infancy research (Ball, 1973; Kotovsky &
Baillargeon, 2000; Luo, Kaufman, & Baillargeon, 2009;
Muentener & Carey, 2010; Muentener, under review;
Woodward, Phillips, & Spelke, 1993).
These findings highlight the importance of dispositional
agency in the development of causal reasoning. Although
further research is needed to uncover the trajectory of causal
representations in early childhood, the current study helps
fill the gap between research on infants’ restricted causal
representations and the sophisticated causal reasoning of
later childhood.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF Faculty Early Career
Development Award, a John Templeton Foundation Award,
and James S. McDonnell Collaborative Interdisciplinary
Grant on Causal Reasoning to L.S.

References
Baillargeon, R., Graber, M., Devos, J., & Black, J. (1990).
Why do young infants fail to search for hidden objects?
Cognition, 36, 255-284.

1805

Ball, W. (1973). The perception of causality in the infant.
Presented at the Meeting of the Society for Research in
Child Development, Philadelphia, PA.
Blakemore, S., Fonlupt, P., Pachot, M., Darmon, C., Boyer,
P., Meltzoff, A., Segebarth, C., & Decety, J. (2001). How
the brain perceives causality: an event-related fMRI
study. Neurological Report, 12, 3741-3746.
Bonawitz, E.B., Ferranti, D., Saxe, R., Gopnik, A.,
Meltzoff, A., Woodward, J., & Schulz, L. (2010) Just do
it? Toddlers’ ability to integrate prediction and action.
Cognition, 115, 104-117.
Bonawitz, E.B., Horowitz, A., Ferranti, D., Schulz, L.
(2009) The block makes it go: causal language helps
toddlers integrate prediction, action, and expectations
about contact relations. Proceedings of the Thirty-first
Cognitive Science Society.
Diamond, A. & Goldman-Rakic, P. (1989). Comparison of
human infants and rhesus monkeys on Piaget's AB task:
evidence for dependence on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Experimental Brain Research, 74, 24-40.
Glymour, C., Spirtes, P., & Scheines, R. (2001). Causation,
prediction and search (2nd revised, ed.). MIT Press.
Gopnik., A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz., L., Kushnir,
T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111, 1-31.
Haith, M. (1998). Who put the cog in infant cognition? Is
rich interpretation too costly? Infant Behavior and
Development, 21, 167–179.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S., & Aslin, R. (2010). The Goldilocks
Effect: Infants’ preference for visual stimuli that are
neither too predictable nor too surprising. Proceedings of
the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Kotovsky, L. & Baillargeon, R. (2000). Reasoning about
collision events involving inert objects in 7.5-month-old
infants. Developmental Science, 3, 344-359.
Leslie, A., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants
perceive causality? Cognition, 25, 265-288.
Luo, Y., Kaufman, L., & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Young
infants’ reasoning about physical events involving selfand nonself-propelled objects. Cognitive Psychology.
Meltzoff, A.N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of
others: re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838–850
Meltzoff, A. N., & Blumenthal, E. J. (2007, March). Causal
understanding and imitation: Effect monitoring in infants.
Paper presented at Harvard University pre-SRCD
meeting, Cambridge, MA.
Michotte, A. (1947). The perception of causality. Basic
Books: New York.
Muentener, P. (under review). Investigating the relation
between causal reasoning and intentional reasoning in
infancy.
Muentener, P., Bonawitz, E., Horowitz, A., & Schulz, L.
(under review). Mind the gap: When toddlers do and do
not expect contact causality.

Muentener, P. & Carey, S. (2010).
Infants’ causal
representations of state change events. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 63-86.
Munakata, Y. (2001). Graded representations in behavioral
dissociations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 309-315.
Oakes, L. & Cohen, L. (1990). Infant perception of a causal
event. Cognitive Development, 5, 193-207.
Pearl, J. (2000).
Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Saxe, R., & Carey, S. (2006). The origin of the idea of
cause: Critical reflections on Michotte’s theory with
evidence from infancy. Acta Psychologica, 123,144-165.
Saxe, R., Tenenbaum, J., & Carey, S. (2005). Secret agents:
Inferences about hidden causes by 10- and 12-month-old
infants. Psychological Science, 16, 995-1001.
Saxe, R., Tzelnic, T., & Carey, S. (2007). Knowing who
dunnit: Infants identify the causal agent in an unseen
causal interaction. Developmental Psychology, 43, 149158.
Schlottmann, A. (2000). Is perception of causality modular?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 441–442.
Schulz, L., Gopnik, A., & Glymour, C. (2007). Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Developmental Science, 10, 322-333.
Schulz, L., Kushnir, T., & Gopnik, A. (2007). Learning
from doing: Intervention and causal inference. In Gopnik
& Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning. Oxford University
Press.
Scholl, B., & Tremoulet, P. (2000). Perceptual causality
and animacy. Trends in Cognitive Science, 4, 299-309.
Sobel, D., & Kirkham, N. (2007). Bayes nets and blickets:
Infants’ developing representations of causal knowledge.
Developmental Science, 10, 298–306.
Thelen, E. & Smith, L. (1994). A Dynamic Systems
Approach to the Development of Cognition and Action.
MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997). Primate Cognition, Oxford
University Press, New York.
Waisman, A., Cook, A., Gopnik, A., & Jacobs, L. (2009a).
Causal inference in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris)
and preschool age children. Presented at the 15th
international conference on comparative cognition.
Melbourne, Florida.
Waisman, A., Cook, A., Gopnik, A., & Jacobs, L. (2009a).
Causal inference in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris)
and preschool age children. Poster presented at the
cognitive development society conference. San Antonio,
TX.
Woodward, A., Phillips, A., & Spelke, E. (1993). Infants’
expectations about the motion of animate versus
inanimate objects. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Boulder, CO.
Woodward, J. (2007). Interventionist theories of causation
in psychological perspective. In Gopnik & Schulz (Eds.),
Causal learning. Oxford University Press.

1806

