UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
More than just logic tasks: New Approaches to understanding Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7p5975pf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Osman, Magda
De Neys, Wim

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

More than just logic tasks: New Approaches to understanding Reasoning
Magda Osman (m.osman@qmul.ac.uk)
Experimental Biology and Psychology Centre, Queen Mary University London
London, E14NS, UK

Wim De Neys (wim.deneys@univ-tlse2.fr)
CNRS, Université de Toulouse, Laboratoire CLLE
31058 Toulouse, France,

Keywords: fMRI, rTMS; Subliminal & Supraliminal Priming,
Clinical populations - ADS

New Directions
Reasoning research has long been associated
with paper and pencil tasks in which peoples’
reasoning skills are judged against established
normative conventions (e.g., Logic). In this way
researchers have tried to assess the extent to
which we can think rationally, and of course how
we deviate from normative conventions. The
“fruit flies” of this domain have been the Wason
selection task (Wason, 1966), and Syllogistic
reasoning tasks (Johnson-Laird, 1984). The field
has advanced in helping us to understanding the
influence of context on the kinds of inferences we
tend to make, and we have gained significant
insights into the kinds of situations in which our
biased thinking is aligned with normative thinking
and the situations in which it conflicts with it.
While such gains have led to proposals that the
underlying mechanisms that support reasoning are
highly adaptive, outside of reasoning research, the
most commonly known findings are from classic
paper and pencil tasks. The field has significantly
moved on and the range of empirical methods
developed to examine reasoning behavior has
broadened along with the empirical tools for
measuring patterns in our inductive and deductive
thinking.
This symposium brings to the fore new
pioneering research and findings with the aim of
stimulating discussion on innovative methods that
are currently used to shed new light on old issues
(How biased are we? Is there a relationship
between our intuitive and analytical thinking?).
Moreover, the overview of these new approaches
in the reasoning field will allow us to highlight the

links with ongoing research in other fields (e.g.,
memory, cognitive control, general neuroscience)
to the cognitive science community. This should
help to boost much needed interdisciplinary
research efforts. Moreover, the aim is to generate
new insights into theoretical issues concerning the
relationship between heuristic-based inferences
and deliberative-based inferences, and the
possible meta-cognitive processes thought to
arbitrate between the two. The talks range from
using priming techniques, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), electrodermal
recordings (SCR), event-related potentials (ERP),
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS), and memory probing through to
incorporating clinical populations.
Wim De Neys has been using fMRI, EEG, and
SCR to examine bias detection during thinking,
Taeko Tsujii’s work using rTMS is the first of its
kind to use this method to examine brain regions
associated with belief-biased reasoning. Magda
Osman has pioneered the use of supraliminal and
subliminal priming methods in reasoning research
to uncover the rational status of people’s
underlying reasoning behavior. Simon Handley’s
developmental work has established a new line of
research that has revealed the absence of belief
biased reasoning in a clinical population, which in
turn has helped to establish critical processes in
non-clinical populations that show the bias.
Wim De Neys
People are often biased by heuristic intuitions
when solving classic reasoning tasks. A key
question is whether people detect that their
judgments are biased: Do people know that their
heuristic judgments conflict with normative

167

considerations in these task? The line of research
developed by Wim De Neys has used a variety of
new behavioral (e.g., memory-based tasks),
psychophysical (e.g., SCR), and neuro-imaging
(e.g., fMRI, ERP) techniques to address this issue.
In contrast with popular beliefs, these findings
suggest that people detect the unwarranted nature
of their heuristic judgments.
De Neys, W., Moyens, E., & Vansteenwegen, D.
(2010). Feeling we’re biased: autonomic
arousal and reasoning conflict. Cognitive,
Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 10,
208-216.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008).
Smarter than we think: When our brains detect
that we are biased. Psychological Science, 19,
483-489.
Magda Osman
Is our default reasoning process ultimately
rational? The amassing evidence in reasoning
research for the past fifty years would argue that
people tend to automatically rely on heuristics
which in many situations is sensible, but actually
highly biased. To examine this, this talk discusses
findings from a novel paradigm in which we use a
combination of priming techniques to uncover
how biased and deep rooted people’s default
reasoning is. The evidence suggests that actually
when primed directly (primes are deliberately
processed) and primed indirectly (primes are
incidentally processed) people responded most
effectively to primes that encouraged rational
thinking.
Van Opstal, F., Gevers, W., Osman, M., &
Verguts, T. (2010). Unconscious task
application. Consciousness and Cognition, 19,
999-1006.
Osman, M. (2007). Can tutoring improve
performance on a reasoning task under
deadline conditions? Memory & Cognition, 35,
342-351.
Taeko Tsujii

What is the relationship between brain and
behavior when reasoning? Belief-bias is an
experience based form of reasoning in which
people recruit their prior knowledge about general
features in the world to help them make
inferences. The advantage of using (rTMS) is that
brain regions can be selectively stimulated or
disrupted in such a way as to reveal whether
belief-biased effects are enhanced or inhibited.
Tsujii and collaborators have, for the first time
shown that disrupting IFC activity eliminated the
belief-bias effect. These findings pave the way for
significant insights into the neurological
mechanisms that help support reasoning
processes.
Tsujii, T., Masuda, S., Akiyama, T., & Watanabe,
S. (2010). The role of inferior frontal cortex in
belief-bias reasoning: An rTMS study.
Neuropsychologica, 48, 2005-2008.

Simon Handley
Much of our reasoning is informed by our prior
knowledge and experience of the world. Thus, our
beliefs help us make inferences about unfamiliar
contexts by drawing from what we know already.
The study of reasoning has been pivotal in
demonstrating situations in which this type of
inferential process are biasing our thinking.
Recent work by Handley and collaborators has
revealed that a participant population showing
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) do not show the
same kinds of biases that are typical of young
adults.
Mckenzie, R., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Handley, S. J.
(2010). Conditional reasoning in autism:
activation and integration of knowledge and
belief. Developmental Psychology, 46, 391403.
Morsanyi, K., Handley, S.J. & Evans J.S.B.T.
(2010). Decontextualised minds: Adolescents
with autism are less susceptible to the
conjunction fallacy than typically developing
adolescents.
Journal
of
Autism
and
Developmental Disorders, 40, 1378-1388.

168

169

