UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motivation and Motor Control: Hemispheric Specialization for Motivation Reverses with
Handedness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1bs979tb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Brookshire, Geoffrey
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motivation and Motor Control:
Hemispheric Specialization for Motivation Reverses with Handedness
Geoffrey Brookshire1,2
(broog731@newschool.edu)

Daniel Casasanto1,2,3
(casasand@newschool.edu)

1

2

Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA
Neurobiology of Language Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
3
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, NL
Abstract

What is the relationship between action and emotion? People
tend to perform approach actions with their dominant hand
and avoidance actions with their nondominant hand. In righthanders, the left frontal lobe (which controls the dominant
hand) is specialized for approach-motivational states, and the
right frontal lobe (which controls the nondominant hand) for
avoidance-motivational states. Are brain areas that support
affective motivation functionally related to areas that support
approach- and avoidance-related motor actions? If so,
hemispheric specialization for motivation should covary with
hemispheric specialization for motor control. Here we tested
this prediction, using electroencephalography (EEG) to
compare resting alpha-band power in right- and left-handers.
Hemispheric asymmetries in alpha-power, which indexes
neural activation, were related to Behavioral Activation
System (BAS) scores, which index approach-motivational
tendencies. Results show that the pattern observed in righthanders reverses in left-handers, whose right hemisphere is
specialized for both approach motivation and for control of
dominant-hand actions. This anatomical covariation suggests
a functional link between affective motivation and motor
control, and also provides information crucial for developing
neural therapies for affective disorders.
Keywords: body-specificity hypothesis; EEG; emotion;
handedness; hemispheric specialization; motivation.

Introduction
Emotional states are intimately linked to actions, and to the
hands people use to perform them. In centuries past, sword
fighters wielded the sword in the dominant hand to approach
an enemy, and raised the shield with the nondominant hand
to avoid attack (Pye-Smith, 1871; in Hardyck &
Petrinovich, 1977). The tendency to approach with the
dominant hand and avoid with the nondominant hand is
evident in more ordinary motor actions, as well. When
picking a piece of fruit from a tree, for example, people
typically pull the fruit toward themselves (an approach
action) using their dominant hand and push away the branch
(an avoidance action) with the nondominant hand. When
startled, people reflexively raise their nondominant hand to
protect their face (Coren, 1992), leaving the dominant hand
free for more complex actions.
In right-handers, approach- and avoidance-related
motivational states are differently lateralized in the frontal
lobes of the brain. The left hemisphere subserves approach
emotions and the right hemisphere, avoidance emotions
(Berkman & Lieberman, 2010; Harmon-Jones, Gable, &

Peterson, 2010). This means that, for right-handers,
approach motivation is co-lateralized with the neural circuits
primarily responsible for control of the dominant hand, and
avoidance motivation with the circuits responsible for
control of the nondominant hand. This may be no mere
coincidence. Approach motivation may be co-lateralized
with dominant-hand motor control because the dominant
hand is used for approach actions. Likewise, avoidance
motivation may be co-lateralized with nondominant-hand
motor control because the nondominant hand is used for
avoidance actions (Casasanto, 2009). Here we investigated
this proposed functional connection between the neural
substrates of affective motivation and motor control.
If the laterality of affective motivation in right-handers
results from a functional relationship between motivational
states and manual motor control, then the hemispheric
correlates of motivation should reverse in left-handers, for
whom dominant- and nondominant-hand motor control is
reversed. Alternatively, if the neural organization of
motivation is functionally independent of manual motor
control, a different relationship between motivation and
handedness should be found. On one possibility,
hemispheric specialization for motivation could be similar
across most right- and left-handers, as is the case for
hemispheric specialization of language (Knecht et al. 2000).
Alternatively, although affective motivation appears clearly
lateralized in right-handers, it could be bilaterally
distributed in left-handers, as is the case for some aspects of
spatial cognition (Hellige et al., 1994; Kosslyn, et al., 1989).

Laterality of emotion, then and now
In addition to dozens of studies confirming the hemispheric
laterality of affective processing in right-handers (for review
see Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Peterson, 2010), a few studies
have investigated emotion processing in left-handers
(Everhart, Harrison, & Crews, 1996; McFarland &
Kennison, 1989; Natale, Gur & Gur, 1983; Reuter-Lorenz,
Givis, & Moscovitch, 1983). Although results of these
studies are consistent with the hemispheric reversal that we
predict, two subsequent discoveries call their interpretation
into question.
These studies have two characteristics in common: they
all used stimuli that varied in their emotional valence, and
they all relied on lateralized presentation of stimuli to the
right/left ear or the right/left visual hemifield (VHF). Over
the course of three decades, the fronto-temporal hemispheric

2610

asymmetry for emotion in right-handers was firmly
established, but it remained unclear to what extent the
observed pattern was driven by differences in the neural
locus of processing affective valence (emotional positivity
or negativity) or affective motivation (the tendency toward
approach or avoidance). However, based on newer research,
it appears that the hemispheric correlates of valence and
motivation can be dissociated, and that motivation can
account for the classic fronto-temporal emotional
asymmetry independent of valence (Berkman & Lieberman,
2010; Harmon-Jones, Gable, & Peterson, 2010). Therefore,
previous studies that appear to show different hemispheric
specialization for valence in left- and right-handers may not
be informative about the hemispheric correlates of
motivation.

The body-specificity of emotional valence
In light of subsequent studies, it appears that studies using
lateralized stimulus presentation to compare emotion
processing in left- and right-handers may not be informative
about the hemispheric correlates of valence, either.
According to the logic of these studies, presenting stimuli to
one ear (McFarland & Kennison, 1989) or one VHF
(Everhart, Harrison, & Crews, 1996; Natale, Gur & Gur,
1983; Reuter-Lorenz, Givis, & Moscovitch, 1983) caused
them to be processed initially by the contalateral
hemisphere, due to crossing of the auditory and visual
pathways. Therefore, responses that differed as a function of
the valence of the stimuli, the side of presentation, and the
handedness of the participant were interpreted as evidence
that valence is lateralized differently in right- and lefthanders.
Yet, newer research suggests an alternative interpretation
of these VHF and dichotic listening studies. The same
relationship of valence, side of space, and handedness found
in these studies can be observed even when hemispheric
processing is not manipulated (i.e., when stimuli are not
presented rapidly or unilaterally). In one study, when
participants were presented with pairs of stimuli side by side
on a page and asked to judge which of two products to buy,
which job applicant to hire, or which of two alien creatures
looks more trustworthy, right-handers tended to prefer the
product, person, or creature on the right, whereas lefthanders tended to prefer the one on the left (Casasanto,
2009). This was true even though stimuli were presented on
a piece of paper, under no time pressure, and were
presumably processed bi-hemispherically.
Children as young as 5 years old already make
evaluations according to handedness and spatial location,
judging animals shown on their dominant side to be nicer
and smarter than animals on their nondominant side
(Casasanto & Henetz, 2011). Beyond the laboratory, the
association of good with one’s dominant side and bad with
the nondominant side can be observed in left- and righthanders’ spontaneous speech and gestures (Casasanto &
Jasmin, 2010).

These results support the body-specificity hypothesis
(Casasanto, 2009), according to which people with different
kinds of bodies, who interact with their environment in
systematically different ways, should from correspondingly
different neurocognitive representations – even when
thinking about abstract things that they can never see or
touch. Right-handers, who interact with the environment
more fluently on the right side of space (and less fluently on
the left side), come to implicitly associate good with right
and bad with left, whereas the opposite is true for lefthanders (Casasanto, 2009; see also Ping, Dhillon, &
Beilock, 2009). This fluency-based explanation was
validated in a study testing people whose dominant hand
was handicapped, either long-term due to unilateral stroke,
or short-term due to motor training in the lab. After a period
of acting more fluently with the left hand than the right,
natural right-handers implicitly associated good with left,
like natural left-handers (Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011).
A pair of experiments directly tested whether bodyspecific space-valence associations in memory could
explain classic VHF effects for emotional faces in right- and
left-handers, long interpreted as evidence for hemispheric
specialization. First, in a standard VHF task, participants
judged the emotional valence of faces flashed to the right or
left of a central fixation. Right-handers were more likely to
classify neutral faces as positive when they appeared on the
right, and as negative when they appeared on the left; lefthanders showed the opposite pattern, consistent with
previous studies (Everhart, Harrison, & Crews, 1996;
Natale, Gur & Gur, 1983; Reuter-Lorenz, Givis, &
Moscovitch, 1983). Degree of handedness, as measured by
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI), correlated
significantly with the strength of the body-specific effect.
In the second experiment, a new group of natural righthanders performed the same VHF task after being randomly
assigned to one of two training conditions (adapted from
Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011). Half of the participants
performed a ‘motor fluency’ task (ostensibly unrelated to
the VHF task) with a bulky ski glove on their left hand,
which preserved their right-hand fluency. The other half
wore the glove on their right hand, which made them
transiently more fluent with their left hand. For natural
right-handers who had been functionally left-handed during
training, face judgments revealed implicit associations of
left with positive and right with negative – like natural lefthanders (Brookshire & Casasanto, 2011).
Given these results, the robust emotional VHF effects
observed over the past three decades can no longer be
interpreted as evidence for hemispheric specialization of
emotions. The side of space on which stimuli are presented
can bias emotional processing even when the stimuli are
processed bi-hemispherically. Induced asymmetries in
motor fluency can determine the direction of space-valence
associations and reverse emotional VHF effects,
independent of long-term hemispheric organization. As
such, previous studies leave open the question whether the

2611

hemispheric correlates of emotion processing differ between
right- and left-handers.

Does motivation lateralize with motor control?
The present study tested whether hemispheric correlates of
motivation covary with hemispheric correlates of manual
motor action. Given the relationship between handedness
and valence found in the behavioral tasks reviewed above, it
was necessary to avoid valenced stimuli and responses.
Furthermore, to avoid spurious laterality effects due to
language processing, visual processing, or motor action, we
did not ask participants to perform any task. Instead, we
measured participants’ resting brain activity and correlated
its asymmetry with an offline measurement known to reflect
trait approach motivation.
We used EEG to examine resting power asymmetries in
the alpha-band (8–12 Hz). Power in this bandwidth
inversely correlates with neural excitability (Romei et al.,
2007) and BOLD signal (Laufs et al., 2003; Goldman et al.,
2002), and is a common index of neural activity. Left-right
asymmetry ratios of alpha power at homologous frontal and
temporal sites reliably relate to long-term biases in approach
motivation as measured by the Behavioral Activation Scale
(BAS; Carver & White, 1994).
In right-handers, higher BAS scores, which indicate
stronger trait approach motivation, correlate with less left
hemisphere alpha power and therefore more left hemisphere
activity (Coan & Allen, 2003; Harmon-Jones & Allen,
1997; Sutton & Davidson, 1997; but see Hewig et al., 2006).
If the brain areas that support approach motivation are
functionally related to areas that control dominant hand
actions, then the relationship between BAS and alpha-power
asymmetry found in right-handers should reverse in lefthanders.

Methods
Participants
Native Dutch speakers (N=48, 13 males) participated in
exchange for payment. Participants had no history of
psychiatric disorders or brain injury. For consistency with
prior studies, we excluded 2 participants who were not
strongly handed (|EHI| ≤ 25), leaving 34 right-handers (7
male; mean EHI = 83.1±17.0) and 12 left-handers (5 male;
mean EHI = -80.5±13.8).

Procedure
After providing informed consent and being fitted with the
electrodes, participants were seated in a normally lit,
electrically shielded room. Six resting baseline blocks were
then collected in which participants were instructed to
remain as still as possible. Each participant performed three
blocks with their eyes closed and three with their eyes open,
looking to the center of a black computer screen during the
eyes-open blocks. The experimenter verbally instructed
participants whether to open or close their eyes on each
block. Blocks alternated between open and closed eyes, and

the order was randomized between participants. After
completing the resting blocks, participants completed Dutch
translations of the BIS/BAS scales (Carver & White, 1994),
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI) (Oldfield,
1971), and several questions unrelated to the present
experiment. There was no relationship between handedness
and BAS (r = -0.004, p > .9), and BAS scores were
indistinguishable between the handedness groups (Righthanders: 23.2 ± 4.2; Left-handers: 23.0 ± 5.7).

EEG Recording
EEG was recorded with a 64-channel active electrode
system and a BrainAmps DC amplifier (Brain Products,
München). The reference electrode was placed at the left
mastoid and the ground at the nasion. Additionally, an
electrode was placed at the right mastoid to compute an offline linked mastoids reference, and one beneath the left eye
to screen out blinks and eye movements. Signals were
sampled at 500 Hz with an online 1000 Hz low-pass filter
and a 10 s time constant (.016 Hz). Impedances between
electrodes were reduced to 10 kΩ. The continuous EEG
signals were segmented into epochs of 62 seconds,
including 1 s at the beginning and end of each block.

Data Analysis
We restricted our analysis to eyes-closed blocks, which
provide the most sensitive measure of the relationship
between asymmetric alpha-power and BAS scores
(Harmon-Jones & Allen, 1997). Because prior studies have
found that asymmetrical alpha power depends on BAS and
not on BIS (Coan & Allen, 2003; Harmon-Jones & Allen,
1997), we focus our analysis on BAS scores.
Analyses were performed with the FieldTrip package in
Matlab (http://www.ru.nl/fcdonders/fieldtrip/).
After
recording, all signals were mathematically re-referenced to
the mean of the left and right mastoids. All data was then
resampled to 300 Hz and band-pass filtered between 2 - 30
Hz. Eye movement artifacts were excluded blind to the
experimental condition with a semi-automated routine using
principal
component
analysis.
Time-frequency
representations were computed in time steps of 50 ms,
centered around 10 Hz with 2 Hz frequency smoothing and
500 ms time smoothing. Each alpha-power value, therefore,
comprised the weighted average of activity from 8-12 Hz
for an epoch from 250 ms before to 250 ms after the time
point, convolved with a Hanning window. All activity for
each 60-s block was then averaged for statistical analysis
and natural-log transformed to normalize the values.
Linear mixed-effects regressions on the ln-transformed
average alpha-power of each eyes-closed block were used
for statistical analysis. Models were fit using the lmer
function from the package lme4 (Bates, 2007) in the R
programming environment (http://www.R-project.org). Pvalues were computed with Wald χ2 tests comparing two
models differing by one parameter at a time. In all models,
subject was treated as a random-effect.

2612

Figure 1: Scalp topography of the statistical significance of
the BAS × Hemisphere interaction, plotted separately in
left-handers (left) and right-handers (right). P-values were
computed independently at each electrode pair, and log10(p)
was plotted with dark areas denoting higher statistical
significance. Because these values reflect comparisons
across the left and right hemispheres, only one hemisphere
was plotted for each handedness group. The electrodes used
in subsequent analyses are circled.

Results
To determine whether results of this experiment replicated
previous findings on the relationship between BAS and
resting asymmetry, we first analyzed data from righthanders, alone. Higher BAS scores correlated with greater
right-sided alpha-power at frontal, superior parietal, and
temporal sites (fig. 1, right). The topography of this BAS ×
Hemisphere interactions is posterior to that usually reported
in emotional/motivational lateralization (Coan & Allen,
2003; Gable & Harmon-Jones, 2007; Harmon-Jones &
Allen 1998; Sutton & Davidson, 1997). On the basis of prior
studies and the scalp topography in right-handers, one site
was chosen for comparison across handedness groups
(located approximately at T3-4). All further statistical
analyses were performed on alpha power recorded from this
electrode pair. This allowed unbiased selection of electrodes
of interest for testing the left-handers and the relationship of
hemisphere, BAS, and handedness.
The 3-way interaction of Hemisphere (Right, Left) × BAS
score (continuous) × Handedness (continuous using EHI)
was highly significant (χ2(1) = 14.50, p = .0001; fig. 2),
indicating that hemispheric specialization for approach
motivation varies as a function of handedness. In righthanders, the BAS × Hemisphere interaction was highly
significant (χ2(1) = 18.29, p = .00002; fig. 2, right). High
BAS scores predicted less alpha-power (and therefore more
activity) in the left hemisphere. In left-handers, the pattern
observed in right-handers was reversed: high BAS scores
predicted less alpha-power in the right hemisphere (χ2(1) =
6.08, p = .01 fig. 2, left; topography: fig. 1, left).

Figure 2: Mean alpha-band power in each hemisphere (LH
= left hemisphere; RH = right hemisphere) for left- and
right-handed participants with High and Low BAS scores.
Bar heights represent power averaged across mean-split
BAS score groups. Error bars indicate within-subject s.e.m.
(* p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001)
There were no main effects of BAS (χ2(1) = 10-11, ns; cf.
Hewig et al., 2006) or EHI-scored handedness (χ2(1) =
.00005, ns). Although not relevant to the goals of this study,
we found a significant main effect of the strength of
handedness: higher absolute values of EHI scores were
related to lower alpha-power (χ2(1) = 4.40, p = .04). This
suggests that more strongly handed people have lower levels
of baseline alpha-power, i.e. higher overall resting activity.
We also found an unanticipated effect of handedness on
resting alpha asymmetry. Collapsing across variation in
BAS scores, Handedness interacted with Hemisphere to
predict alpha power (χ2(1) = 7.81, p = .005). In both rightand left-handers, the hemisphere contralateral to the
dominant hand displayed less alpha-band power (and
therefore greater activity) than the ipsilateral hemisphere.

Discussion
Hemispheric specialization for affective motivation reverses
with handedness. As evidence of this reversal, we show here
that Hemisphere, Handedness, and BAS score interact to
predict resting-state neural activity in the alpha frequency
band. In right-handers, approach motivational tendencies are
lateralized to the left hemisphere, but in left-handers they
are lateralized to the right hemisphere.
The emotional alpha-asymmetry in right-handers, which
we validate here, is so well established that it has led many
researchers to adopt the left-laterality of positive-approach
states and the right-laterality of negative-avoidance states as
facts about the brain (Kinsbourne, 1978; see also Coan &
Allen , 2003; Davidson, et al., 1990; Harmon-Jones, et al.,
2010), just as the left-laterality of language is an accepted
fact. The finding that the alpha-asymmetry for motivation
reverses with handedness calls for a substantial revision to
models of emotion in the brain.

2613

The pattern we find suggests that the hemispheric
laterality of emotion is principled — not arbitrary — and
may not pose an enduring mystery like the laterality of
language. Specifically, we show that hemispheric
specialization for motivation follows specialization for
control of motor actions with the dominant hand. We
predicted this relationship based on prior evidence that
people tend to use their dominant hand for approach actions
and their nondominant hand for avoidance actions, and
evidence that they associate “good” with their dominant side
and “bad” with their nondominant side. The anatomical
covariation we demonstrate here provides initial support for
a proposed functional relationship between the neural
substrates of motivation and motor control (Casasanto,
2009; see also Davidson, et al., 1990).

Functional relationships between motivation and
motor action
The data we report are correlational, so the causal
relationship between the laterality of motivation and the
laterality of manual motor control (i.e., of handedness)
remains unknown. Broadly speaking, there are three
possible relationships: 1. handedness could determine the
laterality of motivation; 2. the laterality of motivation could
determine handedness; 3. the laterality of both could be
dependent on a third factor.
On the first possibility, it is assumed that the laterality of
handedness is determined by some combination of genetic
and environmental factors. Subsequently, the habit of
performing approach actions with the dominant hand and
avoidance actions with the nondominant hand stabilizes the
locus of approach- and avoidance-motivational states.1 On
an evolutionary timescale, neural circuits that support
emotional motivation could be exapted from circuits that
support motor control. On a developmental timescale,
motivational states could be stored as highly abstracted,
covert approach- or avoidance motor plans, implemented in
cortical areas neighboring (or overlapping with) the circuits
that support overt action.
On the second possibility, it is assumed that the laterality
of motivation is determined by some combination of genetic
and environmental factors. Subsequently, having approach
states lateralized to one hemisphere causes the hand
controlled by ipsilateral motor circuits to be used for
approach actions. If approach actions are more frequent and
require more skill than avoidance actions (see note 1), this
would enhance the dexterity of the ‘approach’ hand, making
it dominant. Likewise, having avoidance states lateralized to
1

This account assumes that the established links between
approach-dominant and avoid-nondominant are motivated
independent of genetic handedness or neural proximity. Although
untested, this seems plausible: approach actions often require
dexterity (e.g., picking fruit, putting a key in a lock, touching a
loved one’s face). Avoidance actions such as fending off attack
may require less dexterity, and may also be more dangerous (i.e., it
would be adaptive to risk injuring or sacrificing the less-dexterous
hand when performing avoidance actions).

the other hemisphere causes the hand controlled by its
ipsilateral motor circuits to be used for avoidance actions. If
avoidance actions are less frequent and require less skill
than approach actions, this would decrease the dexterity of
the ‘avoidance’ hand, making it nondominant.
On the third possibility, there could be no direct causal
link between the evolution or development of neural circuits
for motivation and manual motor action. Both could arise
due to some third environmental or genetic factor, as yet
unspecified. In light of the present data, in combination with
behavioral data linking action, motivation, and valence, it
seems unlikely that there is no causal relationship between
the laterality of motivation and motor control, but this
possibility awaits experimental tests that include causal
interventions in which action, valence, and motivation are
manipulated independently. 2

How is motivation different from other lateralized
functions?
Lateralization of language, the most studied asymmetrical
cognitive function, only depends weakly on handedness.
Like most right-handers, the majority of left-handers (73%)
have language abilities lateralized to the left hemisphere
(Knecht et al., 2000). Language lateralization is
parametrically related to graded differences in handedness
(Pujol et al., 1999), but this mostly results from increased
bilaterality in left-handers: not from right-language
dominance, which is rare.
Lateralization of visuospatial cognition also varies with
handedness. Right-handers show a left-hemisphere
advantage for processing categorical spatial relations (e.g.,
under, above) and a right-hemisphere advantage for judging
analog distances (e.g., 2 cm; Kosslyn et al., 1989). In lefthanders, however, categorical and coordinate spatial
relationships are not clearly lateralized in either hemisphere
(Hellige et al., 1994).
The complete reversal of hemispheric specialization with
handedness that we observe here sets motivation apart from
most other lateralized cognitive functions. Approach
motivation is not lateralized like language or spatial
cognition; rather, it is lateralized like motor control of the
dominant hand.

Implications for neurotherapy
The relationship between motivation and motor control has
implications for neurotherapy. Several studies have
demonstrated the effectiveness of transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) (e.g. Janicak et al., 2010) and
biofeedback using EEG (Allen, Harmon-Jones, & Cavender,
2001) to decrease symptoms of depression by shifting
neural activity toward the positive/approach-related left
2

Possibilities 1, 2, and 3 are not mutually exclusive. Independent
factors could give rise to some specification of both handedness
and motivation. Through dominant-approach and nondominantavoidance actions, then, the neural implementations of motivation
and manual motor action could be mutually reinforced.

2614

hemisphere. Effective neural therapies require an accurate
picture of the emotional asymmetries in patients’ brains.
Based on our findings, it appears that the therapies currently
in use could be detrimental to left-handers. The discovery
that the hemispheric correlates of emotion are body-specific
may be crucial for the development of safe, effective
emotional neurotherapy.

Acknowledgments
Research was supported in part by a Haas Fellowship to GB and by
a grant from the Junta de Andalucía (P09-SEJ-4772) and a
McDonnell Scholar Award to DC. The authors thank Laura Hahn
and Evgeniya Krasnoshchekova for their help collecting the data.

References
Allen, J., Harmon-Jones, E., & Cavender, J. (2001). Manipulation
of frontal EEG asymmetry through biofeedback alters selfreported
emotional
responses
and
facial
EMG.
Psychophysiology, 38, 685-693.
Bates, D. (2007). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using S4
classes [Computer software manual].
Berkman, E. & Lieberman, M. (2010). Approaching the Bad and
Avoiding the Good: Lateral Prefrontal Cortical Asymmetry
Distinguishes between Action and Valence. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 22(9), 1970-1979.
Brookshire, G. & Casasanto, D. (2011). Brief motor experience
reverses visual hemifield effects. Poster presented at The 18th
Annual Cognitive Neuroscience Society Meeting, San Francisco,
USA.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of Abstract Concepts: Good
and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. & Chrysikou, E. G. (2011). When Left is 'Right':
Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts. Psychological Science,
22(4), 419-422.
Casasanto, D. & Henetz, T. (2011). Handedness shapes children’s
abstract concepts. Cognitive Science, In press.
Casasanto, D. & Jasmin, K. (2010). Good and Bad in the Hands of
Politicians: Spontaneous gestures during positive and negative
speech. PLoS ONE, 5(7), e11805.
Carver, C.S., & White, T.L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition,
behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending
reward and punishment: the BIS/BAS scales. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319–333.
Coan, J. A., & Allen, J. J. B. (2003). Frontal EEG asymmetry and
the
behavioral
activation
and
inhibition
systems.
Psychophysiology, 40(1), 106-114.
Coren, S. (1992). The left-hander syndrome: The causes and
consequences of left-handedness. New York: Random House.
Davidson, R. J., Ekman, P., Saron, C. D., Senulis, J. A., & Friesen,
W. V. (1990). Approach-withdrawal and cerebral asymmetry:
emotional expression and brain physiology. I. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 330-341.
Everhart, D. E., Harrison, D. W., & Crews, W. D. (1996).
Hemispheric Asymmetry as a Function of Handedness:
Perception of Facial Affect Stimuli. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 82, 264-266.
Hardyck, C., & Petrinovich, C. (1977). Left-handedness.
Psychological Bulletin, 84(3), 385-404.
Harmon-Jones, E., & Allen, J. J. (1997). Behavioral Activation
Sensitivity and Resting Frontal EEG Asymmetry: Covariation of

Putative Indicators Related to Risk for Mood Disorders. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1), 159-163.
Harmon-Jones, E., Gable, P. & Peterson, C. (2010). The role of
asymmetric frontal cortical activity in emotion-related
phenomena: A review and update. Biological Psychology, 84,
451–462.
Hellige, J., Bloch, M., Cowin, E., Eng, T., Eviatar, Z., & Sergent,
V. (1994) Individual variation in hemispheric asymmetry:
multitask study of effects related to handedness and sex. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 123, 235–56.
Hewig, J., Hagemann, D., Seifert, J., Naumann, E., Bartussek, D.
(2006). The relation of cortical activity and BIS/BAS on the trait
level. Biological Psychology, 71, 42-53.
Janicak, P., et al., (2007). Durability of clinical benefit with
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in the treatment of
pharmacoresistant major depression: assessment of relapse
during a 6-month, multisite, open-label study. Brain Stimulation,
3(4), 187-199.
Kinsbourne, M. (1978). The biological determinants of functional
bisymmetry and asymmetry. In Kinsbourne M (Ed.)
Asymmetrical Function of the Brain. New York, Cambridge
University Press.
Knecht, S., Dräger, B., Deppe, M., Bobe, L., Lohmann, H., Flöel,
A., Ringelstein, E. B., Henningsen, H. (2000). Handedness and
hemispheric language dominance in healthy humans. Brain,
123(12), 2512-2518.
Kosslyn, S., Koenig, O., Barrett, A., Cave, C., Tang, J., & Gabrieli,
J. (1989). Evidence for Two Types of Spatial Representations:
Hemispheric Specialization for Categorical and Coordinate
Relations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 15(4), 723-735.
Laufs, H., Kleinschmidt, A., Beyerle, A., Eger, E., Salek-Haddadi,
A., Preibisch, C., & Krakowa, K. (2003). EEG-correlated fMRI
of human alpha activity. NeuroImage, 19, 1463–1476.
McFarland, R. & Kennison, R. (1983). Handedness affects
emotional valence asymmetry. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 68,
435-441.
Natale, M., Gur, R. E., & Gur, R. C. (1983). Hemispheric
asymmetries
in
processing
emotional
expressions.
Neuropsychologia, 21(5), 555-565.
Oldfield, R.C. (1971). The Assessment and Analysis of
Handedness: The Edinburgh Inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1),
97-113.
Ping, R., Dhillon, S., & Beilock, S. (2009). Reach for What You
Like: The Body’s Role in Shaping Preferences. Emotion Review,
1(2), 140-150.
Pujol, J., Deus, J., Losilla, J., & Capdevila, A. (1999). Cerebral
Lateralization of Language in Normal Left-handed People
Studied by Functional MRI. Neurology, 52(5)
Reuter-Lorenz, P., Givist, R., & Moscovitch, M. (1983).
Hemispheric Specialization and the Perception of Emotion:
Evidence from Right-handers and from Inverted and Noninverted Left-handers. Neuropsychologia, 21(6), 687-692.
Romei, V., Brodbeck, V., Michel, C., Amedi, A., Pascual-Leone,
A., & Thut., G. (2007). Spontaneous Fluctuations in Posterior
Alpha-band EEG Activity Reflect Variability in Excitability of
Human Visual Areas. Cerebral Cortex, 18, 2010-2018.
Sutton, S. & Davidson, R. (1997) Prefrontal Brain Asymmetry: A
Biological Substrate of the Behavioral Approach and Inhibition
Systems. Psychological Science, 8(3) 204-210.

2615

