UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Moving Toward the Right Statement: Effects of Grounded Embodied Cognition on
Computational Thinking
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xc81012
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Fadjo, Cameron L.
Black, John B.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

  Moving Toward the Right Statement: Effects of Grounded Embodied
                             Cognition on Computational Thinking
                                               Cameron L. Fadjo
                       Institute for Learning Technologies Department of Human Development
                                                  John B. Black
                       Institute for Learning Technologies Department of Human Development
Abstract: A grounded embodied approach to the instruction of computational abstractions provides concrete rep-
resentations for characteristically abstract symbols. If the perceptual symbols that comprise a pre-defined scenario
are fundamentally grounded in human behavior (e.g. walking), does the mere act of embodiment influence how these
behaviors are represented in a computational artifact? Prior research has demonstrated that an embodied approach
to the instruction of computer programming results in artifacts that implement more complex code structures. The
current study examines how grounded embodied cognition influences the representation of movement in computa-
tional artifacts. Using the Instructional Embodiment (Fadjo et al., 2010) framework, participants engaged in learning
activities through physical and imagined embodiment (Direct Embodiment with Explicit Imagination) or imagined
embodiment without physical enactment (No Embodiment with Explicit Imagination). Findings suggest that physi-
cal enactment with explicit imagination during learning results in control abstractions that represent movement with
greater precision than imagination alone.
                                                          1996

