UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multisensory Sensemaking: Children’s Exploratory Behavior has Organizing Structure at
Micro- and Macro-scales

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tf0b0ft

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Renner, Nancy Owens

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multisensory Sensemaking:
Children’s Exploratory Behavior has Organizing Structure at Micro- and Macro-scales
Nancy Owens Renner (nrenner@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA USA 92093-0515

Abstract

• situated, i.e. physical, social, cultural, and historical
contexts all play a role in cognition;
• distributed, i.e. cognition at every scale manifests in nested
systems with interacting parts. People live and act in
cognitive ecosystems, in which brains, bodies, cultural and
material worlds all exert mutual cognitive influence in any
given moment and as they change over time (Hutchins,
2010). Distributed cognition provides a unifying principle.

When children encounter museum exhibits, they find rich
opportunities for action, perception, learning, and other forms
of cognition. Can we see systematic organization in the
children’s behavior, and by extension, their cognition? What
would count as evidence of this organization? Based on an
account of cognition as embodied, situated, and culturally
mediated, this research illustrates how some cognition can be
directly observed, manifested through interactions among
modalities, people and objects in a distributed cognitive
system. This field study uses micro- and macro-analyses of
behavioral data recorded on video to discover organizing
structure in children’s behavior and cognition, evidenced in
allocation of visual and haptic attention, manipulation of
objects, and use of written, spoken, and gestured language. At
micro- and macro-scales, perceptual engagement with
concrete objects precedes engagement with abstract concepts,
as evidenced in motor behavior and content of speech and
gesture. In this context, we describe learning as a process of
adaptive coordination, rather than a product to be measured.
Future studies will test observation-driven hypotheses related
to development of perceptual skills and patterns of scientific
thinking, promising relevance to educational practices.

Research Methods
To understand how the designed environment structures
cognitive activity, we collected and examined data with
several questions in mind: Can we see systematic
organization in the children’s behavior, and by extension,
their cognition? What would count as evidence of this
organization? How do children move their bodies, use their
senses, and utilize language to explore objects and engage
with ideas? The research team collected video data over
several days, including first-person perspective video,
recorded with head-mounted cameras worn by elementary
students, and third-person perspective video, recorded with
hand-held cameras operated by researchers. These two
perspectives provide a wealth of information about what
children pay attention to, as well as their interactions in
physical and social contexts. These two video data streams
amount to approximately 16 hours of video, primarily
focused on 10 participants (five girls, five boys, all
bilingual), some for two visits to the exhibition, with
supplemental video recorded at specific exhibits.

Keywords: multimodal attention; distributed cognition;
situated cognition; perceptual; conceptual; embodied
learning; education

Introduction
To describe the complexity of learning involves an
ecological model built of interactions among human brains
and bodies, cultural practices and artifacts, all subject to
evolutionary and developmental change over time.
“Learning ecosystems” represents the prevailing perspective
among educational researchers and cognitive scientists
today (NRC, 2009). This ecological view stands in stark
contrast to first generation cognitive science and folk
models of learning. These focus on symbolic information
processing, often with a disregard for the role of context,
culture, and history, and ignoring cognition as a biological
phenomenon that includes emotion, sensory-motor
experience, and probabilistic models of learning through
experience (Gardner, 1985). This study uses observational
methods and defines cognition as:

The research team indexed the video to create an outline of
the event structure, making large-scale behavioral patterns
and anomalies apparent for more detailed study. We
transcribed and coded a subset of the video in a densely
detailed manner (figure 1). The video coding system
includes multiple dimensions that fall into broad categories
related to modalities in coordination with physical objects,
social interaction, speech, and reading behavior. The coded
video permits a broad array of analyses, for example,
duration and sequence of behaviors with individual exhibits,
specific objects of attention (looking at and touching
specimens, interactives, graphic panels), composition of
social group, speech and gesture content, language (English
or Spanish), reading, and behavioral configurations defined
by multimodal coordination.

• embodied, i.e. a body is required for cognition, and the
nature of bodily experience profoundly shapes cognition;

To answer the research questions, this study sought to
describe a learning ecosystem and its organizational
1

285

structure. Toward this goal, the research documents the
abundance and diversity of behaviors, their distribution in
time and space, and interaction effects. Sustained
observation led to hypotheses about the organization of
multimodal behaviors and content of speech. The coded
video permitted testing of these hypotheses in a quantitative
manner. Allocation of attention, sensory-motor engagement,
and the production and timing of speech and gesture provide
observable behavioral evidence of cognition in action, and
illustrate learning as an adaptive process that takes place
through interaction and over time.

By re-representing the coded video data, we can see how
multimodal behaviors combine in sequence revealing a
distinctive behavioral profile that includes look, talk,
manipulate, touch, gesture, and read (figure 3). This
ChronoVis representation of the coded video shows a LookTalk-Touch pattern. Here, the first onset of speech performs
a social function, i.e. a proposal to access the exhibit
(spoken in Spanish, demonstrating sensitivity to the
recipient’s language abilities). Once the child has access, his
hands engage the object. He moves a knob on the front of
the display (in his peripheral vision) while he looks at top of
the display. He coordinates his hand motion with visual
feedback to align single words in a cut-away window, which
he reads aloud for himself one-by-one during pauses in his
motion, “past—present—future.” Then his hand sweeps
over the textured surface of this representation of the San
Andreas Fault, he looks at the graphic panel then back to the
surface, and he moves the knob back and forth.
Another child arrives and asks, “What is this?” The first
child returns the knob to reset position and reads “past,” as
he points to the word then traces an arc over the sculpted
landscape. He moves the knob again, reads “present,”
underlines the word with his finger and briefly points at the
landscape. He moves the knob a final time, reads “future,”
takes a brief look at the graphic, then cedes possession of
the interactive to his classmate. In 24 seconds of activity,
this child negotiates two social interactions in two
languages, coordinates visual and haptic attention to guide
sensory-motor exploration; he reads text to establish context
and make some sense of the object, then he uses interaction
with the object combined with gesture and speech to
demonstrate the object’s function, and perhaps its meaning,
in response to a peer’s question.

Figure 1: Behavioral configurations become visible in the
coded video. The research team used ELAN software and a
customized behavioral coding scheme to represent the occurrence
of behaviors in the horizontal rows; the red vertical line represents
a behavioral configuration in one moment of time. Student’s firstperson view on left; researcher’s third-person view on right.

Results – Micro-analysis
Not surprising among sighted participants, all observed
interactions with exhibits begin with looking. Focus of
visual attention on an exhibit defines the beginning of an
event. The majority of events proceed from looking only to
looking and touching (figure 2). Most exhibit-related talk is
preceded by touch. When focusing on exhibit-related
behaviors, the data show a normative sequential pattern of
Look-Touch-Talk in 48% of all events. Social interactions
and physical constraints generate variations on this pattern.

Talk
Gesture
Read

Figure 3: Re-representation of video data in ChronoVis to
illustrate how a behavioral profile unfolds in time. Two fourthgrade boys interact with a plate tectonics display. Event duration:
24 seconds. X-axis = time.

When interacting with objects and exhibits, as mentioned
above, children tend to look first, then they touch, and then
they speak. The Look-Touch-Talk pattern varies along
several dimensions, including the content of the speech.

Figure 2: Behavioral sequences unfold with each exhibit
interaction. This diagram shows the frequency of occurrence in
sequence for the first onset of behaviors. Look-Touch-Talk is the
most common sequence of behaviors.

2

286

When analyzed across multiple exhibit interactions, talk
related to what an object is and the object’s concrete
perceivable features tends to occur early in the interaction;
talk with abstract conceptual content occurs later (figure 4).
A particular form of perceptual talk—“what” questions and
comments (“What’s that?” “It’s a fossil”)—happen at the
beginning of the interaction most often. Other perceptual
talk includes describing observable features (“They’re so
tiny”) or perceptual processes (“Look, touch it”).
Conceptual talk refers to abstract ideas, unseen processes, or
representational significance, and perceptual/conceptual talk
contains both concrete and abstract content. These tend to
come later in sequence. This work builds on a study of types
and frequencies of learning talk in a museum, which
informed our categorization (Allen, 2002). Of all speech,
these types of exhibit-related talk totaled 46% and talk with
social content totaled 38% (e.g. “Get in line!”). The
remaining 16% had ambiguous content or was inaudible. To
categorize the content and function of speech is certainly
problematic, because any utterance may carry multiple
meanings and perform several functions. Nevertheless, we
sought the defining characteristic for each utterance and
reduced the high-dimensional space of speech to look for
sequential patterns.

Sensory-motor behavior and language content characterize
activities described in these ways: children engage in active
sensing; they discover exhibit uses (or affordances); they
look for cause and effect; they use their bodies to express
ideas; they demonstrate, interpret, and explain. Specific
examples below (with still shots from the video data) serve
as abbreviated illustrations of a broader class of examples.
Active sensing • What is it?
Sensory-motor exploration dominates the children’s
behavior. The children learn about the properties of objects
and environments by experiencing relationships between
movement and the senses (Nöe, 2004). They move bodies,
hands, heads, and eyes, driving sensory input through
multiple modalities simultaneously (figure 5). Using their
bodies, often involving pointing gestures and sometimes
expressed in words, the children ask the question “what is
it?” Often when children read, they trace the text with their
fingers, they voice the words, and sometimes read in unison.
For them, reading is a physical, social, exploratory activity.
Multisensory displays allow for complimentary and
reinforcing experience through many channels.

time in seconds

Types of talk
What
Perceptual
Perceptual/Conceptual
Conceptual

Figure 5: Children engage in active sensing using visual, tactile,
motor, proprioceptive, and auditory systems.

Discovery of exhibit uses (or affordances) •
What can I do with it?
Children’s perceptual skills help
them to find how their bodies fit with objects in the
environment and where they can take action (Gibson, 1979.)
Through imitation learning, observation of others plays a
role in finding affordances. With a plate tectonics interactive
display, a child pushes down on a knob (figure 6). With this
movement, he initiates a series of visual representations: one
plate dives beneath another and begins to melt (subduction),
magma rises to Earth’s surface (volcanism), and the
overlying continental plate lifts up (uplift). Interaction also
provides multisensory experiences of cause and effect.

touch onset
Figure 4: The timing of when talk follows touch depends on the
type of talk. The origin represents the first touch onset. Black
shapes indicate the average latency.

With this field study, we set out to describe cognition
evident in freely behaving humans, and posit structures that
organize the children’s activity at multiple scales. The
quantitative data here are meant to describe the magnitude
of these phenomena. Future quantitative analyses will
explore in finer-grained detail how these patterns vary with
and without adult mediation, and with different kinds of
displays and various objects to touch.

Results – Macro-analysis
Based on this micro-analysis of behavior at a time-scale of
milliseconds, we can also describe macro-scale behavioral
patterns organized into larger activities. By engaging
multiple modalities (sensory, motor, and communicative),
the children use their bodies as if to explore tacit questions.

Figure 6: Children discover exhibit uses. Student’s first-person
view on left; researcher’s third-person view on right.

3

287

Look for cause and effect • What will happen if…?
The discovery of cause and effect relations is a means to
develop perceptual skills (Piaget & Inhelder, 1969). Active
sensing (or finding sensory-motor dependencies) and
discovery of object uses (or affordances) embody children’s
exploration of causality. Children also test the limits of their
actions relative to responses in physical and social realms.
They seem to explore patterns of dependence, which they
can use to infer causal structure (Schultz & Gopnik, 2004).

In our sample taken when the children were freely exploring
the exhibits, representational gestures were uncommon
relative to pointing gestures, comprising 20% of all manual
gestures. Half of all representational gestures occurred at the
subduction display; most gestures originated strategically
where the volcanic vent meets Earth’s surface. We
conjecture that the children used their hands to fill a gap in
the display’s representational content. The Earth’s crosssection shows glowing magma rise to the surface, but then
what? The children seize the opportunity—with fluid
virtuosity—to enact the story’s eruption climax using their
hands, sometimes with explosive vocal sound effects.
Demonstrate, interpret, and explain • Can I show you /
can I tell you? In this social setting, the children comment
on the exhibits, they share what they perceive and know,
often in short sentences accompanied by gesture anchored to
the objects. Their demonstrations, interpretations, and
explanations may be spontaneous or, as in the video stills
(figure 9), elicited by a teacher.

Figure 7: Children look for cause and effect.

In this example, their guided lesson focuses on plate
tectonics, and the children must identify different types of
plate boundaries. The teacher asks what the children see in
the interactive exhibit; they convey in words coupled with
body movements the upward thrust of the uplifted plate
resulting from subduction. The teacher’s orientation lesson
with an activity sheet make explicit a conceptual framework
for plate tectonic theory with three types of plate
boundaries. Highlighting this structure enables the children
to see different features of the display than they saw before.

In a room filled with exhibits that move when pushed and
pulled, this student finds a sandstone block with a ridge
down the middle (figure 7). He places his fingers on the
ridge, pulls toward his body, and tests to see if the rock will
move. In contrast to several other objects that he set in
motion, he discovers that this rock remains immobile.
Use the body to express ideas • How do I make sense of
this? Abundant research suggests that gesture and speech
derive from the same source (McNeill, 2005). Both give the
researcher information about the children’s perceptual
experience and conceptualization. Children use gesture to
express ideas that they can’t easily express in words, due to
language development (especially among bilingual children)
(Goldin-Meadow, 2003) or because gesture can convey
spatial and temporal qualities in a manner different from
speech (Parrill & Sweetser, 2004). Children use gesture as
they speak to model two forms of volcanic eruption in the
subduction display shown below and in figure 6. They use
their hands to perform an oozing spread of lava or a violent
explosion. Gesture compliments speech: “when it builds too
much pressure (hands move up rapidly) it goes up!” (fig 8).

Figure 8: Children use multiple modalities
to express ideas.

Figure 9: Children demonstrate, interpret, and explain.

When enacting tectonic uplift, the morphology of the
gestures express a shape-for-shape mapping (Taub, 2001) in
which the palms represent the horizontality of the Earth’s
crust moving in an upward direction (figure 9). When the
class activity specifically focused the children’s attention on
the structure of the plate boundary and its consequences, the
children produced uplift gestures nearly equal in number to
volcano-type gestures. When children independently
explored the subduction display, the majority of their
gestures expressed aspects of volcanism, possibly an
indicator of its salience. Different forms of mediation
provided by the teacher, i.e. guided observation and an
explicit conceptual framework represented in diagrammatic
form, facilitated new forms of active perception for
scientific thinking. The children used their bodies coupled
4

288

Conclusion

with objects within a framework for social participation to
enact a personal and collective understanding of a geologic
phenomemon.

Children’s efforts to make sense of their perceptual
experiences exert organizing structure on behavior and
cognition. The body is the vehicle of cognition, doing its
work through physical and social interaction. The children
engage in a continuous project of bringing perceptual,
motor, and other cognitive resources of the body into
coordination with structure in the world. Making sense of a
situation may require, even demand, multisensory
engagement. Future work will explore: How can we
deliberately create structure in the learning environment that
offers opportunities to practice learning as a set of skills?
These skills include learning how to see, learning how to
coordinate multimodal perceptual experience, and to use
perceptual experience to solve problems, make inferences,
and produce generalizable explanations. Future work will
focus on advancing perceptual learning theory, developing
analytical methods, and creating an educational design
framework that promotes practice of perceptual skills for
conceptual learning. For educators, designers, and
researchers of learning and cognition, rich territory for
exploration lies at the intersection of body, senses, and
world.

Discussion
Each one of these macro-scale activities are comprised of
micro-scale behaviors that involve interaction with objects
and other people through looking, touching, talking,
moving, and reading. The interaction described in the
micro-analysis results (figure 3) illustrates how these
individual multimodal behaviors integrate into macro-scale
cognitive activities. In that example, the child begins with
active sensing to discover the object’s affordances and
cause-and-effect relations. He seems to make sense of the
object as evidenced in the sequence and coordination of
sensory-motor behaviors, the way that he demonstrates the
object’s function, and using very economical means,
explains an aspect of the object’s meaning to a peer.
Sensory engagement is for making sense of a situation.
Children focus attention of multiple modalities
simultaneously, tuning effort and perception to gain what is
useful in a given context. For children in a science museum,
analysis of their multimodal interaction brings insight about
the organization of their behavior and how their behavior
creates a blend of perceptual and conceptual experiences.

References
Allen, S. 2002. Looking for learning in visitor talk: A
methodological exploration. In Leinhardt, Crowley, Knutson
(Eds.) Learning conversations in museums.
Gardner, H. 1985. The mind’s new science. New York: Basic
Books.
Gibson, J.J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Goldin-Meadow, S. 2003. Hearing gesture: How our hands help
us think. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hutchins, E. 2010. Cognitive ecology. Topics in Cognitive Science,
Vol. 2, Issue 3: 1–11.
McNeill, D. 2005. Gesture & thought. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
National Research Council. 2009. Learning Science in Informal
Environments: People, Places, and Pursuits. Committee on
Learning Science in Informal Environments. Bell, P.,
Lewenstein, B., Shouse, A., Editors. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.
Nöe, A. 2004. Action in perception. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Parrill, F., Sweetser, E. 2004. What we mean by meaning:
Conceptual integration in gesture analysis and transcription.
Gesture, 4:2, 197–219.
Piaget J. & Inhelder, B. 1969. The psychology of the child. New
York: Basic Books.
Schulz, L., Gopnik, A. 2004. Causal learning across domains.
Developmental Psychology, 40, 2, 162-176.
Taub, S. 2001. Language from the body: Iconicity and metaphor in
American Sign Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

The form and dynamics of the children’s multimodal
exploration, the content of their speech, and their use of
gesture, suggests that they ask and answer questions with
their bodies and words. Based on observation of children’s
behavior, I propose that educators can work with, not
against, children’s predispositions toward multimodal
exploration and curiosity. Children seem to engage exhibits
with an inquiry approach, beginning with questions that
blend: “What is it? / What can I do with it? / What will
happen if…?” Under some conditions, the inquiry proceeds
to “How do I make sense of this? / Can I show and tell?”.
This description may not surprise the reader. The surprise is
the degree to which formal and informal education does not
exploit children’s robust social and sensory-motor skills to
make sense of the world.
Conceptual understanding builds on perceptual experience,
as interacting with objects and phenomena generates the raw
material of experience from which to create memories,
extract features, form categories, make causal inferences,
and develop abstract concepts. Social interaction can
facilitate this process, as peers and teachers point out
important things to notice and explain their significance. In
this study of children’s behavior, we see the multi-faceted
intertwined nature of cognition, action, and perception.
Bodies sense and move and interact with objects, other
bodies, and ideas. Talk can mediate experience by
identifying, describing, explaining, and making meaning.
This coordination of resources—of the brain, body, social
and material worlds—constitutes learning in action.

This study was conducted by Nancy Owens Renner, in cooperation with the San
Diego Natural History Museum and the San Diego Unified School District. Research
oversight was provided by University of California San Diego Cognitive Science
faculty Edwin Hutchins, Jim Hollan, and Rafael Núñez. Research assistance was
provided by Alba Basurto, Gina Bello, Richard Caballero, and Jordan Davison.
Parents granted permission for their children to participate in this research by signing
release forms made available in English and Spanish.

5

289

