UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multimodal Transfer of Repetition Patterns in Artificial Grammar Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mz8652n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Finley, Sara
Christiansen, Morten

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multimodal Transfer of Repetition Patterns in Artificial Grammar Learning
Sara Finley (sfinley@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 146270 USA

Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Uris Hall, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract

transmission, give rise to recurring cross-linguistic patterns,
rather than absolute language universals (Evans &
Levinson, 2009). Through cultural evolution, language has
been shaped to fit learners, and this helps explain the
impressive language acquisition abilities of children (Chater
& Christiansen, 2010).
However, empirically uncovering the role of domaingeneral and domain-specific learning mechanisms in
language has proven rather difficult because language
development is intertwined with the development of other
cognitive functions. A potential way to untangle the
contribution of domain-general and domain-specific
processes is to explore learning in a controlled environment.
Artificial grammar learning paradigms offer a mechanism to
explore learning of both linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli
in isolation, allowing the researcher to compare domaingeneral and domain-specific effects of learning in a
controlled environment. Under the guise of statistical
learning, this experimental paradigm has been used to
explore different aspects of learning, such as word
segmentation (Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996) and nonlinguistic patterns (Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002).
In this paper, we test the hypothesis that domain-general
learning mechanisms make it possible to generalize a
pattern from a linguistic domain to a non-linguistic
analogue, and vice versa. If learners are able to learn novel
linguistic patterns in a way that is flexible beyond languagespecific learning, they should be able to transfer that pattern
to a non-linguistic analogue.
One difficulty in assessing transfer from linguistic
phenomena to non-linguistic analogues (and vice versa) is
that some linguistic patterns and processes have no
straightforward non-linguistic analogue. A non-linguistic
version of complex syntactic phenomena, such as nonadjacent dependencies in subject-verb agreement, may be
difficult to map onto non-linguistic, domain-general
cognition. For example, in English, the subject of a sentence
must agree in number with the verb of the sentence, even if
the subject and the verb are not adjacent in the sentence
(e.g., The boys in the corner like bananas). Such agreement
patterns are not easy to translate into alternative domains
(though see Onnis, Christiansen, Chater, & Gomez, 2003 for
a study of nonadjacency learning using visual nonsense
shapes). Even in less ‘abstract’ domains of language such as
phonetics and phonology, it is difficult to find non-linguistic
analogues for patterns because phonological patterns would

Extending learned patterns to previously unseen ones is a key
hallmark of complex cognition. This paper presents evidence
that learners are able to generalize learned patterns to novel
stimuli with very different surface properties within and
across modalities. Using a statistical learning paradigm, adult
learners were exposed to a repetition (reduplication) pattern in
which the first element of a three-element sequence repeated
(e.g., ABAAB). The pattern was presented as either
spoken repetition (e.g., bago, babago) or a non-linguistic
visual analogue (i.e., repetition of non-nameable shapes).
Learners showed significant transfer from a non-linguistic
repetition pattern to a linguistic reduplication pattern, and vice
versa. However, we found a small bias towards linguistic
reduplication, as responses to linguistic patterns were
numerically higher. This suggests that while learners are able
to extend learned patterns to novel patterns in other domains,
factors such as familiarity and naturalness may privilege
linguistic patterns over non-linguistic analogues.
Keywords: statistical learning, reduplication, domain-general
learning mechanisms, generalization.

Domain-generality in Language
One of the most hotly debated topics in the cognitive
science of language is whether the mechanisms involved in
language acquisition and processing are primarily specific to
the domain of language, or whether they may be domaingeneral and play a role in other aspects of cognition.
Domain-specific learning mechanisms have typically been
championed by generative linguists, who see language as a
highly abstract communicative system governed by complex
rules. The complexity and abstractness of these rules have
led many to believe that language is one of the key
components that separate humans from other species (e.g.,
Pinker & Jackendoff, 2009). Such language-specific
mechanisms provide a possible account for the complexity
of language, language universals, as well as the relative ease
with which children can learn complicated language systems
without explicit instruction.
An alternative account of the complexities of language
development focuses on the potential role of domain-general
mechanisms in the acquisition and processing of language.
This perspective suggests that the regularities found across
languages derive from processes of cultural evolution piggybacking on top of general cognitive mechanisms
(Christiansen & Chater, 2008). Constraints on these
domain-general mechanisms, amplified by cultural

330

seem to require manipulation of linguistic variables, such as
vowels and consonants. For example, German and Dutch
have final devoicing, a pattern in which voiced consonants
(e.g., /b, d, g/) become voiceless (e.g., /p, t, k/) at the end of
a word. Because this pattern is phonetically motivated and
manipulates language-specific units, it is difficult to
translate this pattern in a non-linguistic analogue.
However, the fact that it is difficult to translate linguistic
phenomena in terms of non-linguistic analogues does not
mean that such analogues do not exist. For example,
reduplication may be an ideal linguistic element to test for
cross-modal transfer in artificial grammar learning.
Reduplication is a morphological pattern in which an
element from a base is copied, thereby creating a repetition
of a phonological element (e.g., syllable, segment or entire
word). Reduplication is quite common cross-linguistically.
Even English has a variant of reduplication in which a word
is repeated with sch as an onset, in order to de-emphasize a
particular word (e.g., beer shmeer, I’m drinking wine).
While the pattern of reduplication in itself need not relate to
semantic content, it in no way detracts from its linguistic
function, and the question of domain-specificity in
language. The debate of innate and domain-specific
language learning capacities includes phonological and
phonetic patterns, which do not make reference to
semantics.
What makes reduplication ideal for translation into a nonlinguistic analogue is its use of repetition. Repetition is a
highly salient, common pattern that occurs in a wide range
of domains, and can be found in music (e.g., repetition of a
note, verse or stanza), in gestures (e.g., waving), in designs
(e.g., a wall-paper design in which a set of three flowers is
repeated), and in everyday scenes (e.g., a planned
community in which every third house is blue, and adjacent
houses are red).
Further, repetition has been shown to be a key component
in cross-modal transfer in finite-state grammar learning.
(Altmann, Dienes, & Goode, 1995; Tunney & Altmann,
2001). Altmann et al. (1995) showed that repetition of items
can encourage learners to generalize sequences derived from
a finite state grammar across modalities— from spoken
syllables to arbitrary symbols, and vice versa. This suggests
that learning a reduplication pattern may provide a basis for
domain-general generalization, supporting the hypothesis
that learners can transfer between linguistic and nonlinguistic domains.
Within the statistical learning literature, there have been a
multitude of studies investigating linguistic (Frank,
Slemmer, Marcus, & Johnson, 2009; Gerken, 2010; 2007;
Marcus, Vijayan, Bandi Rao, & Vishton, 1999) and nonlinguistic versions of repetition (Fernandes et al., 2009;
Frank, et al., 2009; Marcus, et al., 2007; Saffran, Pollak,
Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007). In these studies, infant and adult
learners are exposed to patterns of repetition. While there is
variation as to which patterns are easiest for infants to learn,
there is a general consensus that adult learners are relatively
good at learning basic repetition patterns, for both linguistic

and non-linguistic stimuli.
While previous studies have shown success in learning
linguistic and non-linguistic repetition patterns, these
studies have not addressed whether learning in repetition
experiments is general enough to support transfer between
linguistic and non-linguistic material. The present study
builds on previous research in domain transfer in grammar
learning, looking specifically at reduplication and repetition.
Learners were exposed to a repetition/reduplication pattern
for either linguistic or non-linguistic stimuli, and then tested
on both linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli. If learners are
able to apply the reduplication/repetition pattern to both
linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli (despite exposure to
only a single modality), it suggests that learners employ
domain-general mechanisms in learning novel patterns.

The Experiment
Participants
All participants were adult native speakers of English with
no previous participation in any experiment involving
reduplication. Forty-eight University of Rochester
undergraduate students and affiliates and were paid either
$10 or $5 for their participation (participants in the NoTraining Control condition were paid $5).

Design
Participants in the critical (trained) conditions were exposed
to a reduplication pattern that involved repetition of the first
syllable or shape.
Shapes Training Participants in the Shapes Training
condition were exposed to 24 sets of non-namable shapes
repeated 5 times each. These non-namable shapes were
similar in form to those used in Fiser and Aslin (2002). All
sets of shapes were of the form AB-AAB, where A and B
refer to two different shape items. All shapes were presented
in the center of the screen for 500 ms, with a 500 ms pause
between AB and AAB, and between each set of shapes. The
shapes were presented individually, one at a time. This
provided an analogue of linguistic processing, in which
sounds are produced serially.
Following exposure, participants were given a twoalternative forced choice task with 48 items. The first 24
items maintained the visual modality. Twelve of the items
were found in the training set (Old Items), and the other 12
items were not found in the training set (New Items). The
Shapes test items were of the form AAB vs. ABB (with
AAB and ABB counterbalanced for order of presentation).
Participants were told to select the set of patterns that best
represented the patterns they had seen prior to the test. The
second 24 test items were presented in the spoken modality,
and were the same items given to participants in the Sounds
Training condition.
Sounds Training Participants in the Sounds Training
condition were exposed to 24 pairs of AB AAB items, in

331

which the first item contained a CV1.CV2 word, and the
second item repeated the first syllable of the first
CV1.CV1 .CV2 word (e.g., [bodu bobodu]).
Following exposure, participants were given a twoalternative forced choice task with 48 items. The first 24
items maintained the spoken modality. Twelve of the items
were found in the training set, and the other 12 items were
not found in the training set. The test items were of the form
AAB vs. ABB, with AAB and ABB counterbalanced for
order of presentation, (e.g., [bobode] vs. [bodede]).
Participants were told to select the pair of words that best
represented the language they had heard prior to the test.
The second 24 test items were presented in the visual
modality, and were the same items given to participants in
the Shapes Training condition.

Shape Materials The shape stimuli were drawn from a set
of non-nameable shapes, similar to those in Fiser and Aslin
(2002). Non-namable shapes were used in order to ensure
that participants did not encode the repetition pattern in
terms of the name of the shape, but rather as a purely nonlinguistic pattern. The shape stimuli were designed to be as
close an analogue to linguistic reduplication as possible.
Each shape was analogous to a spoken syllable. Thus, if in
the syllable /ba/ were repeated in the AAB sequence, a
shape corresponding to /ba/ would be repeated. Because
spoken linguistic stimuli are processed sequentially and
without reference to space, we presented the non-linguistic
shape stimuli in an analogous manner. All shapes were
presented in the same location of the computer screen (the
center) for 500 ms. Examples of shape stimuli are given in
Figure 1. Because it is impossible to show items presented
in sequence in the same visual space, time is represented
from left-to-right, with times (in ms) below each shape, or
pause between shape presentations.

Materials
Spoken Linguistic Materials Spoken linguistic materials
were produced by a native English speaker in a soundattenuated booth. The speaker had no knowledge of the
design or purpose of the experiment. All spoken stimuli
contained only CV syllables, with AB stimuli being
CV1.CV2 and AAB and ABB stimuli being of the form
CV1.CV1.CV2. Consonants were taken from the set: /p, t, k,
b, d, g, m, n, f, z, v, z/ and vowels were taken from the set
/a, ae, e, i, o, u/. Care was taken so that all of the AB, AAB
or ABB forms were non-words in English. Examples of
training stimuli can be found in Table 1, below.

Figure 1: Shapes Training Stimuli.
Test items were created in a similar manner as training
items, and followed an analogous procedure to spoken
linguistic stimuli items: as AAB vs. ABB (with order of
ABB counterbalanced with AAB). There were Old Items
that appeared in the training set, as well as New Items that
contained shapes that were not in the training set.

Table 1: Sounds Training Items.
AB
dife
faemi
todi

AAB
didife
faefaemi
totodi

Procedure

Test stimuli were recorded in the same manner as training
stimuli. There were 24 test items, 12 containing pairs of
words that appeared in training (Old Items), and 12
containing items not heard in training (New Items). Items
appearing in the New Items were drawn from the same set
of consonant and vowels as the training stimuli. While there
were no new consonant and vowel sounds, all syllables in
the New Item test items were not in the training set.
Examples of test stimuli are provided in Table 2.

All phases of the experiment were run in Psyscope X
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993). Participants
were given both written and verbal instructions, and were
debriefed upon completion of the experiment (which took
approximately 20 minutes for participants in the trained
conditions, and 10 minutes for participants in the Control
condition).
Sounds Training Participants in the Sounds Training
condition were told that they were to be listening to pairs of
words from a language they had never heard before. They
were informed that there would be questions about the
language following exposure, but that they need not
memorize the words they heard. Following exposure,
participants were given instructions for the Sounds test
items. Participants were told that they would hear two sets
of pairs of words. One pair of words was from the language
they had just heard, and the other pair of words was not
from the language they had heard; if they believed the first
pair of words was from the language, they were instructed to

Table 2: Sounds Test Items.

AAB
didife
faefaemi

Old Items
ABB
difefe
faemimi

AAB
dedeza
mimibu

New Items
ABB
dezaza
mibubu

332

press the ‘a’ key; if they believed the second pair of words
was from the language, they were instructed to press the ‘l’
key. After responding to the Sounds test items, participants
were given the Shape test items. Participants were told that
they were to watch two sets of three shapes, and that their
job was to select the set of shapes that they preferred.

ANOVA. There was a significant effect of training (F(1,30)
= 32.08, p < 0.0001, η = 0.52), suggesting that participants
learned the reduplication pattern. There was a significant
effect of test item (F(1,30) = 10.62, p < 0.01, η = 0.26),
which reflected the fact that there were significantly more
correct Sounds Test items compared to Shapes Test items.
There was no interaction (F(1,30) = 1.29 p = 0.26, η =
0.041).
While there were a significantly greater number of correct
responses to Sounds items compared to Shapes items in the
Sounds Training condition, there was a significantly greater
number of correct Shapes responses compared to the
Control condition (0.73 vs. 0.49, ± 0.11), (t(15) = 4.31, p <
0.001). This suggests that participants in the Sounds
Training condition successfully transferred the reduplication
pattern to the Shapes test items.

Shapes Training Participants in the Shapes Training
condition were told that they would be watching series of
shapes presented in series of five: a set of two shapes
followed by a set of three shapes. They were informed that
there would be questions about the shapes they saw, but
they need not try and memorize the shapes or the sequences
that they saw. Following exposure, participants were given
instructions for the Shapes test items. Participants were told
that they would hear two sets of three shapes. One set of
shapes belonged to the series of shapes they had just seen,
while the other set of shapes did not belong to the series. If
they believed the first set of shapes was from the series they
had seen, they were instructed to press the ‘a’ key; if they
believed the second set of shapes was from the series, they
were instructed to press the ‘l’ key. Following the Shapes
test items, participants were given the Sounds test items.
Participants were told that they would be hearing two
words, and their job was to select the word that they
preferred.
No-Training Control Participants in the No-Training
Control condition were given test items only (without any
exposure to the sound or shape items). All participants
received both Sound and Shapes test items, but order of
presentation was counterbalanced such that half of the
participants were given the Shapes test items first, while the
other half were given the Sounds test items first.
Participants were told to respond based on their own
intuitions about which shapes or sounds they preferred, and
that there was no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ answer.

Figure 2: Results.
Shapes Training We compared the Shapes Training (mean
= 0.70, CI ± 0.084) condition with the No-Training Control
(mean = 0.52, CI ± 0.09) condition via a 2X2 mixed-design
ANOVA. There was a significant effect of training (F(1,30)
= 9.85, p < 0.01, η = 0.22). There was no effect of test item
(F<1), and no interaction (F<1).
There was a significant effect of transfer, as correct
responses to Sound items were significantly greater than
Sound responses in the Control condition (0.70 vs. 0.57, ±
0.12), (t(15) = 2.29. p < 0.05).

Results
Proportion of correct responses (i.e., choosing the correctly
repeated pattern) for all conditions are given in Figure 1.
The means for Old and New items in the Shapes Training
condition were identical; 0.70 for both Old and New items.
The means for Old and New items in the Sounds Training
condition were not significantly different: 0.89 for Old
Items and 0.88 for New items (t(15)=0.21, p = 0.84). In
order to make a direct comparison between Training and
Control conditions, we combined responses to Old and New
test items because they were not significantly different from
each other. Combining responses for Old and New items
allows for a clean comparison with the Control condition,
for which all items were ‘new’, as no training was given in
this condition.

Overall Because the Control condition was above 50% for
Sound items, we compared the performance of the Control
participants to chance via a one-sample t-test. The effect
was marginally significant (t(15)=1.95, p = 0.070). This
suggests that participants may have had a small bias to
prefer reduplication of the first element compared to
reduplication of the second element. However, given that all
participants were significantly more accurate than controls,
this small bias did not affect the overall results.
Participants in both conditions were able to transfer the
knowledge learned in one domain to another. Participants
trained on a linguistic AAB reduplication pattern transferred
that knowledge to a non-linguistic repetition pattern, and

Sounds Training We compared the Sounds Training (mean
= 0.84, CI ± 0.075) condition with the No-Training Control
condition (mean = 0.52, CI ± 0.09) via a 2X2 mixed-design

333

vice versa. One interesting pattern of results is that sounds
appear to be privileged over shapes. Participants in the
Sounds Training condition chose the correct reduplicated
item for Sound test items more often compared to responses
to Shapes test items in the Shapes Training condition. While
there appears to be a transfer deficit for sounds to shapes but
not from shapes to sounds, it is unclear whether this is a
type of ‘ceiling’ effect. Learners in the Shapes Training
condition showed about the same proportion of correct
responses to shape items, even after training, compared to
responses to Shape Items in the Sounds Training condition.
Third, there was a slight bias towards AAB sound
reduplication in the No-Training Control condition, but no
biases in the Shapes test items. There are two possible
reasons for the greater number of ‘correct’ responses to
sound items. The first is that sound items are in a familiar
domain— speech— while the shape items were unfamiliar
to participants. This lack of familiarity could have made
learning and transfer more difficult. Given that participants
had over 18 years of experience processing English sounds,
but only a few minutes processing the novel shapes, it is
likely that this difference may have produced a difference in
responses.
Another possibility is that processing linguistic patterns,
such as reduplication are privileged. If this is the case, then
it may be easier to learn reduplication in a linguistic domain
than in a non-linguistic domain. Marcus et al. (2007)
support this notion, as they argue that abstract rule learning
in language is privileged. Infants in Marcus et al.’s study
were best able to learn the repetition pattern when presented
as linguistic stimuli, but failed to learn the non-linguistic
pattern. However, infant learners are able to learn the nonlinguistic repetition patterns with highly salient input
(Frank, et al., 2009) or familiar objects (such as dogs)
(Saffran, et al., 2007). The reasons for the privileged status
of language in pattern learning may be due to experience,
amount of exposure and salience, rather than something
inherently special about the linguistic material. However,
this question cannot be addressed under the current
experiment, and will be left as an open question for future
research.

in both linguistic (reduplication) and non-linguistic
(repetition) patterns, we have shown that adult learners can
move with relative ease between domains (linguistic and
non-linguistic) and modalities (shapes and sounds).
Domain-specific theories of language learning predict that
non-linguistic patterns are learned via separate mechanisms
than linguistic patterns. In such domain-specific learning,
representations for linguistic patterns should be highly
complex, and represented solely in terms of linguistic units
(e.g., consonants, vowels and syllables), and will therefore
have no non-linguistic analogue. For example, a domainspecific theory of reduplication might state a rule in which
the first syllable of a root is copied to the beginning of the
reduplicated word. Because shapes have no syllables or
roots, there is no way to represent repetition of nonlinguistic items such as shapes or tones. In order to explain
the effect of transfer from linguistic to non-linguistic
modality in the present study, the mechanisms for learning
and representation must be flexible enough so that
reduplication can be encoded as repetition.
A question for future research is whether the flexibility of
representations in adult learners is specific only to repetition
patterns. If all aspects of language are learned via domaingeneral learning mechanisms, then transfer across
modalities should be found for patterns that do not involve
repetition. While Altmann et al. (1995) showed that
repetition is important in generalization across domains,
Tunney and Altmann (2001) showed that transfer across
domains does not require repetition if the distributional
information in the stimuli is manipulated to induce the
relevant analogies.
Another unresolved question pertains to the nature of the
representations that support the generalization across
domains observed in our study. It may seem that the transfer
results would point to some sort of abstract, amodal
representation that can be applied across both auditory and
visual domains. However, this interpretation is inconsistent
with the results of Conway & Christiansen (2006), who
found no interference (i.e., negative transfer) between visual
and auditory artificial grammar learning. A plausible
hypothesis, then, following Redington & Chater’s (1996)
reevaluation of transfer effects, is that generalization may
happen at test given the salience of modality-specific
representations of the repetition patterns.
A future study is planned looking at transfer in deletion,
which is less salient and (crucially) veers away from
repetition patterns. In addition, future research will create
non-linguistic analogues of patterns in language that make
use of more complex, hierarchical and abstract
representations, such as those involving non-adjacent
dependencies (e.g., Onnis et al., 2003).
Additionally, future research will determine whether
linguistic and non-linguistic patterns are learned via the
same mechanisms. Previous research has suggested both
non-linguistic and linguistic pattern learning follow
relatively similar constraints (Finley & Badecker, 2010;
Kirkham, et al., 2002). For example, Finley and Badecker

Discussion
We have shown that learners are able to transfer knowledge
from a linguistic domain to a non-linguistic domain and vice
versa. Participants exposed to a linguistic reduplication
pattern were able to transfer that reduplication pattern to a
non-linguistic repetition pattern, and learners of a nonlinguistic repetition pattern significantly transferred this
knowledge to a linguistic reduplication pattern.
The results of the present study have important
consequences for theories of language learning and
representation. Because many patterns and processes in
language do not appear to have clear non-linguistic
analogues, it has been largely assumed that linguistic
processes are represented independently of non-linguistic
processes. Using a repetition pattern that has clear analogues

334

(2010) compared learners’ inferences about linguistic and
non-linguistic agreement (harmony) patterns. Harmony is a
phonological pattern in which vowels (and consonants)
share the same phonetic feature values. Learners of a nonlinguistic visual analogue of harmony made similar
inferences compared to learners of the phonological
harmony pattern. The linguistic and non-linguistic patterns
mainly differed with respect to differences in processing
visual versus spoken auditory stimuli. Future work will
continue to explore the ways in which non-linguistic pattern
learning mirrors (or fails to mirror) complex language
learning. Only through comparison of multiple learning
situations will it be possible to uncover the domain-general
and domain-specific interactions that lead to language.
In summary, the present paper explores the role of
domain-general learning mechanisms in adult pattern
learning. Testing adult learners for transfer from spoken
linguistic to visual non-linguistic stimuli, we showed that
learners are highly flexible in their interpretations of novel
patterns. Participants were able to learn both linguistic and
non-linguistic repetition patterns, and were able to transfer
that pattern to a novel domain. These results suggest a
significant role of flexible, domain-general mechanisms in
language learning.

cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32(5),
429-492.
Fernandes, K. J., Frank, M. C., Kirkham, N., Marcus, G.,
Rabagliati, H., & Slemmer, J. (2009). Abstract rule
learning for visual sequences in 8- and 11-month-olds.
Infancy, 14(1), 2-18.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2010). Linguistic and nonlinguistic influences on learning biases for vowel
harmony. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 706-711). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. (2002). Statistical learning of higherorder temporal structure from visual shape sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28(3), 458-467.
Frank, M. C., Slemmer, J., Marcus, G., & Johnson, S. P.
(2009). Information from multiple modalities helps fivemonth-olds learn abstract rules. Developmental Science,
12, 504-509.
Gerken, L. (2010). Infants use rational decision criteria for
choosing among models of their input. Cognition, 115(2),
362-365.
Kirkham, N., Slemmer, J., & Johnson, S. P. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a domain
general leanring mechanism. Cognition, 83(2), B35-B42.
Marcus, G., Fernandes, K. J., & Johnson, S. P. (2007).
Infant rule learning facilitated by speech. Psychological
Science, 18(5), 387-391.
Marcus, G., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule-learning in seven-month-old infants.
Science, 282, 77-80.
Onnis, L., Christiansen, M. H., Chater, N., & Gomez, R. L.
(2003). Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential
learning: Evidence from artificial grammar learning
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 970-975).
Pinker, S., & Jackendoff, R. (2009). The components of
language: What’s specific to language, and what’s
specific to humans? In M. H. Christiansen, C. Collins &
S. Edelman (Eds.), Language Universals (pp. 126-151).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Redington, M., & Chater, N. (1996). Transfer in artificial
grammar learning: A reevaluation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 125(2), 123-138.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-olds. Science, 274, 19261928.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105(3), 669-680.
Tunney, R. J., & Altmann, G. (2001). Two modes of tranfer
in artificial grammar learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 27(3),
614-639.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Patricia Reeder, Elissa
Newport, Patricia Clark, and members of the Aslin-Newport
Lab including Kelly Johnston, Anna States and Emily
Kasman. We assume all responsibility for any errors.
Funding was provided by NIH Grants DC00167 and
T32DC000035.

References
Altmann, G., Dienes, Z., & Goode, A. (1995). On the
modality-independence of implicitly learning grammatical
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 899-912.
Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2010). Language
acquisition meets language evolution. Cognitive Science,
34, 1131-1157.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 31,
489-558.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2006). Statistical
learning within and between modalities: Pitting abstract
against stimulus specific representations. Psychological
Science, 17(10), 905-911.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for

335

