UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
N-back Training Task Performance: Analysis and Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/37c3c9hq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Harbison, J. Isaiah
Atkins, Sharona M.
Dougherty, Michael R.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

N-back Training Task Performance: Analysis and Model
J. Isaiah Harbison (jiharb@umd.edu)
Center for Advanced Study of Language and Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
7005 52nd Avenue, College Park, MD 27642 USA

Sharona M. Atkins (satkins@psyc.umd.edu)
Neuroscience & Cognitive Science Program Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
Biology/Psychology Building, College Park, MD 27642 USA

Michael R. Dougherty (mdougherty@psyc.umd.edu)
Department of Psychology and Center for Advanced Study of Language, University of Maryland
Biology/Psychology Building, College Park, MD 27642 USA

sequence were a “D” because it would match the one
occurring two prior, but respond “no match” otherwise.
The inter-relationships within a sequence of stimuli
appear to be an important factor in determining how the task
is performed. In particular, stimuli (i.e., lures) that match in
locations n+1 or n-1 can change how the n-back task is
performed (Kane et al, 2007). For example, if the 5th letter
in the aforementioned sequence were an F, it would be
considered a lure because it occurred n+1 stimuli ago, and
the correct response is “non match”. Lures are more difficult
to reject than other non-lure/non-targets stimuli; participants
are less accurate and take longer to respond to lures than to
other non-targets (Gray, Chabris, & Braver, 2003; Kane et
al, 2007; McCabe & Hartman, 2008; Oberauer, 2005).
Arguably, the presence of lures changes how participants
perform the n-back task (Kane et al., 2007). Without lures, it
would be possible to use familiarity alone as the basis for a
correct response. Any stimulus re-occurring somewhat
recently would be a target. However, when lures are
included in the sequence recent re-occurrence is not enough
to distinguish targets from non-targets. Instead, it is
necessary to recollect either what stimulus occurred n items
back or have a fine-grained estimate of when a familiar
stimulus last appeared.
Given the suggested importance of lures, the current
analysis focuses on comparing participant performance on
targets, lures, and other non-targets.

Abstract
Despite the n-back task’s apparent effectiveness as a working
memory (WM) training task, its status as a WM assessment is
questionable. We analyzed the accuracy and reaction time
data of participants performing of an adaptive n-back training
task and developed a computational model to describe this
performance. Application of our model to n-back training data
suggests that performance is consistent with a two-stage,
familiarity and recollection account. Furthermore, our results
suggest that interference resolution is an important
determining factor for task accuracy, especially when
responding to targets.
Keywords: working memory; executive functioning; working
memory training; n-back; continuous performance task;
computational model.

N-back and Working Memory
The n-back task has often been used as a working memory
(WM) assessment (Owen et al., 2005) and has recently
become popular as a WM training task (Jaeggi et al., 2008).
Performance gains on n-back training transfer to tasks that
are heavily reliant on WM. Nevertheless, prior work
questions the validity of n-back as a measure of WM ability
(Jaeggi et al. 2010; Kane et al., 2007) and n-back
performance gains do not appear to transfer to complex WM
span tasks (Jaeggi et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008).
Understanding how n-back is performed is important both
for the purpose of evaluating the its validity as a measure of
WM and for isolating the mechanisms that improve over the
course of WM training. The present study provides an
analysis of performance on an adaptive n-back training task
and a model of n-back performance.

Experiment: Training Data
Fifty-six participants completed ten sessions of an adaptive,
n-back training task as part of a larger working memory
training battery. This battery included a training version of
running-span, letter-number sequencing, and block span
(Atkins et al., 2009) tasks as well as four tasks provided by
Posit Science inc. (Brain Fitness Program, Version 2.1;
Insight, Version 1.1). For the present purposes, we will only
note that many participants improved their performance on
the training tasks, and specifically on the n-back training
task. Furthermore, performance gains on the n-back training
task correlated with gains in several remote tasks, including
sentence ambiguity resolution (Novick et al., submitted).

The N-back Task
In the n-back task, participants are presented with a
sequence of stimuli (e.g., letters) one at a time and asked to
compare the current stimulus to one presented n items prior
in the sequence. When performing 2-back, the current
stimulus is a target when it matches the stimulus presented
two stimuli ago. So in the letter sequence “P-F-D-C…”, the
participant should respond “match” if the 5th letter in the

120

Difficulty level can be taken as an indicator of overall
performance, but it does not shed light on what cognitive
processes were used to complete the task.. For that purpose
we turn to accuracy and reaction times on the target, lures,
and other non-targets individually.

N-back Training Task Design
Similar to other training versions of n-back, our version
adapted in difficulty based on participant performance. Two
factors were manipulated to change the task difficulty. The
first was the lure level. There were three levels of lures. The
easiest level (level 0) consisted of no lures. At the next
difficulty level (level 1) lures appeared in position n+1. In
the most difficult lure level (level 2) lures appeared both in
position n+1 and n-1. In addition to adapting lure level to
participant performance, we also adapted difficulty by
changing the value of n. N could range from 1 to 8.
Participants were presented 25-item sequences. In each
sequence there were 5 targets, 0 or 5 lures and the rest were
other non-targets (i.e., letters that had last occurred more
than 10 letters prior). Participant performance on each
sequence was used to determine whether and how the task
difficulty should adapt on the subsequent sequence of 25.
When participants were correct at least 85% of the time the
task got more difficult; when they were correct less than or
equal to 65% of the time, the task got easier. Otherwise, the
task remained at the same difficulty level.
The difficulty level changed by first changing the lure
level. If the difficulty needed to be increased and the lure
level was less than 2, the lure level would increase. Once at
the maximal lure level, n would increase and the lure level
would be reset at zero. Similarly when the task needed to be
made easier and the lure level was greater than 0, the lure
level would be decreased by one level. If the lure level was
already 0, then n would be decreased by one and the lure
level would be reset to two. All participants started at 2back with no lures (i.e., lure level of zero).

Accuracy
Figure 2 shows the percent correct when the target, lure, and
other non-target trials were shown in the third through 25th
serial positions. Participants demonstrated pronounced and
consistent primacy on target trials across serial positions.
Little or no primacy was found for lures and other nontarget trials.

Figure 2: Mean Accuracy for Targets, Lures and Other
non-targets across serial position in the stimulus sequence.
When accuracy is examined separately for each level of n,
the same basic relationship is found. There is an initial drop
in target performance down to an asymptote; the lowest
level of the asymptote is negatively correlated with n. The
top panel of Figure 3 shows representative results from the
4-back task.

Reaction Times
Participants responded correctly to both lures and targets
significantly more slowly than to other non-targets. As
shown in Figure 4, the mean correct reaction time (RT) to
targets and lures were both approximately 380 ms (380.5
and 379.8 respectively). The RT to other non-targets was
343.4, significantly quicker than both other trials types as
determined by within participant t-tests (p’s < 0.001, note
that other significance values are also from within
participant t-tests). This same pattern is found when
analyses are performed separately for each level of n. The
target and lure RTs did not differ significantly for any value
of n. In contrast, for all n values except 8 other non-targets
were responded to more quickly than lures and for all n
values except 2 other non-targets were responded to more
quickly than targets (p’s < 0.05).
A different pattern was found for incorrect response RTs.
Participants were significantly faster at responding
incorrectly to targets than to lures (p < 0.05) and other nontargets (p < 0.01). When examined at each level of n, the

Figure 1: Mean Difficulty level reached by participants by
training session.

General Findings
On average, participants showed marked improvement over
the course of training. Figure 1 shows the mean difficulty
level reached by participants across training sessions, where
difficulty level is defined as the value of n reached plus 1/3
of the lure level or

D = n+

LureLevel
.
3

Eq.1

121

results are largely consistent. For n’s of three through eight,
incorrect target responses were quicker than incorrect lure
and incorrect other non-target responses. However, likely
due to the small number of incorrect lure and other nontarget responses, these differences were only significant four
times.
Comparing correct to incorrect response RTs, no
significant difference was found for targets. However,
correct responses were significantly quicker than incorrect
responses for both lures (p < 0.01) and other non-targets (p
< 0.001).

Summary of Results
The RT results are consistent with previous research. Lures
were expected to take longer to reject than other non-targets.
Similarly, responses to lures were expected to be less
accurate than responses to other non-targets. However, the
primacy found in targets trials was surprising. The number
of items that it is necessary to track, namely n, is constant
across the entire sequence. Despite this, the accuracy for
early targets in the sequence is greater than for later targets.
Follow-up analyses indicated that the obtained primacy
was not due to a decrease in the probability of responding
“match” due to the number of prior “match” responses. The
probability of responding “match” to a target did not vary
within a sequence, and remained constant at about 58%.
One explanation for the observed primacy is that
participants were less than perfect at removing stimuli from
consideration that were not longer relevant. Irrelevant
stimuli, stimuli that occurred greater than n positions prior,
may have been maintained in addition to and potentially at
the expense of the relevant stimuli. Removal of irrelevant
information has previously been indicated as important to
performance in the n-back task (Oberauer, 2005).

Figure 3: Participant (Panel A) and Model (Panel B)
Accuracy across serial positions for 4-back.

Figure 5: Participant Reaction time data (Panel A) and
Model predictions for 4-back.

Modeling n-back Performance
A computational model of n-back performance was
developed based on prior work describing n-back
performance. Specifically, the model implemented a twostage decision process, which includes a familiarity and a
recollection process. It also implemented imperfect removal

Figure 4: Mean Reaction Time for Targets, Lures and
Other non-targets for Correct and Incorrect Trials.

122

of irrelevant information from the set actively maintained in
WM. Both of these assumptions were based on Oberauer’s
(2005) account of n-back performance. In addition, to allow
the irrelevant information maintained in WM to impact
performance, we implemented forgetting as due to
interference between items actively maintained in WM
(Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2008).

search for the n-th back stimulus by probing memory with
the n-th back context. However, we assumed that the n-th
back stimulus is only probabilistically reinstated.
Specifically, each item of the n-th back context is reinstated
with probability pReinstate.
The current, modified version of HyGene does not use
any of the standard HyGene parameters (L, AC, ActMinH,
TMAX). Instead, as indicated in the model modification
description it introduces four new parameters. These
parameters and their values for the reported simulations are
shown in Table 1.

Model Implementation
These theoretical assumptions were implemented within an
existing model of familiarity/probability judgment and
recall/recollection, HyGene (Thomas et al., 2008). While
this model has previously only been applied to hypothesis
generation and judgment, it is based on a model of
recognition memory, Minerva2 (Hintzman, 1988) and is
therefore well equipped to handle familiarity judgments. It
also utilizes sampling and retrieval dynamics based on
successful models of recall, making it capable of
recollection as well. To apply HyGene to the n-back task it
was necessary to: (1) Elaborate on its WM processes, (2)
Add a multi-stage recognition process, and (3) Represent
time.

Table 1. Parameters
Name
pRemove
pDrift
pReinstate
tRetrieval

Sim. Value
.15
.33
.75
.10

Model Details
There are three components used in the modified model: the
probe, the active subset of memory, and semantic memory.
Each stimulus in the active subset of memory is represented
as a trace, a combination of an item (e.g., letter) and the
context in which the item appeared. Each item is
represented as a unique, randomly generated vector of 1’s, 1’s, and 0’s. Ones represent the presence and negative ones
represent the absence of some abstract feature. A zero
indicates that the presence or absence of a feature is
unknown or lost. For each simulation run, a new randomly
generated vector is created for each of the letters used in the
experiment. The collection of unique letter vectors
constitutes the semantic memory of the model.
While the initial context vector is generated randomly,
like the item vectors, each subsequent context was generated
based on the previous context vector and a random drift
factor. Each element in a new context is the same as each
element in the previous context with probability (1-pDrift).
With pDrift, that element is set to a random value (i.e., -1, 0,
1).
As each stimulus is processed, a vector representing that
stimulus and the vector representing the current context are
stored as a trace in the active subset of memory. Once the
active subset has more than n traces, the model attempts to
remove the traces of the items that occurred more than n
stimuli prior from the active subset. The probability of
removing the extra traces at each time step is pRemove. The
maintenance of items in the active subset has a cost.
Specifically, every trace competes with every other trace for
each of its shared features. When a new item enters the
active subset, there is a 50% chance that it loses each feature
it shares with an item already in the active subset and a 50%
chance that it keeps that feature and that the item already in
the active subset loses it.

WM Processes We assumed that while performing the nback task, participants try to maintain the last n items in an
active subset of memory. Once the item is more than n
stimuli old, the model attempts to remove that item from the
active subset. The probability of successfully removing the
no longer relevant item on each time step is determined by a
new parameter in the model, pRemove. In addition, items in
the active subset compete with one another. Each feature
can only be maintained by one item in the active subset
(Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2008), therefore the
competition for features between active items causes
interference.
Recognition Process The model completes up to three
processes when responding in the n-back task. The initial
step is determining the familiarity of the current stimulus. If
the stimulus is not sufficiently familiar, then the current
stimulus is judged as a non-match and no further processing
steps are taken. However, if the current stimulus is
sufficiently familiar, an attempt to recall or recollect the n-th
back item is made. If the retrieved item matches the current
stimulus, the response is “match”. If the retrieved item does
not match the current stimulus, then the response is “nonmatch”. If retrieval fails, that is the activation of the to-beretrieved items is less than a threshold tRetreival, then the
model guesses whether or not that stimulus is a target. The
RT predictions from the present simulations are based on
the simplifying assumption that each process (familiarity
judgment, recollection, and guessing) takes a single unit of
time.
Time Contextual drift was used to represent time. With each
time step the representation of the current context was
modified with probability pDrift. This allowed the model to

123

Familiarity is accessed by probing the active subset with
the item portion of the current vector. To determine
familiarity, the first step is to calculate the similarity of the
current item to the items in the active subset by

tRetrieval, otherwise retrieval fails and the model guesses
whether or not the stimulus is a target. The probability of
the model guessing target is set to the actual probability of
targets in the sequence, 0.2 in the current experiment.
If retrieval is successful then the retrieved item is
compared with the current stimulus. If the current stimulus
matches the retrieved item, then the response is “match”. If
the retrieved item does not match the current stimulus, then
the response is “non-match”.
Familiarity, recollection, and guessing each take time.
Here we assume that each take a single unit of time.
Therefore, the RT predictions are completely determined by
the average number of processes required to correctly and
incorrectly respond to the targets, lures and other nontargets.

M

∑PT

j ij

j =1

Si =

Ni

,

Eq. 2

where Pj is jth element in probe P and Tij is the jth element
in memory trace i. Ni is the number of elements that are
non-zero in either the probe or the trace. M is the number of
traces in the active subset.
The activation of each trace, Ai, is the cube of its
similarity value. The echo intensity of the active subset to
the probe is the sum of all these activations:
M

I = ∑ Ai ,

Simulations Results

Eq. 3

The model was run once on each stimulus sequence given to
participants at each level of n. The second panel of Figure 3
shows simulation results for 4-back. The model produces
primacy, especially for targets. It also shows the same
pattern of RT results as shown by participants, as shown in
the second panel of Figure 5. Specifically, correct responses
are made to targets and lures at approximately the same
speed but responses to other non-targets are faster. Incorrect
responses to other non-targets and lures are slower than
incorrect responses to targets. While the detailed results are
only shown for 4-back, the model predictions, like
participant performance, is consistent across levels of n. The
only change being that as n increases, the asymptotic level
of accuracy for targets decreases for both participants and
the model.
Primacy is predicted by the model due to the interference
between the items maintained in the active subset of
memory. Specifically, it is due to the number of other items
that any given item must compete with before that item can
be used to make a response. For example, when performing
4-back, the first item of the sequence only competes with
the three items added after it. After the third subsequent
item is added, the first item will be the n-th back stimulus to
be used to make the next response. However, the fourth item
in the sequence competes with at least the three items that
preceded it into the active subset and the three items that
followed it. The amount of interference is increased when
items that are no longer relevant remain in the active subset.
However, even with perfect removal of irrelevant items
some degree of primacy is found.
As mentioned above, the RT predictions are completely
driven by the number of processes used to make a response.
For example, normally two processes are necessary to make
a correct or incorrect response to a target: familiarity and
recollection. Correct responses to other non-targets are
quicker because they can usually be identified as nonmatches by the results of the familiarity process alone. In
contrast, incorrect responses to other non-targets occur
primarily when the stimulus is judged as familiar but recall
fails and an incorrect guess of “match” is made. Like

i =1

where M is the number of traces in the active subset. If the I
is greater than 0, then the stimulus is considered familiar.
Otherwise, the response is “non-match”.
If the item is familiar then the recollection or recall
process is initiated to determine if the current stimulus
matches the stimulus n-back. This requires the n-th back
context be reinstated. Each element in the current context is
converted to the n-th back context with probability
pReinstate. The reinstated context is used to probe the active
subset by again cubing the results from Equation 2. This
time, however, the context is used as the probe and
activations are not used to determine the echo intensity but
instead the echo content by
M

C = ∑ AiTij .

Eq. 4

i =1

The echo content is a noisy version of the items most
activated by the reinstated context. C will not be an exact
match of any particular item. Therefore, C is disambiguated
following the procedure used to disambiguate hypotheses in
HyGene. This is done by recalling items from semantic
memory based on their activation to C.
Semantic memory is the collection of the vectors
representing each of the items used as stimuli. C is first
normalized and then it is used to probe semantic memory.
Once more Equation 2 is used to determine the activation
but this time of semantic memory instead of the active
subset. Retrieval from semantic memory is based on the
activation of each item vector. The probability of sampling
semantic vector i is

Pi =

Ai

,

W

∑A
j =1

Eq. 5

j

where W is the number of vectors in semantic memory.
The first item sampled from semantic memory is
considered the n-th back stimulus. However, to be
successfully retrieved the activation of the to-be-retrieved
vector must be greater than the retrieval threshold,

124

targets, correct lure responses often involve both familiarity
and recollection, but incorrect lure responses are sometimes
the result of false recollection and sometimes the result of
guessing.

References
Atkins, S. M., Harbison, J. I., Bunting, M. F., TeubnerRhodes, S., & Dougherty, M. R. (2009, November).
Measuring working memory with automated block span
and automated letter-number sequencing. Poster
presented at the 50th Annual Meetin of the Psychonomic
Society.
Gray, J. R., Chabris, C. F., & Braver, T. S. (2003). Neural
mechanisms of general fluid intelligence. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 316-322.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and
recognition memry in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 96, 528-551.
Jaeggi, S. M., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. J.
(2008). Improving fluid intelligence with training on
working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 68296833.
Jaeggi, S. M., Buschkuehl, M., Perrig, W. J., Meier, B.
(2010). The concurrent validity of the N-back task as a
working memory measure. Memory, 18, 394-412.
Kane, M. J., Conway, A. R. A., Miura, T. K., & Colflesh, G.
J. H., (2007). Working memory, attention control, and the
n-back task: A question of construct validity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 615-622.
Li, S. C., Schmiedek, F., Huxhold, O., Röcke, C., Smith, J.,
& Lindenberger, U. (2008). Working memory plasticity in
old age: Practice gain, transfer, and maintenance.
Psychology of Aging. 23, 731-742.
McCabe, J., & Hartman, M. (2008). Working memory for
item and temporal information in younger and older
adults. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 15, 754600.
Novick, J. M., Hussey, E., Teubner-Rhodes, S., Dougherty,
M. R., Harbison, J. I., & Bunting, M. F. (submitted).
Clearing the garden path: Improving sentences processing
through executive training.
Oberauer, K. (2005). Binding and inhibition in working
memory: Individual and age differences in short-term
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 368-387.
Oberauer, K., & Lewandowsky, S. (2008). Forgetting in
immediate serial recall: Decay, temporal distinctiveness,
or interference? Psychological Review, 115, 544-576.
Owen, A. M., McMillan, K. M., Laird, A. R., & Bullmore,
E. (2005). N-back working memory paradigm: A metaanalysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies.
Human Brain Mapping, 25,46-59.
Thomas, R. P., Dougherty, M. R., Sprenger, A., &
Harbison, J. I., (2008). Diagnostic hypothesis generation
and human judgment. Psychological Review, 115, 155185.

General Discussion
A detailed examination of n-back performance supports the
claim that lures are necessary for making the task more than
a familiarity judgment task (Kane et al., 2007). However,
the difference in RTs between other non-targets and the two
trial types in which recollection is necessary, targets and
lures, indicated that the presence of lures in a stimulus
sequence does not necessarily change how participants
respond to the other non-target trials. The present model
accounts for this RT data by assuming that the familiarity of
a stimulus determines whether or not a recollection is
attempted. If a stimulus is not sufficiently familiar, then the
stimulus is immediately labeled a non-target. Therefore,
according to the present model, correct responses on nontarget trials can be accounted for exclusively by familiarity
whether or not the stimulus sequence also contains lures.
Only lures and targets, the trial types likely to be familiar
due to their occurrence approximately n stimuli ago are
likely to trigger recollection.
Other non-targets make up at least 50% of the trials in
most applications of n-back, so an overall n-back score
could mostly reflect the ability to discriminate familiar
items. Therefore, according to the present analysis the score
does not primarily reflect a participant’s ability to recognize
the reoccurrence of the n-th back item, but instead
familiarity judgment. This is one potential reason for the
low correlation between the n-back task and standard
working memory assessments (e.g., operation span and
reading span) in which recall is necessary.
WM is often conceptualized as having a capacity or span
component as well as an executive function or attentional
control component. The present modeling effort suggests
that the span component of WM is not necessary to account
for n-back performance, as this aspect of WM is not
implemented within the model. Instead the executive
function or attentional control aspect alone might be
sufficient. Attentional control was implemented here as the
ability to remove irrelevant information from attention
(pRemove) and the ability to conduct controlled memory
search (pReinstate). This might also differentiate n-back
from other WM assessments, as the other tasks might rely
more heavily on capacity or span.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the University of Maryland
Center for Advanced Study of Language with funding from
the Department of Defense. The authors thank Michael
Bunting, Jared Novick, Scott Weems, Erika Hussey, Susan
Teubner-Rhodes, and Barbara Forsyth for their
contributions to the design and implementation of the
experiment.

125

