UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
New Approaches to the Problem of Conceptual Change in the Learning of Science and Math

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qj741zd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Vosniadou, Stella
Chi, Michellene T.H.
Ohlsson, Stellan
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

New Approaches to the Problem of Conceptual Change in the Learning of Science
and Math
Participants
Stella Vosniadou (svosniad@phs.uoa.gr)

Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
David D. Cosejo (dcosej1@uic.edu)

Department of Philosophy and History of Science
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece

Department of Psychology
University of Illinois at Chicago

Michelene T.H. Chi (mtchi@asu.edu)
Department of Psychology
Arizona State University

David E. Brown (debrown@illinois.edu)
Curriculum & Instruction
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Discussant:
Nancy J. Nerserssian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology

Introduction
Concepts are not static. They change in many ways from the
most simple – as in cases where a new instance is added on
to an existing concept – to the most radical – as in cases that
involve belief revision, ontological category shifts and
changes in causality. The purpose of the present symposium
is to present some of the most recent attempts to describe
and explain the more radical kinds of conceptual changes
that take place when students are exposed to counterintuitive concepts in science and mathematics.
One important issue in conceptual change research has
focused on whether conceptual change requires the revision
of concepts embedded in relatively coherent „framework
theories‟ (e.g.,Vosniadou, Vamvakoussi & Skopeliti, 2008)
or the integration of fragmented pieces (diSessa, 2008).
According to the „framework theory‟ approach, students use
enrichment mechanisms to incorporate scientific
information to an incompatible naive theory. Because of the
incompatibility between existing knowledge structures and
the new, to-be-acquired, information, such learning
processes may lead either to internal consistency (and, thus,
to fragmentation) or to the formation of misconceptions. In
recent work, Brown and Hammer (2008) propose that the
knowledge system should be seen as consisting of dynamic
cognitive structures which arise from the interactions of
smaller conceptual elements. They claim that such a
complex systems perspective can integrate the differences
between the fragmentation vs. coherence accounts.
Another recent debate in this area concerns Chi‟s (2008)
categorical shift hypothesis vs. Ohlsson‟s (2011)
resubsumption hypothesis to explain the processes thereby
which learners abandon their prior beliefs because they are
inconsistent with currently accepted scientific explanations.
As noticed by Ohlsson (2009) such non-monotonic changes
are difficult to promote with instruction and have a low
probability of occurring spontaneously. According to the
resubsumption hypothesis, when a learner comes to realize
that an alternative theory, developed to make sense in one

domain, may be preferable in order to explain a
phenomenon which applies to some other domain, s/he will
subsume the phenomenon under the alternative theory. This
process depends on the recognition of similarities rather
than on being confronted with anomalies. In contrast,
according to the category shift hypothesis, a concept is
categorized under the wrong category in the first place and
conceptual change is brought about by noticing the
anomalies caused by this mis-categorization.
Even though these arguments are important for
understanding conceptual change processes they have had
little presence in the meetings of the Cognitive Science
Society so far. The aim of this symposium is to bring some
of the current discussions and different perspectives on
conceptual change to the attention of the cognitive science
audience. All the speakers are key developers of the
different approaches and have led their development.

The Symposium
Misconceived Causal Explanations for ‘Emergent’
Science Processes: Michelene T.H. Chi. Examples of the
visible or imagined patterns of science processes such as
natural selection and diffusion might be giraffes‟ necks
getting longer over generations and ink “flowing” in water
after several drops have been added. Instead of explaining
the patterns of these processes as emerging from the
collective interactions of all the agents (e.g., both the water
and ink molecules), students often explain the pattern as
being caused by controlling agents (e.g., the ink only) with
intentional goals. Radical conceptual change refers to
learning that changes such robust and incorrect prior
explanations to the correct explanations, and this kind of
conceptual change has been impossible to achieve.
Our hypothesis for why students generate misconceived
explanations is that students have formed familiar scripts
and narratives from their daily exposures to everyday events
and stories, and they rely on a generalized version of their
narrative scripts to interpret and explain science processes.
This generalized script, (or a “direct causal schema”), is

1575

perfectly adequate and accurate for explaining sequential
and stage-like science processes such as cycles of moon,
circulation of blood, stages of mitosis, and photosynthesis,
as well as the conditions and constraints of the patterns
themselves. However, such a “direct causal schema” is
inappropriate for explaining non-sequential (or emergent)
kind of sciences processes, such as diffusion, natural
selection, osmosis, and heat flow, resulting in robust
misconceived explanations. In order to achieve conceptual
change, students need an alternative general schema that is
suitable for explaining and interpreting emergent processes.
We describe one attempt at designing and teaching a
generalized “emergent causal schema.”
Explicit and Implicit Processing in a Laboratory Model
of Conceptual Change: Stellan Ohlsson and David Cosejo.
We hypothesize that conceptual change requires both
deliberate hypothesis testing and implicit learning of cooccurrence information in the environment. However, welldefined computational process models of conceptual change
are yet to appear. Conceptual change is a temporally
extended process with infrequent and course-grained
expression in observable behavior. Developmental
psychologists, educational researchers and historians of
science work with temporally scarce data that provide scant
information about the processes involved. To study these
processes under controlled conditions, we have developed a
laboratory model of conceptual change that we call recategorization. In a re-categorization paradigm, participants
learn an unfamiliar category, to criterion, at which point the
target category is re-defined. The participants are not
informed of this but continue the standard categorization
cycles of stimulus presentation, categorizations, and
feedback until the revised category has been learned to
criterion. The question is how, by what processes, the
initially acquired category – the “misconception” – is
unlearned, and the revised, target category is acquired. We
present some preliminary data obtained with this paradigm
that supports the view that conceptual change (in this
paradigm) is an interaction between explicit and implicit
processing. The relation of the model to naturalistic
conceptual change is raised, and the question of how the
model can be improved to capture more of naturalistic
processes is discussed.
Conceptual change processes in mathematics: The case
of fractions: Stella Vosniadou.The results of a series of
experiments will be presented and used to argue that
students‟ difficulties with fractions go beyond the mere lack
of adequate practice and unfamiliarity Rather, the evidence
points to the conclusion that we are dealing with a
conceptual change problem, where the new, to-be-acquired
information conflicts with students‟ concept of number as
natural number and where the whole number concept
inhibits the acquisition of fraction information and
constrains operations with fractions even in adults.
According to the framework theory (Vosniadou et al.,
2008), students‟ initial concept of number constrains their
interpretation of new information regarding rational number

causing persistent misconceptions. Misconceptions such as
„multiplication always makes bigger‟ and „the bigger the
terms the bigger the fraction‟ reveal the interference of
rational number reasoning on rational number tasks. The
framework theory suggests that misconceptions are often
caused as students use enrichment mechanisms to add the
new, incompatible information to their initial number
concept. Understanding fractions requires the construction
of an integrated representation of number which may
critically depend on the development of executive function
skills such as the capacity to inhibit habitual responses.
A Complex Dynamic Systems Perspective on Conceptual
Change: David E. Brown. When a student's conception is
considered as a Complex Dynamic System -CDS (i.e., as
like a dynamic ecosystem rather than as like a "regular
thing," such as a rock), aspects of students' conceptions and
conceptual change, which are surprising if these conceptions
are considered as regular entities, become expected. First,
with CDS's, at times strong influences can lead to little
change (strong stabilities or "attractors" develop that are
affected little by external influences), which predicts the
kind of robustness often seen with students' conceptions.
Second, CDS's are emergent and evolving rather than static.
Any identifiable systematicities in student thought would
then be the result of dynamic emergence from the complex
system of knowledge elements. Such emergent structures
can be fleeting or highly stable, accounting for both strong
coherence and significant contextuality in students'
conceptions, both of which have been seen in numerous
studies. Finally, CDS's are embedded in and embed other
CDS's. We would therefore expect interactions among
various levels of complexity that impinge on students'
conceptions: subconceptual, conceptual, metaconceptual,
discursive, sociocultural, etc. A CDS view encourages
consideration of such interactions, without a reification of
one level to the exclusion of others. Such a
multidimensional perspective, a natural outgrowth of a CDS
view, is increasingly seen as important in considerations of
student conceptual change.

References
Chi, M. T. H. (2008). Three types of conceptual change:
belief revision, mental model transformation, and
categorical shift. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International
handbook of research on conceptual change (pp. 61–82),
New York: Routledge
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics.
Cognition and Instruction, 10(2/3), pp. 105-225.
Ohlsson, S. (2011). Deep learning: How the mind overrides
experience. New York: Cambridge University Press
Vosniadou, S., Vamvakoussi, X., & Skopeliti, I. (2008).
The Framework Theory Approach to the Problem of
Conceptual Change. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.). International
Handbook of Research on Conceptual Change. New York:
Routledge.

1576

