UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Now I like it, now I don’t: Delay effects and retrospective judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4rz7z3v6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Aldrovandi, Silvio
Poirier, Marie
Kusev, Petko
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Now I like it, now I don’t: Delay effects and retrospective judgment
Silvio Aldrovandi (S.Aldrovandi@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Marie Poirier (M.Poirier@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, London, EC1V 0HB, UK

Petko Kusev (P.Kusev@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Kingston University, Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UK

Daniel Heussen (Daniel.Heussen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Peter Ayton (P.Ayton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, Northampton Square, London, EC1V 0HB, UK

Abstract
The present paper tests the widely accepted hypothesis that
on-line judgment implies functional independence between
memory for, and judgment of, verbal stimuli (e.g., Anderson,
1989; Hastie & Park, 1986). In the present study, participants
recalled lists of words, after having assessed each for its
pleasantness. Presentation position of a negative item within
the lists was manipulated. Also, items memorability was
manipulated after their presentation – by inserting a filled
delay between presentation and the judgment task; in this
way, on-line judgment formation was spared. The memory
manipulation reduced recall rates for negative items presented
in the last position – and their negative influence on
pleasantness ratings accordingly. These results contradict the
predictions of pure on-line approaches to judgment formation
(e.g., Betsch, Plessner, Schwieren, & Gütig, 2001) and
suggest that even in on-line judgment tasks, memory plays a
role.
Keywords: on-line judgment, memory,
retrospective evaluations, delay effects.

accessibility,

Introduction
In everyday life, it is a regular experience to evaluate events
once they have unfolded. Retrospective evaluations
(hereafter RE) can be defined as the summary assessments
of the quality of the event, provided in hindsight; RE are
coherent evaluations which involve the integration of
information from hedonic states into a unitary judgment.
Such evaluations can be provided about episodes which may
have varied in quality and intensity over time (Fredrickson,
2000) and about target stimuli which have been presented in
a sequential manner (e.g., Anderson & Hubert, 1963; Bruine
de Bruin, 2005).
A very important question concerns the nature of the
memory processes involved in RE: Do people retrieve
episodic information about experiences in order to evaluate

them in hindsight?
In the literature, there are two
contrasting approaches to this question that are more widely
documented. On one hand, some theoretical accounts (e.g.
the two-memory hypothesis; Anderson, 1989; Anderson &
Hubert, 1963; the value-account; Betsch et al., 2001)
propose functional autonomy between memory and
judgment processes. According to these accounts,
impressions of episodes are formed “on-line” (i.e., while
they are being experienced) and RE are based on the
product of this on-line judgment. Retrieving episodic
information from the event itself is viewed as a cognitively
costly operation –which is called upon if, and only if, the
on-line judgment is prevented (for example, by not
forewarning participants about the subsequent judgment
task; Hastie & Park, 1986). These approaches propose that
people do not rely in any significant manner on episodic
information about an event when they evaluate it in
hindsight.
On the other hand, several theoretical views suggest that –
to some degree or another– retrieved information influences
judgment often leading to biases in RE (e.g., Dougherty,
Gettys, & Ogden, 1999; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973; see
also Schwarz, 1998). For these approaches, the moments
within an episode that are most available in memory (i.e.
“accessible”; Schwarz, 1998) disproportionately affect RE.
In support of the role of retrieval in summary assessments,
many studies have found significant correlations between
memory and judgment measures, suggesting that memory
and judgment may be functionally related (e.g., Aldrovandi,
Poirier, Heussen, & Ayton 2009; Reyes, Thompson &
Bower, 1980; Schwarz, 1998; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973).
However, experimental evidence that highlights
correlations between memory and judgment does not
preclude the possibility that such correlations are
attributable to other factors (e.g., vividness; Shedler &
Manis, 1986). It remains possible then that retrospective
judgment is not causally related to retrieval processes. For

2866

instance, Anderson (1989) suggested that impression
memory (i.e., on-line judgment) and verbal memory (i.e.,
episodic memory) may be “distinct functionally” (p. 209)
but the output from the two systems may correlate since
they operate on the same attended stimuli. To re-iterate, the
suggestions is that even if 'memory for' and 'judgment of'
verbal stimuli are significantly related this does not
necessarily imply that people base their retrospective
judgments on the episodic information they retrieve from
memory.
The aim of the present investigation was to implement a
stricter test of the hypothesis that people access information
about a specific event in order to evaluate it. Stronger
evidence in support of the role of memory in RE would be
produced if manipulating the memorability of certain
moments within the to-be-assessed episodes influences
retrospective judgment. If RE do not depend on the
information retrieved from memory, then manipulating the
accessibility of some segments within the events should not
affect judgment in hindsight. On the other hand, if retrieval
and judgment processes are functionally dependent, then the
easier it is to access specific information, the larger its
impact on RE.
Some studies have attempted to predict judgment as a
consequence of experimental memory manipulations (e.g.,
Gabrielcick & Fazio, 1984; Hanita, Gavanski, & Fazio,
1997; Lewandowsky & Smith, 1983). Lewandowsky and
Smith (1983) increased the memorability of non-famous
instances within a set through repetition, which in turn
increased the corresponding frequency estimates
participants provided. The authors concluded that the
successful memory manipulation affected the participants’
judgment responses (see also Gabrielcick & Fazio, 1984).
One of the common features of most of these studies is that
the experimental manipulation was implemented prior or
during the presentation of the—to-be-judged and to-berecalled—stimuli; it seems thus reasonable to argue that
such manipulation may have affected on-line judgment
formation as well—most likely in the same way as it
influenced memory. Hence, manipulating memorability of
the information after its presentation may provide more
convincing evidence that people access the episode trace of
the stimuli in order to assess them—instead of retrieving
whatever evaluation was performed on-line, while attending
to the stimuli.
Furthermore, participants in the above cited studies (e.g.,
Lewandowsky & Smith, 1983) were asked to complete an
evaluation task that involved frequency estimation of
specific instances within a search set—a typical example of
frequency judgment (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). In
the literature, there is less evidence that bears upon the role
of memory in hedonic or quality judgments, which in all
likelihood do not rely on the same cognitive processes as
frequency estimation (see Hogarth and Einhorn, 1992 for a
discussion of this issue).
Aldrovandi et al. (2009) showed that inserting a negative
item within a list of neutral words significantly reduced the

judged pleasantness of the list – relative to lists that did not
contain a negative item. More specifically, both primacy
and recency effects were observed for RE, as lists with a
negative item presented either in the first or last positions
were rated more unpleasantly than those lists where the
negative item was presented in the middle positions. In the
present paper, we called upon the same type of stimuli and
judgment task—but influenced memorability of the negative
items through an additional manipulation. For some lists, a
filled delay was inserted after the items presentation; the
effects of filled delay manipulations are well established in
the literature, and when implemented in such simple
fashion, they lead to a decrease in recency effects (e.g.,
Bjork & Whitten, 1974).
The rationale was that if a negative item’s accessibility in
memory is lowered –as it is presented at the end of a list and
a filled delay follows items presentation– then its impact on
the summary assessment of the list as a whole should be
smaller than if the negative item’s accessibility is not
manipulated (no delay or immediate condition). As items’
accessibility in memory was manipulated after stimuli
encoding –and more importantly after the on-line judgment
evaluation was formed– no delay effects should be observed
for judgment if RE are solely based on on-line processing.

Study
In this study, the role of memory in RE was investigated.
First, memorability of the information was manipulated
after the items presentation; hence, it seems reasonable to
argue that on-line judgment formation was relatively
unaffected by the experimental manipulation. If RE are
purely formed on-line—at least when people are aware of
the subsequent judgment task, like in the present case—then
there should be no significant effect of a post-hoc
manipulation: After all, the on-line judgment is formed
while the stimuli are attended to – and this on-line
impression is what RE are based upon. On the other hand, if
memory biases judgments –at least in part–, then it is
expected that whatever effect is going to be seen for the
memory results it is going to be reflected in the judgment
pattern.
Second, we examined the associations between memory
and judgment. RE were elicited first and memory for the
content of the word-list obtained second (details of how this
was done follow below). Hence, it was possible to contrast
the mean pleasantness rating obtained when the negative
item was recalled with the mean rating for the trials when it
was not recalled. Presumably, if a distinctive item is
available for later recall, it is more likely to have been
available at the time of judgment. Conversely, if the
negative item is not available for recall, the probability that
it was available at the time of judgment is reduced. Hence,
we would expect that on average, the pleasantness rating
will be lower in the cases where the negative item was
available for the memory component of the task. The effect
of a negative item’s availability was further analysed by
examining ease of recall. As a measure of relative memory

2867

accessibility, we used output position in the memory task.
Since participants were asked to perform free recall (hence
no output constraints were implemented), we made the
simplifying assumption that items recalled first are on
average more readily accessible in memory. It was assumed
that negative items recalled early on were more easily
accessible and would have had more impact on RE than
negative items that are recalled later on. Hence, our
hypothesis was that the earlier a negative item was recalled,
the stronger its impact on retrospective evaluations.

Method
Participants A total of 79 participants (49 males) took
part in the internet-based experiment, advertised through
ipoints®. Participants’ age ranged from 28 to 65 years (M =
46.9, SD = 10.2) and they were granted ipoints® in
exchange for their participation.

Design and Materials A pool of 132 words was selected
from the Affective Norms of English Words database
(ANEW; Bradley & Lang, 1999). Sixteen negative items
were selected along with 116 neutral ones. The selection
was based on the valence and arousal scores of each item on
the database scales. Negative items were selected to be low
in valence (less than 3, on a scale of 1-9) and high in arousal
(over 5.9, on the same scale). Neutral items scored in the
middle range for valence (5.3 to 6.2) and low on the arousal
scale (less than 4.6).
From the resulting word pool, 22 six-word lists were
created, as follows. Six lists included a negative item in the
first position followed by 5 neutral words—hereafter
identified as “Start” lists. Four “Middle” lists had a negative
item in the middle positions (2 lists in 3rd position and 2 lists
in 4th position.)1 Six “End” lists comprised five neutral items
and a negative word in last position. Finally, six control lists
contained only neutral words.
Within-list matching between the negative (if any) and the
neutral items ensured that negative and neutral words were
equated on familiarity ratings (Coltheart, 1981; M = 531.9
and M = 530.8, respectively), number of phonemes (M = 4.7
and M = 4.4, respectively), and the Kucera-Francis
frequency index (Kucera & Francis, 1967; M = 28.2 and M
= 34.8, respectively). Furthermore, lists were pair-matched
on the above dimensions; rotation across participants
allowed each list to be presented approximately the same
number of times as each of the different list types and in
each different delay condition.

Procedure A series of introductory screens gathered
demographic data and allowed participants to familiarise
themselves with the computer-controlled procedure and to
accept the conditions described in the consent form.
Participants were told that the aim of the study was to gather

normative data about the pleasantness of 6-word lists. They
were instructed to attend to the lists and to provide an
overall pleasantness rating for each one after its
presentation. The ratings were on a 0-100 scale (0 = very
unpleasant, 100 = very pleasant), and participants were
encouraged to make use of the whole range in their
responses.
Each word was presented for one second with an interstimulus interval of 0.75 seconds. A series of asterisks
appeared on the screen for 1 second to signal the end of the
list presentation. After the asterisks had disappeared from
the screen, in half of the trials participants were prompted to
immediately provide their rating (immediate condition).
Participants were required to use the mouse to click on a
slide bar (with extremes of 0 and 100) on the position they
felt was closest to their impression of the list. In order to
limit the extent of anchoring effects (e.g., Chapman &
Johnson, 2002) a sliding marker would appear on the bar
(with its equivalent numerical value underneath) only after
participants clicked for the first time on the slide bar.
Participants then had the opportunity to adjust this initial
rating by sliding the marker, and were to confirm their final
one by clicking on a “Continue” button. In the remaining
half of the trials, participants had to engage in a distractor
task that lasted 10 seconds (delay condition). During this
task, a letter was presented on the screen, and participants
had to type the following letters, skipping one letter between
each entry; for example, if the letter ‘A’ was presented,
participants had to type in the letters ‘C’, ‘E’, ‘G’, and so
forth. After the distractor task, participants provided the
judgment task. Delay condition was manipulated within-ss,
and the alternation between delay and immediate trials was
randomised for each participant.
After rating a given list’s overall pleasantness,
participants were required to perform a recall task, during
which they had to recall the two items that came to mind
most readily –and any further item they may remembered in
the following screen. This modified version of a free recall
task was used to reduce the cognitive demands of the
memory task. Previous research has shown that typical
recall tasks, which require participants to perform an
exhaustive search in memory, can hinder the underlying
associations between memory and judgment (e.g., Kitayama
& Burnstein, 1989). This finding is in line with many others
which suggest that people seem to base their evaluations on
partial information – on the elements they can retrieve and
that are most easily accessible in memory (e.g., Schwarz,
1998; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). In addition, participants
were asked not to overlook the rating task in order to
proceed more quickly to the recall task. Four practice trials
were provided. List presentation order was randomised
independently for each participant and no time limit was set
for either the rating or the recall tasks.

Results
1

Analyses revealed no major differences in either memory or
judgment measures between lists with a negative item in 3rd or 4th
position.

Information about the IP address and the time participants
took to complete the whole experiment was collected. One

2868

participant was excluded from the analysis because of
excessive task duration, as it took her 112 minutes to
complete the whole experiment (while the average duration
was 24 minutes.) Six more participants were excluded
because of their poor performance on the distractor task,
which ranged from 0% to 4% correct trials. This resulted in
the total sample size being 72 (i.e. overall, 8.9% of
participants were excluded.) Alpha was set to .05 for all
analyses.

Memory Figure 1 represents the mean recall proportion for
the negative items as a function of item position and delay
condition. The recall pattern for the negative items was
different between the two delay condition—and in the line
with the predictions2. Both primacy and recency effects can
be observed in the immediate condition; however, recency
effects disappeared when a filled delay was inserted
between items presentation and the recall task.
1
0.9
0.8

Judgment In order to reduce the influence of potential
anchoring effects (e.g., Chapman & Johnson, 2002) and of
inter-individual differences in the use of the 0-100 scale,
judgment scores were transformed as follows: For each
participant, the average pleasantness rating for the Control
lists was subtracted from the pleasantness ratings for each
Start, Middle and End list. The new corrected judgment
scores (J’) therefore represented how much more unpleasant
each Start, Middle and End list was in comparison to the
average Control list for each participant. J’ scores were then
averaged for each participant, according to the negative item
presentation position and whether the negative item
presented in the list was recalled or not.
The judgment pattern mirrors the memory results. There
seems to be little or no difference for pleasantness ratings
for Start and Middle lists; however, End lists were rated as
more unpleasant in the immediate condition compared to the
delay condition.

0.6

0

start

Immediate
0.5

middle

end

-2
Delay

Mean corrected judgment (J')

Mean prop recall

0.7

interaction was significant, F(2, 142) = 3.5, p = .033, ηp2 =
.05. Post-hoc analyses with Bonferroni adjustment revealed
no recall differences between immediate and delay
conditions for negative items presented at the beginning or
in the middle of the list (ps > .79). For recency positions
there was a recall advantage for the immediate condition,
t(71) = 4.3, p < .001, d = .51.

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Pos1

Pos3-4

Pos6

Position

-4
-6
-8
Immediate
-10
Delay
-12
-14
-16

Figure 1: Mean proportion recall for negative items as a
function of word position and delay condition. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.
st

rd

-18
-20

th

The data were analysed using a 3 (position: 1 , 3 /4 , and
6th) × 2 (delay: immediate vs. delay) repeated measure
ANOVA. Main effects of position (F(2, 127.6) = 28.8, p <
.001, ηp2 = .29)3 and delay (F(1, 71) = 10.1, p = .002, ηp2 =
.12) were noted. Most importantly, the position by delay
2

Preliminary analyses revealed that, overall, recall for negative
items (M = .58, SD = .16) was higher than for neutral words (M =
.48, SD = .15; t(71) = 6.4, p < .001, d = .76).
3
When degrees of freedom are not integers, they were adjusted
according to the Greenhouse-Geisser correction due to violations
of the Sphericity assumption.

List type

Figure 2: Mean pleasantness ratings as a function of list type
and delay condition. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.
A 3 × 2 repeated measures ANOVA was run, with list
type (Start, Middle and End) and delay (immediate vs.
delay) as the factors. The significant main effects of list type
(F(2, 127.1) = 3.3, p = .047, ηp2 = .04) and delay (F(1, 71) =
7.7, p = .007, ηp2 = .09) were qualified by the significant

2869

interaction between the two variables (F(2, 142) = 7.4, p <
.001, ηp2 = .10). Post-hoc analyses with Bonferroni
adjustment confirmed that there was no reliable difference
in terms of pleasantness ratings between immediate and
delay conditions for Start and Middle lists (both ps > .19);
on the other hand, End lists were rated as significantly more
pleasant in the delay condition, t(71) = 4.1, p < .001, d =
.49.

Memory-Judgment relationships4 We explored the
associations between memory and judgment in two ways.
First, we compared the corrected average pleasantness
rating for lists where the negative item was recalled versus
lists where the negative item was not recalled (cf.
availability as “content of recall”; Schwarz, 1998)—
separately for the immediate and delay conditions. Table 1
indicates that when the negative item was recalled in the
memory task, pleasantness ratings were lower (M = -11.7,
SD = 9.6) than when the negative item was not recalled (M
= -5.9, SD = 7.0). This pattern seems true for both
immediate and delay conditions.
A 2 (memory: negative item recalled vs. not recalled) × 2
(delay: immediate vs. delay) within-subjects ANOVA
confirmed these observations. The main effect of memory
was significant (F(1, 71) = 40.6, p < .001, ηp2 = .37),
confirming that overall ratings were more unpleasant for
those lists where the negative word was recalled. Neither the
main effect of delay (F(1, 71) = 2.5, p = .113) nor the
interaction between memory and delay (F < 1) were
significant – the latter confirming that the memory and
judgment measures were associated regardless of the delay
condition.
Table 1: Mean corrected pleasantness ratings (J’) as a
function of list type and negative item being recalled or not

ratings (J’) were examined according to the position in
which the negative item was recalled by the participants –
regardless of its presentation position. The underlying
rationale was that items that are more accessible in memory
are likely to be recalled earlier—if the negative item is more
accessible and recalled early we would expect its impact on
retrospective evaluations to be higher than when it is
recalled later in the protocol or not at all (cf. availability as
“ease of access”; Schwarz, 1998)
Table 2: Mean corrected pleasantness ratings (J’) as a
function of negative item recall output position
Negative item recall output position
Not
Positions Positions
recalled
1&2
3 to 6
Pleasantness
ratings (J’)

-7.1
(10.2)

-4.7
(7.2)

Yes

M
SD

-12.2
(10.3)

-11.2
(10.9)

Second, retrospective evaluations were analysed depending
on the negative item recall position5,6. The pleasantness

4

-13.3
(10.7)

-8.3
(11.1)

Discussion

Was the negative
item recalled?
M
SD

-6.6
(6.9)

Table 2 above suggests that pleasantness ratings varied
depending on the negative item output position – and that
they were lowest when the participants recalled the negative
item as either the first or second response (M = -13.3, SD =
10.7).
The analysis revealed a significant main effect of recall
position on pleasantness ratings (F(2, 142) = 18.5, p < .001,
ηp2 = .21). Post-hoc analyses with Bonferroni adjustment
confirmed that judgments provided when the negative item
was recalled among the first two responses were lower than
when it was recalled among the last four responses (t(71) =
6.4, p < .001, d = .77) – or not recalled at all (t(71) = 3.9, p
< .001, d = .46). For the latter two scenarios, the difference
was not significant, t(71) = 1.5, p = .383.

Delay condition
Immediate
Delay

No

M
SD

For all these analyses, non parametric tests were run as well—as
parametric assumptions were not always met. As all the results
were the same, we will report the parametric analyses.
5
This analysis yielded a total of 3.2% missing values, which were
missing completely at random as the MCR Little’s test was not
significant, χ2 (2) = 1.5, p > .47. Missing values were replaced
using different methods, including mean substitution by subject,
grand mean, and Expectation-Maximization algorithm (Schafer &
Olsen, 1998). As all the analyses returned the same results, we will

The results of the present experiment suggest that, even
when aware of the upcoming judgment task, people rely on
the memory trace in order to provide RE (see also
Dougherty et al., 1999; Schwarz, 1998).
As expected, inserting a filled delay hindered recency
effects for the items’ recall. More importantly though,
negative items presented at the end of the series exerted a
large impact on RE for the immediate condition—while
recency effects for RE were largely hampered in the delay
condition.
The results of the correlational analyses support the
prediction that, even in on-line judgment tasks, memory
drives RE. Pleasantness ratings were lower for the lists
where the negative item was recalled—compared to those
where it was not recalled. This finding supports the idea that
be reporting the data obtained via Expectation-Maximization
algorithm.
6
In this case, the analyses could not be broken down by delay
condition because of the large number of missing values.

2870

when negative information was easily available in memory
at the time of judgment, it exerted a higher impact on
judgment. The assumption was that when a negative item
was not recalled in the memory task, it was also less likely
to be available at the time of RE; on average, this would
lead to a less negative assessment of the list. These results
suggest that, when prompted to provide a pleasantness
rating, participants relied at least to some extent on episodic
information stored in memory. If participants had solely
relied on on-line judgment formation, there would be no
reason to expect the observed judgment pattern for the delay
condition; after all, the on-line judgment stores the formed
impression which will be the base for the RE. Furthermore,
accessibility in memory of a negative item seemed to
moderate retrospective judgment, since lower ratings were
associated with the negative item being recalled early in the
response sequence. The on-line view would not lead to the
expectation that the accessibility of the distinctive-negative
item would have an impact on RE.
In conclusion, the results of the present experiment
provide evidence supporting the hypothesis that memory
plays a significant role in biasing summary assessments.
Retrospective judgment was successfully predicted on the
basis of the memory pattern observed.

References
Aldrovandi, S., Poirier, M., Heussen, D., & Ayton, P. (2009).
Memory strategies mediate the relationships between
memory and judgment. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2457–2462). Cognitive
Science Society.
Anderson, N. H. (1989). Functional memory and on-line
attribution. In J. N. Bassili (Ed.), On-line cognition in
person perception (pp. 175–220). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, N. H., & Hubert, S. (1963). Effects of concomitant
verbal recall on order effects in personality impression
formation. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 2, 379–391.
Betsch, T., Plessner, H., Schwieren, C. & Gütig, R. (2001). I
like it but I don’t know why: A value-account approach to
implicit attitude formation. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 242–253
Bjork, R. A., & Whitten, W. B. (1974). Recency-sensitive
retrieval processes in long-term free recall. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 173–189.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affective
ratings. Technical report C-1, Gainesville, FL. The Center
for Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
Bruine de Bruin, W. (2005). Save the last dance for me:
Unwanted serial position effects in jury evaluations. Acta
Psychologica, 118, 245–260.

Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J. (2002). Incorporating the
irrelevant: Anchors in judgments of belief and value. In T.
Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman, (Eds.), Heuristic and
Biases (pp.120–138). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497–
505.
Dougherty, M. R. P., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999).
MINERVA-DM: A memory processes model for judgments
of likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180–209.
Gabrielcick, A., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). Priming and frequency
estimation: A strict test of the availability heuristic.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10, 85–89.
Hanita, M., Gavanski, I., & Fazio, R. H. (1997). Influencing
probability judgments by manipulating the accessibility of
sample spaces. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
23, 801–813.
Hastie, R., & Park, B. (1986). The relationship between
memory and judgement depends on whether the judgment
task is memory-based or on-line. Psychological Review, 93,
258–268.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1992). Order effects in
belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1–55.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational Analysis
of Present-Day American English. Brown University Press,
Providence R.I.
Kitayama, S., & Burnstein, E. (1989). The relation between
opinion and memory: Distinguishing between associative
density and structural equality. In J. N. Bassili (Ed.), Online cognition in person perception (pp. 91–122). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Lewandowsky, S., & Smith, P. W. (1983). The effect of
increasing the memorability of category instances on
estimates of category size. Memory & Cognition, 11, 347–
350.
Reyes, R. M, Thompson, W. C., & Bower, G. H. (1980).
Judgmental biases resulting from differing availabilities of
arguments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39, 2–12.
Schafer, J. L., & Olsen, M. K. (1998). Multiple imputation for
multivariate missing-data problems: A data analyst’s
perspective. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 33, 545–
571.
Schwarz, N. (1998). Accessible content and accessibility
experiences: The interplay of declarative and experiential
information in judgment. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 2, 87–99.
Shedler, J., & Manis, M. (1986). Can the availability heuristic
explain vividness effects? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 26–36.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207–232.

2871

