UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Overextensions that extend into adolescence: Insights from a threshold model of
categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hc7101z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Verheyen, Steven
Ameel, Eef
Stroms, Gert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Overextensions that extend into adolescence:
Insights from a threshold model of categorization
Steven Verheyen (steven.verheyen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
The development of the meaning of common nouns may continue well past the early years of language acquisition (Ameel,
Malt, & Storms, 2008, 2011; Andersen, 1975). The nature
of this development is investigated through the application of
a formal model to categorization decisions by children aged
7 − 13 years and adults. Children up till the age of 13 overextend categories. It is established that these overextensions
are not due to differences in the manner in which children
and adults organize items with respect to the target categories.
Even the youngest children appear to know about the internal
category organization that informs categorization. Rather, the
overextensions are the results of children imposing too tolerant
a criterion for category membership on this organization. With
age children learn of this discrepancy and gradually reduce it
to converge upon the conventional adult meaning.
Keywords: categorization; word learning; overextension; later
lexical development; typicality.

Introduction
Young children face the incredible task of having to master
a vast number of categories. Unsurprisingly, they commit a
number of errors in the process. Overextensions, for instance,
occur when the child is excessively liberal in allowing items
into a category (e.g., referring to all liquid containers as bottles). An excessively conservative use of a category label is
called an underextension (e.g., restricting the use of bottle to
milk bottles only). These departures from the conventional
use of categories by adults provide a window into the manner
in which children acquire category meanings. Most contemporary research on the matter would have us believe that this
window has closed by the time children reach the age of six.
Indeed, it seems to be (implicitly) assumed that the meanings
of the circa 14,000 words that the child has acquired by this
age are no longer subject to change. The developmental trajectory of these words is generally not investigated in children
older than six.
This assumption appears particularly prevalent for nouns
that are used to refer to the common household objects that
children encounter at a very early age. We know of only three
studies that looked into children’s use of category labels to
denote such objects after the early years of language acquisition. Surprisingly, all three studies suggest that the meaning
of these category labels continues to change well after children reach the age of six. Andersen (1975) asked Englishspeaking children aged 3, 6, 9, and 12 years to name drinking
vessels. She found that it wasn’t until the age of 12 that children’s naming behavior resembled that of adults. Similarly,
Ameel et al. (2008) asked Dutch-speaking children aged 5, 8,

10, 12, and 14 years to name a set of household storage containers. They found that at least up to the age of 14 did the
naming behavior of the children change. With age the naming behavior grew closer to that of adults. Recently, Ameel
et al. (2011) demonstrated that this result not only holds in
a production task, but also in a comprehension task. They
asked Dutch-speaking children aged 7, 9, 11, and 13 years
to decide whether the household storage containers used by
Ameel et al. (2008) did or did not belong to each of a number of suggested categories. The study revealed that children
up to the age of 13 overextended the category labels. With
age these overextensions gradually gave way and children’s
categorization behavior converged upon that of adults.
The aim of this study is to investigate the nature of the development that takes place after the initial years of language
acquisition. To this end we will reanalyze the categorization
data that were collected by Ameel et al. (2011). The proposed
method of analysis is fairly new to the study of word learning in that it involves the use of a formal model. It is our
belief that a formal approach to this subject matter promises
to yield new insights that are difficult to arrive at using traditional methods only. The next section recapitulates the procedures that Ameel et al. (2011) used to obtain the data that we
will reanalyze. The subsequent sections provide details about
the model that we will employ.

Data
Categorization
Ameel et al. (2011) had 20 children aged 7, 21 children aged
9, 20 children aged 11, 20 children aged 13, and 36 adults
(mean age 23;1 years) complete three categorization tasks.
All participants were native speakers of Dutch. In each of
the tasks the same set of 73 pictured storage containers were
presented in a random order for categorization. In American
English the objects would presumably receive the name bottle
or jar. Ameel et al. (2008) showed that they were likely to be
called fles, bus, or pot in Dutch. Each of these labels served
as a target category in one of the three categorization tasks.
The order of the target categories was randomized across participants. The participants were invited to indicate for every
item whether the suggested category label was appropriate
(1) or not (0). This procedure resulted in three separate binary item-by-person matrices, one for each target category.

2000

Figure 1: Prototypical examples of the fles (left), bus (middle), and pot (right) categories.

Typicality
From Ameel et al. (2011) typicality judgments by 21 children
aged 7, 21 children aged 9, 23 children aged 11, and 28 adults
(mean age 18;9 years) were also available. None of them had
participated in the categorization task. All of them were native speakers of Dutch. All participants were presented with
the 73 pictured storage containers three times (each time in
a random order) and asked to judge their typicality towards
fles, bus, and pot. The presentation order of the target categories was randomized across participants. The participants
were invited to indicate for every item how good an example it was of the suggested category label. They had a seven
point rating scale at their disposal to provide their answers. A
score of ’1’ was indicated to mean that the item was a very
poor example of the category. A score of ’4’ was indicated
to mean that the item was an okay example of the category.
A score of ’7’ was indicated to mean that the item was a very
good example of the category. To assist the children in providing their answer, these points were also accompanied by a
schematic frowning face, a straight face, and a smiling face,
respectively. The resulting typicality judgments for each category were averaged across each age group’s members and
z-transformed. The pictured storage containers in Figure 1
are considered prototypical exemplars of fles, bus, and pot,
respectively, in all age groups.

A threshold model of categorization
Studies into developmental changes in word meaning are often framed in the context of prototype theory (e.g., Ameel
et al., 2008; Kuczaj, 1982). The formal model that we will
employ is therefore inspired by a version of prototype theory known as the Threshold Theory (Hampton, 2007). The
Threshold Theory of categorization posits that prior to making a categorization decision the similarity between the item’s
representation and the category’s representation is compared
against an internal threshold. If the assessed similarity surpasses the internal threshold, it favors a positive categorization decision; otherwise it does not.
Prototype theory is often associated with abstracted summary representations of categories, but we will not make
claims pertaining to this issue in our modeling endeavor. We
will merely contend that the items become organized along
a latent scale. This organization may result from the assess-

ment of the similarity between the items’ representations and
an abstracted summary representation of the category, but
doesn’t necessarily have to. It may also result from similarity
assessments involving other kinds of representations (e.g., an
instantiated set of representative exemplars). Other sources
of information may also inform the positioning of the items
along the scale. If the target items are words, for instance, lexical familiarity might be of importance. The organization of
the items along the scale will be derived from the categorization data. The resulting organization is thus to be understood
with respect to a specific category. The model positions items
that are seldom endorsed as members of the target category
low on the scale. It positions items that are often endorsed as
members of the target category higher on the scale.
At the heart of the model lies the assumption that the categorization scale is common to participants of all ages. Regardless of the age of the participants we thus assume that
they organize the items with respect to the category in a similar manner. We expect participants to differ with respect to
the categorization criterion they use, however. We assume
that every participant employs a personal threshold in categorization, which is positioned along the same scale as the
items. The distance between a participant’s threshold and an
item’s position along the scale is assumed to inform the participant’s categorization decision with respect to the item. If
the item surpasses the threshold, the odds are that the participant will endorse it. The greater the distance between item
and threshold, the greater the odds of a positive categorization decision. If the item does not surpass the threshold, the
odds are that the participant will not endorse it. Under this
circumstance, the odds of a negative categorization decision
increase with the distance between item and threshold. The
threshold position of every participant will be derived from
the categorization data. The model positions thresholds of
participants who endorse many of the items as members of
the target category low on the scale. Many of the target items
will surpass these thresholds. The model positions thresholds
of participants who endorse fewer of the items higher on the
scale. These thresholds will be surpassed by only a few of the
items.
Formally, the application of the model to an item-byperson categorization matrix yields an item position estimate
βi for every item i and a threshold position estimate θ p for

2001

every person p. The categorization decision of every participant p towards every item i is treated as a Bernoulli trial. The
participant’s estimated threshold position θ p and the item’s
estimated position βi combine according to Equation (1) to
yield the corresponding probability of a positive decision:
Pr(x pi = yes) =

e(βi − θ p )
1 + e(βi − θ p )

Table 1: Helmert coding of age levels.
Age X1 X2 X3 X4
7-year olds −1 −1 −1 −1
9-year olds 1
−1 −1 −1
11-year olds 0
2
−1 −1
13-year olds 0
0
3
−1
adults 0
0
0
4

(1)

Explanatory versions of the threshold model
In what follows we will try to capture the categorization decisions of different age groups with the model in Equation (1).
Since this involves the assumption that the organization of the
items with respect to the target categories is the same for all
participants (regardless of age) this constitutes a test of the
hypothesis that even the youngest children among the participants know about the internal structure of the categories, but
do not (yet) agree with adults on the conventional extension.
For this hypothesis to have any merit at all, the model will
have to pass a goodness of fit test after it has been applied to
the categorization data. It needs to be shown that the model,
with its assumption of a single latent dimension for all, can
account for the variability in the observed responses.
To allow for a second test of this hypothesis we propose to
extend the model through linear components that introduce
external information. While the model that is expressed in
Equation (1) is merely a descriptive one that only yields estimates of items’ and persons’ positions along a latent scale, the
introduction of external information into the model renders it
explanatory. The external information allows one to account
for the observed variability in item or person position estimates. On the item side we will subsequently express the βi ’s
as a linear function of each age group’s typicality judgments:
βi = δ0 + δ1 TY Pi + εi with εi ∼ N(0,σ2ε )

(2)

with δ1 expressing the effect of the z-transformed typicality scores of a particular age group, and δ0 taking the role
of intercept. Random item variation is allowed to influence
the prediction of the βi ’s as well. This allows for the assessment of the magnitude of the explanatory power of each age
group’s typicality judgments. Typicality is perhaps the most
direct measure of internal category structure that one can obtain. If we are correct in assuming that even the young children know about the categories’ internal structure and use it
for their categorization decisions, their typicality judgments
should explain about as much of the variance in the item positions as the adult typicality judgments do.
It is further hypothesized that, with the knowledge about
the internal category structure already in store, children learn
about the appropriate region among the organized items to
place their threshold criteria as they become older. Since
Ameel et al. (2011) reported overextension for the categories
under investigation we expect to see a more conservative
placement of the threshold criteria with age. As age increases
we thus expect a shift from low threshold values (positioned

low on the latent scale and surpassed by many of the target
items) to high threshold values (positioned higher on the scale
and surpassed by fewer of the items). To evaluate this hypothesis, we will on the person side of the model express the θ p ’s
as a linear function of four dummy variables X1 , X2 , X3 , and
X4 (with the respective weights termed γ1 to γ4 ) that recode
age group membership following the Helmert scheme in Table 1. The Helmert coding scheme allows for the detection
of monotonic trends. It contrasts each level with the mean of
the preceding levels. It is therefore ideally suited to test the
hypothesis that with age participants impose a higher threshold on category membership. If γn is found to differ reliably
from 0 it constitutes evidence that the n youngest age groups
overextend the category with respect to the (n + 1)th group.

Model estimation
All model analyses were performed in WinBUGS. For every
combination of model and item-by-person categorization matrix five chains were run with 10,000 samples each, for a total
of 50,000 samples from the posteriors of the models’ parameters. The resulting distributions allow us to answer a number
of substantive questions. We start, however, with a discussion
of the fit of the models to the categorization data. Space restrictions only allow us to show the fit results for fles, but they
are indicative of the results for the other two categories.

Results
Posterior predictive
The black dots in the right bottom panel of Figure 2 summarize the fles categorization data the models were fitted to. For
each of the 73 items there is a dot representing the proportion
of participants providing a positive categorization response.
The items are ordered along the horizontal axis according to
their mean βi estimate across all samples. The other panels
show the categorization data separated per age group. These
panels maintain the same ordering of items that was adopted
in the right bottom panel.
The plots demonstrate a developmental change in the extension of the category. With age participants become more
conservative. An increasingly smaller number of items are
endorsed by a large number of the participants. This aspect of
the data corresponds to the pattern of overextension in children that was observed by Ameel et al. (2011). The plots
add to this finding in that they suggest that the developmental change occurs in an organized manner. Indeed, all panels

2002




 
 
 
 


 

! 





 
 
 
 








 
 
 
 

#" 

*+,








 
 
 
 





$%&')(

Figure 2: Posterior prediction of the threshold model for the fles categorization data, separated per age group and across
all participants (bottom right panel). The black dots show the data (per item the proportion of participants providing a yes
response). The gray areas show 100 posterior predictive samples of Pr(yes) for every item. The items are ordered along the
horizontal axes according to the mean βi estimate across all samples.

Item variation

show an increase in the proportion of yes responses with the
estimated position along the latent scale. While this increase
is situated along the first diagonal in the youngest children’s
panel, it gradually takes on a different shape as the panels
present the data from older participants. Nevertheless, it appears that in all age groups the increase roughly follows the
latent scale extracted by the model. This suggests it is appropriate to assume that even the youngest children in the sample
have a rather good idea about the organization of the items
with respect to the target category and make use of this organization for their categorization decisions.
The gray areas in Figure 2 show 100 posterior predictive
samples of Pr(yes) for every item. An adequate model should
be able to describe the patterns in the data it was fitted to.
The posterior predictive is a distribution over data that allows
one to assess whether this is the case. It represents the relative probability of different observable outcomes after the
model has been fitted to the data. From Figure 2 it becomes
apparent that the model is able to pick up the most striking
aspects of the data. The gray areas quite closely mirror the
observed data. Admittedly, there are a number of observations - especially in the youngest age group - that are not well
accounted for by the model, but as a first formal approximation of this kind of data, the model fares quite well. In the
Discussion section we will elaborate on how the model might
be extended to relate to the data more closely, but for now
we will continue with the simple model and its explanatory
versions and see what more we can learn from them.

Each age group’s typicality judgments proved reliable predictors of the item variation found in categorization. The
Bayesian credibility interval (BCI) of parameter δ1 from
Equation (2) (i.e., the region around the mean δ1 estimate
that contains 95% of the mass of its posterior distribution)
did not include 0 in any of the categories. For fles the BCI’s
were [1.71,2.40], [1.51,2.30], [1.99,2.41], and [1.89,2.36]
for typicalities provided by children aged 7, 9, 11, and
adults, respectively. For bus these BCI’s were [1.01,1.57],
[1.12,1.63], [1.36,1.72], and [1.10,1.58]. For pot they
were [1.18,1.99], [1.60,2.21], [1.80,2.32], and [1.84,2.31].
More importantly, however, is the variance in the βi estimates
accounted for by the typicality judgments. Table 2 shows the
percentage of variance accounted for (VAF) per category by
each age group’s typicality judgments. In each of the categories the VAF increases with age, but the magnitude of the
increase is rather small: From 79% to 86% for fles, from 62%
to 65% for bus, and from 80% to 85% for pot. These differences are most likely due to age related differences in the
reliability of the typicality judgments. Indeed, Ameel et al.
(2011) report an increase in these reliabilities with age. We
therefore take the results to indicate that even the youngest
children in our study know about the internal structure of
the categories fles, bus, and pot and use it to provide categorization decisions. Typicality judgments arguably provide the
most direct measure of a category’s internal structure. Here,
the typicality judgments by participants of different ages all
accounted for the variation of items along the categorization

2003

Table 2: Item variance accounted for by typicality.
Age fles bus pot
7-year olds .79 .62 .80
9-year olds .81 .62 .81
11-year olds .84 .64 .82
adults .86 .65 .85

dimension about equally well. The item organization that the
model extracts from the categorization data is reliably predicted by the internal category structure that judgments of
typicality capture - even those provided by the 7-years olds.
Note that typicality has been taken to reflect item-category
similarity (e.g., Hampton, 2007). To the extent that this assertion is true, the results for bus in Table 2 suggest that there are
additional considerations that inform categorization: Part of
the item variation is left unexplained by typicality. An investigation into other sources that govern categorization is beyond
the scope of the current paper, but might easily be initiated by
an inspection of the items with βi ’s that are not well predicted
by typicality.

Person variation
Figure 3 presents per category and age group boxplots of the
mean θ p ’s that were obtained with the exploratory model.
The value of θ p reflects the position of person p’s threshold
along the categorization scale, with larger values indicating
positions further along the scale. For all three of the categories an age related shift in the employed threshold criteria
is notable: With age the estimated θ p values grow larger. Apparently, when children become older, they place their categorization thresholds further along the scales, thereby becoming more restrictive of the items they allow in the categories. In terms of the results from the previous section, it
would appear that with age items need to be of increasingly
high typicality (i.e., item-category similarity) to be endorsed
as category members.
The results of the analyses with the model that incorporates
age group membership through the Helmert coding in Table
1 support these informal observations following inspection of
Figure 3. The majority of the BCI’s of the parameters γ1 ,
γ2 , γ3 , and γ4 were found not to include 0. This indicates
that the contrasts that the dummy variables X1 , X2 , X3 , and
X4 constitute are reliable: The mean threshold criterion that
is employed by the participants of a particular age group is
indeed more conservative than the mean threshold criterion
employed by the participants in the younger age groups. For
fles the BCI’s of γ1 , γ2 , γ3 , and γ4 were [.04,.74], [−.18,.20],
[.13,.40], and [.17,.34], respectively, indicating that all contrasts - except for the one comparing 11-year olds with 7and 9-year olds - were reliable. For bus these BCI’s were
[−.26,.34], [−.12,.23], [.06,.31], and [.18,.34]. For pot they
were [.02,.72], [−.17,.23], [.10,.39], and [.32,.50]. Note
that none of the BCI’s for γ4 include 0, supporting the claim
by Ameel et al. (2011) that ovextension errors for common

nouns may persist into adolescence.
Age group membership accounts for 34% of the variance in
θ p estimates in fles, for 34% in bus, and for 48% in pot. Given
that the change in threshold position with age is present in all
three categories it is reasonable to expect a certain degree of
correspondence between the threshold estimates obtained in
the context of one category and the threshold estimates obtained in the context of another. However, if certain children
within an age group could be found to display categorization behavior that resembles that of younger or older children
and this behavior would generalize across categories, an even
higher degree of correspondence is to be expected. The estimated threshold differences within an age group would then
also carry valuable information. To investigate this possibility we correlated the θ p estimates obtained in the context of
one category with the θ p estimates obtained in the context
of another (robs ) and compared the resulting correlation to a
correlation that was obtained by treating all participants in an
age group as if they were interchangeable (rage ). To achieve
this the θ p estimates within each age group were randomly
permuted prior to computing the correlation between categories. This procedure was repeated for all combinations of
categories and all 50,000 samples from the thresholds’ posterior distributions. For the combination of fles and bus the
mean of the resulting distribution for robs was .53 compared
to .34 for rage . For fles and pot the mean of robs was .55 compared to .41 for rage . For bus and pot the mean of robs was
.61 compared to .41 for rage . The observed correspondence
in threshold use is greater than what would be expected based
upon age alone. Not only the θ p differences between age
groups are thus of importance. Within age groups the θ p values reflect substantive differences as well. Clearly, the later
years of language development know stable and pronounced
inter-individual differences, much like the ones that are characteristic of the early years of language acquisition.

Discussion
The aim of the current study was to gain insight into the
changes in common nouns’ meanings after the early years
of language acquisition through the use of a formal model.
The proposed model offers a process account of the decreasing pattern of overextension observed in children aged 7-13
by Ameel et al. (2011). The results of the model analyses
suggest that children and adults organize items in a similar
manner with respect to the target categories. The items are organized along a dimension that closely resembles typicality.
On this dimension the categorizers impose threshold criteria.
When an item surpasses a categorization threshold the odds
are that it will be endorsed. When the item does not surpass
the categorization threshold the odds are that it will not be endorsed. Overextension is observed in children up till the age
of 13 because they place their threshold criteria lower on the
categorization dimension than adults do. It appears that the
children have acquired sufficient knowledge about the categories’ meanings to construct the dimension that underlies

2004





 













 



 






 























Figure 3: Boxplots of the mean θ p estimates (across samples) per category and age group.

categorization, but do not yet agree with adults on the appropriate region to place the categorization threshold.
Part of the explanation for this observation probably lies
in everyday language use, where a category label is primarily
used to denote its prototypical exemplars. Items that reside at
the category boundary are awarded the category label less often and might even be awarded a different label depending on
the context (Clark, 1997). This makes it difficult for children
to discover what the appropriate extension of the category is.
Only with age, as children experience that their use of a category label does not always accord with that of adults, or when
they are old enough to have this explicitly pointed out to them,
can they start to shift their membership criteria in the direction of those used by adults. This process of gradually conforming to what is conventional in the language community
is known as the principle of conventionality (Chouinard &
Clark, 2003; Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994). According to the results of our model analyses it might very well
be the main principle that governs the development of meaning after the early years of acquisition.
The model that we have forwarded is one of the first pertaining to word meaning development. As such it is subject to many improvements. In Figure 2, for instance, we
saw that departures from the predicted pattern were most
prevalent for the youngest children. These children might
have only just acquired the meaning of the target categories,
making their category representations still somewhat instable
(Kuczaj, 1982; Thomson & Chapman, 1977). To accommodate this we are considering introducing noisy responding in
the model. If initial instability of category representations
is responsible for the departures in Figure 2, the noisy responding component should be more pronounced among the
younger children. Incorporating manners to capture dependencies between items might also improve the fit of the model
as it promises to identify chaining. Chaining is at work when
children provide a different answer to an item than what is expected based on item-category similarity (i.e., typicality) be-

cause of the item’s similarity to one or more other items. The
categorization decision then not merely entails the comparison of item-category similarity against an internal threshold,
but also becomes dependent upon the decision made for one
or more other items. These dependencies might constitute an
important aspect of the children’s categorization behavior that
is overlooked in the current version of the model.

References
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., & Storms, G. (2008). Object naming
and later lexical development: From baby bottle to beer
bottle. Journal of Memory and Language, 58, 262-285.
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., & Storms, G. (2011). Mowgli in the
jungle of words: Comprehension and later lexical development. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Andersen, E. S. (1975). Cups and glasses: Learning that
boundaries are vague. Child Language, 2, 79-103.
Chouinard, M. M., & Clark, E. V. (2003). Adult reformulations of child errors as negative evidence. Journal of Child
Language, 30, 637-669.
Clark, E. V. (1997). Conceptual perspective and lexical
choice in acquisition. Cognition, 64, 1-37.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical
principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21, 125155.
Hampton, J. A. (2007). Typicality, graded membership, and
vagueness. Cognitive Science, 31, 355-384.
Kuczaj, S. A. (1982). Young children’s overextensions of
object words in comprehension and/or production: Support
for a prototype theory of early object word meaning. First
Language, 3, 93-105.
Thomson, J. R., & Chapman, R. S. (1977). Who is ”daddy”
revisited: The status of two-year olds’ overextended words
in use and comprehension. Journal of Child Language, 4,
359-376.

2005

