UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pain as Enactive Perception: Applying Noe's Theory of Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7430s6sp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Kyburg, Alice

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pain as Enactive Perception: Applying Noë’s Theory of Perception
Alice I. Kyburg (kyburg@uwosh.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Wisconsin Oshkosh
Oshkosh, WI 54901 USA
Abstract

Pain as “Active” Representation

We begin with a view defended elsewhere that pain is a
representation of tissue damage that is dependent on what
one is doing. We extend this view by exploring a relation
between pain and action inspired by Alva Noë’s theory of
perception. We consider whether sensorimotor knowledge
related to tissue damage plays a role in pain experience.
We explore this possibility by considering various kinds of
pain, including the pain of a thorn in one’s foot, that of a
herniated disk, and the chronic pain that sometimes follows
the healing of an injury. We find that there is a large class
of pain for which the phenomenal experience could easily
be informed by sensorimotor knowledge in much the way
Noë claims it is for vision and other forms of perception.
We also find that conceiving of pain in this way inspires
new understanding of phantom limb pain and chronic pain.

I support Tye’s representational account of pain, with the
qualification that representations of tissue damage are
dynamic and very likely to depend on the activities the
subject is engaged in and the demands they place on his
representational resources. To emphasize that actions
influence how things are represented, I call this version of
the representation account of pain the active
representational account. The idea is that pain is, in
several ways, like vision and other forms of perception:
(1) there are special-purpose sensorimotor pairings that
serve to reduce the subject’s representational load while
facilitating specific actions and (2) the total
representational load dedicated to representing tissue
damage is a function of the other demands on a subject’s
representational resources.1 If one has stepped on a thorn
the traditional representationist will say that one’s foot
pain is the representation of damage to one’s foot by the
thorn. The active representationalist will agree, but will
emphasize that one’s foot pain may vary with the activity
one is engaged in. If one is walking with a thorn in one’s
foot one will have a pain that facilitates such walking. In
this case the particular representation of tissue damage is
part of a specialized sensorimotor pairing. If the subject
lies down for a nap in the woods the pain will have a
different phenomenal content – it will still be a
representation of a foot injury, but it will lack the content
necessary for walking.
Consider the type of pain one often has when one is
first injured. There is the initial “Ow!”, a sudden, intense,
all encompassing pain. The content of this representation
includes particular information about the injury, such as
its location and whether it is, for instance, a burn, a stab, a
cut, or a knock with a heavy object. The greater demand
on representational resources comes from the urgent need
to act (sometimes, even, the instinct to act) by, for
example, withdrawing one’s limb from the heat source,
stepping away from the poking stick, or just removing all
stress from the injured limb. It is likely that the
representation of tissue damage during this initial phase
facilitates the carrying out of such defensive acts.
Consider the initial pain of a thorn entering deeply into
one’s foot. One experiences the sharp piercing pain, has a
sudden and powerful urge to raise one’s foot and keep it
up, and tries to do so. Nearly all unrelated thoughts and
actions cease.

Keywords: pain;perception;enactive perception;action
.

Introduction
Philosophical accounts of pain have covered a wide
variety of theories. A recent theory by Colin Klein (2007)
is that pain is an imperative, the content of which defines
the quality of the experience. Michael Tye (1995, 2005)
conceives of pain as a nonconceptual representation of
tissue damage (or disruption). I have argued that these
two accounts are much closer to each other than they at
first appear and that the representationist account can be
expanded to incorporate the strengths of the imperative
account by acknowledging the role of action in
determining how tissue damage is represented. In this
paper I further develop this action-based representational
account of pain by incorporating insights from (Noë,
2004) on active perception. In Section Two I describe the
active representational account of pain, an expanded
version of Tye’s representational account of pain, that
explicitly incorporates the hypothesis that how pain is
represented is influenced by the activities one is engaged
in. In Section Three I present some aspects of Noë’s
action-centered account of perception that have
interesting applications to pain when pain is understood as
a kind of perception. In Section Four I apply these ideas
to the expanded representational account of pain
presented in Section Two. In Section Five I consider how
this augmented active representational account of pain
fares with some of the more philosophically difficult
cases of pain.

1

1829

See (Hayhoe & Ballard, 2005) and (Ballard et al., 1991)

Following this sudden onset of intense pain there is
often a second kind of pain. This pain reveals greater
range of detail regarding the injury’s type, its extent, its
degree, and its impact on movement and other activities.
In cases where the damage is little or none the pain
quickly fades to nothing. In other cases the pain
transforms into something that hurts but does not
overwhelm, like an ache or a throbbing sensation. As a
part of this experience one carefully surveys and assesses
the wound, often using vision and touch to explore it. In
the case of the thorn prick, one might look at the
punctured area on one’s foot, caress the surface of the
skin there, and press hard around its edges. In doing so,
one also intensely concentrates on it. Through these
activities the injury seems to come into sharper focus -the pain reveals greater detail regarding the nature and
extent of damage to the foot, along with how movement
impacts it.
Usually one does not remain focused on one’s wound,
however, but returns to the things that we, as humans, do.
One carries out these activities of living and in many
cases one experiences injuries differently as a result. In
these cases, pain is a representation of tissue damage, but
one that is suited for the task one is engaged in. It can be
a special-purpose representation, that is, a dedicated
sensorimotor pairing, or it can be a less detailed
representation that frees up resources needed for other
purposes. For instance, after failing to pull out the thorn,
one may start to walk again, taking care to not step
directly on it. While walking the pain will take on new
qualitative content – it will be an ache with a quickly
shifting content that depends on where on the foot one is
stepping and the direction one’s weight is shifting. This
ache is probably a special-purpose representation that
serves as a guide to help one walk or run with a foot
injury. It is part of the pairing that comprises one’s ability
to move effectively with a foot wound. The fact that one
sometimes walks with better results after several steps
suggests that the representation and motor behavior
pairing can be fine-tuned as one interacts more with one’s
environment.
An example of how pain can be a function not just of
tissue damage but of the total demands on
representational resources is the severely injured soldier
who manages to save another injured soldier with little
awareness of the extent of his own injury. In such a case
he probably makes use of a representation of tissue
damage that specifically facilitates his life-saving action,
but leaves out the detail that would be responsible for the
great pain normally experienced when one moves with
such an injury.2 The experience of many actresses and
athletes offers another such example. They learn that they
can perform well despite severe menstrual cramps or
other pains they experience just prior to performance time

and that while fully engaged in the performance their
discomfort is significantly less.3
The types of pain described above suggest that pain,
understood as the representation of tissue damage, is
dynamic, varying with the action or activity of the agent.
Pain can be a representation that offers just enough detail
to facilitate an agent’s immediate action to prevent further
damage to the affected tissue. Alternatively, pain can be a
detailed representation of the tissue damage, formed as
the subject surveys her injury. Pain can also be a less
detailed representation of tissue damage, special-purpose
or not, that makes available the needed representational
resources for some ongoing high-priority activity.
The dependence of the representation of tissue damage
on the goals and activities of the subject suggest that it is
appropriate to consider pain a form of perception and not
simply a low-level representation. It follows that general
research on perception may add to our understanding of
pain. In the next section I look at Noë’s theory of
perception and consider ways in which it might apply to
the active representational account of pain.

Noe’s View of Perception as Action
Alva Noë has developed an influential, if controversial,
account of perception that puts action at its center in a
way different from what is considered above. For Noë, to
perceive is to act in much the same way as a blind man
acts when he uses a walking stick. It is an activity, not a
passive experience. If pain is a type of perception, as
many philosophers and psychologists have concluded,
then it follows from Noe’s account that pain too must be
active in this way.4 In this section we sketch Noë’s view
of perception and in Section 5 we consider how our
understanding of pain might be informed by it.5
Noë is committed to the controversial idea sometimes
found in certain subfields of artificial intelligence that the
world itself serves as an extension of our representational
medium. Since we know that specific actions will
3

I learned that this is a common experience among actresses
from Ethel Kyburg, a former professional actress and my
mother. I am by no means suggesting that menstrual cramps are
“all in the head” except in the obvious sense that they are
representations of bodily disruption of some kind. What I am
suggesting is that many people find that by fully engaging in
highly demanding activities, the qualitative content of such
pains can change.
4
Recent perception-based accounts of pain include (Tye,
2005), (Aydede, 2005), and (Shoemaker, 2001). (Chapman,
1986) claims that the view that pain is a function of perception is
the dominant view in psychology, though as of 1986 Chapman
suggested that medical field had lagged behind in this
understanding of pain. More recently (Carmichael, 2007)
suggests that the medical field is beginning to think of pain as
perception.
5
To the best of my knowledge Noë has not discussed pain in
any of his publications on perception. I do not mean to attribute
to him any position on this subject.

2

(Prinz, 2005) offers alternative theory -- that such a soldier
fully perceives, is even aware of, his pain, but then does not
remember.

1830

immediately access certain perceptual data, we do not
form an internal representation of this data. There is no
need.6 For instance, if we shoot our eyes to the left we
will find visual information regarding the tomato on the
table that we know is there. We have no need to
internally represent the details of that tomato when such a
simple motion would provide us with them.
What is required to perceive, on Noë’s account, is
knowledge of the relations between certain actions or
movements and the perceptual data that they would make
available.
Noë calls this sensorimotor knowledge.
Sensorimotor knowledge takes the form of conditionals
such as, Were I to reach out for a perceived object like so,
it would feel thusly or Were I to move my head to the left
it would have such and such an appearance of shape and
color. In looking at the tomato on a table, there may
appear something with a combination of shades of red and
white that fills the approximate shape of an ellipse in our
field of vision. On Noë’s view we do not come to see it
as a red round sphere unless we have identified a relevant
set of sensorimotor knowledge.
That is, we only
experience the tomato as a red round sphere if we
understand that were we to move our head to the left, the
tomato would appear this other way, less elliptical and
more round, and its color would appear that other way,
were we were to reach a concave hand behind it, our hand
would feel a surface that fits into its own curvature like
so, and so on.
According to (Noë, 2004, 2009), the fact that the world
acts as an extension of our representational medium
means that there is available to us, through basic actions
with our eyes and body, a rich body of sensory
information about the world. If we know what we need to
do to access this data, i.e., if we have already identified
relevant sensorimotor knowledge, then we feel as if we
already have accessed it. In perceiving we actively seek
particular sensory data through saccades and movements
of various sorts that we can use to identify sets of relevant
sensorimotor knowledge.
Through this process we
experience particular colors, shapes and textures. We
perceive things as filling three-dimensional spaces in
particular ways.
We have complete perceptual
experience, or, using another of Noë’s expressions, we
experience objects as perceptually present. The gappy,
bouncy stream of incoming sensory data produces a stable
and gap free perceptual experience because that data
enables us to identify relevant sensorimotor knowledge,
giving us a sense of the presence of much more data than
the incoming stream that we started with.
If sensorimotor knowledge is required by the perceiver
to “close the deal in perception”, as Noë asserts, that is, to
go from the look or sound or feel of an object as sensed
from a given perspective to a complete perceptual
experience, then what implications might this have for a

representational account of pain?
question.

We now consider this

Sensorimotor Knowledge and Pain Action
So far I have endorsed the view that pain is the
representation of tissue damage, but I have emphasized
that the activity the subject is engaged in can impact how
this damage is represented, and, therefore, how it feels.
Noë’s account of perception suggests another refinement
of the representational account of pain: there is a basic
sensory data concerning tissue damage and there is the
way the tissue damage seems once the basic data is
informed by a set of sensorimotor knowledge.
But what is the sensorimotor knowledge that is taken to
be relevant to our perception of tissue damage? Consider
the initial “Ow!” that often draws one’s attention to a new
injury. If it is a painful poke then the subject knows such
things as that if she withdraws the poked body part from
the source of the poking then the poking pain will relent
and if she moves it closer then the pain will worsen.
Similarly, if she is in the process of getting a burn she
understands that if she moves the affected tissue away
from the heat source or the heat source away from the
affected tissue then that initial, intense burning sensation
will decrease or cease. A subject also acquires relevant
sensorimotor facts as she assesses a wound. For instance,
she might learn that whenever she presses firmly an inch
or more away from where a thorn has entered her foot it
does not hurt, whereas whenever she presses firmly a half
an inch or closer to the thorn it hurts. Later, as the subject
engages in movements that repeatedly impact the
damaged tissue, the set of relevant sensorimotor
knowledge continues to grow.
That we have sensorimotor knowledge related to our
experience of pain seems obvious. Noë’s view of
perception, however, is that sensorimotor knowledge adds
a significant component to a subject’s perceptual
experience. Applying this view to pain, it follows that
sensorimotor knowledge “completes” pain, gives it
“perceptual presence”. These expressions, applied to
pain, are unfortunate since it is difficult to conceive of
any experience of pain as incomplete or lacking in
presence. Still, awkward language aside, there is insight
gleaned from considering the impact of sensorimotor
knowledge on pain. In particular, such knowledge can
add perspective to the experience of one’s tissue damage
in the way that Noë claims it adds perspective to our
experience of seeing.
Consider the experience of a
person who walks with a thorn in her foot. There is no
doubt that her experience of her injury serves to guide her
walking. She is intensely aware of such facts as that if
she moved this way it would feel thusly, if she moved that
way it would feel this other way. Furthermore, such a
pain sometimes feels like it has a three-dimensional
shape, the surface area defining the space that one must
move around to avoid more intense pain. While the entire

6

Versions of this hypothesis are expressed in (Brooks, 1991)
and (Ballard et. al, 1991). It is also found in (Dennett, 1991).

1831

story could simply be that what one does determines how
one’s tissue damage is represented, which in turn
determines the phenomenal content of one’s pain, an
alternative suggested by Noe’s approach is that
sensorimotor knowledge adds something to pain
experience beyond what is determined by the basic
representation of tissue damage. That is, the sensorimotor
knowledge of how the foot would feel were one to step
this other way has some bearing on how the foot does
feel, even without stepping that way.
The threedimensional form that one imagines moving around as
one limps along does not serve merely as a heuristic for
successful walking, it is the way that one’s foot injury is
experienced when walking.
The pains that Colin Klein (2007) describes to motivate
his imperative account of pain serve as another example
of how sensorimotor knowledge may indeed be impacting
our phenomenal pain experiences. The pain from putting
one’s hand very near a fire seems inseparable from the
overwhelming urge one has to withdraw the hand. Klein
asserts that this burning pain is simply the very strong
urge not to leave the hand near the fire. On the active
representational account of my earlier work, the burning
pain in the hand is the representation of damaged tissue
that is most conducive to quick and immediate removal of
the hand from the damaging location. The contribution
of Noë’s theory of perception is that one’s sensorimotor
knowledge of how the hand would feel were one to move
it in certain ways relative to the fire impacts one’s actual
experience of the hand near the fire. That is, one’s pain
experience already engages knowledge of how certain
movements would bring an end to the burning sensation.
The urge to move the hand from the fire is not identical to
the pain experience, as Klein asserts, nor is it the result of
multiple inferences. It is an immediate outcome of
combining
sensorimotor
knowledge
with
the
representation of tissue damage.
The cases above illustrate the way that ordinary pains
could be conceived as representations of tissue damage
enhanced with sensorimotor knowledge. What this view
implies, however, is that there is such a thing as pure
sensory pain, that is, pain that is not informed by
sensorimotor knowledge. An artist can identify the
perspective-bound way a tomato appears without
sensorimotor knowledge – it appears elliptical, with areas
of different colors. The question to consider now is: is
there a way that tissue damage seems without
sensorimotor knowledge? Introspective reports of pain
caused by impinged or damaged nerves suggest an
answer. People with such pain universally agree that that
their pain is categorically different from other pains.
While it is more difficult for them to bear than other pain,
what puts it in a different category is not merely its degree
of discomfort. Rather, the physical and mental behaviors
that people normally engage in when they have pains
have different results in these cases. For example, closely
examining the pain in one’s arm due to a herniated disk

does not reveal an area of damage of a certain shape and
extent. One cannot learn to move around it. Nor can one
press along one side of the wound and then move to the
other side and thereby bring about a dull pain that seems
to travel about the circumference of the damaged area.
One might caress the painful area of the arm, pinch it, try
to assess its extent and shape, but the information one
gathers through this process is strikingly sparse. The pain
due to an impinged or damaged nerve is disturbingly
independent of deliberate movement in a way that
ordinary pain is not. If ordinary pain has its phenomenal
content in part due to the process of bringing to bear
relevant sensorimotor knowledge, then the pain of an
impinged or damaged nerve stands out as pain for which
little or no relevant sensorimotor knowledge can be
identified. Such pain is, in this sense, perspective-bound
sensory data.
We have treated pain as a form of perception and
applied some aspects of Noë’s theory of perception to it.
In particular we have treated pain as the representation of
tissue damage created when basic sensory data is
combined with sensorimotor knowledge. But, as in other
forms of perception, there is a wide range of sensorimotor
knowledge that could be drawn on and not all of it is
necessarily brought to bear on any particular
representation. Our knowledge that if we poke a red
tomato hard our finger feels slimy does not normally find
its way into our complete perceptual experience of the
tomato on the table. Perception seems to incorporate the
sensorimotor knowledge that is somehow deemed most
relevant to the task one is pursuing. We could well
experience pain differently depending on what we are
doing, in part, because we bring to bear different sets of
sensorimotor knowledge in different cases. The pain we
experience from a thorn wound will feel differently when
moving about on our feet than when lying down not just
because we are putting pressure near the damaged areas in
the one case but not in the other, but also because when
we are lying down we are not calling up the sensorimotor
knowledge relevant to walking. The subject’s sense that
her foot wound has a certain three-dimensional shape
continues only so long as there is a stream of pokes,
caresses, or other pressures on and around the region of
the injury. It fades soon after such contacts cease because
the sensorimotor knowledge responsible for the sense that
her pain has a shape is no longer relevant.
This study of pain began by embracing the
representational account of pain while emphasizing the
dependence of the representation of tissue damage on
what the subject is doing. We explored how Noë’s
account of perception might apply to pain and found that
when it is combined with the active representational
account presented at the start, the result provides a richer
source of explanation for certain pain phenomena. I
continue in this vein in the next section by applying this
expanded active representational theory of pain to chronic
pain and phantom limb pain.

1832

Some Difficult Cases

such; if I uncurl the fingers to this or that degree the
sensation will be this other way.
An interesting implication of this account is that if a
subject were to engage a different set of sensorimotor
knowledge pertaining to his injury, the qualitative content
of his pain would change. In fact, (Ramachandran,
Rogers-Ramachandra, & Cobb, 1995) found that some
subjects found relief when mirrors were set up to create
the illusion that they could move their missing arm and
fingers. This illusion sufficed to make them feel for a
moment as if they were actually engaged in the act of
uncurling the fist that was bringing so much pain. On a
simple representional account of pain, why should the
illusion of movement in the missing limb relieve pain?
The expanded representational account considered here
suggests an explanation: in seeming to move the missing
hand, new data is brought to bear on the representation of
his wound. The subject forms a new intention, to keep
the fingers from returning to the painful, curled position,
which calls up new sensorimotor pairings used in the past
when his goal was to keep the (now missing) hand from
curling. Furthermore, if only for a moment, he now
engages such sensorimotor knowledge as, If I curl my
fingers tightly I will again feel this other (awful) way; If I
flex my fingers I will continue to feel this (less awful) way,
etc. When the subject returns to feeling as if his fingers
are curled painfully into his palm, this experience reflects
the return to a representation of tightly curled fingers,
informed by the earlier sensorimotor data: If I curl the
fingers tighter the sensation will be such and such; if I
uncurl the fingers to this or that degree the sensation will
be this other way, etc.
(Carmichael, 2007) reports that in the medical treatment
of U.S. soldiers who have lost limbs in Iraq and
Afghanistan, there is a movement to immediately and
thoroughly medicate with morphine and to continue this
treatment for some time. The goal is to prevent the subject
from forming the “habits of perception” responsible for
phantom limb pain. But what are these habits of
perception? Could they be the habits of employing
particular sets of sensorimotor data that are no longer
relevant? Noë’s notion that a perceptual experience is
made complete by the processing of a set of sensorimotor
knowledge suggests a new area of inquiry in pain
research: How is sensorimotor knowledge related to the
representation of tissue damage unlearned when it no
longer applies? Could one learn to bring false
sensorimotor data to bear on the representation of tissue
damage to make an injury more bearable? Assuming that
athletes are good at acquiring new sensorimotor
knowledge, are they less inclined to have chronic pain
following their injuries? Could morphine and other pain
treatments interfere with our ability to unlearn
sensorimotor knowledge that is no longer relevant and our
ability to learn new, relevant sensorimotor knowledge?
How does morphine impact the employment of
sensorimotor knowledge in the first place?

Chronic pain (persistent pain in the absence of any
identifiable tissue damage) is often cited as an example of
mysterious pain. Often it takes the form of pain
associated with an injury that has long since healed. The
most compelling account of it compatible with a
representational account of pain is that in such cases there
still is vulnerable tissue, even though the injury appears
completely healed. This tissue is represented as damaged
or disrupted in some way, accounting for the subject’s
ongoing experience of pain. While this explanation may
be correct, the theory considered here suggests another
possibility as well:
perhaps there is sensorimotor
knowledge that was relevant to the sensations of tissue
damage during the former injury that is inappropriately
identified as still relevant. For instance, following foot
surgery there will be an extended period during which
particular movements will put stress on particularly
vulnerable areas of the foot. The subject will acquire
sensorimotor knowledge relevant to her injury such as: If
I step on the inside ball of my foot it feels that way, if I
step on the outside it feels this other way, etc. Such
sensorimotor knowledge may well create a sense of a
damaged region of the foot that one must move around, as
discussed earlier. Normally, as the foot heals, this
sensorimotor knowledge is updated. It could be that
chronic pain in the foot is the experience of certain
pressures on the foot processed with outdated
sensorimotor knowledge.
Phantom limb pain is another example of pain that is
not well understood. One’s experience in these cases is of
pain in a limb that no longer exists. (Tye, 2005b)
proposes that phantom limb pain is the representation of
tissue damage as in a location that is no longer a part of
the body. The subject suffering from such pain has a
representation that there is tissue damage in a certain
place but there is no such thing. In this sense, the pain is
illusory. I agree with this explanation as far as it goes, but
more can be said. Many people who suffer from phantom
limb pain have strong urges to move parts of their missing
limbs in ways they feel would relieve their pain. For
example, (Ramachandran, Rogers-Ramachandra, & Cobb,
1995) describe subjects suffering from phantom limb pain
in an arm who feel as if the fingers in the missing hand
are so tightly curled that they are painfully pressing into
the palm. The subjects have a strong urge to uncurl their
fingers to relieve the pain, despite the fact that they are
fully aware that they have no fingers to uncurl. In other
words, the subjects have a strong sense of how their pain
would be were they to move in particular ways. What this
suggests is that phantom limb pain is another case of a
representation of tissue damage that is formed by
processing outdated sensorimotor knowledge. In the case
above, for instance, sensorimotor data of the following
sort may well be informing the subject’s experience: If I
curl the fingers tighter the sensation will be such and

1833

The above questions make clear a role for future work.
In addition, in order to best defend the view presented in
this paper, one needs to say more about internal pains
such as stomach aches, the pain of cancer and lyme
disease, and labor pains. These pains seem to be
unrelated to how a subject moves. Is there a role for
sensorimotor knowledge in the explanation of
phenomenal experiences of these pains?

Klein, C. (2007) An imperative theory of pain. The
Journal of Philosophy CIV, 10, 517—532.
Marr, D. (1982) Vision: a computational investigation in
to the human representation and processing of visual
information. New York: Freeman & Co.
Matthen, M. (2005) Seeing, doing, and knowing. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Melzack, R. and Wall, P. (1965) Pain mechanisms: a new
theory. Science, 150, 971 – 979.
Millikan, R. (1995) Pushmi-pullyu representations. In J.
Tomberlin (Ed.) Philosophical Perspectives, 9: AI,
Connectionism and Philosophical Psychology.
Atascadero: Ridgeview Publishing Co.
Neisser, U. (1976) Cognition and reality: principles and
implications of cognitive psychology. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman.
Noë, A. (2004) Action in perception. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Peacocke, C. (1983) Sense and content: experience,
thought, and their relations. Clarendon Press: Oxford;
Oxford University Press: New York.
Pitcher, G. (1970) Pain perception. Philosophical Review
74, 368 – 393.
Prinz, J. (2005) A neurofunctional theory of
consciousness. In Brook, A. and Akins, K. (Eds.)
Cognition and the brain: the philosophy and
neuroscience movement. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Prinz, J. (2008) Is consciousness embodied. In P.
Robbins and M. Aydede (Eds.) Cambridge Handbook
of Situated Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ramachandran, V. S.,Rogers-Ramachandra, D. C. &
Cobb, S. (1995) Touching the phantom. Nature 377:
489–490.
Shoemaker, S. (2001) Introspection and phenomenal
content. Philosophical Topics 28(2), 247 – 273.
Tumulty, M. (2009) Pains, imperatives, and
intentionalism. The Journal of Philosophy CIV, 10,
161–166.
Tye, M. (2005a) Another look at representationalism
about pain. In M. Aydede, (Ed.) Pain: new essays on
its nature and methodology. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Tye, M. (2005b) In defense of representationalism: reply
to commentaries. In M. Aydede (Ed.), Pain: new
essays on its nature and methodology. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Tye, M. (1995) Representationalist theory of pains and
their phenomenal character. In J. E. Tomberlin, (Ed.)
Philosophical perspectives, 9, AI connectionism and
philosophical psychology.

Conclusion
In this paper I have not attempted to establish as fact the
applicability of Noë’s theory of perception to pain, but,
rather, to present a possibility that I believe merits further
consideration by academics and clinicians. On the view
under consideration, how tissue damage is experienced is
determined not just by sensory data collected from the
area of the damaged tissue, but also by the actions one is
engaged in and by sensorimotor knowledge that relates
these and other actions to the tissue. In thinking of pain
in this way new kinds of explanations of pain phenomena
become available, and with them, new possibilities for the
treatment of pain and its prevention. I leave it to future
work within the cognitive sciences to further develop and
evaluate this account. At the same time, I hope that those
in empirical and clinical fields are willing to consider the
possible role of sensorimotor knowledge for pain
experiences.

References
Aydede, M. (Ed.) (2005). Pain: new essays on its nature
and methodology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aydede, M. (2005) The main difficulty with pain. In M.
Aydede (Ed.) Pain: new essays on its nature and
methodology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aydede, M. and Guzeldere, G. (2002) Some foundational
problems in the scientific study of pain. Philosophy of
Science, 69 S265 – S283.
Ballard, D., et. al (1991) Animate vision. Artificial
Intelligence 48, 57 – 86.
Brooks, R. (1991) Intelligence without representation.
Artificial Intelligence Journal,
Carmichael, M. (2007) Unlocking the secrets of pain.
Newsweek CXLIX, 23.
Chapman, C. R. (1986) Pain, perception, and illusion. In
R. A. Sternbach (Ed.) The psychology of pain. Second
Edition. New York: Raven Press.
Dennett, D. (1991) Consciousness explained. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. (1978) Why you can’t make a computer that
feels pain. Synthese 38 (3).
Evans, G. (1982) The varieties of reference. J. McDowell
(Ed.) Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hall, R. J. (1998) Are pains necessarily unpleasant?
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 49, 643 –
59.
Hayhoe, M. & Ballard, D. (2005) Eye movements in
natural behavior. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 9(4).

1834

