UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perceptual learning for a familiar category under inversion: An analogue of face inversion?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4df612np

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
McLaren, IPL
Civile, Circo

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perceptual learning for a familiar category under inversion:
An analogue of face inversion?
I.P.L. McLaren(I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.

Ciro Civile (cc413@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK.
Abstract
This study investigated the link between expertise for a prototypedefined category and the face inversion effect (which refers to the
decline in performance in recognising faces that are inverted
compared to the recognition of faces in their normal upright
orientation; e.g., Yin, 1969). We aimed to demonstrate an
analogous effect in chequerboards drawn from a familiar category
such that participants had acquired a certain expertise with that
category. Participants in this study were first presented with a
categorisation task in which they were asked to sort a number of
chequerboards (in an upright orientation) into two categories. This
increased their familiarity with these categories. Then, in the next
(study) phase, participants were presented with a set of
chequerboards which included exemplars (some upright, some
inverted) from one of the two categories that participants were
familiar with, plus exemplars (also upright or inverted) from a
novel category. Following this, participants were presented with
an old/new recognition task that included exemplars seen in the
study phase plus new exemplars of the same (familiar and novel)
categories in both orientations (upright and inverted). We
succeeded in obtaining the same pattern of effects reported in
McLaren (1997), i.e. a significant inversion effect for stimuli
drawn from the familiar category, but with standard recognition
procedures. We interpret the results in terms of McLaren and
Mackintosh's (2000) theory of representation development.
Keywords:Inversion; perceptual learning; expertise; faces;
recognition; chequerboards; categorization; latent inhibition.

Introduction
The face inversion effect proper refers to the greater
decline in performance in recognizing faces that are inverted
compared to the recognition of faces in their normal upright
orientation when contrasted with similar manipulations
using other stimuli such as pictures of houses (Yin, 1969).
On the basis of this effect it had been believed that faces
were processed in our brain in a different way to other kinds
of stimuli. The assumption that facial stimuli are special can
be challenged by the demonstration that the inversion effect
in recognition memory can be as strong with images of dogs
as with faces when the subjects are experts in specific dog
breeds (Diamond & Carey, 1986). Thus, this suggests that
the face inversion effect may not be due to the fact that
facial stimuli are separately processed by the brain, but
instead that there are other factors, such as expertise, which
give rise to this effect. Back in 1997 McLaren demonstrated
that we can obtain a significant inversion effect analogous
to that in faces with chequerboards drawn from a familiar

category as long as they possess the appropriate stimulus
structure. Subjects were exposed to a set of chequerboards
and were asked to categorise them into two different
prototype-defined categories. This was followed by a
discrimination task which included two pairs of
chequerboards (one pair in an upright and the other pair in
an inverted orientation) from a familiar category, plus two
control pairs of chequerboards from a novel category (again
one pair upright the other inverted). The results showed that
familiarity with a category defined by a prototype gave
subjects an enhanced ability to discriminate between
exemplars of that category in an upright orientation. This
benefit was lost when the stimuli were inverted, to the
extent that learning of the discrimination involving inverted
familiar exemplars was worse than for appropriate controls.
No inversion effect was found for exemplars taken from a
novel category of chequerboards, or for chequerboards that
were taken from a familiar category that was not prototypebased. In the same study McLaren (1997) tried to extend
those results in a delayed matching task. Each trial of the
delayed matching task involved a category exemplar being
presented for 1 sec in either an upright or inverted
orientation, and finally a second exemplar drawn from the
same category and with the same orientation as the first.
Subjects had to decide whether the second chequerboard
was the same as or different from the first as rapidly as
possible by pressing one of two keys. Trials were
randomized with the constraint that half were positive
(same) trials and half negative (different). Results showed
that subjects presented with exemplars from a familiar
category were significantly better at judging whether upright
exemplars were the same or different than at making the
same decision for the inverted exemplars. Finally
performance on the familiar upright exemplars was
significantly better than that for novel controls. Thus,
experience with a category leads to a significant inversion
effect in a matching task confirming the results obtained in
the discrimination task. However this time performance on
inverted familiar exemplars was not significantly worse than
that on inverted novel exemplars. In the present study we
aimed to replicate McLaren’s (1997) findings using a
standard face recognition paradigm, but with chequerboards
as stimuli rather than faces. The prediction was that
expertise with members of a familiar, prototype-defined
category would lead to an improved ability in distinguishing

3320

and recognising these members; an improvement that would
be lost on inversion. Finally, as McLaren (1997) showed
that inversion of familiar exemplars may incur some cost in
discriminating those exemplars, we investigated whether
there may be some cost when recognising inverted familiar
exemplars.

Experiment 1a
Experiment 1a aimed to find a significant inversion effect in
an artificial prototype-defined category that participants
became familiar with during the experiment.

Materials
The stimuli were 16 x 16 chequerboards containing roughly
half black and half white squares. Four prototypes were
generated at random but with the constraint that they shared
50% of their squares with any of the other prototypes.
Exemplars were generated from these prototypes by
changing squares at random as described in Figure 1.

A

B

C

D

Figure 1: The prototypes for categories A, B, C and D. On
average, 48 of the squares were set at random to generate
each exemplar, thus, on average, 24 squares would be
expected to alter from black to white or white to black.
There was no special relationship between exemplars
generated from each prototype.

Participants
32 psychology undergraduates at the University of Exeter
took part in the experiment. The study was counterbalanced
by splitting participants into 8 groups.

Procedure
The study consisted of a ‘categorisation phase’ a ‘study
phase’ and an old/new recognition ‘test phase’. In the
categorisation phase, the subjects were instructed that once
they pressed any key on the keyboard, a set of chequerboard
stimuli would appear on the screen, one at a time in random
order. Their task was to sort these stimuli into two
categories by pressing one of the two keys (“x” or “.”), and
they would get immediate feedback as to whether their

response was correct or not. If they did not respond within
4seconds, they would be timed out. The set of chequerboard
stimuli included 128 exemplars of two different categories,
with 64 in each category. Subjects were encouraged to scan
the whole of each chequerboard before categorising it. In
order to counterbalance our stimuli, we used 8 participant
groups. The first 4 of those were presented, during the
categorisation task, with 64 exemplars drawn from category
A and 64 exemplars drawn from category B. The second 4
were presented with 64 exemplars drawn from each of the C
and D categories. After the categorisation phase was
concluded participants proceeded to the study phase. For
each subject, the task was to look at a number of new
exemplars from one of the two familiar categories seen in
the categorisation task, plus an equal number of novel
exemplars from a category not previously seen. Thus, for
example, participant group 1 was presented with a set of
stimuli that included 32 exemplars (16 upright and 16
inverted) drawn from category A (familiar) and 32
exemplars (16 in both orientations) drawn from category C
which was novel for them. To counterbalance this
participant group 5 was presented with 32 exemplars (16
upright and 16 inverted) drawn from category C (familiar)
and 32 exemplars (16 in both orientations) drawn from
category A which was novel for that group. Thus, in the
study phase each participant was shown 4 types of exemplar
each containing 16 stimuli giving a total of 64 exemplars.
These were presented one at a time in a random order for 3
seconds. The exemplar types were: 1-Familiar Inverted
exemplars (1FI); 2-Familiar Upright exemplars (1FU); 3Novel Inverted exemplars(1NI) and 4-Novel Upright
exemplars (1NU). Following the study phase subjects were
given an old/new recognition task. This involved the 64
exemplars seen in the study phase (32 in an upright and 32
in an inverted orientation, as presented in the study phase),
plus 64 new exemplars (32 in an upright and 32 in an
inverted orientation) split across the same four exemplar
types shown in the study phase. The unstudied exemplar
types were: 5-Familiar Inverted exemplars (2FI); 6-Familiar
Upright
exemplars
(2FU);
7Novel
Inverted
exemplars(2NI) and 8-Novel Upright exemplars (2NU).
Each exemplar had a unique identifying number, to make
sure that an individual exemplar never appeared in more
than one condition at a time during the experiment. To
simplify their use in the experiment, the stimuli available
were divided into sets of 16 giving 8 sets of stimuli, and
each participant group was shown a different combination
of the 8 sets as shown in Table 1 below. Subjects in the test
phase were asked to press “.” on the computer keyboard if
they had seen the chequerboard before in the study phase, or
“x” if they had not seen it and had 4 seconds in which to do
so. Data was collected on accuracy and latency in
recognition performance across the test recognition phase.
At the end of the study subjects were debriefed about the
purpose of the experiment.

3321

There was also a significant interaction between category
type and orientation, F(1,31)=3.63, p<.05 one-tail. The
effect of category type and orientation on recognition was
also analyzed by means of planned comparisons on d’
scores. Familiar upright exemplars were not recognized
significantly better than unfamiliar upright exemplars,
F(1,31)=2.07, p=.08, though there was a clear trend in that
direction. There was also a non-significant trend for familiar
inverted exemplars to be worse than novel ones,
F(1,31)=0.92, p= .17.

Discussion

Table 1: Combinations of the stimuli presented to each
participant group. Exemplars used in the study phase and
the test phase were numbers 64 to128. The first 4 stimulus
groups were the ones seen both in the study phase and in the
test. The latter 4 were seen only during the test phase.

Results
The data from all 32 subjects was used for the signal
detection analysis. In the categorization phase, the mean
percentage correct was 64%. Figure 2 gives the results from
the test phase for the signal detection measure d' by
category type. Following McLaren (1997) we expected an
inversion effect (higher score for upright than for inverted)
for the familiar category, no inversion effect for the novel
category, and a significant difference between the effects of
inversion for familiar and novel categories. Planned
contrasts were used to examine whether these effects were
reliable. As expected, a significant difference in d' was
found for the upright versus inverted familiar category
exemplars, F(1,31)=3.59, p<.05 one-tail. No significant
inversion effect was found for novel category exemplars,
F(1,31)=-1.16, p=ns.

Figure 2: the X axis gives the four different stimulus
conditions, whereas the Y axis shows the mean d' for the
old/new recognition phase in Experiment 1a.

We have replicated the original effect with chequerboards,
but this time using exactly the same recognition paradigm as
is normally used for face recognition studies. There is a
significant inversion effect for the familiar category of
chequerboards, but no inversion effect for novel
chequerboards. An explanation consistent with the results
obtained in Experiment 1a is that stimulus pre-exposure
leads to perceptual learning. The familiar chequerboards
benefit from this and, hence, subjects are better able to
recognize upright exemplars of that category. But an
individual’s performance declines when presented with
exemplars of that ostensibly familiar category in an inverted
orientation because they are not actually familiar with the
stimuli in that orientation (McLaren, Kaye and Mackintosh,
1989; McLaren & Mackintosh, 2000). This leads to the
inversion effect observed with the familiar category, but this
effect is not seen for the novel chequerboards as here there
is no perceptual learning to be lost on inversion. One issue
for this account of Experiment 1a's results, however, is that
the mechanism described predicts such an effect only for
categories defined in terms of a prototype, but we have no
direct evidence for this in these experiments as yet.

Experiment 1b
In Experiment 1b we addressed this issue. The same
procedure was used again but this time there was an
alteration in the method used to generate the stimuli. We
used a variant on the procedure for generating ‘shuffled’
stimuli outlined in McLaren (1997), as this produced stimuli
that were as easy to classify as prototype-defined stimuli,
but they did not average to the base pattern used to generate
them and so did not, as a class, possess a prototype
themselves. Exemplars were constructed by shuffling rows,
a random permutation of 3 randomly chosen horizontal rows
of a base pattern (we used the base patterns from
Experiment 1a) constituting an exemplar of that category.
We only shuffled three rows, to keep the number of squares
that (on average) changed the same as in Experiment 1a
(this was far fewer than the number shuffled in 1997). The
procedure was that two rows were identified at random and
swapped, then a new row was identified, and swapped with
one of the previous two. The result is that, on average, half
the squares in each of the three rows will be altered making
24 in all. Thus, this experiment is, in some sense the control

3322

for Experiment 1a, though as will become apparent, the ease
of classification produced by using these materials more
nearly matched that of Experiment 2. We predicted no
inversion effect for either familiar or novel category
exemplars in this experiment.

Discussion

Participants
32 psychology undergraduates at the University of Exeter
took part in the experiment. The study was counterbalanced,
as in Experiments 1 and 2, by splitting participants into 8
groups.

Experiment 1b supported our explanation of the inversion
effect, in particular that the inversion effect would only arise
for a category of stimuli based on a prototype. Being able to
categorize stimuli that were not defined by a prototype did
not give the subjects any advantage in recognising
exemplars of that category in their upright orientation, and
did not produce any of the effects observed in Experiment
1a. However, our inversion effect in Experiment 1a is not as
substantial as we would like. This may be because
participants found it too hard to recognize the
chequerboards. Experiment 2 aimed to address this issue.

Results
The data from all 32 subjects was, as for Experiments1a,
used for the analysis.. In the categorisation phase, the mean
percentage correct was 77%. Thus, as we predicted the
stimuli were at least as easy to categorize as stimuli in
Experiment 1a. However as Figure 3 suggests there was no
significant difference in d-prime means for familiar category
exemplars or for novel category exemplars, confirming our
predictions. The crucial interaction, however, is not that
within Experiment 1b, but emerges when we compare the
results of Experiment 1b with those of Experiment 1a. In
McLaren (1997) a similar comparison showed that the
inversion effect, defined as the familiarity by orientation
interaction, obtained with exemplars drawn from a
prototype-defined category was significantly greater than
that obtained with exemplars drawn from a category that
was not defined by a prototype. If we compute the
Experiment by Familiarity by Orientation interaction for
Experiments 1a and 1b we find F(1,31)=5.15, p=.013 (onetail), confirming that this is the case here. Thus we have the
necessary evidence to state that the inversion effect depends
on both the category being familiar and its being prototype
based.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was a replication of Experiment 1a but this
time we tried to make the chequerboards more “clumpy”,
with the intention of making the stimuli easier to recognize.
We hoped to obtain a stronger inversion effect for familiar
chequerboards than the one obtained in Experiment 1a.

Materials
In this experiment a randomly chosen 96 squares (up from
48 in Experiment 1a) were set at random to generate each
exemplar, and the prototypes themselves had stronger
differentiation into black and white areas (see Figure 4).

Prototype A
Experiment 1

Prototype A
Experiment 2

Exemplar A65
Experiment 1

Exemplar A65
Experiment 2

Figure 4: The prototypes and example exemplars for
category A in Experiment 1 and for category A in
Experiment 2.

Participants
Figure 3: The X axis shows the four different stimulus
conditions, whereas the Y axis shows the average number of
accurate responses (out of 32) for each of the four
conditions in the test phase of Experiment 1b.

32 psychology undergraduates at the University of Exeter
took part in the experiment. The study was counterbalanced,
as in Experiment 1, by splitting participants into 8 groups.

Procedure
This was exactly the same as that used in Experiment 1a.

3323

Results
The data from all 32 subjects was used for the analysis. In
the categorisation phase, the mean percentage correct was
77%, indicating that our manipulation of the stimuli had
made them easier to classify at least. Figure 5 gives the
results for the mean d' score by category type. Planned
comparisons were used to examine whether or not there
was a significant inversion effect for familiar category
exemplars. A reliable difference in d' emerged for the
upright versus the inverted familiar category exemplars,
F(1,31)=8.09, p<.01 one-tail. There was also a significant
interaction between category type and orientation,
F(1,31)=4.12, p<.03 one-tail. To explore this further the
effect of category type on the recognition of upright
exemplars was also analyzed. Familiar upright exemplars
were not recognized significantly better than unfamiliar
upright exemplars, F(1,31)=.96, p=.17, but novel inverted
exemplars were recognized significantly better than familiar
inverted exemplars, F(1,31)=4.11, p<.03 one tail.

Figure 5:The X axis shows the four different stimulus’
conditions, whereas the Y axis shows the mean
discrimination in d-prime (out of 32) for the old/new
recognition phase in Experiment 2.

Discussion
Experiment 2 replicated and strengthened the findings
obtained in Experiment 1a.We were able to increase the
inversion effect for chequerboards by making them easier to
recognize. Thus, our results confirm that an inversion effect
can be induced by familiarizing participants with a category.
We are now also able to comment further on the basis for
this effect. The trend for familiar upright exemplars to be
better recognized than novel upright exemplars was not
itself significant (though the effect was numerically in the
right direction), but this time inverted familiar exemplars
were significantly worse recognized than novel inverted
exemplars. This replicates the finding in McLaren (1997),
and indicates that the inversion effect may be as much to do
with a disadvantage for inverted familiar exemplars as it is

with an advantage for upright familiar exemplars. We return
to this point in the General Discussion.

General Discussion
Experiments 1a, 1b and 2 support the hypothesis that
expertise with a category defined by a prototype leads to an
inversion effect in standard recognition paradigms with
stimuli drawn from that category, and this does not happen
after experience with a category that cannot be defined in
terms of a prototype. Before accepting this assertion,
however, we must establish that the pattern of performance
seen in Experiment 1b was not simply a floor effect when
compared to Experiment 1a. In fact, the data argue against
this interpretation. Performance overall in Experiment 1a
was only marginally better than chance F(1,31)=2.64,
p=.057, confirming that our participants found the task very
difficult. Overall performance in Experiment 1b was
significantly above chance, F(1,31)=8.00, p<.005, however,
so if anything the task with the shuffled chequerboards was
easier, as the categorization results also suggest. It is
unlikely, therefore, that the lack of an inversion effect with
the shuffled chequerboards is due to a floor effect.
There is one aspect of the stimulus construction used this
time in the case of the shuffled chequerboards that does
require further discussion. In the McLaren (1997)
experiments, the rows were shuffled a great deal, and as
such the likelihood of any given row remaining in its base
position was rather low. This meant that the average of all
the shuffled patterns was a set of vertical bands of varying
degrees of grey (depending on the proportion of black
squares in any given column), and this average was not
actually a chequerboard, and so could not be considered as a
prototype of the category. In these experiments we only
shuffle three rows, to equate the number of squares changed
(on average) in Experiments 1 a and 1b, and this means that
the chance of a row not being changed from its base position
is rather high. Given this, the average of all the shuffled
exemplars will now approximate a (slightly blurry)
chequerboard, and the claim that this is no longer a
prototype-defined category is harder to sustain.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that our procedures with
these stimuli lead to a quite different set of results to those
obtained with the standard prototype + noise stimuli used in
Experiments 1a and 2. A more detailed application of the
MKM (McLaren, Kaye and Mackintosh, 1989; further
developed in McLaren and Mackintosh, 2000) model to
these stimuli helps make it clear why this should be so.
Take the stimuli of Experiments 1a and 2 first. Starting
with a base pattern (the prototype), 48 squares are randomly
chosen and then set to black or white at random to create
each exemplar that will, on average, differ by 24 squares
from the prototype. Consider a typical changed square in the
middle of the stimulus. It will be surrounded by 8 squares
that will mostly be those of the base pattern (on average
0.75 of a square of these 8 will have changed). As a
consequence of category pre-exposure, the MKM model

3324

tells us that the elements of a stimulus associate to one
another, and that this allows them to predict one another,
reduce their error scores, and as a consequence their
salience decreases. But, for a changed
square the
predictions from the surrounding elements (which as near
neighbours will be important predictors of this square) will
be wrong, and so the square will have a very high salience
because of it's very high error score. This facilitates
discrimination and recognition based on these changed
features (which define the exemplars). In the case of the
shuffled stimuli in Experiment 1b, because a row is moved
as a whole, the squares either side of a changed square will
be the same as usual for that square and are the best
predictors of that square, even though its location in the
stimulus has altered. The predictions of the other
surrounding squares (on average 5.75 will be unchanged)
will be less important. The essential difference captured by
this analysis is that shuffling rows makes the squares in a
row the best predictors of one another independent of where
that row is in the stimulus, and this acts in opposition to any
salience increase that would be gained from location
specific prediction effects. Thus category pre-exposure will
not be expected to be so beneficial in the shuffled case.
The basis of the inversion effect obtained with prototypedefined categories seems to be in part due to some
advantage for the upright exemplars from the familiar
category. This was significant in McLaren (1997), and
though not independently significant in the studies reported
here, if we assess Experiments 1a and 2 in combination by
deriving the Z-scores based on their probabilities (1.41 and
0.96), summing them and dividing by 2 to get a final Z
we have Z=1.67, p<.05. The explanation of an advantage for
the upright exemplars drawn from the familiar category has
already been given but bears some repetition. During
! elements common to the
categorization, the prototypical
exemplars of a given category will be routinely exposed,
and so will lose salience according to the MKM model
(McLaren and Mackintosh, 2000). By way of contrast, the
elements unique to each exemplar (which the subjects will
have less exposure to), will still have relatively high
salience. Hence, the structure of this prototype-defined
category will ensure that differential latent inhibition of
common and unique elements can happen. This differential
latent inhibition as a consequence of categorization leads to
perceptual learning, which leads to an improved ability to
recognize upright exemplars of the familiar category
because this depends on using the unique elements of
exemplars rather than the ones they share in common. This
advantage would be lost on inversion because subjects are
not familiar with those exemplars in an inverted orientation,
and hence the unique elements of an exemplar would no
longer enjoy a salience advantage over the elements
common to most exemplars and the prototype. On the other
hand, when subjects are presented with exemplars of a novel
category that they have not been pre-exposed to, no
mechanisms for latent inhibition and hence perceptual
learning can apply (at least not straight away) so there will

not be any benefit in recognizing exemplars of that novel
category in their upright orientation. Thus, no significant
inversion effect would be expected, because an inverted
novel chequerboard is just another novel chequerboard.
This leaves us with the evidence that we now have from two
studies that familiarity with a prototype-defined category
will lead to inverted members of that category being less
easily discriminated (McLaren, 1997) or recognized
(Experiment 2 of this paper) than novel controls. The
implications of this finding are far-reaching, because they
suggest that inversion effects, including those with faces,
could depend on a disadvantage for familiar inverted stimuli
as much as on an advantage for familiar upright stimuli. In
fact, it is only experiments of the type reported here which
can reveal this possibility, as the baseline for standard face
inversion experiments is hard to establish. McLaren (1997)
speculates on the possible basis of such a component to the
inversion effect if it were to be established that such a
component exists. We believe that we have now succeeded
in demonstrating that this effect is real, but the explanation
of the disadvantage brought about by inversion will have to
wait for further research.

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this paper was supported by a
Postgraduate studentship and an Exeter Graduate
Fellowship awarded to Ciro Civile.
REFERENCES
Aitken, M.R.F., Bennett, C.H., McLaren, I.P.L., &
Mackintosh, N.J. (1996). Perceptual differentiation during
categorization learning by pigeons. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
22, 43-50.
Diamond, R., & Carey, S.(1986). Why faces are and are not
special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115, 107-117.
McLaren, I.P.L(1997). Categorization and perceptual
learning: An analogue of the face inversion effect. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 50A (2),.
257-273.
McLaren, I.P.L., Kaye, H. and Mackintosh, N.J. (1989). An
associative theory of the representation of stimuli:
applications to perceptual learning and latent inhibition. In
R.G.M. Morris (Ed.) Parallel Distributed Processing Implications for Psychology and Neurobiology. Oxford.
OUP.
McLaren, I.P.L., Leevers, H.L., & Mackintosh, N.J.(1994).
Recognition, categorisation and perceptual learning.
Attention & Performance XV. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
McLaren, I.P.L., & Mackintosh.(2000). An elemental model
of associative learning: latent inhibition and perceptual
learning. Animal Learning & Behaviour, 28 (3), 211-246.
Yin, R. K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145

3325

