UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Philosophers, three year olds &amp; autistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/647665tp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Slezak, Peter

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Philosophers, three year olds & autistics
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science, School of History & Philosophy
University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052 Australia

Abstract

Baffling and Vexatious?

In the ‘false belief’ task (Wimmer and Perner 1983) autistics
and three year olds attribute beliefs based on the objective
truth of a situation in the world rather than what the person
believes on the basis of available information. Several
recalcitrant problems in philosophy are based on the same
mistake in which philosophers take their own knowledge of
the truth rather than the subject’s justified belief as relevant to
belief ascription. Specifically, externalism regarding mental
content rests on intuitions such as those evoked by Putnam’s
Twin Earth example. However, despite its subjective force,
externalism may be undermined by attending to its aetiology
and showing how the intuitions arise from deceptive
mechanisms. Instead of defending internalism directly, I ask:
Why does externalism seem so convincing? This is a
cognitive science of biases and illusions among philosophers.

It is widely acknowledged that externalism has become
established as the dominant view about mental content.
(Egan 1999, Farkas 2003a, Rey 2004, Wikforss 2008).
Moreover, Segal (2000, 24) remarked that underpinning
externalism, “Putnam’s Twin Earth example has become a
sort of paradigm in the philosophies of language and mind.”
However, Fodor (1987a) has noted that the Twin-Earth
Problem “isn’t a problem; it’s just a handful of intuitions
together with a commentary on some immediate
implications of accepting them” (1987a, 208). Significantly,
Fodor writes:
… it is very plausible that all these intuitions hang together.
The question is: What on earth do they hang on? (Fodor
1987, 202).

Keywords: Mental content; semantics; externalism;
internalism; individualism; Twin Earth; intuitions.

Intuitions and Externalism
In confronting certain persistent puzzles, philosophers
resemble the three-year olds and autistics in the false-belief
task of Wimmer and Perner (1983) where belief is ascribed
on the basis of the truth rather than the subject’s justified
beliefs. In these cases, the believer’s internal state of mind
can remain fixed and yet the beliefs can be made to change
from true to false by manipulating the external world. This
is essentially Farkas’ (2003b) reason for pressing the
internalist case regarding mental content on the grounds that
“external features are important only if they are
incorporated into the internal cognitive or experiential
perspective of cognizers.” Farkas (2003b) succinctly
summarizes the moral of the Putnam’s famous Twin Earth
story: “Internally identical subjects … can have different
mental contents.” Similarly in the notorious Gettier
problem, internally identical subjects can have different
“mental contents” if the latter are individuated on the basis
of the truth as known to the theorist but unavailable to the
believer. I will suggest that Quine’s (1960) famous puzzles
concerning propositional attitudes rest on the same
intuitions about beliefs that may be true or false for reasons
entirely independent of the believer’s grounds. The
relevance of these matters to cognitive science lies in
settling interminable debates about the individuation of
mental states by showing that the most widely held
externalist view is based on seductive but misleading
intuitions.

Farkas (2003b) characterizes this “deeply rooted” intuition
as “baffling” and a “vexatious problem” that “poses a
serious challenge for any attempts to give an internalist
analysis” of the familiar thought experiments such as
Putnam’s (1975) Twin Earth scenario. Kripke acknowledges
that he was led by his “natural intuition” to the view that
proper names are rigid designators. Kripke (1972, 42)
wrote:
Of course, some philosophers think that something’s having
intuitive content is very inconclusive evidence in favor of it.
I think it is very heavy evidence in favour of anything,
myself. I really don’t know, in a way, what more conclusive
evidence one can have about anything, ultimately speaking.

Nevertheless, Pietroski (2003) suggests “despite a
considerable literature on this topic, no one has shown that
names do bear any interesting and theoretically tractable
relation to their bearers.” If he is correct, we are owed an
explanation of how so many philosophers could have been
so misguided. Chomsky has characterized the orthodox
philosophical conception of semantics as a kind of illusion.
He says “there is no word-thing relations of the Fregean
variety” since such relations are “mythical” by contrast with
the question of “how the person’s mental representations
enter into articulation and perception” (1996, 23). However,
Fodor (2000) expresses puzzlement about Chomsky’s view
of semantics, saying: “I think it is hard to make sense” of
Chomsky’s remarks and “It’s not so clear that what
Chomsky takes to be semantic truths actually are.”

2128

Chomsky rejects the orthodox semantic conception of a
presumed relation between words and things that he
describes as “obscure” and “perverse” (2000b, 39). He
warns about the “distorting residues of common-sense
understanding” (2000b, 23). In what we might term the
‘NRA thesis’ by analogy with the notorious slogan,
Chomsky (2002, 43) says “Words don’t refer; English
people refer; it’s an act”. Chomsky points to the seductive
intuitions with which I am concerned saying “one would
want to ask why such ideas appear so compelling” (1995,
57). However, where Chomsky (2000b, 148) explicitly
addresses the matter of intuitions underlying Putnam’s story
about the reference of the word “water” on Twin Earth, he
seems sceptical about the prospect of any deeper analysis.
He writes “we can have no intuitions about the question,
because the terms extension, reference, true of, denote, and
others related to them are technical innovations, which mean
exactly what their inventors tell us they mean” Chomsky
(2000b, 148). However, even if we grant Chomsky’s point
in general, it seems clear that certain intuitions may be
induced by the notorious thought experiments that
preoccupy philosophers. These intuitions are not random in
the way that intuitions about technical concepts might be
among the uninitiated. A vast philosophical literature attests
to the existence of systematic, robust and widely shared
intuitions that are at the heart of externalism.

Little Choice?
Chomsky points out that certain externalist questions are
never raised for phonology where there is no sensible notion
of a non-individualist or extra-linguistic object, but with
regard to semantics the analogous, spurious, answers are
assumed to be obvious. It is in regard to this sense of
obviousness that I want to ask why philosophers feel that
these “intuitive responses to a certain kind of thoughtexperiment appear to leave them little choice,” as
Boghossian (1998, 273) puts it. If Farkas and Boghossian
are right about the spurious intuitions driving externalism,
then these may be susceptible to a satisfactory analysis. Like
an explanation of the Müller-Lyer illusion, it may defuse the
intuition even if not curing us of it.

Glue
We see the intuitions at work in certain objections to Egan’s
computational account of content. Some have complained
that the states characterized by a computational theory of
vision are not essentially visual states (Egan 1999, 190).
However, the objection rests on an implicit, illegitimate
criterion. Egan’s examples of computationally individuated
states allegedly fail to be visual not because of any
deficiency in their functional role but only in the sense of
not being viewable by us. It is significant that this irrelevant
criterion underlies the same complaint against Pylyshyn’s
(2003) account of visual imagery. His “tacit knowledge”
account does not posit pictorial representations and are,
therefore, said to be not essentially visual (see Farah 1988,
Slezak 1995). Implicitly, this means the representations are

not intelligible to us as viewers. However, in these cases we
see a tacit reliance on the very intelligence that is to be
explained. It is only from this vantage point that the
contents of mental states appear to be an essential property.
However, Egan notes that, given the right functional role,
visual representations might be auditory and, therefore, “the
content assigned to states of the device by an interpretation
that is appropriate to its normal environment is not an
essential property of the device as computationally
characterized” (1999, 190).
Fodor has referred to this assumed essentiality as the
“glue” that holds representations together with their
vehicles. This is, of course, the concern of Fodor’s earlier
question: What makes a computer program play chess rather
than simulate the Six Day War? (Fodor 1978, 207). Egan
emphasizes that the possibility of alternative semantic
interpretations does not pose a problem for computational
theories. Thus, the computational states of the visual system
might be interpretable as covarying with the fluctuating
stock market index (Egan 1999, 183). However, Fodor and
Lepore present the fundamental puzzle as follows:
What we need to know is what precludes radical mismatches
between intension and extension. Why can’t you have a
sentence that has an inferential role appropriate to the
thought that water is wet, but is true iff 4 is prime? (1992,
171)

Fodor and Lepore say that no adequate semantics could
allow an expression whose intension and extension were so
radically disconnected. They ask “What on earth would it
mean?” (1992, 170) – that is, if the computational,
inferential role and external truth conditions come apart.
This question is very revealing about the intuitions of
interest here. Presumably, this question asks how we might
conceivably understand an expression whose intension and
extension diverged. However, unless it is merely a façon de
parler, the very question suggests that the problem may
arise precisely from conceiving the explanatory problem in
terms of how we might understand mental representations
as distinct from how we might explain them. Here we may
see what lies behind the troublesome intuitions that support
an externalist conception of content, namely, the tacit
reliance on precisely the kind of understanding that is to be
explained.

Mayan Intuitions
Gabriel Segal (2004) objects to Putnam’s and Kripke’s
externalist intuitions, on what seem to be secondary
grounds. He says “there are specific reasons why we should
not trust those intuitions” (2004, 339), namely, that “both
Putnam and Kripke … mistakenly think that their intuitions
are ‘ours’, that they are representative of those of all
sensible, reflective humans” (2004, 340) – a failure of
empirical, anthropological, psychological caution. Segal’s
concern about the apriorism of Putnam and Kripke appears
to arise merely from over-generalizing from their own
unrepresentative intuitions. Accordingly, Segal proceeds to

2129

give anthropological evidence of the variation in intuitions
among the Maya regarding Twin-Earth type questions.
However, even if the Maya all shared the Kripke-Putnam
intuitions, this would hardly establish the metaphysical
claims that are taken to be warranted on their basis. Segal’s
criticism doesn’t address the question of the underlying
source of the intuitions even if they were found to be
universally shared.

Invisible Narrator Illusion
In Crane’s (1996) useful phrase, the question of who is “in
the know” is central to untangling the intuitions at the heart
of the puzzles concerning externalism. We don’t notice our
own role as philosophers or theorists in the very formulation
of the conundrum and our own essential contribution as
observers. Philosophers’ talk of truth and reference adopts
the stance of the invisible narrator of a novel or movie
according to which he, and we, know how things really are.
In the familiar example, we know that Clark Kent is really
Superman. We might ask: Does Lois Lane love Clark Kent?
However, although this problem is essentially Kripke’s case
of Pierre, the puzzles that are generated in this manner are
not too deep for ten year olds to appreciate.
The invisibility of our own role and our own knowledge
creates the illusion that it is the relational fact about how the
world really is that determines the thought or belief in
question. However, the truth about the way the world really
is gets conveyed only via our own tacit knowledge of the
relevant facts. Putnam’s concession that the truth about the
non-psychological world “may take an indeterminate
amount of scientific investigation” is the give-away clue to
the intuition that is leading us astray. The clear conclusion
we must draw from Putnam’s reasoning is that we might
never have discovered that Oscar1 and Oscar2 understood the
term “water” differently. We are to suppose that people
might differ in the meanings of their words and thoughts
regardless of anything we might ever come to learn about
the scientific truths about the world.
As Crane (1996, 293) notes, “the Twin Earth cases are
meant to demonstrate that the world itself can, as it were, fix
the meanings of some of our words.” However, as Fodor
and Crane have argued, such relational properties cannot be
relevant to the intrinsic contents of mental states. The
appearance of relevance arises from our own “being in the
know.” Of course, “omniscience” is to be understood here
only in the sense of knowing what the subject of thought
ascription does not know – the illusion of the invisible
narrator who knows the truth.

Thoughts and their Ascription
Michael Devitt (1984) has made a salutary distinction
between ‘Thoughts and their Ascription’: “Thoughts are one
thing, their ascription another” (Devitt 1984, 385). Devitt
warns “it is a common practice … to use ‘belief’, for
example, where what one means to refer to is belief
ascription” (1984, 389). The failure to respect Devitt’s
distinction is to blame for Kripke’s (1979) “Puzzle About

Belief” in which we seem forced to describe the hapless
Frenchman Pierre as holding contradictory beliefs about
London. He doesn’t know Londres is London, and thinks
Londres est jolie and also ‘London is ugly’. Kripke
acknowledges “I am fully aware that complete and
straightforward descriptions of the situation are possible and
that in this sense there is no paradox” (1979, 895). However,
he insists “none of this answers the original question”
namely “Does Pierre, or does he not, believe that London is
pretty?” He says “I know of no answer to this question that
seems satisfactory … No answer has yet been given (Kripke
1979, 895,6). Kripke is emphatic that talk of ‘what is really
going on’ cannot resolve the problem and, indeed, the
puzzle has remained a source of philosophical debate.
Evidently unconvinced, in a footnote en passant, Fodor
(2008, 76) recently asks “But why on earth should we
suppose that the question [concerning Pierre] has a definite
right answer when it’s phrased that way? And, once one
sees why it doesn’t, why does it matter that it doesn’t?” I
want to give some brief considerations in support of Fodor’s
dismissive attitude.
Chomsky, too, has considered Kripke’s widespread
externalist conception of denotation or reference as
misguided on the grounds that it makes no sense to talk
about the independent existence of such an external object
as London:
A city is both concrete and abstract, both animate and
inanimate: Los Angeles may be pondering its fate grimly,
fearing destruction by another earthquake or administrative
decision. London is not a place. Rather it is at a place, though
it is not the things at that place, which could be radically
changed or moved, leaving London intact. London could be
destroyed and rebuilt, perhaps after millennia, still being
London. (Chomsky 2000, 126).

Thus, Chomsky explains “What is a thing, and if so what
thing it is, depends on specific configurations of human
interests, intentions, goals, and actions” (2000, 137) and
regards the notion of independent reference as “dubious”.
Granting Chomsky’s point, nevertheless it is helpful to
notice that Kripke’s puzzle arises from a different source.
Even if there were such an external real-world object as
London to serve as the referent or denotation, Kripke’s
puzzle can be seen to arise in a different manner – namely,
from the vagaries of belief ascription and not from the
nature of belief about a purported object – a salutary
distinction that has been emphasized in this context by
Devitt (1984).
That is, Kripke’s puzzlement about belief may be
misguided for reasons other than the fact that there is no
such object as London, even if Chomsky is correct in this
claim. If we assume, for the sake of argument that there is
some independent external object, we can see that the
puzzle arises from potential ambiguity of belief ascription.
For example, we can generate Kripke’s puzzle by noting
that Pierre might appear to have contradictory beliefs about
a certain number. That is, by analogy with Kripke’s original

2130

version of the story, Pierre may come to believe both the
following sentences:
(1) The smallest prime is a lucky number.
(2) The even prime is an unlucky number.
Following Kripke’s puzzlement, we might ask “Does Pierre,
or does he not, believe that the number 2 is lucky?” Of
course, as in the original example of London/Londres,
Pierre does not know that the smallest prime and the even
prime are the same number.
Does Lois Lane love Superman? Well, yes and no. As
ten-year olds appreciate, we share the perspective of the
invisible, omniscient narrator when telling these stories and
the apparent “Puzzle about belief” only arises if we
systematically conflate the subject’s beliefs with our own.
That is, just because Lois Lane doesn’t know that Clark
Kent is Superman, we need not ascribe a contradiction to
her beliefs. For the same reason, we need not take seriously
Kripke’s puzzle about Pierre’s beliefs. In particular, in these
cases, we recognize that the source of the problem is not the
supposed existence of the object but rather, “who is in the
know.” In considering Kripke’s (1979) puzzle about belief,
Brandom (1994, 574) alludes to the source of the underlying
intuitions and explains the source of the puzzle in a
revealing manner. He writes:
Individual speakers are not omniscient about the commitments
they undertake by their use of various expressions …

But, of course, we are. That is, in formulating the problem,
we tacitly adopt the vantage point of the invisible narrator’s
omniscience in the sense that we know the relevant facts
about the world that are unknown to the subject whose
semantic contents we wish to characterize. According to
Brandom, the problem in Kripke’s use of this principle
arises from the fact that “the very same words used to avow
the belief are used to report it” (1994, 577), but as he points
out later (1994, 590) “Conceptual contents are essentially
expressively perspectival”
… they can be specified explicitly only from some point of
view, against the background of some repertoire of discursive
commitments, and how it is correct to specify them varies from
one discursive point of view to another. (Brandom 1994, 590)

Ralph, Pierre and Oscar
It seems that the potential ambiguity between styles of
ascription, the equivocation between perspectives, is the
diagnosis for the notorious puzzles of Kripke and Putnam.
We can see how the same ambiguity and the same intuitions
are generated in Quine’s famous sentences:
(1) Ralph believes that the man in the brown hat is a spy.
(2) Ralph does not believe that the man seen at the beach is a spy.

As Quine (1966, 185) had noted, Ralph does not know it but
the men are one and the same, both of the ‘that’-clauses

being about the man Ortcutt. Quine’s puzzle is evidently the
same as Kripke’s puzzle of Pierre’s belief with his question,
“Can we say of this man (Bernard J. Ortcutt, to give him a
name) that Ralph believes him to be a spy?” Quine notes
that we appear to find ourselves accepting a contradiction of
the form that is just like Kripke’s unsolved puzzle about
Pierre.
Putnam’s device of imagining a replica of Oscar, the
person to whom we want to ascribe beliefs, disguises the
same apparent contradiction of Kripke’s Pierre. The
apparent contradiction is avoided only because the one
mind/brain of Pierre is split into the two identical Oscars.
Nevertheless, the Twin Earth puzzle is generated in the
familiar way by substituting into opaque belief contexts.
Thus, Putnam’s Twin Earth puzzle can be seen to fit the
familiar pattern of Quine’s Ralph:
(4) Twin Oscar believes water (XYZ) is wet
(5) Twin Oscar does not believe water (H2O) is wet

In Quine’s case we have Ralph’s different beliefs about the
same object (Ortcutt), and in Putnam’s case we have the
same belief about different objects (H2O and XYZ). In both
cases the puzzle is an artifact of the ascriber’s perspective,
his omniscience in knowing the truth about the objects in
each case. In both cases, the beliefs appear contradictory
only because we the ascribers know the truth.
If we don’t split the subject into identical duplicates as
in the Twin Earth case, we can generate the same puzzle in a
different way by changing the external world. Thus,
Gettier’s subject, too, has a belief (‘There is a sheep in the
paddock’) that happens to be true, though not in virtue of
information available to him but only to us as ascribers, like
the molecular composition of water. Analogous to Putnam’s
stratagem of changing worlds, we can turn the very same
belief from true to false by taking the unseen truth-maker
sheep out of the paddock. Again, we have the same
internalistically individuated belief both true and false
without any internal, intrinsic difference.

What a dubber dubbed?
The intuitions that give rise to the puzzles in this domain
may be understood when seen in another context. The
perspectival shift of attention from the believer to the
ascriber (ourselves as philosophers) appears to be exactly
the basis for Chomsky’s (1959) telling criticisms of Skinner
regarding the very concept of a stimulus and its alleged
independent, external objectivity. Skinner’s identification of
a stimulus involved externally individuating the alleged
causes of behaviour without noticing that these were, in fact,
disguised internally individuated mental contents. We can
see the striking parallel in Farkas’ (2003b) paper in which
she addresses an apparently independent question of Loewer
and Rey (1991, xxv), namely, “the question of what a
dubber dubbed.” Farkas wants to emphasize the aspect of
the subject’s ability to discriminate rather than any external

2131

causal chain that is widely invoked. Loewer and Rey write
in response to historical causal theories:

That knowledge plays a central role in the experiment. … Twin
Earth teaches us that water is required for the word ‘water’ to
name the concept water … but we only learn this because we
know – empirically – that water is the kind actually named by
‘water’. (1998, 278)

… a natural answer to the question of what a dubber dubbed
might be: whatever kind of thing she would discriminate as
that thing; that is, whatever she would apply the thing to, as
opposed to everything she wouldn’t. (Loewer and Rey 1991,
xxv)

Unwittingly it seems, these discussions echo Chomsky’s
response to Skinner’s attempt to ground psychology in
purely, objective external factors. The parallel between
Skinner’s concerns and that of content externalists seems
evident. Farkas replies to Burge’s (1986) view that
perceptual experience is about mind-independent objects
and that our representations specify objects as such:
The only way Burge can get his externalist conclusion is if …
he claims that whatever happens to be there to cause
Sebastian’s experiences … will determine content. … there are
too many properties which all the actual instances could, as a
matter of accident share, and which are external … to the
subject’s cognitive or experiential perspective.

This is an almost verbatim rehearsal of Chomsky’s (1959)
response to Skinner’s project of seeking objective, external
causes of behaviour. The parallel in unrelated debates is
suggestive concerning the intuitions that are at work – in
this case, the illusion that we as theorists and ascribers of
content are not making an essential, unnoticed contribution
which is doing the work.
Chomsky exposed the sham of technical notions such as
“stimulus” illustrating the possible reactions to a painting:
Dutch, or perhaps Clashes with the wallpaper, I thought you
liked abstract work, Never saw it before, Tilted, Beautiful,
Hanging too low, Remember our camping trip last summer?
Chomsky explained the same point Farkas makes against
Burge:
This device is a simple as it is empty. Since properties are free
for the asking … we can account for a wide class of responses
… by identifying the ‘controlling stimuli’. But the word
‘stimulus’ has lost all objectivity in this usage. Stimuli are no
longer part of the outside physical world; they are driven back
into the organism. It is clear from such examples, which
abound, that the talk of ‘stimulus control’ simply disguises a
complete retreat to mentalistic psychology. (1959, 32)

Chomsky shows that the external, objective stimulus is
unknowingly characterized as such on the basis of
assumptions about internal mental processes.

Justified True Belief
Boghossian’s analysis is very suggestive and we may
usefully extrapolate from his characterization of the Twin
Earth thought-experiment. He writes:
Putnam’s original experiment is carried out on a term – ‘water’
– in full knowledge that it does refer to a kind: namely H2O.

Boghossian’s reference to what “we” learn and what “we”
know is a key to the source of the puzzlement in the Twin
Earth story since, of course, what we know as philosophers
telling the story is distinct from what Oscar and Twin Oscar
know. As Boghossian notes, it is a stipulation of the
scenario that Oscar and his twin are not chemists and have
no specific views about the microstructure of water.
Accordingly, since we know the facts of the relevant
chemistry, we may paraphrase Boghossian’s remarks by
saying that Oscar has a justified, true belief about water
unlike Twin Oscar despite being in the same mental state.
Of course, this formulation should elicit a strong sense
of déjà vu. We are reminded of the Gettier Problem (1963),
and I suggest that we may illuminate externalism by
recalling the features of this notorious conundrum. The
intuition that the subject may be ascribed justified belief
while lacking knowledge arises from the fact that he doesn’t
know the truth, as it is known to us. The truth may, indeed
be so recondite as to be unknowable to anyone except the
theorist posing the Gettier puzzle, just like the knowledge of
chemistry in Putnam’s thought-experiment. The puzzle of
Twin Earth arises in the same way because of the semantic
evaluability of mental content. This is the feature that makes
Twin Oscar’s belief about water allegedly different from
Oscar’s despite the identity of their internal states. Oscar’s
belief that he is drinking water is true, but Twin Oscar’s
identical internal mental state is false.
As Burge (1988) puts it, “We take up a perspective on
ourselves from the outside.” Adopting this perspective is
another way of making the point of Boghossian and Farkas:
The truth about the chemical structure of water as H2O and
twin-water as XYZ may never be discovered by people on
either planet. As Farkas observes, “it is difficult to conceive
how the referring intention could, in advance – that is,
before the actual identification of the underlying
composition – legislate about relevant and irrelevant
differences in structure.” We may gloss Farkas’ point by
saying that externalism depends on the theorist’s
omniscience about the chemistry of water in Putnam’s case,
or the existence of a sheep beyond the subject’s ken in
Gettier’s case.
Whether or not Chomsky is right to doubt that there is a
subject of semantics conceived in the usual technical sense
as a relation of words and things, it helps to see the source
of the widespread conviction concerning this relation.
Strawson’s myth of the logically proper name is the illusion
of the invisible narrator.
It seems clear that Gettier’s Problem and Putnam’s
puzzle have the same structure. Like Putnam’s twins, an
identical mental state of Gettier’s subject may be both true
and false. Gettier’s subject is in a mental state which is true
by accident, and therefore the same mental state might

2132

become false if external facts are otherwise. In Chisholm’s
example, if the sheep wanders out of the field, the subject’s
justified true belief that there is a sheep in the field becomes
false although there is no change in the internal mental state
of the subject. Like the Twin Earth scenario, Gettier cases
demonstrate the independence of internal mental states from
the truths of the external world.
For this reason, the Gettier sheep example is
suggestively similar to Fodor’s (1987, 107) illustration of
misrepresentation in which a token mental representation
‘horse’ is caused by a cow. The parallel may be seen in
Fodor’s characterisation of the hapless frog who is faced
with a moving lead pellet rather than a fly. As Fodor puts it,
this is a case in which the “world has gone wrong,” as we
might also say in the Gettier and Putnam cases.

Relevance for Cognitive Science
Does the speedometer misrepresent the speed of a bicycle
when it is on rollers and not moving? It doesn’t matter how
we might choose to answer this question since the theory of
speedometers just like psychology has no obligation to
explain why the world may go wrong. Once we see the
source of the puzzlement, like the question of Lois Lane’s
beliefs about Clark Kent, it remains unclear what interest
the invisible narrator’s ‘God’s eye’ perspective holds for
any scientific psychological issue concerning mental
representations and their semantic content.
The wider interest of these matters lies in their bearing
on disputes in cognitive science concerning the study of
mental representations. Farkas (2003), Wikforss (2008) and
Boghossian (1998) have noted that externalism has become
the orthodoxy about mental content, arising from the
intuitions underlying Putnam’s and Kripke’s puzzles.
However, the internalist alternative is succinctly stated by
Schantz (2004: 23): “As far as psychological explanation is
concerned, what counts is how the world is internally
represented as being, not how the world really is.” Farkas’
(2003), too, argues that “external features are important only
if they are incorporated into the internal cognitive or
experiential perspective of cognizers.” Seeing why PutnamKripke externalist intuitions are illusory helps to strengthen
the growing internalist opposition.

References
Boghossian, P. 1998. What the Externalist Can Know A
Priori, in C. Wright, B.C. Smith & C. Macdonald eds.,
Knowing Our Own Minds, Oxford.
Brandom, R. 1994. Making It Explicit, Harvard.
Burge, T. 1986. Cartesian Error and the Objectivity of
Perception, in P. Pettit and J. McDowell, Subject, Thought
and Content, Clarendon Press, 117-36.
Burge, T. 1988. Individualism and Self-Knowledge, The
Journal of Philosophy, 85, 649-63.
Chomsky, N. 1959. Review of Skinner’s Verbal Behavior,
Language, 35, 1, 26-58.
Chomsky, N. 1995. Language and Nature, Mind, 104, 1-61.

Chomsky, N. 2000. New Horizons in the Study of Language
and Mind, Cambridge.
Chomsky, N. 2002. An Intervew with Noam Chomsky, The
Harvard Review of Philosophy, vol. x
Crane, T. 1996. All the Difference in the World, in A.
Pessin & S. Goldberg eds., The Twin Earth Chronicles,
Sharpe
Devitt, M. 1984. Thoughts and their Ascription, Peter A.
French, Theodore E. Uehling and Howard K. Wettstein
eds., Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. IX, 385-420:
University of Minnesota Press.
Egan, F. 1999. In Defence of Narrow Mindedness, Mind &
Language, 14, 2, 177-194.
Farkas, K. 2003a. What is Externalism? Philosophical
Studies, 112, 187-208.
Farkas, K. 2003b. Does Twin Earth Rest on a Mistake?
Croatian Journal of Philosophy, III/8, 155-69.
Fodor, J.A. 1978. Tom Swift and His Procedural
Grandmother, in RePresentations, 1981, MIT, 204-224.
Fodor, J.A. 1987a. Individualism and Supervenience, in A.
Pessin & S. Goldberg eds., The Twin Earth Chronicles,
New York: M.E Sharpe, 1996.
Fodor, J.A. 2000. It’s All in the Mind, Times, June 23.
Gettier, E.L. 1963. Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?
Analysis, 23, 121-3.
Kripke, S. 1972. Naming and Necessity, Harvard.
Kripke, S. 1979. A Puzzle About Belief, in P. Ludlow ed.,
Readings in the Philosophy of Language, MIT Press.
Loewer, B. & Rey, G. 1991. Meaning in Mind: Fodor and
his Critics, Blackwell.
Pietroski, P.M. 2003. The Character of Natural Language
Semantics in A. Barber ed., Epistemology of Language,
Oxford.
Putnam, H. 1975. The Meaning of Meaning, in Mind,
Language and Reality: Philosophical Papers Volume 2,
Cambridge, 215-271.
Pylyshyn, Z. 2003. Seeing and Visualizing, , MIT Press.
Quine, W.V. 1966. The Ways of Paradox, Random House.
Rey, G. 2004. Millikan’s (Un?)Compromised Externalism,
in R. Schantz ed., The Externalist Challenge, de Gruyter.
Schantz, R. ed. 2004. The Externalist Challenge, de Gruyter
Segal, G.M.A. 2004. Reference, Causal Powers, Externalist
Intuitions and Unicorns, in R. Schantz eds., The
Externalist Challenge, de Gruyter.
Slezak, P. 1995. The ‘Philosophical’ Case Against Visual
Imagery, in P. Slezak, T. Caelli and R. Clark eds.,
Perspectives on Cognitive Science, Ablex.
Slezak, P. 2002. The Tripartite Model of Representation,
Philosophical Psychology, 15, 3, 239-270.
Slezak, P. 2004. The World Gone Wrong? Images, Illusions,
Mistakes and Misrepresentations, in H. Clapin, P. Staines
& P. Slezak eds., Representation in Mind, Elsevier.
Wikforss, A. 2008. Semantic Externalism and Psychological
Externalism, Philosophy Compass, 3/1, 158-181.
Wimmer, H. & Perner, J. 1983. Beliefs about beliefs.
Cognition, 13, 103-28.

2133

