UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pragmatic expectations and coreference: how alternative constructions and referring
expressions can serve as cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/65d311dt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Baumann, Peter
Konieczny, Lars
Hemforth, Barbara

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pragmatic expectations and coreference: how alternative constructions and
referring expressions can serve as cues
Peter Baumann (peter.baumann@mars.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Romance Languages and Literature, University of Freiburg, Platz der Universität 3
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany

Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany

Barbara Hemforth (barbara.hemforth@parisdescartes.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et de Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Abstract
This paper addresses the question whether possible alternative
constructions and alternative choices of referring expressions
influence the resolution of anaphoric expressions. We present
a questionnaire, a self-paced reading study and a corpus analysis, suggesting that alternative constructions and referring expressions help to constitute preferences for anaphora in referentially ambiguous sentences and also affect on-line sentence
processing.
Keywords: Anaphora resolution, pragmatics, conversational
implicatures, pronouns, sentence processing

Introduction
In many languages, the interpretation of non-reflexive pronouns is sensitive to a variety of factors. On the structural and
syntactic level, there is evidence indicating a general preference for the first-mentioned antecedent (Gernsbacher & Hargreaves, 1988) and for the subject (Järvikivi, Gompel, Hyönä,
& Bertram, 2005), while on the pragmatic/discourse level,
topicality (Givón, 1983), the chain of causality, and general
discourse relations (Sanders, 1997; Kehler, 2002) have been
shown to influence anaphora resolution. One may thus argue that anaphora resolution is driven by the interaction of
grammatical rules and pragmatic constraints, with the former
being language-specific and the latter reflecting general principles of human cognition (cf. Thornton, Gil, & MacDonald,
1998).
One prominent set of pragmatic constraints are the conversational maxims formulated by Grice (1975), which listeners
rely on and speakers exploit to convey meaning beyond the
level of what is actually said. Out of the four maxims, two are
of special interest here: the maxim of quantity (‘do not make
your contribution more informative than is required’) and the
maxim of manner (‘avoid ambiguity’). They are the basis for
most conversational implicatures used to describe the roles
of different referring expressions in anaphora resolution. One
such example is the contrast between pronouns and reflexives
in English (Levinson, 1987): reflexives are more informative
than pronouns in the sense that they entail immediate coreference and are to be bound within the local domain. When
hearing a pronoun, a listener can thus infer that the speaker

does not mean immediate coreference, because if so he would
have used a reflexive.
While most work on conversational implicatures in
anaphora resolution focuses on the role of alternative referring expressions, we would like to suggest that implicatures
can also be formed on the basis of constructions, more specifically on possible alternative constructions that were not used.

Alternative Constructions
For the domain of relative clause attachment one such example of a conversational implicature based on alternative constructions can be found in Frazier and Clifton (1996): in order to explain why in sentences like (1) English shows low
attachment (i.e. the colonel had an accident), while Spanish
and many other languages prefer high attachment (as reported
by Mitchell, Cuetos, & Corley, 1992), one may consider that
English has an alternative construction to unambiguously express high attachment: the Saxon genitive (2). An English
listener can presuppose that the speaker obeys the Gricean
maxim of manner and chooses the most appropriate construction. In the referentially ambiguous sentence (1a), the listener
can thus assume that the speaker intended a low-attachment
reading, because he could have used the alternative construction to unambigously express high attachment. For a Spanish
speaker, on the other hand, there is only one way to express
sentence (1b), and so the listener must assume that the more
‘prominent’ attachment site was intended by the speaker.
(1) a.
b.

The daughter of the colonel who had an accident . . .
La hija del coronel que tuvo un accidente . . .

(2)

The colonel’s daughter who had an accident . . .

First evidence that alternative constructions might also play
a role in anaphora resolution was presented by Hemforth,
Colonna, Pynte, and Konieczny (2004). In a cross-linguistic
comparison they showed that sentences like (3) are interpreted differently in German and French: while Germans
consider the subject ‘Polizist’ (‘policeman’) as the antecedent
of the pronoun, speakers of French prefer the object ‘facteur’
(‘postman’).

3293

(3) a.
b.

(4)

Le policier a rencontré le facteur avant qu’il rentre
chez lui.
Der Polizist hat den Briefträger getroffen, bevor er
nach Hause ging.
The policeman met the postman before he went
home.

In the remainder of this paper we present two experiments,
a questionnaire and a self-paced reading study, and a corpus analysis. In the questionnaire we investigated the role of
pronouns and alternative constructions as cues to determine
coreference in Portuguese, partially replicating the findings
of Hemforth et al. (2004). In the self-paced reading study we
examined if the effect of alternative constructions on pronoun
resolution also shows up in on-line sentence processing.

Le policier a rencontré le facteur avant de rentrer
chez lui.
The policeman met the postman before going home.

Questionnaire

These differences can be explained in terms of a conversational implicature: in French there is an alternative infinitive
construction (4) for sentences like (3a), which allows to unambiguously express coreference of the subject of the second
verb with the subject of the matrix clause. Therefore, speakers and listeners of French take the object of the matrix clause
as the antecedent of the pronoun, while Germans cannot do
so, because no such alternative construction exists in German.
In order to find out, whether the object preference in French
avant que-clauses may indeed be the result of a conversational implicature, coreference patterns should be investigated in other languages that possess two (or more) interchangeable constructions with different degrees of referential
ambiguity. One such language is Portuguese.
As a closely related Romance language, Portuguese provides the same two before-constructions (5) as French.

The influence of the existence of a referentially unambiguous infinitive construction on anaphora resolution in ambiguous sentences containing the Portuguese conjunction ‘antes
que’ (‘before’) was examined by comparing the antecedent
choices in antes que-clauses with the choices of antecedents
in a referentially ambiguous second main clause, which was
introduced by ‘depois’ (‘after that’), a conjunction expressing
the same temporal configuration, but having no alternative infinitive construction. Additionally, we examined the role of
the referring expression itself by either using or omitting the
pronoun.

Materials and Design

But unlike French, Portuguese is a pro-drop language and allows to omit the pronoun ‘ele’ (‘he’) in (5a). The use or omission of the pronoun constitutes an alternative and may thus
form the basis of yet another conversational implicature, this
time based on the Gricean maxim of quantity.

We constructed 16 referentially ambiguous Portuguese sentences like (6), containing the conjunctions ‘antes que’ (‘before’) and ‘depois’ (‘after that’). The verbs of the (first) main
clauses were chosen to express no implicit causality and not
to explicitly focus on either one of the referents. To minimize possible gender effects, half of the sentences contained
female referents and the two referents in one sentence were
chosen to be comparably stereotypical. Other possible semantic or pragmatic effects were controlled by switching the
grammatical role of the two referents for half of participants.
In addition, we varied whether a pronoun was used or not
in the second clause, thus yielding a 2 × 2 design with the
factors Clause Type (main clauses (‘depois’) vs. subordinate
clause (‘antes que’)) and Pronoun (with pronoun vs. without
pronoun).

Referring Expressions

(6) a.

(5) a.

b.

O polícia encontrou o carteiro antes que ele fosse
para casa.
The policeman met the postman before he went
home.
O polícia encontrou o carteiro antes de ir para casa.
The policeman met the postman before going home.

A rather elaborate formulation of the maxim of quantity for
referring expressions is the Accessibility Scale (Ariel, 1990),
which states that lexically less informative anaphora tend to
refer to more salient antecedents. For the special case of
null pronouns and full pronouns the maxim of quantity was
formulated in purely structural terms as the Position of Antecedent Hypothesis (Carminati, 2002, PAH). It says that null
pronouns prefer to retrieve an antecedent in the (highest) Spec
IP, usually the subject, whereas full pronouns prefer an antecedent in a lower syntactic position. The PAH was formulated using Italian data and seems to be consistent with data
from Spanish (Alonso-Ovalle, Fernández-Solera, Frazier, &
Clifton., 2002), Romanian (Geber, 2006) and Catalan (Perera
& Bel, 2011). And so, one might assume that it holds for
Portuguese, too.

b.

c.

d.

O pintor viu o pescador, antes que ele abrisse a
janela.
The painter saw the fisherman before he opened the
window.
O pintor viu o pescador. Depois ele abriu a janela.
The painter saw the fisherman. After that he opened
the window.
O pintor viu o pescador, antes que abrisse a janela.
The painter saw the fisherman before (he) opened
the window.
O pintor viu o pescador. Depois abriu a janela.
The painter saw the fisherman. After that (he)
opened the window.

In addition to the stimulus sentences, 32 unrelated filler sentences were constructed, containing pronouns in object position or ambiguously attached relative clauses. All sentences

3294

(7)

Percentage of subject answers
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.8

were followed by a paraphrase of the second clause, containing a gap to fill in:
abriu a janela.

O

Ten native speakers of Portuguese, mainly students from the
Instituto Superior Técnico in Lisbon (Portugal), volunteered
to fill out the questionnaire. The 16 stimulus sentences were
divided into four lists, such that each list contained exactly
one condition of each item, and in any given list, each condition occurred the same number of times. Each list was combined with the filler items and randomized for each participant. The questionnaire consisted of six pages and a cover
sheet, which informed the participants that there were no incorrect responses to the questions and that they were supposed to answer spontaneously.

0.0

Participants and Procedure

with pronoun
without pronoun

antes que

depois
Conjunction

Figure 1: Relative frequencies of choosing subject coreference

Results
The relative over-all distribution of antecedent choices for the
two clause types is shown in Table 1. In the main clauses
(‘depois’) condition, we observe a strong subject preference
for the pronoun (≈ 79 %), while in the subclause (‘antes que’)
condition the object is slightly preferred (≈ 61 %) to the subject. The preferences become clearer when looking at both

effects are based on the z-statistics. Table 2 shows the results
Table 2: Logistic mixed effects model results for the questionnaire data

Table 1: Relative frequencies of choosing subject or object

Object
Subject

subclause (‘antes que’)
0.61
0.39

(Intercept)
Pronoun
Clause Type
Pronoun × Clause

main clauses (‘depois’)
0.21
0.79

factors, as shown in Figure 1. Without pronoun, the subject
preference in the main clauses (‘depois’) condition is very
clear (≈ 95%), while in sentences with pronoun we observe a
strong object preference in the subclause (‘antes que’) condition (≈ 83%). In the other two cases, the main clauses
(‘depois’) condition in sentences with pronouns and the subclause (‘antes que’) condition in sentences without pronouns,
we observe a slight subject preference. To further evaluate
these results, we fitted a logistic mixed-effects model to the
questionnaire data, predicting (subject) answers by the two
experimental factors Clause Type and Pronoun as fixed effects. To account for inter-individual differences among participants and words, we included the random factors participant and item into the model. For the experimental factors,
labels were transformed into numerical values, and centered
prior to analysis, so as to have a mean of 0 and a range of
1. This procedure minimizes collinearity between variables,
and, in combination with sum coding of contrasts, allows coefficients to be interpreted in an analogous way to the main effects and interactions in an Analysis of Variance. The analysis
yields estimates, standard errors and z-values for each fixed
effect and interaction.1 The reported p-values for the main
1 Analyses were carried out using the statistical software R and
the lme4 package for mixed effects models.

Estimate
0.66
-2.55
2.67
-0.36

Std. Error
0.41
0.56
0.53
1.03

z
1.62
-4.59
5.07
-0.35

pz
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.73

of the logistic mixed-effects regression, indicating that there
are reliable main effects of Clause Type (z = 5.07, p < .001)
and Pronoun (z = −4.59, p < .001), but no interaction between the two.

Discussion
Our results show that the existence of a referentially unambiguous alternative construction does influence the resolution
of an anaphor in an ambiguous sentence, thus replicating the
findings of Hemforth et al. (2004). In addition, our results
indicate that the use or omission of a pronoun itself constitutes an alternative that influences the establishment of coreference in a way that a non-subject antecedent is considered
more likely if a pronoun is encountered in a sentence where
it could be omitted. This supports the Position of Antecedent
Hypothesis (Carminati, 2002) and is in line with the above
mentioned results found in other Romance languages. The
two effects, the alternative construction for the conjunction
‘antes que’ (‘before’) and the use of the pronoun seem to
be additive and thus independent. When they both add up,
they yield a strong object preference for the pronoun, which
is comparable to the one found in French by Hemforth et al.
(2004).

3295

Reading Study
Although the results of the questionnaire suggest that alternative constructions are considered during the process of
anaphora resolution, there is at least one alternative explanations for our findings, namely that anaphora resolution within
and across sentences is governed by different mechanisms
(see e.g. Miltsakaki, 2002). To exclude such an explanation and to investigate, whether the effect of alternative constructions also shows up in on-line sentence processing, we
conducted a self-paced reading experiment, comparing the effect of two different subordinating conjunctions, one of them,
‘antes que’ (‘before’) having an alternative infinitive construction, the other one, ‘quando’ (‘when’), not. Since the
effects of alternative constructions and pronoun use turned
out to be additive, we restricted ourselves to further examining only the effect of the former.

Design and Materials
Twenty-four unambiguous experimental items like (8) were
constructed, varying the factors Antecedent = Subject vs. Object and Conjunction = ‘antes que’ (‘before’) vs. ‘quando’
(‘when’), yielding a 2 × 2 design.

d.

As for the questionnaire, the verbs of the main clauses were
chosen to express no implicit causality and not to explicitly
focus on either one of the referents. To minimize possible
gender effects, the two referents in one sentence where chosen to be comparably stereotypical for their respective gender. In addition to the stimulus sentences, 48 unrelated filler
sentences without any pronouns were constructed.

Participants and Procedure
Twenty-four native speakers of Portuguese, mostly students
from the Catholic University of Portugal in Lisbon, volunteered to participate in the experiment. The sentences were
presented in a stationary window self-paced-reading fashion,
i.e. participants pressed the spacebar to reveal each word of
the sentence. As a new word appeared in the center of the
screen, the preceding word disappeared. After the last word

520

540

Results

Reading times
500
480

c.

We expect effects to occur on the pronoun and the next word
(spill-over), because in self-paced reading, effects often spill
over to the next word (Sanford & Garrod, 1989). Faster reading times are assumed to reflect easier processing and higher
predictability (Levy, 2008), and so we expect reduced reading
times on the pronoun and the spill-over after ‘antes que’ (‘before’) if the pronoun refers to the object, compared to when
the pronoun refers to the subject. After ‘quando’ (‘when’) we
do not expect any difference in reading times between a pronoun referring to the subject and one referring to the object.

460

b.

O polícia encorajou a actriz, antes que ele voltasse
para casa.
The policeman encouraged the actress before he
went home.
O polícia encorajou a actriz, antes que ela voltasse
para casa.
The policeman encouraged the actress before she
went home.
O polícia encorajou a actriz, quando ele voltou para
casa.
The policeman encouraged the actress when he went
home.
O polícia encorajou a actriz, quando ela voltou para
casa.
The policeman encouraged the actress when she
went home.

Hypotheses

Antecedent
Object
Subject

440

(8) a.

of each item, a forced-choice comprehension question was
presented and participants were not informed about the correctness of their responses. The experiment was set up using the self-paced reading software Linger, which recorded
the time between key-presses and the correctness of the responses. Items were randomized and rotated onto four lists,
such that each sentence was presented in only one condition
to each participant and that each condition appeared the same
number of times. Before the experiment started, participants
read a description of the procedure to follow and were told to
read the sentences as naturally as possible and to treat them
as completely independent of one another.

antes que

quando
Conjunction

Figure 2: Mean and standard error of raw reading times on
the pronoun
Mean reading times on the pronoun and the spill-over are
shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively. Residual reading times were calculated by fitting a linear mixed-effects
model predicting logarithm transformed reading times of all
words from word length, correctness of answers and item
type. To account for inter-individual differences and longitudinal effects of training or fatigue, we included the random
factor participant with item position in the experiment as random slope. The estimated residual log-transformed reading
times on the pronoun and the spill-over were analyzed for effects of the experimental factors Antecedent and Conjunction

3296

580
480

Reading times
500 520 540

560

faster reading times on the pronoun and the spill-over when
the pronoun referred to the object of the preceding clause and
followed the conjunction ‘antes que’ (‘before’), this might indicate that alternative constructions are being considered and
lead to pragmatic expectations based on the respective conversational implicature. However, our results cannot exclude
the alternative explanation (see e.g. Gennari & MacDonald,
2009) that the effects found here directly mirror the statistical
distributions of coreference preferences for specific constructions. This question will be addressed in the following corpus
analysis.

440

460

Antecedent
Object
Subject
antes que

Corpus Study

quando

In more recent work, Hemforth et al. (2010) report the results
of a questionnaire and a visual-world experiment conducted
in English. Like French, English also has an alternative construction for subordinate clauses starting with ‘before’:

Conjunction

Figure 3: Mean and standard error of raw reading times on
the spill-over

(9) a.
type, using a linear mixed effects model with these two fixed
effects and item as random factor. As in the logistic regression, labels of the experimental factors were transformed into
numerical values, and centered prior to analysis, so as to have
a mean of 0 and a range of 1. The analysis yields estimates,
standard errors and t-values for each fixed effect and interaction. The reported p-values for the main effects are based
on Monte-Carlo-Markov-Chain (MCMC) sampling. Table 3

b.

Table 3: Linear mixed effects model results on the pronoun
Estimate Std. Error
t pMCMC
(Intercept)
0.02
0.01
1.74
0.08
Antecedent
0.05
0.03
1.86
0.06
Conjunction
0.02
0.03
0.68
0.50
Ante. × Conj.
-0.12
0.06 -2.09
0.04

Table 4: Linear mixed effects model results on the spill-over
Estimate Std. Error
t pMCMC
(Intercept)
-0.02
0.02 -1.19
0.24
Antecedent
0.07
0.03
2.18
0.03
Conjunction
0.06
0.03
2.09
0.04
Ante. × Conj.
-0.13
0.06 -2.05
0.04
and Table 4 show the results of the linear mixed-effects model
on the pronoun and the spill-over, respectively. On the pronoun we find a reliable interaction of Antecedent and Conjunction type (t = −2.09, p < .05). On the spill-over, both
Antecedent (t = 2.18, p < .05) and Conjunction (t = 2.09,
p < .05) showed significant main effects and a reliable interaction (t = −2.05, p < .05).

Discussion
The results of the self-paced reading study show that the interpretational preferences of pronouns can be observed during
on-line sentence processing. As participants showed reliably

The policeman met the postman before he went
home.
The policeman met the postman before going home.

A purely Gricean account would thus predict that English patterns with French with respect to pronoun resolution, but the
results of Hemforth et al. (2010) show a clear subject preference for the pronoun, though not as strong as the one found
in German. The authors thus adopt a frequency-based explanation and show that the preferences found in questionnaires
and visual-world experiments match frequencies obtained in
a ‘small-scale’ corpus analysis. Such an explanation can also
be applied to the Portuguese data presented above. However,
it remains to be be explained, where the differing preferences
in different languages originally come from (for a critical discussion of processing theories based on frequency alone, see
Frazier & Clifton, 1996). Conversational implicatures and the
Gricean maxims might provide such an explanation.
One possible reason why English does not show the coreference pattern of French may be that speakers of English do
not perceive the before doing-construction in (9b) as an alternative construction for a subordinate clause starting with ‘before’. One might e.g. argue that the before doing-construction
is preferably found in written registers as opposed to spoken
language.
One necessary condition for a construction to be perceived
as an alternative is to be frequent and so a good start is to examine the frequencies of the alternative constructions in our
three languages. In order to do so, we analyzed the Europarl
corpus (Koehn, 2005), a parallel corpus of approximately 55
million words (per language), which was extracted from the
proceedings of the European Parliament. In the French and
Portuguese part of the corpus, we searched for the strings
‘avant que’, ‘avant qu’’, and ‘antes que’. The number
of hits was interpreted as the number of subordinate clauses.
For the alternative construction, we searched for ‘avant de’
and ‘antes de’, and looked at the word immediately follow-

3297

ing these strings. If it was either an object pronoun or a word
with an infinitive ending, it was counted as an instance of
the alternative construction. The English part of the Europarl
corpus has an annotation of phrasal nodes, and so subordinate
clauses were counted based on all hits of the string ‘before’
that were not annotated as part of a prepositional phrase (PP),
while for the alternative construction all other hits were used.
Table 5: Corpus counts

subordinate clause
alternative construction
ratio

Portuguese
376
3729
9.91

French
1917
3043
1.58

English
7460
1725
0.23

Table 5 shows the results of our analysis: in both French
and Portuguese, the alternative infinitive construction is more
frequent than the corresponding subordinate clause. This
is in striking contrast to English, where the before doingconstruction is more than 4 times less frequent than a beforeclause. One may therefore assume that the English before doing-construction is not frequent enough not be considered as
an alternative construction for a subordinate ‘before’-clause.

Conclusion
We presented evidence that conversational implicatures based
on alternative constructions and the form of referring expressions influence the resolution of anaphora in referentially ambiguous sentences.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Daniel Müller and Christoph Wolk for
many fruitful discussions. We are very grateful to all the volunteers who participated in our experiments, and to Padre
Hugo dos Santos, Catarina Matos Correia and Frederico
Fiúza, who helped recruiting them.

References
Alonso-Ovalle, L., Fernández-Solera, S., Frazier, L., &
Clifton., C. (2002). Null vs. overt pronouns and the topicfocus articulation in spanish. Rivista di Linguistica, 14(2),
1–19.
Ariel, M. (1990). Accessing noun-phrase antecedents. London: Routledge.
Carminati, M. N. (2002). The Processing of Italian Subject
Pronouns. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (1996). Construal. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Geber, D. (2006). Processing subject pronouns in relation
to non-canonical (quirky) constructions. Cahiers Linguistiques d’Ottawa/Ottawa Papers in Linguistics, 34, 47–61.
Gennari, S., & MacDonald, M. (2009). Linking production
and comprehension processes: The case of relative clauses.
Cognition, 111, 1–23.

Gernsbacher, M. A., & Hargreaves, D. J. (1988). Accessing sentence participants: The advantage of first mention.
Journal of Memory and Language, 27(6), 699–717.
Givón, T. (1983). Topic Continuity in Discourse: A Quantitative Cross-Language Study. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Speech Acts. Academic Press.
Hemforth, B., Colonna, S., Pynte, J., & Konieczny, L. (2004).
Pronoun resolution across languages. 10th Annual Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing (AMLaP).
Hemforth, B., Konieczny, L., Scheepers, C., Colonna, S.,
Schimke, S., Baumann, P., et al. (2010). Language specific
preferences in anaphor resolution: Exposure or gricean
maximes? In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 2218–2223). Portland, USA: Cognitive Science Society.
Järvikivi, J., Gompel, R. P. van, Hyönä, J., & Bertram, R.
(2005). Ambiguous pronoun resolution: Contrasting the
first-mention and subject-preference accounts. Psychological Science, 16(4), 260–264.
Kehler, A. (2002). Coherence, Reference and the Theory of
Grammar. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical
machine translation. MT Summit.
Levinson, S. C. (1987). Pragmatics and the grammar of
anaphora: A partial pragmatic reduction of binding and
control phenomena. Journal of Linguistics, 23(2), 379–
434.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106(3), 1126–1177.
Miltsakaki, E. (2002). Towards an aposynthesis of topic continuity and intrasentential anaphora. Computational Linguistics, 28(3), 319–355.
Mitchell, D. C., Cuetos, F., & Corley, M. M. B. (1992). Statistical versus linguistic determinants of parsing bias: crosslinguistic evidence. 5th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing.
Perera, J., & Bel, A. (2011). Propietats pragmàtiques i gramaticals en el desenvolupament de la coreferència pronominal. Zeitschrift für Katalanistik, 24.
Sanders, T. J. M. (1997). Semantic and pragmatic sources of
coherence: On the categorization of coherence relations in
context. Discourse Processes, 24, 119-147.
Sanford, A. J., & Garrod, S. C. (1989). What, when, and
how?: Questions of immediacy in anaphoric reference resolution. Language and Cognitive Processes, 4(3&4), 235–
262.
Thornton, R., Gil, M., & MacDonald, M. (1998). Accounting for crosslinguistic variation: A constraint-based perspective. In D. Hillert (Ed.), Syntax and semantics: A
crosslinguistic perspective (Vol. 31, pp. 211–225). Academic Press.

3298

