UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probability-matching in 10-month-old infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8t79q5rc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Davis, Sarah
Newport, Elissa
Aslin, Richard

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probability-matching in 10-month-old infants
Sarah J. Davis (sdavis@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14607 USA

Elissa L. Newport (newport@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14607 USA

Richard N. Aslin (aslin@cvs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14607 USA
Abstract
Evidence from the probability learning literature indicates that
when presented with simple situations that require making
predictions, adults tend to probability match whereas children
are likely to show maximization (Stevenson & Weir, 1959;
Weir, 1964). The reason for this developmental difference is
not fully understood, but one possibility investigated here is
that children have fewer resources available to differentiate
among the probabilities of the competing alternatives. To
investigate this hypothesis at its origin, we used an
anticipatory eye movement paradigm to gather twoalternative choice responses from 10-month-old infants. In
two experiments we presented infants with either an entirely
predictable (100-0%) or a probabilistic (70-30%) series of
visual events. Infants showed evidence of probability
matching rather than maximizing. These results are discussed
in the context of alternative explanations for maximizing and
the utility of eye-tracking as a window on infants’ probability
learning.
Keywords: Probability learning; probability matching; eyetracking; infants

Introduction
As we explore our world, we sample from our environment
in order to make predictions about future events and to
assess the likelihood of receiving rewards. For example,
evidence from the statistical learning literature indicates that
adults, infants, and animals can extract information about
the distributional properties of visual and auditory stimuli in
the absence of a task (Fiser & Aslin, 2001, 2002; Kirkham
et al., 2002; Saffran et al., 1996a,b; Toro & Trabalón, 2005).
Evidence from the causal learning literature indicates that
young children are sensitive to event contingencies (Gopnik
et al., 2004).
This ability to track and store information about
probabilities allows learners to adjust their behavior to
maximize their predictions and their receipt of rewards,
even when there is not a perfect correlation between events
and their outcomes. When faced with the task of predicting
future events in an uncertain environment a learner has two
strategies. One is to make predictions that directly match the
exposure probabilities observed in the environment, a
pattern known as probability matching. The other is to

always choose the more common outcome, a pattern known
as maximization.
In the context of reward prediction, an ideal learner
should choose the action that maximizes the overall rate of
reward. However, evidence from the probability learning
literature indicates that adults tend to probability match
rather than maximize, at least in simple situations (Gardner,
1957; Weir, 1964, 1972). In the classic probability learning
experiment, Gardner (1957) presented participants with two
light bulbs and asked them on each trial to predict which
light would illuminate. After participants made a choice,
one of the bulbs would turn on. One bulb turned on 70% of
the time and the other bulb 30% of the time. If the
participants were probability matching (i.e., picking the
70% light on 70% of the trials and the 30% light on 30% of
the trials), then their overall accuracy would average 58%
correct. If, on the other hand, learners chose the 70% light
on every trial, their overall accuracy would be 70% correct.
In this situation, maximizing on the more probable
alternative is the better strategy because it leads to higher
overall accuracy. Yet under most circumstances, adults
typically probability match.
Whether adults show probability matching or maximizing
on a given task can be influenced by a number of factors,
including the contingency of the feedback (Weir, 1972) and
the number of response alternatives. For example, when the
number of alternatives increases, participants are more
likely to show maximizing behavior in both visual tasks
(Gardner, 1957; Weir 1964) and auditory language learning
experiments (Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009).
The age of participants is also related to performance in
these tasks, with the youngest children often exhibiting the
highest rates of maximizing behavior (Austin & Newport,
unpublished manuscript; Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009;
Stevenson & Weir, 1959; Weir, 1964). When given access
to the same input, why might children act differently than
adults? It seems unlikely that they are better strategizers
than adults. Rather this behavior could be based on their
greater cognitive limitations, either in their representations
of the world or their use of those representations.
When a learner comes into an environment where there
are two possible outcomes, such as the two light bulb task, it

3011

is plausible that expectations will be equally divided
between the two events. With each new piece of data (i.e.,
which light bulb actually turns on during that trial),
expectations will be updated. After sufficient exposure to
the environmental events, a skilled learner should have
formed expectations that match the frequency of the
observed events (i.e., probability matching). One possible
explanation for why children are more likely to maximize
than adults is that their representation of events in the
environment may be less nuanced. Rather than having a
representation that matches the frequencies found in their
input, they might have a representation that is more
weighted towards the most commonly experienced outcome
because they do not accurately perceive or store the lower
probabilities. If the young learner is biased to focus
attention on the more salient (i.e., common) event
probability, then this could lead to the maximizing behavior
observed in many tasks.
A second possibility for these behavioral age differences
is that adults and children may have the same
representations for events, but they may have differences in
how they select a response based on these representations.
Perhaps children require more evidence than adults before
they are able to enact a relatively uncommon option.
Although the child may have a representation of the less
common event occurring 30% of the time, this relatively
low rate of occurrence may not be enough to cause them to
consider that choice as a viable alternative, or it may not be
enough to support the selection of the weaker response
tendency. When adults are engaged in a probability learning
experiment, there is a clear goal (to pick the correct light)
and an overt choice response is required. The benefit of
testing infants is that we can explore their natural tendencies
to sample from their environment without an explicit task.
Observing this behavior may provide insight into the
underlying causes for probability matching or maximizing.
A number of studies of infants’ abilities to track
probabilities and statistics have relied on looking time
measures. For example, Xu and Garcia (2008) explored
whether 8-month-old infants could use probabilistic
information to make generalizations about likely events.
After viewing a box containing many more red balls than
white balls, the infant saw the experimenter pull 5 balls
from the box. Infants showed a significantly longer looking
time when the 5 balls at test consisted of four white and
only one red ball (an unlikely outcome given the contents of
the box) than when there were four red and one white ball (a
likely outcome). This result indicated that infants are
sensitive to the probabilities in their environment and that
they can use this information to make predictions about
future events.
This type of looking time measure can be used to indicate
what events are surprising to an infant, and thus indicate
their expectations. Duration of looking, however, is only
able to reveal the infant’s behavior (and allow inferences
about expectations) after an event has occurred. In order to
reveal whether infants probability-match or maximize, a

paradigm is required that measures choice responses. Here
we provide data from just such a two-choice paradigm using
an anticipatory eye movement paradigm (McMurray &
Aslin, 2004). A target object disappeared behind an
occluder and reappeared at each of two locations with some
probability (e.g., 70% left and 30% right). The dependent
measure was the proportion of trials in which infants
exhibited anticipatory eye-movements to each of these
locations before the target reappeared from behind the
occluder. Our results show that 10-month-old infants
probability-match rather than maximize, and that they also
modulate their expectations based on the ratio of event
probabilities.

Experiment 1: Baseline
The purpose of this experiment was two-fold. First, it was
designed to test the feasibility of using an anticipatory eye
movement paradigm to track infant eye gaze during a
predictive object occlusion task. Second, it provides a
baseline measure of anticipatory responses when the
outcome is entirely predictable, and thus can be compared to
a probabilistic set of outcomes.

Methods
Participants. 12 parents from the Rochester community
volunteered their infants. The parents were recruited
through mailings, posted flyers, and web ads. The infants
ranged in age from 10.1 to 11.1 months (M = 10.6 months)
and had no reported hearing or vision deficits. An additional
8 infants were tested but excluded due to fussiness (7) and
eye-tracker calibration difficulties (1). Participants received
either $10 or a toy as compensation.
Materials. An image of a blue occluder in the shape of an
inverted T was presented on a light grey background. The
target object was a yellow smiley-face.
Apparatus. Eye-tracking was performed using a tablemounted Tobii 1750 eye-tracker with a 17-inch monitor.
The stimuli were presented using the SMART-T program
(Shukla, Wen, White & Aslin, in press) through Matlab
running on a Mac Mini with an Inter Core 2 Duo processor.
Procedure. Each infant was seated on a parents’ lap with
the child’s eyes approximately 23 inches from the Tobii
monitor. Infants viewed a minimum of 20 trials using the
McMurray and Aslin (2004) occlusion-based anticipatory
eye movement paradigm. This design creates a twoalternative forced-choice (2AFC) procedure in which infants
can learn to anticipate the reappearance of a target object
after occlusion.
Each trial began with the appearance and looming (to
150% of its original size) of the target object (the smileyface) below the occluder while a sound played (“Ooo”).
During each trial the object moved upward at a rate of 150
pixels per second (3.9 deg/sec) behind the occluder, paused
for one second, and then continued to move so as to

3012

reappear in the open space at the top right or top left of the
occluder (Figure 1). While following this path, a tonal
melody was played as a background sound. Full occlusion
of the target occurred for 2400 ms. Once fully visible from
behind the occluder, the object loomed again and another
sound was played (“Wow”).

Figure 1: Target object with path on a right side trial,
inverted T occluder and coding areas

Proportion of looks to more common side

On the first trial the occluder was semi-transparent,
allowing the infant to see the movement of the target behind
the occluder. Over the next 4 trials the occluder became less
transparent until it was opaque and fully hid the target’s
movement on the 6th trial.
In this baseline condition all trials ended with the target
reappearing on the same side. Half the infants had 100%
reappearance on the left (100L) and half had 100%
reappearance on the right (100R).
If infants are predicting the trajectory and reappearance of
the target, and not just reacting to its reappearance, then the
majority of their fixations during the period of target
occlusion should be on the side of the screen where they
expect the target to reappear.

Results
The first 10 trials of the experiment were treated as the
“training” phase and were not included in the analyses. In
order to observe the predictions of the infant, fixation
location was observed during the period of target occlusion.
To ensure that the infant was actively watching the display,
only trials in which the infant fixated on the target during its
initial loom (before it began to move to become occluded)
were analyzed. In addition, only those infants who attended
to a minimum of 10 trials (after the training period) were
included in the final analyses. Infants completed an average
of 32 trials (range: 27-47).
Two areas of interest (AOI) were defined for identifying
anticipatory eye movements: the right and left sides of the
occluder (see Figure 1). Looks outside these AOIs (labeled
as “other” in Figure 1) were not considered to be indicative
of a left/right side choice for predicting the reappearance of
the target. Infants in the 100L and 100R conditions did not
differ on their proportions of looking time to the more
common side (p>0.5) and so the two groups were collapsed
for all analyses.
The proportion of looks to each side was calculated at
each time point during the occlusion period for each infant.
Figure 2 shows the resulting mean time-course plot for
infants in the baseline condition. These results suggest that
infants were able to predict the reappearance of the target,
spending the majority of the time while the object was
occluded looking at the correct AOI.
Two metrics of correct anticipations were calculated for
each infant. The first computed the total looking time to
each AOI while the target was occluded and expressed the
looking time to the correct AOI as a proportion. Infants in
this baseline condition spent 75% of their looking time to
the dominant AOI (100R or 100L). This performance was
significantly greater than 50% (p<0.001).
The second metric calculated, for each infant on each
trial, to which AOI they spent the majority of their looking
time, regardless of the magnitude of the difference between
the two AOIs. By this binary-choice metric, infants in the

2400 ms Target Occlusion

Time ms
baseline condition chose the more common side on an
Figure 2: Proportion of looks to the more common side during the period when the target object was occluded

3013

Comparison of Experiments

average of 76.2% of the trials. This performance was also
significantly greater than chance (p<0.001).
Even though neither the proportion of looking time nor
the binary-choice metrics indicated that infants solely
attended to the 100% AOI, both measures were significantly
above chance, thereby establishing a baseline for
comparison with probabilistic designs.

Experiment 2: Probabilistic Exposure
Experiment 1 illustrated that infants can predict the
reappearance of a target object when there is only evidence
that the target reappears in one of two AOIs. The goal of
Experiment 2 is to explore, in a probabilistic design with
evidence of some target reappearance in each of the AOIs,
whether infants will maximize (show the same looking
behavior as in Experiment 1), or whether they will alter their
looking behavior in response to the increase in uncertainty
about where the target will reappear.

The critical comparison is between looking time to the
more common side in the baseline (Experiment 1) and
probabilistic (Experiment 2) conditions, which indicates
whether infants show maximization in the 70-30 condition
of Experiment 2. As stated above, infants in the baseline
condition spent 75% of their anticipatory time looking to the
more common (100%) AOI, whereas infants in the
probabilistic (70%-30%) condition anticipated the more
common AOI 56% of the time. This was a significant
difference (p<0.05). Using the binary-choice metric, infants
in the baseline condition chose the more common side on
76.2% of trials, whereas infants in the probabilistic
condition chose that side on 58.6% of trials. This difference
was marginally significant (p=0.07). These results suggest
that infants in the baseline condition did deploy significantly
more of their attention to the more common AOI than did
infants in the probabilistic condition.

Methods

Discussion

Participants. 15 parents volunteered their infants and were
compensated in the same manner as Experiment 1. The
infants ranged in age from 10.0 to 10.6 months (M=10.3).
An additional 9 infants were tested but excluded due to
experimenter error (1), fussiness (7), and eye-tracker
calibration difficulties (1).
Materials and Apparatus. Same as in Experiment 1.
Procedure. The Procedure was identical to Experiment 1
except that across trials the target reappeared on the more
common side only 70% of the time and on the other side
30% of the time. The infants were split between the left side
more common (70L30R) and right side more common
(30L70R) conditions.

Results
Infants completed an average of 32.6 trials (range: 22-52).
As in Experiment 1, the proportion of looks to the right and
left sides was calculated at each time point during the period
of target occlusion. Infants in the 70L30R and 30L70R
conditions did not differ in their proportions of looking time
to the more common side (p>0.1), and so the two groups
were collapsed for all analyses. Overall, infants spent 56%
of their looking time on the more common (70%) side. This
was not significantly greater than chance (p=0.6).
The binary choice metric was also calculated for each
infant on each trial. This method revealed that infants in the
probabilistic condition chose the more common side on an
average of 58.6% of trials. This metric was also not
significantly greater than chance (p=0.19).
Infants in this 70-30 probabilistic design did not spend
significantly more than half of their looking time to the
more common AOI, even though numerically there was a
slight bias in the correct direction.

Studies of probabilistic knowledge in infants have, prior to
the present report, relied on post-event looking times (i.e.,
Xu & Garcia, 2008). Although highly informative, these
measures do not provide information about expectations
before the event occurs. The results of the present eyetracking studies indicate that infants are able to track the
motion of a target object during an occlusion task and that
this is a viable paradigm for examining probabilistic
expectations.
The critical comparison between performance on the
baseline and probabilistic conditions indicates that infants
are spending significantly less time on the more common
side in the probabilistic condition. This indicates that infants
are not maximizing, but are instead responding to the
probabilities of their input. Given the behavior of young
children on two-choice response tasks (Stevenson & Weir,
1959), it is somewhat surprising that 10-month-olds do not
show maximization behavior. It is not clear, however,
whether the baseline condition serves as an accurate
indicator of how infants interpret deterministic events.
Because performance in the 100-0% condition only reached
75%, the lower rate of 56% in the 70-30% condition, which
did not differ from 50%, may have under-estimated
performance in this probabilistic condition. Nevertheless, it
is clear that infants did not show the same 75% rate of
responding in the 70-30% condition, and therefore did not
show maximizing.
In order to address this issue in the future, the results of
Experiment 2 should be compared to a wider range of
probability contrasts. For example, the 70-30 condition
(Experiment 2) may be too close to 50-50 for infants to
detect the probability difference. Thus, a 80-20 condition
might reveal performance that is closer to maximizing. In
addition, allowing an overt choice response such as reaching
for the moving object, would permit comparisons between
eye movements and other types of responses.

3014

We know from visual tasks and miniature language
learning studies that the number of alternatives available
significantly alters performance (Gardner, 1957; Weir,
1964; Hudson Kam & Newport, 2009). By increasing the
number of choice locations available in our tasks, we can,
for example, compare performance on a 70-30 condition
with a 70-15-15 condition. Differences in anticipation rates
for the 70% choice across these 2-choice and 3-choice
conditions might increase our understanding of how infants
treat probabilistic information.
One of the benefits of the anticipatory eye movement
paradigm used in the present experiments is that it can be
used across a wide range of ages. Our results indicate that
10-month-old infants do not show the type of maximization
that can be found in preschoolers. By using a modified
version of this task with a wider age range we may be able
to determine how eye gaze behavior changes across age
groups, especially at ages when we observe maximizing on
overt choice tasks (e.g., the light bulb paradigm).
Finally, although we have access to time-course data from
the anticipatory eye movements, we are not able from this
information alone to determine what representations the
infants and children might have during the task. In
particular, how might their looking time on a trial-by-trial
basis relate to their beliefs about the distribution of events?
Developing a computational model that used this eye-gaze
data to map ongoing beliefs to behavior would greatly
increase our understanding of this relationship.
Together the results of our first two experiments indicate
that (1) we can use an anticipatory eye movement paradigm
to collect information about expectations of probabilistic
events, and (2) infants do not show evidence of
maximization in a simple two-choice probabilistic task. In
ongoing work we are using this paradigm to explore further
questions about probabilistic expectations and response
choice.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH Grants HD037082 to
RNA and DC00167 to ELN. We thank Johnny Wen for
assistance with analyses; Suzanne Horowitz, Alyssa
Thatcher, and the research assistants of the Rochester Baby
Lab for help recruiting and scheduling subjects; and Patricia
Reeder and Celeste Kidd for advice, comments, and
suggestions.

Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. R. (2002). Statistical learning of higher
order temporal structure from visual shape-sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 130, 658-680.
Gardner, R. A (1957). Probability-learning with two and
three choices. The American Journal of Psychology,
70(2), 164-185.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, T., Kushnir, T.,
& Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111(1), 1-31.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2009). Getting it
right by getting it wrong: When learners change
languages. Cognitive Psychology, 59, 30-66.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: Evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83(2),
B35-B42.
McMurray, B., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Anticipatory eye
movements reveal infants’ auditory and visual categories.
Infancy, 6(2), 203-229.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (1996). Word
segmentation: The role of distributional cues. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 606-621.
Shukla, M., Wen, J., White, K. S. & Aslin, R. N. (in press).
SMART-T: A system for novel fully automated
anticipatory eye-tracking paradigms. Behavior Research
Methods.
Stevenson, H. W. & Weir, M. W. (1959). Variables
affecting childrens’ performance in a probability
learning task. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
57(6), 403–412.
Toro, J. M. & Trabalón, J. B. (2005). Statistical
computations over a speech stream in a rodent.
Perception& Psychophysics, 67, 867-875.
Weir, M. W. (1964). Developmental changes in problemsolving strategies. Psychological Review, 71(6), 473-490.
Weir, M. W. (1972). Probability performance:
Reinforcement procedure and number of alternatives. The
American Journal of Psychology, 85(2), 261-270.
Xu. F. & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 105(13), 5012.

References
Austin, C. A. & Newport, E. L. (unpublished manuscript).
Predictable versus unpredictable variation: Regularization
in adult and child learners.
Fiser, J. & Aslin, R. R. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.

3015

