UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processing Scalar Inferences in Face-Threatening Contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8v0591mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bonnefon, Jean-Francois
De Neys, Wim
Feeney, Aidan

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processing Scalar Inferences in Face-Threatening Contexts
Jean-François Bonnefon (bonnefon@univ-tlse2.fr)
CNRS and Université de Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Wim De Neys (deneys@univ-tlse2.fr)
CNRS and Université de Toulouse
Toulouse, France

Aidan Feeney (a.feeney@qub.ac.uk)
Queen’s University Belfast
Belfast, Northern Ireland
Abstract

contexts, for reasons of politeness; but they did not elucidate
how individuals adopted this interpretation. This is the question we will address.

Depending on politeness considerations, the quantifier ‘some’
can receive a broad interpretation (some and possibly all) or
a narrow interpretation (some but not all). Face-threatening
statements such as ‘some people hated your speech’ encourage the broad interpretation that everyone hated the speech.
Because previous research showed that broad interpretations
are normally faster and easier, politeness should be easy to
process, since it would encourage what is normally the easier interpretation of the statement. Using response time measures and a cognitive load manipulation, this research shows
that just the opposite is true: Face threatening contexts encourage the broad interpretation of ‘some’ while making it longer
and more difficult to reach. This result raises difficulties for
current cognitive theories of pragmatic inferences.
Keywords: Scalar inference; politeness; processing; response
time; cognitive load.

Face-Threatening Contexts
Face is a sense of public self-esteem that all of us project,
and are motivated to support, in social interactions. Many
actions, called face-threatening acts, can induce a loss of face
(e.g., apologizing, or criticizing). Performing such an action
often requires the use of a politeness strategy that mitigates
the face threat (Brown & Levinson, 1978/1987).
One of these strategies is to hedge by means of a scalar
term. For example, instead of bluntly asserting (2-a), speakers may politely hedge as in (2-b):

The Inference from ‘Some’

(2)

Experimental pragmatics engages in an experimental investigation of the mental processes involved in inferring what
people mean from sentences, contexts, and the implicit principles that govern the use of sentences in context (Noveck &
Reboul, 2008). The drosophila of experimental pragmatics
is the contextual inference from ‘some’ to some but not all.
Although ‘some’ is semantically consistent with the broad interpretation some and possibly all, it is commonly given the
narrow interpretation some but not all. For example, most
adult speakers of English would assume the assertion of (1-a)
to convey that the speaker believes (1-b):
(1)

a.
b.

Some of the guests brought wine.
Not all of the guests brought wine.

The inference from (1-a) to (1-b) is a scalar inference (Horn,
1984), stemming from the ordered informativeness scale <
some, all >. From a Gricean perspective (Grice, 1989), if a
cooperative speaker were in a position to assert (1-b), he or
she would do so, and would not use the less informative (yet
logically consistent) wording (1-a).
A key theoretical issue within experimental pragmatics is
to explain why and how people adopt the narrow interpretation of ‘some’ in some contexts but not in others. Bonnefon,
Feeney, and Villejoubert (2009) in particular showed that
broad interpretations were more likely in face-threatening

a.
b.

You are wrong.
You are possibly wrong.

When they hear (2-b), individuals tend to interpret ‘possibly’
as denoting a high probability, because they do not construe
this term as a genuine expression of uncertainty, but rather as
a polite way to preserve the face of the listener (Bonnefon &
Villejoubert, 2006; Pighin & Bonnefon, in press). In a sense,
people usually adopt a narrow interpretation of ‘possibly’ that
eliminates high probabilities, but they switch to a broad interpretation (that includes high probabilities) in face-threatening
contexts.
Comparably, instead of bluntly asserting (3-a), speakers
may politely hedge as in (3-b):
(3)

a.
b.

All of the guests hated the meal you cooked.
Some of the guests hated the meal you cooked.

When they hear (3-b), individuals tend to disregard the scalar
inference attached to ‘some’ and to reach a broad interpretation. That is, when X in ‘some X-ed’ threatens the face of
the listener, individuals find it likely that the speaker might
have meant that all X-ed, but used the scalar term nonetheless, out of politeness (Bonnefon et al., 2009). As we will
now explain, the current article aims at elucidating the time
and effort it takes to reach that interpretation, and thus at elucidating whether politeness is easy or hard to process.

3389

Processing Scalar Inferences
Experimental pragmatics has devoted considerable attention
to the cognitive processes underlying broad and narrow interpretations of ‘some’. This experimental work stemmed from
the controversy between generalized and particularized approaches to scalar inferences. Generalized approaches (e.g.,
Levinson, 2000) claim that scalar inferences are endorsed by
default, but then canceled in some contexts: Narrow interpretations should thus be faster and easier than broad interpretations. Particularized approaches, not limited to but often identified with Relevance Theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1986/1995),
claim that scalar inferences are not derived by default, but
rather triggered in some contexts and not in others: Broad
interpretations should thus be faster and easier than narrow
interpretations.
The extant evidence broadly supports the particularized
view. The narrow interpretation appears to take longer than
the broad interpretation (Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck &
Posada, 2003), the narrow interpretation is less frequent when
participants must respond quickly (Bott & Noveck, 2004),
and it is less frequent when participants must carry out a
secondary task (De Neys & Schaeken, 2007). Finally, the
processing time of ‘some’ decreases in contexts that make
the narrow interpretation inappropriate (Breheny, Katsos, &
Williams, 2006). Prior data thus suggest that broad interpretations of ‘some’ are faster and easier than narrow interpretations.
The question remains, though, of whether this pattern of
results will hold in face-threatening contexts. As summarized in the previous section, we already know that facethreatening contexts encourage broad interpretations. If we
show that broad interpretations remain faster and easier in
face-threatening contexts (as they are in other contexts), then
we will be in a position to argue that politeness is easy to process: Politeness considerations would quickly direct people
to the easy interpretation of ‘some’. The possibility arises,
however, that politeness is in fact hard to process. Stephan,
Liberman, and Trope (2010), in particular, provided data suggesting that politeness was associated with abstract levels of
cognitive construal, which are assumed to tap into effortful
cognitive processes. If really politeness is hard to process,
then people should slowly and effortfully reach the broad interpretation of ‘some’ in face-threatening contexts, in contrast
to standard results.
The question of whether face-threatening contexts make
broad interpretations easier or harder is an important one
for experimental pragmatics. The particularized approach to
scalar inferences (currently supported by most available data)
assumes that any context that prompts a broad interpretation
results in easier processing. Showing that face-threatening
contexts encourage broad interpretations whilst making them
harder would require to revisit this basic assumption.
In the rest of this article, we provide experimental data
investigating whether face-threatening contexts make broad
interpretation easy and fast, or difficult and slow. We con-

trast face-threatening statements (e.g., some people hated
your speech) with their control version (e.g., some people
loved your speech). We record response times associated with
broad and narrow interpretations of some, for both types of
statement. Previous research suggests that broad interpretations will be faster for ‘love’ statements. If politeness is easy
to process, this result will extend to ‘hate’ statements; but if
politeness is hard to process, this result will be reversed for
‘hate’ statements.
In parallel, we record the percentage of broad interpretations of ‘love’ and ‘hate’ statements reached under cognitive load, to that reached without cognitive load. Previous
research suggests that cognitive load will increase the proportion of broad interpretations for ‘love’ statements. If politeness is easy to process, this result will extend to ‘hate’
statements; but if politeness is hard to process, this result will
be reversed for ‘hate’ statements.

Method
A total of 356 first-year psychology students of the University
of Leuven participated in return for course credit.

Scalar interpretation task
Participants were presented with two problems (the ‘trip’ and
‘speech’ scenarios), in random order for each participant.
Half of the participants read a face-boost version of the two
scenarios whereas the other half read a face-threat version of
the two scenarios. Below is an example of the face-boost version (‘trip’ scenario), translated from Dutch :
Imagine you organized a group trip. You are discussing
the trip with Alice, who was in the group. There were 6
other people who went on this trip. You are considering
whether to recommend the trip to some friends.
Hearing this, Alice tells you that ‘Some people loved
the way the trip was organised.’
Given what Alice tells you, do you think that it is possible that everybody loved the way the trip was organized?
1. Yes
2. No
A ‘Yes’ response indicates a broad interpretation, and a
‘No’ response indicates a narrow interpretation. In the facethreat condition, the word ‘loved’ was replaced with the word
‘hated’.
In its face-boost version, the The ‘speech’ scenario read:
Imagine you gave a speech at a small political rally. You
are discussing your speech with Denise, who was in the
audience. There were 6 other people in the audience.
You are considering whether to give this same speech to
another audience.
Hearing this, Denise tells you that ‘Some people loved
your speech.’
Given what Denise tells you, do you think that it is possible that everybody loved your speech?

3390

that they had to remember the complete pattern correctly. The
load procedure was clarified with two practice items. Instructions stressed that it was crucial that the dot patterns were
reproduced correctly in the upcoming task.

~
~
~

Results

~

Dot memory task
The dot memory task was properly performed, with an average of 3.5 dots correctly localized.

Figure 1: Example of dot pattern in the load group.

Percentage of narrow interpretations
Figure 2 displays the percentage of scalar inferences (as measured by a narrow interpretation of ‘some’) as a function of
cognitive load, in the face-boost context as well as in the facethreat context. An analysis of variance1 failed to detect any
main effect of load, F(1, 352) < 1, p > .25 (unless otherwise
mentioned, p values are 1-tailed), but detected a main effect
of context, F(1, 352) = 10.4, p < .001, reflecting the fact that
narrow interpretations were more frequent in the face-boost
context, overall, than in the face-threat context.

1. Yes
2. No
A ‘Yes’ response indicates a broad interpretation, and a
‘No’ response indicates a narrow interpretation. In the facethreat condition, the word ‘loved’ was replaced with the word
‘hated’.
The problems were presented on a computer screen. Participants first read the background information (text in italics in
the example above). When they were finished, they pressed
the ENTER-key and the remaining part of the scenario was
presented. Response time was measured starting at the moment participants pressed the key, and thus does not include
the time participants spent reading the background information.

Narrow interpretations (%)

Face Boost

Dot memory task
Cognitive load was manipulated by asking half of the participants in the face-threat and face-boost conditions to memorize a dot pattern while making their scenario judgments. A
3 × 3 matrix filled with a complex 4-dot pattern (see Figure 1)
was briefly presented after participants had read the background information of the scenario. Storage of these complex
dot patterns has been shown to tap executive resources (De
Neys, 2006; Miyake, Friedman, Rettinger, Shah, & Hegarty,
2001). Participants memorized the pattern and were asked to
reproduce it after they had entered their response to the scenario question.

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of 18 to 31. Approximately
half of the participants were assigned to the face-threat and
face-boost group. Within each group half of the participants
were assigned to the load and control condition. In the load
condition the dot pattern was presented for 850 ms after participants indicated that they were finished reading the background information by pressing the ENTER-key. Next, participants were presented with the remaining part of the scenario
and entered their response. No specific instructions were
given to participants as to how long they should think about
their response. After participants had entered their response,
an empty matrix was presented and participants had to reproduce the dot pattern. They received feedback on whether
the pattern had been reproduced correctly and were reminded

Face Threat

70
60
50
40
30

Control

Load

Control

Load

Figure 2: Percentage of scalar inferences, as measured by a
narrow interpretation (‘No’ responses) of ‘some’. Cognitive
load decreases the proportion of scalar inferences in the faceboost context, but it has the opposite effect in the face-threat
context.
Critically, this main effect was qualified by a significant
interaction between load and context, F(1, 352) = 9.9, p <
.001. As already apparent from the visual inspection of
Figure 2, planned comparisons revealed that load had opposite effects in the face-boost and face-threat contexts. In
the face-boost context, load significantly decreased the frequency of narrow interpretations (from 73% down to 56%),
F(1, 352) = 7.0, p < .01. In contrast, in the face-threat context, load increased the frequency of narrow interpretations
(from 45% up to 56%), F(1, 352) = 3.2, p < .05.2
1 Because each participant saw two scenarios, the dependent variable in this analysis is the average individual number of narrow interpretations. No differences were detected between the responses
to the two scenarios.
2 The rate of narrow interpretations in the load condition remains
significantly above chance level, t = 1.93, p = .05 (two-tailed), ruling out the possibility that participants in the load condition responded randomly under cognitive load.

3391

Response times in the control condition
Face Boost
Narrow Interpretations(%)

Because caution is required in interpreting response time data
under load, we focus our analyses on the response time data
in the control condition.3
Table 1: Average response time (in seconds) for broad and
narrow interpretations, in the face-boost and face-threat contexts. Standard deviations are included in parentheses.

Face-Boost
Face-Threat

Broad Responses

Narrow Responses

11.1(5.9)
13.9(6.8)

10.1(4.1)
10.2(4.2)

Discussion
The quantifier ‘some’ is commonly given the narrow interpretation some but not all rather than the broad interpretation some and possibly all, but this tendency varies across
3 The pattern of response time in the load condition was similar
to that we report for the control condition, it is left out only because
its interpretation would require multiple qualifications. In the faceboost condition, broad interpretations of ‘some’ took about the same
time as narrow interpretations (12.4 s vs. 12.1 s); and in the facethreat condition, broad interpretations of ‘some’ took longer than
narrow interpretations (13.3 s vs. 11.6 s).

60

40

20

Fast

Table 1 displays the time taken to reach narrow or broad
interpretations of ‘some’, in the face-boost and face-threat
contexts. An analysis of variance detected a main effect of
the type of response, F(1, 217) = 10.1, p < .01, reflecting
the fact that broad responses took overall longer than narrow responses, and a main effect of context, F(1, 217) = 3.8,
p < .05, reflecting the fact that participants in the face-threat
context took longer to respond. These two main effects, however, were qualified by an interaction effect, F(1, 217) = 3.1,
p < .05, which could readily be anticipated from Table 1.
The difference in response time between the broad and the
narrow interpretations was only significant in the face-threat
context. In the face-boost condition, broad interpretations of
‘some’ took about the same time as narrow interpretations,
t(43.2) = 1.1, p = .30 (corrected for unequal variances). In
the face-threat condition, however, broad interpretations of
‘some’ took much longer than narrow interpretations, and this
difference achieved significance, t(109.4) = 3.5, p < .001
(corrected for unequal variances).
For an alternate view of the response time data, Figure 3
displays the proportion of narrow interpretations in the two
contexts, as a function of response speed (equal-width intervals of 7 s). In the face-boost condition, the proportion of narrow responses was not detectably different as a function of response speed, F(2, 93) < 1, p = .68. Results in the face-threat
condition, however, clearly suggest that the broad interpretation was slowly acquired, with narrow interpretations being less and less likely for slower responses, F(2, 93) = 5.7,
p < .01.

Face Threat

Moderate

Slow

Fast

Moderate

Slow

Figure 3: Percentage of narrow interpretations (‘No’ responses) as a function of response speed, in the no load condition. In the face-boost condition, narrow interpretations dominate however fast or slow the response. In the face-threat
context, narrow interpretations dominate among fast responders, but broad interpretations are gradually preferred as responses get slower.
contexts. In particular, it is inverted in face-threatening contexts, wherein the broad interpretation of ‘some’ threatens the
positive self-image of the listener. Up until now, research in
experimental pragmatics always found that the broad interpretation of ‘some’ reflected faster and less demanding cognitive processing than its narrow interpretation. This article
aimed at investigating whether this result would reverse in
face-threatening contexts, in line with the hypothesis that politeness is hard to process. We asked 356 participants to interpret ‘some’ statements in a face-threatening context, or in a
control, face-boosting context. In both contexts, we recorded
the response time associated with the narrow and broad interpretations of ‘some’. Furthermore, and still in both contexts,
we assessed the effect of cognitive load on the interpretation
of ‘some’.
Results in the face-boost condition were consistent with
previous findings. Cognitive load did reduce the frequency
of narrow interpretations (De Neys & Schaeken, 2007), although narrow interpretations were not reliably associated
with a longer response time (Bott & Noveck, 2004; Noveck
& Posada, 2003). It is possible that our response time measure was not sensitive enough to capture an effect that previous findings suggest to be small, and not always reproducible
(Feeney, Scrafton, Duckworth, & Handley, 2004; Grodner,
Klein, Carbary, & Tanenhaus, 2010).
In the face-threat context, though, cognitive load increased
the frequency of narrow interpretations, and broad interpretations took longer. Taken together, these findings suggest that
broad interpretations are no longer quick and easy to reach
when the context is face-threatening, but that they rather require slow and effortful processing. We draw this conclusion with due caution, for we only used two scenarios in this
experiment, which makes it difficult to control for noisy response time measures. In the rest of this article, we examine
the theoretical implications of this finding for the particularized approach to scalar inferences, and more specifically to

3392

one of its best-established models, Relevance Theory.

Theoretical implications
Previous work suggested that contexts which increased the
frequency of broad interpretations also made such interpretations easier (Breheny et al., 2006). Clearly, face-threatening
contexts do not work that way. On the contrary, they appear to
encourage broad interpretations whilst making these very interpretations more difficult. Politeness, thus, is not processed
in a fast and effortless way; it rather appears to add a layer of
complexity to the usual processes involved in the interpretation of ‘some’. The question is whether these processes can
be captured by current cognitive models of scalar inference.
Relevance theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1986/1995) is among
the best-established of these cognitive models. Relevance
theory assumes that people settle on the optimally relevant
interpretation of a statement, which requires that (a) the statement achieves cognitive effects that are large enough to make
it worth processing; and (b) these effects could not have been
achieved by another statement, that would be easier to process and compatible with the communicator’s abilities and
preferences.
Relevance theory can explain why a broad interpretation
of some is optimally relevant in a face-threatening context. It
is a plausible assumption that the cognitive effect of reaching a face-threatening interpretation (e.g., everybody hated
your speech) is worth what our data suggest to be a considerable processing effort, and although this cognitive effect
might be achieved for less effort, by bluntly stating the facethreatening fact, this would go against a plausible preference
of the speaker, that of being nice.
One issue remains, though. Relevance theory assumes that
people adopt a path of least effort to interpretation, and that
they stop at the first optimally relevant interpretation. Our
data show that in face-threatening contexts, the narrow interpretation of ‘some’ requires less time and effort than its broad
interpretation. That the broad interpretation be optimally relevant is therefore not enough to explain why people adopt it,
as it is also necessary to explain why they do not stop first at
the narrow interpretation. Only two theoretical possibilities
arise: (a) the narrow interpretation is not optimally relevant
in face-threatening contexts; or (b) the narrow interpretation
is optimally relevant, but people still continue searching for
another interpretation, and eventually settle on the broad interpretation.
Both options come with their own set of difficulties. The
first option would require us to explain why, processing costs
being equal, the cognitive effects of a narrow interpretation
would be weaker in face-threatening contexts, as compared to
other contexts. The second option is consistent with the view
that politeness contexts prompt people to look for covert, indirect meaning (Demeure, Bonnefon, & Raufaste, 2008), but
it would require to let go of a fundamental assumption of Relevance theory. It would indeed require to accept that listeners,
when cued that politeness is required by the situation, do not

stop at the first equilibrium between effect and effort, but tentatively engage in a second push towards another equilibrium.
We can attempt to capture the processing consequences of
this last option by fitting a simple mathematical model to our
data. We start by assuming that a given proportion P1 of participants is likely to make the first move to a narrow interpretation of ‘some x-ed’, whether X is a face threat or a face
boost. Let us now assume that when X is a face threat, some
proportion P2 of participants not only make the first move to
the narrow interpretation, but also a second move to the polite broad interpretation. Let us finally model concurrent load
with two parameters α < 1 and β < 1, such that only α × P1
of the participants are able to overcome load when making
the first move, and only β × P2 of the participants are able to
overcome load when making the second move. Fitting this
simple model to our data, we arrive at P1 = .73, P2 = .28,
α = .77, and β = 0.
According to these parameter values, our data would suggest that arriving at the first equilibrium associated with the
narrow interpretation is relatively easy and natural: Three
quarters of participants would make it under control conditions, and three quarters of these would continue to do so
under load (note that the relative easiness of this move is consistent with our response time data). However, arriving at
the second politeness cued equilibrium is much more effortful. Only a quarter of participants would reach this second
equilibrium when there is no load, and none would be able to
reach it under load.
Our data cannot, on their own, help decide whether Relevance Theory should be modified in line with this model,
or whether it should be modified so as to argue that narrow
interpretations are not optimally relevant in face-threatening
contexts. Rather, they put the theory at an exciting crossroad,
where each route comes with its set of theoretical obstacles.
This is, one might argue, a success for experimental pragmatics. Not only can linguistic theories be tested through experimental data, but experimental data can also sometimes force
hard choices on a well-tested theory.

Acknowledgments
Jean-François Bonnefon and Wim De Neys, CLLE (CNRS,
UTM, EPHE), Toulouse, France. Aidan Feeney, School
of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland. Address correspondence to Jean-François Bonnefon,
‘Cognition, Langues, Langage et Ergonomie,’ Maison de la
recherche, 5 allées A. Machado, 31058 Toulouse Cedex 9,
France. E-mail: bonnefon@univ-tlse2.fr. We thank Gaëlle
Villejoubert for useful discussions about this work. Data
were collected while Wim De Neys was affiliated to the
Lab Experimentele Psychologie, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. This research was supported by grant ANR-07-JCJC0065-01 from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche, an
FWO (Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek-Vlaanderen) research grant, and by grant PN 08.010 (awarded by the British
Council) and 18223VF (awarded by the Ministère des Af-

3393

faires Étrangères et Européennes) under the Alliance FrancoBritish Programme 2008.

References
Bonnefon, J. F., Feeney, A., & Villejoubert, G. (2009). When
some is actually all: Scalar inferences in face-threatening
contexts. Cognition, 112, 249–258.
Bonnefon, J. F., & Villejoubert, G. (2006). Tactful or doubtful? Expectations of politeness explain the severity bias
in the interpretation of probability phrases. Psychological
Science, 17, 747–751.
Bott, L., & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar inferences. Cognition, 51, 437–457.
Breheny, R., Katsos, N., & Williams, J. (2006). Are generalised scalar implicatures generated by default? An on-line
investigation into the role of context in generating pragmatic inferences. Cognition, 100, 434–463.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1978)
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning: Two
systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17, 428–
433.
De Neys, W., & Schaeken, W. (2007). When people are more
logical under cognitive load –Dual task impact on scalar
implicatures. Experimental Psychology, 54, 128–133.
Demeure, V., Bonnefon, J. F., & Raufaste, E. (2008). Utilitarian relevance and face management in the interpretation of
ambiguous question/request statements. Memory and Cognition, 36, 873–881.
Feeney, A., Scrafton, S., Duckworth, A., & Handley, S. J.
(2004). The story of some: Everyday pragmatic inference
by children and adults. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58, 121–132.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Grodner, D. J., Klein, N. M., Carbary, K. M., & Tanenhaus,
M. K. (2010). “Some”, and possibly all, scalar inferences
are not delayed: Evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment. Cognition, 116, 42–55.
Horn, L. R. (1984). Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference: Q-based and R-based implicature. In
D. Schiffrin (Ed.), Meaning, form, and use in context (pp.
11–42). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of
generalized conversational implicature. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Rettinger, D. A., Shah, P., &
Hegarty, M. (2001). How are visuospatial working memory, executive functioning, and spatial abilities related? A
latent-variable analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 621–640.
Noveck, I. A., & Posada, A. (2003). Characterising the time

course of an implicature. Brain and Language, 85, 203–
210.
Noveck, I. A., & Reboul, A. (2008). Experimental pragmatics: a Gricean turn in the study of language. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11, 425–431.
Pighin, S., & Bonnefon, J. F. (in press). Facework and uncertain reasoning in health communication. Patient Education
and Counseling.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance, communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. (Original work
published 1986)
Stephan, E., Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (2010). Politeness
and psychological distance: A construal level perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 268–
280.

3394

