UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prospective Memory Tasks in Aviation: Effects of Age and Working Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7657f2k8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Van Benthem, Kathleen
Herdman, Chris M.
LeFevre, Jo-Anne

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prospective Memory Tasks in Aviation: Effects of Age and Working Memory
Kathleen Van Benthem (kvbenthe@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 0A3 Canada

Chris M. Herdman (chris_herdman@carleton.ca)
Visualization and Simulation Centre, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 0A3 Canada

Jo-Anne LeFevre (jlefevre@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 0A3 Canada

Abstract
Prospective memory is the ability to remember to perform
acts in the future. Prospective memory is essential in the
aviation domain because it supports a range of tasks including
remembering to complete critical radio communications. A
wide variety of literature reports that in the laboratory
younger adults outperform older adults on many prospective
memory tasks. In naturalistic settings however, older adults
perform as well as or better than younger adults. It is
suggested that lower working memory load from on-going
background tasks, context cues and the habitual nature of the
tasks are reasons for the improved performance by older
adults in naturalistic settings. We tested this notion using a
Cessna 172 aircraft simulator to examine radio
communication task completion rates of 45 pilots (16 older
and 29 younger participants). Individual measures of working
memory were also collected. In contrast to the trends reported
in the literature, we found that older pilots had significantly
lower communication task completion rates than younger
pilots in both the low and high working memory workload
conditions. A multiple regression model identified age and
working memory scores as the strongest individual predictors
of prospective memory task performance in the low workload
condition and working memory and recent pilot-in-command
hours as significant predictors of performance in the high
workload condition. Our results suggest that, even in a low
workload condition, a naturalistic aviation context did not
afford advantages to older pilots and that prospective memory
task performance appears associated with age and working
memory function.
Keywords: prospective memory; applied cognitive science;
working memory; aging; aviation.

Introduction
Prospective memory refers to the ability to remember to
perform mental or physical acts in the future. The present
research examined the prospective memory performance of
older pilots (aged 51 to 76) and younger pilots (ages 26 to
50) in a naturalistic aviation-related setting. Existing
literature on prospective memory and aging suggests that, in
naturalistic settings, older and younger adults tend to
perform similarly on measures of prospective memory
(Einstein & McDaniel, 1990; Kvavilashvili & Fisher, 2007).
In contrast, in laboratory settings, where prospective
memory performance is tested using novel tasks, younger

adults show better prospective memory performance than
older adults (Craik & Bialystok, 2006). It has been
suggested that in naturalistic settings older adults’
prospective memory performance might benefit from (a) the
time- and event-based cues afforded by the environment or
strategically created by the older adult, (b) a reduced
working memory load in the on-going or background tasks,
and/or (c) an increase in the importance older adults might
place on remembering in the naturalistic tasks (Dismukes,
2010; Einstein & McDaniel, 1990; Kvavilashvili & Fisher,
2007). In comparison with young adults, older adults are
believed to have reduced working memory capacity (Craik,
Anderson, Kerr, & Li, 1995; Salthouse, 1994; 1996). As
such, some authors have investigated the influence of
reduced working memory demands experienced by older
adults in everyday naturalistic environments and explored
how these reduced demands might improve performance in
prospective memory tasks. For example, Einstein and
McDaniel (1990) addressed the issue of this explanation for
age effects based on the ease of ongoing tasks by attempting
to equate the background working memory requirements
during laboratory tasks for older and younger participants.
The reduction in working memory resource allocation for
older adults did result in better performance in prospective
memory tasks for older adults (as compared to the younger
adults).
Previous research pertaining to age and prospective
memory can be classified according to the study variables of
setting (laboratory vs. naturalistic), task (habitual vs.
episodic), ongoing background working memory load (low
or high), task cue (cued or non-cued) and task cue context
(event-based vs. time-based). In a meta-analysis of
prospective memory and aging, Uttl (2008) reported that
younger adults tend to perform better on prospective
memory tasks in most conditions, with the exception that
older adults might demonstrate similar or better
performance, as compared to younger adults, in naturalistic
studies. It is important to note however, that when older
adults performed as well as or better than younger
participants the prospective memory tasks under
investigation occurred in contexts of low working memory
load, were habitual in nature and were associated with cues

2335

in the environment. The identification of features associated
with naturalistic settings has lead other researchers to
conclude that the similar prospective memory performance
found for younger and older adults in naturalistic settings
might not be as robust as originally thought (Craik &
Bialystok, 2006).
Prospective memory has also been examined with respect
to aviation-related tasks. Much of this work has come from
the NASA Ames Research Center, Flight Cognition
Laboratory (Dismukes, 2007; Dismukes & Berman, 2010;
Dodhia & Dismukes, 2005, 2009; Holbrook & Dismukes,
2009). Generally speaking, when pilots failed to complete
prospective memory tasks, in both habitual and episodic
tasks the errors were caused by interruptions, missed cues,
changes to routine procedures, and interleaving/timesharing
of concurrent tasks. These sources of prospective memory
failures were exacerbated by high working memory load
(Dismukes, 2010). Dodhia and Dismukes (2005) found that
prospective memory failures could be attributed to lack of or
inefficient encoding of the intent to remember, changing
goals and context at the end of the interruption and a
mismatch between the original task cues and the cues
available after the interruption.
The present research tested the hypothesis that older and
younger pilots would perform similarly in a prospective
memory task occurring in a naturalistic condition where the
cued, habitual prospective memory task took place within an
on-going context of a low working memory load.

Method
The present data are from a larger study of aging, cognitive
health and general aviation. In this study, pilots operate a
Cessna 172 simulator and carry out a variety of aviationrelated tasks while flying standard practice circuit patterns
(see Figure 1). One of the tasks required of all pilots is to
remember to complete six radio calls (verbal transmission of
pilot location) at specific times during each circuit flown.

Figure 1: Standard Practice Circuit (Pattern)
We examined the prospective memory performance of
pilots by comparing the radio communication task
completion rates of older and younger pilot groups under
both low and high working memory load conditions.
Individual measures of working memory were also collected
in order to determine if there was a relationship between
pilot prospective memory performance and working
memory ability.

Participants
Participants represented a wide range of pilot certification
levels and expertise: including student (n=10), private
(n=27) and military, commercial or airline transport pilots
(n=8). Pilots were recruited from local flying clubs with
posters and notices in club newsletters. Selection criteria for
this analysis included pilots (aged 26 or older) having a
minimum of a valid student’s certification. Pilots were
grouped by age as younger (aged 26 to 50, M=40 years,
n=29) and older (aged 51 to 76, M= 59 years, n=16). The
length of time pilots had been certified to fly was the only
pilot characteristic that differed significantly between older
and younger pilot groups, F(1,43)= 18.44, p<.001.
Table 1: Pilot Characteristics

Pilot Characteristics
(n=45, 4 Female)
Years Certified
Total Hours Flown
Pilot-in-command
Hours (Previous 12
months)

Younger Pilots
Mean Value
(Range)
9 (1-29)
817
(22-8000)
40 (0-308)

Older Pilots
Mean
Value
(Range)
23 (1-43)
789
(34-4460)
29 (0-150)

Procedure
Participants provided informed consent after a thorough
description of the study purpose and activities. Each
participant completed a flight experience questionnaire
regarding their overall flying experience/expertise and
experience with simulated aircraft. Participants then
completed a full cognitive health assessment battery (the
DCATTM). Only Subtest 6, an index of working memory is
discussed in this analysis. Participants were provided with a
visual and verbal presentation outlining the requirements for
flying a “perfect circuit” followed by a practice session
(four full circuits with experimenter feedback) to familiarize
themselves with the flight simulator and the controls. After
the practice session, participants flew six left hand circuits
at two uncontrolled airfields (one representing a low and the
other a high workload condition). Detailed instructions
regarding the radio communication tasks were provided in
both writing and verbal presentation. Participant feedback
indicated that the circuit flying procedures to be followed in
this study were either similar or very similar to their own
circuit procedures. Thus, despite being simulated flight, the
situation was considered familiar and many of the tasks
habitual for these pilots.
DCATTM Subtest 6: The Identification of Driving
Situations The DCATTM consists of a computerized touchscreen system comprised of six individually scored sub-tests
each designed to capture some element of cognitive function
implicit in the cognitive abilities required for safe driving.
Participants respond by touching the correct target on the

2336

screen. The DCATTM produces aged-normed z-scores for
each of the six subtests. The z-scores reflect both accuracy
and timing of the responses. All the subtests were completed
for each participant; however, because of Subtest 6’s
comprehensive use of working memory functions it is the
only subtest selected for this analysis. For further
information on the other five subtests and their utility in
predicting high risk older drivers see DriveABLE (1997).
DCATTM Subtest 6 requires participant to watch ten short
(approximately 5 to 15 seconds) narrated video clips of
actual driving footage and then answer a question relating to
some aspect of spatial judgment or driving safety related to
the just-seen video clip. Participants must quickly integrate
the auditory and visual stimuli in each of ten video clips and
hold the stimuli in working memory in order to answer each
trial correctly. After the presentation of each scenario
stimulus and a one second inter-stimulus interval, a
multiple-choice method of target selection is provided on
the next screen presentation. Four answer options are
provided via text and narration and include targets such as
“how should you respond?” or “what is the most dangerous
thing in this situation?” Participants select a response by
touching the desired target (either 1, 2, 3 or 4) on the screen.
Cessna 172 Simulator The aircraft simulator was a Cessna
172 aircraft cockpit and fuselage (see Figure 2) running
Microsoft FSX software. The simulator was equipped with
actual Cessna 172 controls and physical instruments. Large
screens provided 45 degrees of vertical field of view and
120 degrees of horizontal field of view. Pilots wore a
headset in order to hear communication from other
simulated aircraft at their aerodrome and beyond.

during circuit two; and four other aircraft during circuit
three. In both workload conditions pilots were informed
that they would be required to maintain situation awareness
of their aircraft and all other aircraft. In each condition the
simulated weather was clear and no critical events with
respect to instrumentation or aircraft controls were
introduced.
Prospective Memory Task: Radio Communication
Completion Rate Participants were provided with detailed
instructions regarding the number and the timing of the
radio calls they were to perform during each circuit they
completed. As per standard procedures, the pilots’ radio
calls were to convey information pertaining to their current
location. Each circuit required six radio calls to be
completed. One radio call was required during each of the
following six circuit events: initial rolling on runway (or
subsequent runway touch and go or runway overshoot
events), airborne, turning downwind, mid-downwind,
turning base, and turning final. Participants were not
penalized for extra calls, but only received a point for each
required call made during the prescribed circuit event. Six
calls per circuit X three circuits X two workload conditions
allowed for a total of 36 radio communication calls to be
recorded. Implicit cues used by the pilots to remember to
perform the radio communication tasks might be considered
as both time- and event-based as each radio communication
was to be completed at a specified location (e.g. turning
downwind), or point in time (immediately after take-off),
during each circuit. Explicit cues were not provided by the
experimental except during the practice session when the
experimenter would remind pilots if a radio call was
forgotten.

Results
Impact of Workload
Overall, pilots completed more radio communication tasks
in the low than in the high workload condition,
F(1, 42) = 23.12, p<.001, p2.= .35. Pilots demonstrated a
92% radio communication task completion rate in the low
workload condition and an 86 % radio communication task
completion rate in the high workload. As shown in Figure
3, the workload effect was found for both pilot age groups:
F(1, 28) = 13.05, p<.01, p2.= .32 (younger group) and
F(1, 15) = 9.41, p<.001, p2.= .39 (older group).

Figure 2: Cessna 172 Simulator
Working Memory Workload Manipulation Pilots flew in
two experimental protocols. In the first protocol, the low
workload condition, pilots flew at an aerodrome with simple
flat terrain and no other aircraft during circuit one; one other
aircraft during circuit two; and two other aircraft during
circuit three. In the second protocol, the high workload
condition, the pilots flew in unfamiliar mountainous terrain
with two other aircraft during circuit one; three other aircraft

Comparison of Younger and Older Pilot Prospective
Memory Task Performance
In both the low and high workload conditions there was a
main effect of Age, F(1,43) = 8.00, p < .01, p2 = .16 (low
workload) and F(1,43) = 5.45, p < .05, p2 = .11 (high
workload).

2337

Discussion

Figure 3: Mean Number of Radio Calls for the Younger and
Older Pilots across Workload Conditions
As shown in Figure 3, there was no interaction between
age and workload condition, (F < 1): older pilots completed
fewer radio calls than the younger pilots in both the low and
the high workload conditions.
Variance in Prospective Memory Performance
Multiple regression analyses provide an indication of pilot
characteristics, which might predict some of the variance in
prospective memory task scores.
Individual radio
communication completion rates were examined with
respect to the pilot characteristics of age, recent pilot-incommand hours and the working memory index (i.e.,
DCATTM Subtest 6 scores). Years certified to fly and total
hours flown were not included in the model due to their
high correlation with age and recent pilot-in-command
hours, respectively.
The low workload condition produced a model with age
and DCATTM Subtest 6 as the strongest predictors of
prospective memory performance (ANOVA, F(2, 42) =
5.05, p<.05. The R-square value indicated that age and
working memory index together account for 19.4% of the
variance in radio communication task completion rates in
the low workload condition. This pattern of results suggests
that age and working memory are relevant predictors of
prospective memory performance in our low workload
condition.
Multiple regression results for the high workload
condition produced a model with marginal significance
(ANOVA, F(2, 42) = 3.15, p = .053). The R-square value
indicated a 13.0% shared contribution of working memory
index and recent flight hours to high workload radio
communication task completion rates.

The present research examined the hypothesis that older
pilots would perform as well as younger pilots for
prospective memory tasks in naturalistic study conditions
where an implicitly cued, habitual prospective memory task
occurred across a low workload background. Despite our
efforts to create the aforementioned condition, we found that
younger pilots tended to outperform older pilots in both the
low and high workload conditions. The finding that older
pilots did not perform as well as younger pilots on a
naturalistic prospective memory task is contrary to findings
from other researchers such as Einstein & McDaniel (1990)
and Uttl (2008), who found that older participants typically
performed as well as or better than younger participants for
prospective memory in naturalistic settings.
Pilots were not explicitly cued to perform radio calls, but
relied upon implicit event and time-based cues. This
provided the participants with a realistic scenario of radio
call completion during a circuit as well as provided the
experimenters with a prospective memory task with cues
incorporated into the underlying or foundational task. This
was meant to overcome the issue with laboratory setting
research where the underlying task itself does not
necessarily provide clues as to when a task should take
place.
The habitual nature of the radio communication task can
also be examined. Because other prospective memory
studies in naturalistic environments have utilized habitual
tasks such as remembering to take medication, or brushing
your teeth, it could be argued that the prospective memory
task used in the present research might not have been as
habitual in nature as is typically seen in a habitual
prospective memory task. Indeed, while participants
indicated that, in reality, some aerodromes and situations
might require only four or five calls per circuit, without
exception, completing radio communication calls habitually
during circuit events was considered standard and even
required practice. Additionally, pilots in the present study
had flown an average of 40 hours (younger pilots) and 29
hours (older pilots) in the previous 12 months: thus assuring
that both groups had recently been engaged in similar radio
call tasks. While the amount of recent flight time varied
across participants, performing radio calls is ingrained
within circuit flight behaviour and once circuit activity
begins, pilots are all aware of and well versed in knowing
when to complete radio tasks during the circuit flight. To
minimize experience effects of low recent flight hours and
differences in radio call routines between subjects a
minimum of four practice circuits was provided with
feedback and reminders about when to perform the radio
calls.
Subject matter experts for this present research reported
that the low workload condition, with its simple terrain and
low levels of circuit traffic (maximum of two other aircraft),
constituted a reasonable facsimile of a low workload circuit.
The findings that the low workload condition produced an

2338

86% (older pilots) and 95% (younger pilots) task
completion rate appear to represent a reasonable
compromise between a workload that no longer offers face
validity (because the condition would be too simplistic and
no longer reflect a naturalistic circuit setting) and a
workload that was overly demanding, and beyond the
threshold of “low”.
Additionally, the near perfect
performance of some pilots in the low workload condition
demonstrated that the first scenario was indeed “low”.

even with habitual and implicitly cued tasks. Recall that
the results of the multiple regression analysis revealed that
only the working memory index predicted prospective
memory task performance in both workload conditions. The
present study demonstrates that for a broad range of pilot
age, experience and expertise, working memory might play
a leading role in supporting prospective memory
performance of radio communication tasks. While one
might be tempted to rely on the strength of “habit” to
undergird prospective memory performance in naturalistic
settings, working memory resources appear to overshadow
advantages afforded by habit or the total experience with a
task. In summary, despite the naturalistic setting, older
pilots may not have performed as well as younger pilots in
the low workload condition due to task reliance on working
memory and the implicit nature of the cues.

Main Effect of Age
The present research has implications for a wide range of
systems designed to promote prospective memory for older
adults. Specifically, it should not be assumed that because a
task in a naturalistic setting is performed against the
backdrop of a low workload that older adults will perform to
the same level as younger adults. Attention should be paid
to the features of the task context, including the cues
afforded by the environment or cues embedded within the
task itself. In this study, time- and event-based cues were
not sufficient enough reminders to promote the required
behaviour by the older participants suggesting that features
of the cues might play an important role in prospective
memory performance for older adults.
With respect to age effects in both workload conditions:
pilot age contributed significantly to the regression model
predicting radio call performance in the low workload
condition; however, age was not a significant contributor to
the regression model in the high workload condition, but
was replaced instead by recent pilot-in-command hours. It
should be noted, however, that older pilots had fewer recent
pilot-in-command hours than younger pilots, thus indirectly
associating age with performance in the high background
working memory load condition. Older pilots flew
approximately one hour less per month in the previous 12
months than younger pilots. This difference in recent flight
hours between age groups was not statistically significant;
however, it might be the case that in high working memory
load contexts the reduced flight time by older pilots
represented a functionally significant difference.

Future Research
Aviation studies pertaining to prospective memory have
revealed that, in the cockpit, pilots forget to complete both
habitual and episodic tasks because of interruptions, missed
cues, changes to routine and timesharing of concurrent tasks
(Dismukes, 2010). In light of the present findings it would
be beneficial to examine each of these sources of distraction
with respect to their working memory demands, in addition
to the possible effects of age and working memory
performance of pilots on habitual and episodic cockpit tasks.
It would also be useful to compare older and younger adult
performance on prospective memory tasks by further
examining the effect of recent flight hours for older pilots,
in particular, in high workload conditions. Additionally,
manipulating the cues afforded by the environment would
further explicate how elements within naturalistic settings
might promote prospective memory performance for older
adults. Finally, replication of the present findings in other
complex tasks, either within aviation or beyond, would add
to the theory pertaining to the effects of age and working
memory load on prospective memory in naturalistic settings.

References

Working Memory and Task Cues
Working memory performance and cue features can also
illuminate the paradox that exists in the prospective memory
literature pertaining to age effects reliably found in the
laboratory but not in naturalistic settings. The radio
communication task required not only prospective memory,
but also retrospective memory with respect to the
instructions regarding timing of the required radio calls.
Embedded within each circuit were implicit event-based
cues as to when to complete a radio call, e.g. at the start of
each downwind leg of the circuit. If this instruction was not
maintained in working memory throughout the task (even
though radio calls are a habitual event within circuit
activity) then prospective memory would also appear to be
reduced. This tension between retrospective and prospective
memory highlights the importance of working memory,

Craik, F. I. M., Anderson, N. D., Kerr, S. A., & Li, K. Z. H.
(1995). Memory changes in normal ageing. In A. D.
Baddeley, B. A. Wilson & F. N. Watts (Eds.), Handbook
of memory disorders (pp. 211-241). Chichester, U.K.:
Wiley.
Craik, F. & Bialystok, E. (2006). Planning and task
management in older adults: Cooking breakfast. Memory
& Cognition 34, 1236–1249.
Dismukes, R. K. (2010). Remembrance of things future:
Prospective memory in laboratory, workplace, and
everyday settings. NASA Ames Research Center.
Retrieved
January
21,
2011
from
http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/flightcognition/Publicat
ions/Dismukes_Remembrance_28Jan10.pdf

2339

Dismukes, R.K. & Berman, B. (2010). Checklists and
monitoring in the cockpit: Why crucial defenses
sometimes fail. NASA Technical Memorandum (NASA
TM-2010-216396). Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames
Research Center.
Dodhia, R. M. & Dismukes, R. K. (2009). Interruptions
create prospective memory tasks. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 23(1), 73-89.
DriveABLE Testing Ltd. (1997). Evaluations for at-risk
experienced drivers. DriveABLE Testing Ltd, Edmonton,
Alberta.
Einstein, G. & McDaniel, M. (1990) Normal aging and
prospective memory.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 16, 717–
726.
Holbrook, J. B. & Dismukes, R. K. (2009). Prospective
memory in everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society 53rd Annual Meeting,
pp. 590-594. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Kvavilashvili, L, & Fisher L. (2007) Is time-based
prospective remembering mediated by self-initiated
rehearsals? Role of incidental cues, ongoing activity, age,
and motivation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 136, 112–132.
Salthouse, T. A. (1994). The aging of working memory.
Neuropsychology, 8, 535-543.
Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing speed theory of
adult age differences in cognition. Psychological Review,
103, 403-428.
Uttl, B. (2008). Transparent meta-analysis of prospective
memory and aging. PLoS ONE 3(2): e1568.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001568. Retrieved January 21,
2011fromhttp://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F
10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0001568.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research is provided in part by scholarships
to K. Van Benthem from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada, the J. James
Mackie Endowment for Graduate Scholarships, Ottawa,
Canada and the Graduate Award for Research in Dementia,
Ottawa, Canada. Research infrastructure was supported
through the Canadian Foundation for Innovation and the
Ontario Innovation Trust. We thank Anne Barr, Dr.
Matthew Brown and Andrew Staples of the Carleton
University, ACE Laboratory for their consultation and
engineering expertise.

2340

