UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rational Order Effects in Responsibility Attributions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5q96q9zc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Gerstenberg, Tobias
Lagnado, David
Speekenbrink, Maarten
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rational Order Effects in Responsibility Attributions
Tobias Gerstenberg (t.gerstenberg@ucl.ac.uk), David A. Lagnado (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk),
Maarten Speekenbrink (m.speekenbrink@ucl.ac.uk), Catherine Lok Sze Cheung (c.cheung@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual, and Brain Sciences
University College London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Two experiments establish a rational order effect in
responsibility attributions. Experiment 1 shows that in a team
challenge in which players contribute sequentially, the last
player’s blame or credit for a performance is reduced if the
team’s result is already determined prior to his acting.
However, credit and blame attributions still vary with quality
of performance in these cases. This finding is at odds with
Spellman (1997) who proposed that a person’s perceived
contribution varies with the degree to which it changes the
probability of the eventual outcome. Experiment 2 illustrates
that the rational order effect does not overgeneralize to
situations in which the experienced order of events does not
map onto the objective order of events. The quality of the last
person’s performance is only discredited if she knew that the
result was already determined.
Keywords: responsibility attribution; causal chain; order
effect.

Introduction
Consider you are the manager of your country’s soccer team
in the next world cup. After a nerve-wracking final ending
in a draw, the winner has to be determined through a penalty
shoot-out. You have already chosen five players from your
team but you are still undecided about the order in which
they shall shoot. You feel that later shots are more important
than earlier ones but you also know that the game might
already be decided before the 5th player gets to shoot.
Should you put your best striker first or last? A similar
problem occurs when thinking about the order in which
runners should run in a team relay. In this paper, we are
interested in people’s perceptions of the extent to which
individuals carry responsibility for their group’s result in
situations in which the group members contribute
sequentially.
Chains comprised of several events that eventually lead to
a positive or negative outcome are an interesting test field
for attribution theories. According to a simple
counterfactual analysis, each of the events qualifies equally
as a cause of the effect. If any of the events in the chain had
not occurred, the effect would also not have occurred.
However, several studies have shown that there are
systematic differences as to which events in a chain are
judged as being more causal (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990)
or more likely to be mentally undone in order to prevent the
outcome from happening (Wells, Taylor & Turtle, 1987).
Different theories have been proposed to answer the
question of what guides people’s differential evaluation of
individual events in chains.
One important factor influencing whether earlier or later
events in the chain are more likely to be seen as important is

the dependence relation between the events. In a causal
chain, later events are (causally) dependent on earlier
events. In a temporal chain, the individual events are largely
independent of each other.
Wells et al. (1987) describe a scenario in which an actor
arrives late due to a causal sequence of events. They showed
that people exhibit a primacy effect for causal chains. The
earliest event was rated as a greater cause of his lateness
than any of the subsequent events. In contrast, Miller and
Gunasegaram (1990) demonstrated a recency effect for
temporal chains. In a scenario in which two players only
gain a prize if both of their pennies match after a sequential
coin flip, 92% of the participants indicated that if the coins
are mismatched then the player who went first is more likely
to blame the second player than vice versa. However, the
mapping between type of chain and the tendency of
focusing on earlier versus later events is not perfect.
N'Gbala and Branscombe (1995), for example, have shown
that later events can be seen as more important in a causal
chain.
In a very influential paper, Spellman (1997) proposed a
unifying theory to explain the differences in attributions.
Rather than focusing on different types of chains, Spellman
argued that people’s intuitions can be accounted for by
assuming that they engage in a process akin to a stepwise
multiple regression in which the probability of the effect is
evaluated after each of the events in the chain has occurred.
The crediting causality model (CCM) predicts that an
event’s perceived causal contribution varies with the extent
to which it changed the probability of the eventual outcome.
The more an event changes the outcome’s probability, the
more it is judged to be causal.
For example, consider the coin flip scenario described
above. Before the first player flips her coin, the probability
of the team winning the prize is 50%. Since both players’
coins have to match, the probability of winning remains
unchanged after the first person’s flip. However, after the
second person flipped his coin, the probability of winning
goes either up to 100% if he matched the first player’s coin
or down to 0% if he failed to match. Since the probability
change due to the first player is 0% and due to the second
player 50%, the model correctly predicts that people will
judge the second player as being more causal then the first
player.
Since its proposal, several shortcomings of the CCM have
been demonstrated. Importantly, because the model predicts
causality ratings merely based on the notion of probability
change it is insensitive to the way in which these changes
are brought about. However, studies have shown that
voluntary human actions are preferred over physical events

1715

as causes (Lagnado & Channon, 2008) even when the
change in probability is identical (Hilton, McClure &
Sutton, 2010). Furthermore, Mandel (2003) has shown that
a later event can receive a higher causal rating even though
an earlier event has already increased the probability of the
outcome to almost certainty. If an actor has been poisoned
first but is then killed in a car crash, people select the car
crash as the cause of death rather than the poison despite the
fact that the poison had already increased the probability of
death to certainty. Mandel (2003) suggests that people
prefer to select as causes those events that are sufficient to
bring about the outcome, whereas they tend to select events
that were necessary for the outcome when asked how it
could have been prevented.
A factor that has been largely neglected in the
psychological literature on attributions of causal
responsibility in chains is performance. The quality with
which an action is performed normally corresponds closely
to the degree of probability change in the outcome. For
example, the probability with which a good result is
achieved in a supply chain varies closely with how well
each worker does his job. However, the tight coupling
between quality of performance and change of probability in
the outcome is sometimes broken. The context of team
sports in which individual players contribute sequentially to
the team’s outcome provides an ideal test case where the
individual performances and the respective changes in the
probability of the result can be dissociated. Consider the
example of a team relay mentioned earlier. If the
performance of the first three runners in a team was very
poor, the probability of the team winning before the fourth
runner is essentially zero and cannot be increased anymore
irrespective of the fourth runner’s performance. The
question is now whether the extent to which the fourth
player is seen as responsible for the team’s loss will still
vary with how well he ran, despite the fact that the
probability of the team winning is now independent of the
quality of his performance. This effect could not be
accounted for by the CCM.
In Experiment 2 of Spellman (1997), a game-show
scenario is described in which two players, Allen and Barry,
perform their tasks sequentially. If Allen performs his task
well, Barry gets the easier of two possible tasks. If Allen
performs poorly, Barry gets the harder task. The team wins
if Barry succeeds in his task. In one condition, for example,
Barry was described as having a 90% chance of succeeding
in the easier task and a 10% chance of succeeding in the
harder task. The results showed that participants’ causal
contribution ratings varied closely in accordance with the
CCM. Which of the two players was rated as more causal
depended on the degree to which each of them changed the
probability of the eventual outcome. While in many of the
cases the quality of Allen’s performance influenced the
probability that Barry would succeed in his task, there was
also a set of cases in which the probability of Barry
succeeding in his task was independent of Allen’s
performance. That is, Barry was described as being equally

good in the two possible tasks. Interestingly, despite the fact
that in these situations the probability of the team’s result
did not vary with the quality of Allen’s performance,
participants’ causal contribution ratings did.
In situations in which the team won, Allen’s causal
contribution was rated higher when he performed his task
well compared to when he performed his task poorly.
Similarly, in situations in which the team did not win the
prize, Allen’s contribution to the result was rated lower
when he performed well compared to when he performed
poorly. This result has not been discussed by Spellman
(1997) or by any of the subsequent studies that have tested
her model. While in Spellman’s (1997) experiment, the
team’s final outcome is always determined by the last player
in the chain, there are situations such as the team relay
described above in which the outcome can already be
determined by an earlier event in the chain. Will an identical
performance of a later player in the chain be evaluated
differently depending on whether the team’s outcome was
already certain or still open?
The present paper explores how (i) quality of performance
and (ii) the extent to which a contribution was critical to the
result, as measured by the change of probability in outcome
that it induced, affects people’s perceptions of how
responsible each contribution was for the eventual outcome.
In line with CCM, we expect that the extent to which an
identical performance will be seen as responsible for the
team’s result varies depending on whether the result was
already determined or not. However, in contrast to the
predictions of the CCM, we expect that the quality of
performance influences how responsible a player is seen for
the team’s outcome, even in situations in which the result is
already determined.

Experiment 1
Participants acted as external observers evaluating the
performance of different teams in the qualifiers of an
invented sport (similar to gymnastics) for the London
Olympics 2012. Each of the 32 countries is represented by a
team of three athletes. The athletes perform their routines
individually and receive a score from a panel of judges
ranging from 0 (= very bad performance) to 10 (= excellent
performance). Participants were instructed that the average
performance in the competition was 5 points. A country
qualifies for the Olympics if its team scores 15 or more
points in total. How many points over and above 15 a team
scores does not make a difference. Participants were
informed that the athletes perform their individual routines
sequentially and that later athletes know how their previous
teammates have performed. For each of the 32 teams,
participants experienced two different phases. In the
probability rating phase, they saw the scores of each of the
three athletes sequentially and, after each athlete’s score,
indicated on a slider how likely they thought that the team
would qualify (see Figure 1). The slider ranged from 0
(‘definitely not’) to 100 (‘definitely yes’) and was initialized
at the midpoint. The progress bar at the top of the screen

1716

Figure 1. Screenshot of the probability updating phase.

Figure 2. Screenshot of the responsibility attribution phase.

showed how many points were still required for the team to
qualify and was updated after each athlete’s score. Once the
team qualified, the progress bar turned green. If the team
could not qualify anymore, the bar turned red.
In the responsibility attribution phase, each athlete’s
score was shown simultaneously in a table (see Figure 2).
Participants were asked: “To what extent is each of the
athletes responsible for their team’s success or failure to
qualify?” If the team qualified, participants attributed credit
(green sliders ranging from the center to the right). If the
team did not qualify, participants attributed blame (red
sliders ranging from the center to the left). The sliders for
each athlete ranged from 0 (‘none’) to 10 (‘high’) and could
be moved independently, that is, they did not have to sum
up to a certain value.
Table 1 shows 24 of the patterns of scores that were used
in the experiment. We systematically varied the scores of
the 3rd athlete as either low (mean score = 3) or high (mean
score = 7) for different scores by the first two athletes. This
approach allowed us to compare how an identical
performance of the 3rd athlete was evaluated as a function of
whether the results was already certain prior to his
performing or still uncertain. There were two possible ways
in which the team’s result could have already been
determined by the scores of the first two athletes. A team’s
loss was certain if the sum of the first two athletes’ scores
was 4 points or less. Because the maximum score that an
athlete can achieve in the challenge is 10, it was impossible
for the third athlete to make their team win. Likewise, a
team’s win was certain prior to the 3rd athlete’s performance
if the first two athletes’ scores added up to 15 or more
points.

A consequence of this design is that, while keeping the
absolute performance of the 3rd athlete identical in the
different situations the relative performance compared to his
teammates varies. He performs relatively well in the certain
loss as compared to the uncertain loss cases and relatively
poorly in the certain win as compared to the uncertain win
situations. Because our main interest concerns the effect of
the (un-)certainty of outcome on the attributions for the 3rd
athlete, we controlled for the effects of relative performance
by including 8 additional cases in which the scores of all
three athletes were identical. Here, all athletes either scored
2 (or 3 points) in the certain loss cases, 3 (or 4 points) in the
uncertain loss cases, 6 (or 7 points) in the uncertain win
cases and 8 (or 9 points) in the certain win cases. Any
differences between the three athletes in these situations can
only be explained in terms of order effects.
The main target of interest in our design is the 3rd athlete.
We hypothesized that both her performance as well as the
certainty of the team’s result prior to her turn would affect
participants’ attributions. More precisely, we expected the
3rd athlete’s blame for losses to be higher and credit for wins
to be lower when she received a low as compared to a high
score even in situations in which the results was already
certain. Furthermore, we predicted that the 3rd athlete would
receive less credit for an identical performance if the result
was already certain as compared to still uncertain. Likewise,
we predicted that the athlete would receive less blame for an
identical performance if the team had already certainly
missed the qualification threshold prior to her turn.

Table 1. Patterns of non-identical athletes’ scores used in
the experiment.
R
C
S
L
H

loss
certain uncertain
2 3 4 6 7 8
4 3 2 4 3 2
8 7 6 8 7 6

win
uncertain
certain
11 12 13 16 17 18
4
3
2
4
3
2
8
7
6
8
7
6

R = result, C = certainty of the team’s result after the 2nd athlete’s score, S
= sum of the 1st and the 2nd athletes’ scores, L = low score by the 3rd athlete,
H = high score by the 3rd athlete.

Method
Participants 41 (22 female) participants recruited through
the UCL subject pool took part in the experiment. The mean
age was 23.1 (SD = 2.5).
Materials The program was written in Adobe Flash CS5.
Design For the 24 patterns in which the scores of the three
athletes were non-identical (see Table 1), the experiment
followed a within-subject 2 (result: win vs. loss) x 2
(certainty of outcome: uncertain vs. certain) x 2
(performance of the 3rd athlete: low vs. high score) design.
For the patterns with identical scores of the three athletes,
the experiment followed a within-subject 2 (result) x 2
(certainty of outcome) design.

1717

a)

b)

Figure 4. Mean blame and credit ratings of the 3rd athlete for cases with non-identical scores (top) and of all three athletes for
cases with identical scores (bottom). Error bars indicate ±1 SEM.
Procedure The study was carried out online.1 After having
read the instructions, participants did one practice trial in
which the different components of the screen were
explained. A set of 4 comprehension check questions
ensured that participants had understood the task. On
average, they answered 89% of the comprehension check
questions correctly. After answering each of the questions,
the correct solution was displayed. Participants then
evaluated the performance of 32 teams in the probability
rating phase (Figure 1) and the attribution phase (Figure 2)
as described above. If a team did not qualify, participants
attributed blame otherwise they attributed credit.
Throughout the game, they could remind themselves of the
rules by clicking on the ‘Rules’ button in the bottom left of
the screen (see Figures 1 and 2). The median time that it
took participants to finish the study was 18.8 minutes.

Results
For all our analyses we adopted a significance criterion of
.05 (two-sided) and applied Bonferroni corrections when
multiple test were conducted on the same data set.
Probability updating phase Figure 3 (left panel) shows the
mean probability of success ratings for wins and losses
separated for situations in which the outcome was already
certain after the 2nd athlete’s score or still uncertain. For
losses, participants’ probability of success ratings after the
2nd athlete’s score was revealed were significantly lower in
the certain (M = 4.5, SD = 11.5) compared to the uncertain
cases (M = 27.1, SD = 18.1), t(40) = -15.71. For wins,
participant’s probability ratings were significantly higher in
certain (M = 96.4, SD = 10.4) compared to the uncertain
cases (M = 75.8, SD = 15.1), t(40) = 14.46.
Responsibility attribution phase First, we wanted to test to
what extent the blame and credit ratings for the 3rd athlete
varied as a function of his performance and whether the
team’s result was already certain after the 2nd athlete’s score
or not. Two separate 2 (certainty: certain vs. uncertain) x 2

(performance: low vs. high score) repeated measures
ANOVAs for losses and wins were conducted on the ratings
for the 3rd athlete in the non-identical cases (see Figure 4a
top).
For losses, there were significant main effects of
performance F(1,40) = 129.33, η = .764 and of certainty
F(1,40) = 6.86, η = .146 but no interaction. The 3rd athlete
was blamed more if he received a low score compared to a
high score. Furthermore, his blame ratings were lower when
the team had already certainly missed the qualification
criterion compared to when the outcome was still uncertain.
Crucially, the effect of performance significantly influenced
the athlete’s blame ratings both for situations in which the
outcome was still uncertain (t(40) = 11.37) as well as when
it was already determined (t(40) = 8.36).
For wins, there were significant main effects of
performance F(1,40) = 66.03, η = .623 and of certainty
F(1,40) = 31.76, η = .443 but no interaction effect. The 3rd
athlete received more credit for a high score compared to a
low score. Also, credit attributions were higher if the result
was still uncertain compared to certain. Again, the effect of

Figure 3. Mean probability of success ratings after each
athlete’s score was revealed. Black markers = uncertain
cases, white markers = certain cases.

1

The experiment can be accessed here:
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/lagnado-lab/research.html

1718

performance significantly influenced the athlete’s credit
ratings both for situations in which the outcome was still
uncertain (t(40) = -7.76) as well as when it was already
determined (t(40) = -6.84).
As outlined above, the predicted order effect and the
relative performance effect go in the same direction for the
cases in which the scores of the three athletes were nonidentical. Hence, we analyzed the situations separately in
which all of the athletes had identical scores. Any
differences for these cases can only be explained with
respect to the order of performance.
Figure 4a (bottom) shows the mean blame ratings for
losses and credit ratings for wins attributed to all three
athletes in the team in situations in which the result was
uncertain and certain. To evaluate whether the 3rd athlete’s
ratings varied as a function of certainty of outcome, we
compared the difference in the average attributions of the
first two athletes with the 3rd athlete. For losses, this
difference was significantly greater in the certain cases (M =
-1.97, SD = 3.77) as opposed to the uncertain cases (M =
0.11, SD = 1.81). The 3rd athlete received significantly less
blame for an identical performance if the result was already
certain as compared to uncertain, t(40) = -3.88. For wins,
likewise, the 3rd athlete received significantly less credit for
an identical performance if the result was already certain
(M = -2.79, SD = 4.18) as compared to uncertain (M = -0.71,
SD = 2.16), t(40) = -3.29.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that how much blame or
credit an athlete receives for his team’s loss or win depends
to a large extent on her performance. Even when the result
of the team challenge is already determined, an athlete still
receives more credit and less blame for a good performance
compared to a bad performance. This finding is at odds with
the CCM, since the performance of the player does not
influence the probability of the team’s outcome in these
situations as revealed by participants’ subjective probability
ratings. However, participants did show an attenuation
effect to the extent that the blame and credit attributions to
the last athlete were reduced when the result was certain
compared to uncertain.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we wanted to see whether the reduction in
blame and credit attributions for the situations in which the
outcome was already determined overgeneralizes to
situations in which it would be inappropriate. Crucially,
whether the performance of the 3rd athlete should be
discredited given that the outcome is already certain
depends on that athlete’s knowledge that this is the case.
While keeping the experienced order of events unchanged,
Experiment 2 altered the objective order of events and,
alongside, the knowledge states of the athletes, by having
the individual athletes perform simultaneously without
knowing how the other team members perform. Spellman
(1997) has shown that both the order in which events occur

in the world as well as the order in which people learn about
them can influence people’s attributions. Experiment 2
aimed to investigate this further. Would participants show
reduced blame attributions for losses and credit attributions
for wins when they knew that the result was already
determined? Or would they appreciate that the athletes did
not know each other’s scores and hence show no attenuation
effect as a function of the certainty of the result?

Method
Participants 56 (42 female) participants recruited through
the UCL subject pool took part in the experiment. The mean
age was 21.4 (SD = 4.6).
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
except for a minimal change in the instructions. Participants
were informed that the athletes of each team were
performing their individual routines simultaneously at
different stadiums. Importantly, the athletes did not know
how their teammates were doing. Participants were told that
due to technical issues, they would see the scores of the
three athletes sequentially. On average, participants
answered 89% of the comprehension questions correctly.
The median time it took participants to complete the study
was 16.5 minutes.

Results
Probability updating phase Figure 3 (right panel) shows
the probability of success ratings for Experiment 2. Again,
participants were more confident about the team’s loss after
the 2nd athlete’s score was revealed in the certain (M = 4.3,
SD = 10.3) compared to the uncertain condition (M = 25.2,
SD = 15.8), t(55) = -17.77. Also for wins, participants gave
significantly higher ratings in the certain (M = 96.7, SD =
10.5) than in the uncertain condition (M = 75.7, SD = 14.8),
t(55) = 20.53.
Responsibility attribution phase Again, the blame and
credit ratings for the 3rd athlete varied with how he
performed and, although much less so, with whether the
result was already certain or not. Figure 4b (top) shows the
blame and credit attributions of the 3rd athlete for the
situations in which the scores of the three athletes were nonidentical. For losses, there were significant main effects of
performance F(1,55) = 261.55, η = .826 and of certainty
F(1,55) = 6.97, η = .112 but no interaction effect. For wins,
there were significant main effects of performance F(1,55)
= 363.55, η = .869 and of certainty F(1,55) = 14.04, η =
.203 but no interaction effect.
Importantly, the difference between the blame attributions
in the certain cases and the uncertain cases was significantly
larger in Experiment 1 (M = -0.91, SD = 2.23) compared to
Experiment 2 (M = -0.25, SD = .71), t(95) = -2.07.
Likewise, the differences between the credit attributions as a
function of outcome certainty were larger in Experiment 1
(M = -2.95, SD = 3.35) than in Experiment 2 (M = -0.73, SD
= 1.45), t(95) = -4.44.
Figure 4b (bottom) shows the blame and credit ratings of
all three athletes for the situations in which their scores were

1719

identical. There was no significant difference between the
mean blame ratings of the first two athletes and the 3rd
athlete in the certain cases (M = -0.05, SD = 0.57) and the
uncertain cases (M = 0, SD = 0.95). Furthermore, there was
no significant difference for the credit ratings between the
certain (M = -0.35, SD = 1.57) and the uncertain cases (M =
-0.25, SD = 1.08).

Discussion
Similar to Experiment 1, blame and credit ratings varied
depending on how the athletes performed. However, in
contrast to the results of Experiment 1, the certainty factor
had only a small influence on participants’ responsibility
attributions for the 3rd athlete in the non-identical cases and
no influence in the identical cases. As mentioned above, the
small effect of the certainty factor is likely to be a result of
the differences in relative performance in the non-identical
cases. Most of the participants were not influenced by the
experienced order of events and took into account the fact
that the 3rd athlete did not know her teammates’ scores.
Hence, the quality of the 3rd athlete’s performance was not
discredited in situations in which the outcome was already
determined.

General Discussion
The results of two experiments show that people exhibit a
rational attenuation effect in their responsibility attributions
for team-members contributing sequentially to a team
challenge. The quality of a team-member’s performance is
discredited for situations in which the outcome is already
determined. Importantly, this effect is only present in
situations in which the later team-member knows the
previous members’ scores. It does not overgeneralize to
situations in which the order with which participants learn
about the scores does not map onto the order in which they
are generated: it seems to be the inferred epistemic state of
the athletes that drives the attenuation effect. However, as
the differences in epistemic states of the players between
Experiment 1 and 2 were confounded with different
objective orders of events, future research is needed that
decouples these factors. In addition, it would be interesting
to contrast the present situation to one in which physical
events unfold over time.
Participants showed neither a primacy nor a recency
effect in situations in which the team’s outcome was still
uncertain (see Figure 4 bottom panels). Only when athletes
knew their teammates’ scores (Experiment 1) were the
blame and credit ratings for the 3rd athlete reduced when the
outcome was already certain.
Spellman’s (1997) CCM cannot account for the
performance effect in situations in which the result is
already determined. However, we consider this effect to be
rational since the quality of performance of the 3rd athlete
still conveys important information. For example, if an
athlete performed well despite the fact that the team had
already lost for sure we learn that he is in principle capable
of a good performance. The athlete’s good performance

could have made a difference, in the counterfactual situation
in which his teammates had performed somewhat better. In
contrast, if the 3rd athlete performed poorly, we cannot be
sure whether this is only due to the fact that he knows that
the team has already lost and hence does not try hard, or
whether he might not have performed better even if his
contribution would have been needed. This difference in the
information we receive makes it rational to take into account
an athlete’s performance even if the result was already
determined.
Our experiments highlight the fact that a comprehensive
model of responsibility attribution in group contexts will
need to take into account the mental states of the players
(Gerstenberg, Lagnado & Kareev, 2010), the extent to
which each player made a difference to the outcome
(Gerstenberg & Lagnado, 2010) as well as the quality of
individual performance.

Acknowledgments
TG is the beneficiary of a doctoral grant from the AXA
research fund. DL was supported by ESRC grant (RES-06233-0004) and MS by ESRC grant (RES-062-23-1511).

References
Gerstenberg, T. & Lagnado, D. A. (2010). Spreading the
blame: The attribution of responsibility amongst
multiple agents. Cognition, 115, 166-171.
Gerstenberg, T., Lagnado. D. A. & Kareev, Y. (2010). The
dice are cast: The role of intended versus actual
contributions in responsibility attribution. In S. Ohlsson
& R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Hilton, D. J., McClure, J. & Sutton, R. M. (2010). Selecting
explanations from causal chains: Do statistical principles
explain preferences for voluntary causes? European
Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 383-400.
Lagnado, D. A. & Channon, S. (2008). Judgments of cause
and blame: the effects of intentionality and
foreseeability. Cognition, 108 (3), 754-70.
Mandel, D. R. (2003). Judgment dissociation theory: an
analysis of differences in causal, counterfactual, and
covariational reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 132 (3), 419-34.
Miller, D. T. & Gunasegaram, S. (1990). Temporal order
and the perceived mutability of events: Implications for
blame assignment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 59 (6), 1111-1118.
NʼGbala, A. & Branscombe, N. R. (1995). Mental
simulation and causal attribution: When simulating an
event does not affect fault assignment. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 31, 139-162.
Spellman, B. A. (1997). Crediting causality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 126 (4), 323-348.
Wells, G. L., Taylor, B. R. & Turtle, J. W. (1987). The
undoing of scenarios. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 53 (3), 421-430.

1720

