UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Retrieval Dynamics of In-the-Moment and Long-Term Statistical Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1h44z9tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Vlach, Haley A.
Sandhofer, Catherine M.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Retrieval Dynamics of In-the-Moment and Long-Term Statistical Word Learning
Haley A. Vlach (haleyvlach@ucla.edu)
Catherine M. Sandhofer (sandhof@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
1285 Franz Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Abstract
Memory. Research on human memory has long sought to
discover the conditions of learning that (a) create and store a
representation of knowledge and (b) produce a
representation that can be recalled and accessed over
extended periods of time. This body of research has
revealed several learning conditions that promote long-term
memory. For example, distributing practice (e.g., Bjork &
Allen, 1970), varying the conditions of practice (e.g., Smith
& Rothkopf, 1984), and reducing feedback to the learner
(e.g., Schmidt, 1991) have all been shown to promote longterm memory.
These learning conditions support long-term memory
because they introduce difficulty for learners while
knowledge is being acquired (see Bjork, 1994, for a review).
Although introducing difficulty during learning often deters
immediate performance, retention tests reveal higher longterm performance (compared to easier learning conditions).
Because of the long-term benefit of such difficulties, these
conditions of learning are often termed „desirable
difficulties‟ of learning (e.g., Bjork, 1994). Consequently,
memory research suggests that creating difficulty during
learning promotes long-term performance.
An example of a desirable difficulty of learning is
distributed practice, often termed the spacing effect (e.g.,
Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008). The spacing effect is
the robust phenomenon whereby memory is enhanced when
learning events are distributed across time (i.e., spaced),
instead of being presented in immediate succession (i.e.,
massed). Because of the time between learning events,
spaced learning creates greater opportunities for forgetting
(e.g., Bjork & Allen, 1970). Consequently, retrieving
previous learning events is more difficult. On the other
hand, massed presentations prevent forgetting because
presentations are in immediate succession, making retrieval
of previous learning events easier. In fact, upon immediate
testing, massed presentations lead to a greater amount of
learning than spaced presentations. However, if a test is
administered following a delay, a spaced presentation
schedule will yield more learning than the massed
presentation schedule (e.g., Vlach et al., 2008).

Theories of word learning have proposed several tools that
children and adults use to reduce the difficulty of the word
learning problem. However, we propose that reducing difficulty
may be detrimental—difficulty may promote long-term word
learning. In this study, we tested predictions of desirable
difficulties and the retrieval effort hypothesis in a crosssituational word learning paradigm. Learners were presented
with objects and labels in three conditions of learning (easy,
medium, and difficult) and tested either immediately or one
week later. Results revealed a counterintuitive pattern of
performance—initially, participants in the easy condition had
the highest performance. However, after a one week delay,
participants in the medium condition had the highest
performance. Participants‟ self-report of retrieval difficulty
during learning is used to account for differences in performance
over time. This work is discussed in terms of the implications
for several fields of cognitive science: statistical learning,
human memory, and language and cognitive development.
Keywords: word and category learning; statistical learning;
cross-situational learning; language and cognitive development;

Introduction
Word learning has been described as one of the greatest
challenges of cognitive development. The world offers
learners a seemingly infinite number of word-to-world
mappings yet children and adults appear to learn words with
great ease (Quine, 1960). How do learners accomplish such
a difficult task?
Theories of word learning have focused on tools that
learners use to make the word learning problem easier.
These tools range from basic cognitive processes of
attention (e.g., Smith, 2000), to social cues (e.g., Tomasello
& Barton, 1994), to early constraints, such as mutual
exclusivity (e.g., Markman, 1989). Although theories of
word learning propose different mechanisms and tools, all
theories suggest that reducing difficulty of the task is
beneficial for word learning.
In this study, we take a radically different perspective on
word learning. We propose that the difficulty children and
adults encounter during word mapping may be beneficial to
the learning process. That is, a desirable amount of
difficulty may promote long-term word learning. We
examine how difficult learning conditions affect learners‟
in-the-moment and long-term statistical word mapping. We
take a mechanistic approach by examining a basic cognitive
process that contributes to different learning outcomes:
retrieval difficulty during learning. Taken together, this
work demonstrates the central role of retrieval processes in
statistical learning and word mapping.

Word Learning. Word learning tasks differ from memory
tasks. In memory tasks, learners are asked to store a
specific piece of information and then retrieve that piece of
information later.
However, in word learning tasks,
children and adults are required to aggregate and abstract
across learning events in order to infer and/or generalize to a
new experience.

789

Figure 1. Example stimuli, for first three trials, from the different learning conditions: 2 x 2, 3 x 3, and 4 x 4.
Several researchers have long suggested that, although
introducing difficulty during memory tasks is beneficial,
these difficulties may be detrimental in more complex
cognitive tasks (e.g., Gagne, 1950). For example, spaced
learning was proposed to be particularly detrimental in
generalization tasks. In fact, spaced learning was coined the
“enemy of induction” (e.g., Gagne, 1950; see Kornell &
Bjork, 2008, for a discussion). Despite speculations that
desirable difficulties may be the “enemy of induction”,
recent research suggests that imposing difficulty during
learning promotes long-term word learning and
generalization (e.g., Vlach et al., 2008).

presented simultaneously. In the 4 x 4 condition, four
objects and four labels were presented simultaneously. The
conditions were classified as „easy‟ (2 x 2), „medium‟ (3 x
3), and „hard‟ (4 x 4), based upon the amount of retrieval
necessary to correctly map words to objects in one learning
event. In the 2 x 2 condition, retrieving at least two prior
associations is required to successfully map the words to
objects in one learning event. In the 3 x 3 condition,
retrieving at least three prior associations is required. In the
4 x 4 condition, retrieving at least four prior associations is
required. During learning, participants were presented with
a paper and pencil task. In this task, they were asked to
report the objects for which they could successfully retrieve
the corresponding label. These conditions and tasks
allowed for a direct comparison of the effects of varying
degrees of retrieval difficulty in statistical word learning.

Why is difficulty during learning beneficial? One
limitation of previous research on desirable difficulties in
memory and word learning is that the mechanism(s)
underlying performance differences are often poorly
understood. That is, experiments are not commonly set up
to determine and/or isolate the specific cognitive processes
that cause higher long-term performance.
Several
theoretical frameworks, including desirable difficulties in
learning, have suggested that more difficult (but eventually
successful) retrieval is more beneficial for long-term
learning than easier retrieval (e.g., Bjork, 1994). However,
only within the last few years have researchers begun to test
predictions of the retrieval effort hypothesis (see Pyc &
Rawson, 2009, for a discussion).
Could the degree of difficulty in retrieving prior
associations between word and objects promote long-term
statistical word learning? From one perspective, difficulty in
retrieving prior associations should deter statistical word
learning because it would prevent learners from aggregating
learning events together. If learners cannot aggregate
learning events, they may not be able to determine which
associations are more probable than others. On the other
hand, memory mechanisms have been shown to promote
word learning tasks (e.g., Vlach et al., 2008), and thus more
effortful retrieval may support statistical word learning by
promoting memory for associations.
The current study examined this question by presenting
learners with a cross-situational word learning paradigm in
three learning conditions: 2 x 2 (easy), 3 x 3 (medium), and
4 x 4 (hard). In the 2 x 2 condition, two objects and two
words were presented in each learning trial, simultaneously.
In the 3 x 3 condition, three objects and three labels were

Method
Participants
Participants were 64 undergraduates at University of
California, Los Angeles. Participants received course credit
for their participation.

Design
This study used a 3 x 2 design: Learning Condition (2 x 2, 3
x 3, and 4 x 4) and Testing Delay (Immediate or 1 Week
Delay) were between-subjects factors. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the six conditions of the study.

Stimuli
Pictures of objects were presented on a 15-inch computer
screen and the sound for the labels was presented through
the computer‟s speakers. As Figure 1 shows, the objects
were pictures of novel objects. There were a total of 18
objects. The labels were novel words following the
phonotactic probabilities of English (e.g., „blicket‟). There
were a total of 18 labels. Objects and labels were randomly
paired together, for a total of 18 object-label pairs. In all
conditions, there were a total of 6 presentations of each of
the 18 object-label pairs. There were also an additional four
objects and four labels presented during the training trial.

790

In the 2 x 2 condition, two objects and two words were
presented in each learning trial, simultaneously. In the 3 x 3
condition, three objects and three labels were presented
simultaneously. In the 4 x 4 condition, four objects and four
labels were presented simultaneously. Figure 1 shows three
learning trials of the experiment for each of the three
conditions. It is important to note that the presentation
order of objects and labels was randomized in each trial—
the first word presented did not necessarily refer to the first
object on the screen.
Because the same number of object-label pairs (18 pairs)
were presented in each condition, the same number of times
(6 presentations each), other presentation factors varied
across conditions in order to ensure equivalent exposure to
the object-label pairs. Table 1 outlines these variations,
which were adapted from Yu and Smith (2007). Although
the number of trials and time per trial varied, the total
exposure time remained constant across the conditions.

For the 3 x 3 and 4 x 4 conditions, the number of letters
corresponded to the number of objects and labels for each
trial. For example, in the 4 x 4 condition, participants were
given a worksheet that had „A‟, „B‟, „C‟, „D‟, and „None‟
for each trial. In sum, this task assessed the quantity and
times at which participants experienced success in retrieving
labels for objects.
The second task was a final test designed to assess overall
word learning performance. The final test consisted of four
force-choice questions. Each question presented one label
and asked participants to identify the corresponding object
among four objects. The three foil objects were other
objects used in the experiment. No one object was repeated
in the tests. Thus, 16 of the 18 objects were used in the test.

Procedure
Participants were told that they would be shown children‟s
toys and it was their job to figure out which word went with
which toy. They were also instructed that it would be
ambiguous as to which words went with which objects on
each trial. Participants were then given a brief training
exercise to demonstrate what the experiment would be like.
The training consisted of three learning trials, each with two
objects and two labels, immediately followed by a forcedchoice test. Objects and labels used during training were
not included during the rest of the experiment.
After the training trial, participants were informed that
they would now be beginning the learning phase of the
experiment. Participants were presented with learning trials
according to the condition in which they were assigned (2 x
2, 3 x 3, or 4 x 4). The number and length of trials was also
set according to the condition (see Table 1).
Participants were also instructed to complete a worksheet
during the learning trials. Participants were asked to circle
the object(s) for which they knew the corresponding label.
If they did not know the corresponding labels for any of the
objects, they were told to circle „None‟.
After viewing all of the learning trials and completing the
worksheet, participants were given a final forced-choice
test, depending upon the testing condition in which they
were assigned. In the immediate condition, participants
were given a test immediately following learning. In the
one week delay condition, participants were asked to come
back exactly 7 days after the learning session and complete
the test.

Table 1. Three Learning Conditions
Condition
2x2
3x3
4x4

Number
of Trials
54
36
27

Time per
Trial (in secs)
6
9
12

Total Time
(in secs)
324
324
324

Measures of Learning. In order to assess learners‟ in-themoment and long-term performance, participants were given
two pencil and paper tasks. The first task occurred during
learning and was used to assess retrieval difficulty.
Participants were given a worksheet in which they were
asked to indicate the object(s) for which they had learned
the corresponding label, on each trial. If they did not know
the label for any of the objects, they were asked to circle
„None‟. If they knew the label for the first object, they
would circle „A‟. If they knew the labels for all of the
objects, they would circle all of the letters. An example
worksheet, for the 2 x 2 condition, is shown in Figure 2.
For each trial, circle A, B, A & B, or None.
Trial #
1
2
3
4

54

A
A
A
A

A

B
B
B
B

B

None
None
None
None

Results
We asked whether difficulty would promote learners‟ longterm word learning in a cross-situational learning paradigm.
If difficulty promoted word learning, we would expect to
see lower performance immediately, but stronger
performance long-term. However, if difficulty did not
promote word learning, we would expect to see lower
performance regardless of testing delay. Moreover, we
wanted to examine if there were differences in learner‟s inthe-moment learning that could be contributing to
differences in long-term performance. Specifically, we

None

Figure 2. An example of the worksheet used for the 2 x 2
condition. Participants self-reported the object(s) for which
they could/could not retrieve the corresponding label.

791

predicted that perhaps retrieval difficulty during learning
might predict long-term performance.

condition, p > .05.
In sum, initially participants in the 3 x 3 condition had
lower performance than the 2 x 2 condition. However, one
week later, participants in the 3 x 3 condition had higher
performance than participants in the 2 x 2 condition. This
finding replicates that of previous research (e.g., Vlach &
Sandhofer, 2010) and extends this work by demonstrating
that retrieval difficult, but eventually successful retrieval
can promote long-term learning.

Overall Word Learning Performance. We started our
analysis by examining participant‟s overall word learning
performance at the final test (see Figure 3). We conducted a
3 (Learning Condition) x 2 (Testing Delay) ANOVA, with
the number of correct responses at the final test as the
dependent measure.
Results of this test revealed a
significant main effect of learning condition, F(2, 58) =
7.287, p = .002, a significant main effect of testing delay,
F(1, 58) = 3.610, p = .052, and a significant interaction of
learning and testing delay, F(2, 58) = 3.951, p = .025.
In order to explore the interaction, we conducted two
univariate ANOVAs, one in each testing condition. We
then computed three planned comparisons using t-tests with
Bonferroni corrections (p < .05) to determine the nature of
the differences between learning conditions within each
testing delay condition. If difficulty promoted word
learning, we expected there to be differences in performance
between learning conditions across the testing conditions.
In the immediate testing condition, there was a main
effect of learning condition, F(2, 31) = 6.270, p = .005.
Participants in the 2 x 2 condition had significantly higher
performance than in the 4 x 4 condition, p = .004.
Performance was also higher in the 2 x 2 condition than the
3 x 3 condition, p = .047. Finally, performance in the 3 x 3
condition was significantly higher than the 4 x 4 condition,
p =.051. Thus, the greater the number of object-label
pairings in each learning trial, the lower the performance.
However, there was a different pattern of results in the
one week delay condition. There was a main effect of
learning condition, F(2, 27) = 4.925, p = .015. Participants
in the 3 x 3 condition had higher performance than both the
2 x 2 condition, p = .046, and 4 x 4 condition, p = .016.
Participants in the 4 x 4 condition did not have significantly
different performance than participants in the 2 x 2

In-the-Moment Word Learning Performance. We were
particularly interested in determining if there were
differences of in-the-moment learning that could be
contributing to differences in long-term performance.
Specifically, we thought that retrieval difficulty during
learning could be a mechanism underlying performance. To
explore this possibility, we analyzed participants‟ self-report
of what they were retrieving. If there were differences in
the number and timing of retrieval successes, this could be
contributing to differences in performance.
We started by dividing learning into nine blocks of time,
36 seconds each. We chose this timescale because, over 36
seconds, participants in all of the conditions were exposed
to the same number of object-label pairings. For example,
in the 2 x 2 condition, there were 6 trials with 2 object-label
pairings, for a total of 12 object-label pairings. In the 3 x 3
condition, there were 4 trials with 3 object-label pairings,
for a total of 12 object-label pairings. Finally, in the 4 x 4
condition, there were 3 trials with 4 object-label pairings
each, for a total of 12-object label pairings.
After dividing learning into nine timescales (36s), we then
counted the number of objects that the participants reported
as successfully retrieving the corresponding labels. To do
this, we counted the number of objects (i.e., letters on the
worksheet, see Figure 2) participants circled between the
start of the experiment and the time point, resulting in a
cumulative number of successful retrievals. For example,
suppose a participant circled 2 objects between the time 0
and time 1, and 4 objects between time 1 and 2. The
resulting values would be 0 for time point 0, 2 for time point
1, and 6 (i.e., 2+4) for time point 2.
We then computed a mixed 3 (Learning Condition) x 9
(Time Point) ANOVA, with learning condition as a
between-subjects variable and time point as a withinsubjects variable. Results of this test revealed a main effect
of learning condition, F(2, 61) = 16.876, p < .001, a main
effect of time point, F(4, 488) = 277.917, p < .001, and a
significant interaction of learning condition and time point,
F(16, 488) = 14.004, p < .001 (see Figure 4, next page).
In order to explore the interaction, we conducted nine
univariate ANOVAs, one at each time point. We then
computed planned comparisons using t-tests with
Bonferroni corrections (p < .05) to determine the nature of
the differences between learning conditions within each
time point. If retrieval was difficult initially but then
successful, we expected there to be differences in

Figure 3. Average number of correct responses at final test,
by condition. Dashed line represents chance performance.
* = p < .05, ** = p < .01.

792

and final test performance using Pearson‟s r. There was a
significant correlation for both participants in the immediate
condition, r(32) = .441, p = .005, and participants in the one
week delay condition, r(28) = .449, p = .041.

performance between learning conditions across the
different time points.
At every time point, there was a main effect of learning
condition (all ps < .001). There were also no floor or ceiling
effects. However, across time points there were differences
in which learning conditions were significantly different
from one another. In time points 1-3, participants in the 2 x
2 condition reported successfully retrieving more pairings
than participants in the 3 x 3 and 4 x 4 conditions (which
did not significantly differ from each other, ps > .05). At
time points 4-5, all learning conditions were significantly
different from one another, ps < .05. Finally, in time points
7-9, participants in the 4 x 4 condition reported retrieving
significantly less pairings than participants in the 2 x 2 and
3 x 3 conditions (which did not significantly differ from
each other, ps > .05).
In sum, participants in the 3 x 3 condition reported
significantly fewer retrieval successes initially (compared to
participants in the 2 x 2 condition). This suggests that, at
first, retrieval was difficult for participants in the 3 x 3
condition. However, by the end of the experiment,
participants in the 3 x 3 conditions were more successfully
retrieving pairings of objects and words (compared to
participants in the 4 x 4 condition). This pattern of
retrievals could explain both the lower immediate
performance and the higher long-term performance of
participants in the 3 x 3 condition.

Discussion
At the immediate test, participants in the 2 x 2 condition
had higher performance than participants in the 3 x 3 and 4
x 4 conditions. However, at the one week delayed test,
participants in the 3 x 3 condition had higher performance
than participants in the 2 x 2 and 4 x 4 conditions. This
finding replicates previous research demonstrating that
difficult learning conditions often deter immediate word
learning performance but promote long-term performance,
relative to easier conditions of learning (e.g., Vlach &
Sandhofer, 2010). This work extends this work by
pinpointing a mechanism, retrieval difficulty, which may be
contributing to differences in long-term performance.
Why did participants in the 3 x 3 condition have lower
performance initially but higher performance at the one
week delayed test? We predicted that perhaps retrieval
difficulty during learning could account for differences in
long-term performance. Specifically, we predicted that
more difficult, but eventually successful, retrieval would
promote long-term performance (often termed the retrieval
effort hypothesis, see Pyc & Rawson, 2009).
Our analysis of participants‟ self-reported retrievals
during learning revealed that participants in the 3 x 3
condition had a particularly unique pattern of retrievals,
compared to participants in the 2 x 2 and 4 x 4 conditions.
During the initial part of learning, participants in the 3 x 3
condition reported a lower number of retrieval successes,
suggesting that retrieval was difficult. However, in the
middle portion of learning, participants in the 3 x 3
condition reported significantly more retrieval successes
than participants in the 4 x 4 condition, but significantly
fewer than participants in the 2 x 2 condition. Finally, by
the last portion of learning, the number of retrieval
successes by participants in the 3 x 3 condition did not
significantly differ from participants in the 2 x 2 condition.
This suggests that, by the last portion of learning,
participants in the 3 x 3 condition were experiencing more
successful retrieval.
This work bridges several fields of research, including
statistical learning, human memory, and language and
cognitive development. As such, we have outlined the
different contributions this work to each field of research.

Accuracy of Self-Report. As a final analysis of in-themoment word learning, we examined the accuracy of
participants‟ self-report. If participants were accurately
reporting what they were retrieving, participants that
reported successfully retrieving more should have higher
final test performance. Thus, we analyzed the relationship
between total number of retrieval successes during learning

Implications for Theories of Statistical Learning. This
work highlights the importance of retrieval processes in
statistical learning. In any given moment, a learner must
retrieve potential associations from the past in order to
aggregate them with the information currently being
learned. Moreover, at a later point in time, learners need to
retrieve prior associations in order to make statistical
inferences. Whether it be during learning or at test, retrieval
is central in statistical learning.

Figure 4. Average cumulative number of reported retrieval
successes, by time point, for the three conditions of learning.
Participants in the 3 x 3 condition started with a period of
more difficult retrieval and ended with a period of more
successful retrieval, relative to the other conditions.

793

On a more global level, this work suggests a powerful
role of memory in statistical learning. Previous research has
attributed word learning to both basic cognitive processes of
attention (e.g., Yu & Smith, 2007) and more complex
algorithms and forms of inference making (e.g., Xu &
Tenenbaum, 2007). However, this work suggests that
memory processes, another basic cognitive process, should
be added to the list of mechanisms driving word learning.

Acknowledgments
We thank the undergraduate research assistants of the
Language and Cognitive Development Lab at UCLA for
their assistance in collecting data: Livon Ghermezi, Crystal
Holloway, Nicole Lew, Chandni Parikh, and Justina Taban.

References
Bjork, R. A. (1994).
Memory and metamemory
considerations in the training of human beings. In J.
Metcalf and A. P. Shimura (Eds.), Metacognition:
Knowing about knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bjork, R. A., & Allen, T. W. (1970). The spacing effect:
Consolidation or differential encoding? Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 567-572.
Gagne, R. M. (1950). The effect of sequence of presentation
of similar items on the learning of paired-associates.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40, 61-73.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: Is spacing the "enemy of induction"?
Psychological Science, 19, 585-592.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Pyc, M. A., Rawson, K. A. (2009). Testing the retrieval
effort hypothesis: Does greater difficulty correctly
recalling information lead to higher levels of memory?
Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 437-447.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Schmidt, R. A. (1991). Frequent augmented feedback can
degrade learning: Evidence and interpretations. In G. E.
Stelmach & J. Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor
neuroscience. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Smith, L. B. (2000). Learning how to learn words: An
associative crane. In Becoming a Word Learner. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, S. M., & Rothkopf, E. Z. (1984). Contextual
enrichment and distribution of practice in the classroom.
Cognition and Instruction, 1, 341-358.
Tomasello, M., & Barton, M. (1994). Learning words in
non-ostensive contexts. Developmental Psychology, 30,
639-650.
Vlach, H. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2010). Desirable
difficulties in cross-situational word learning. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Vlach, H. A., Sandhofer, C. M., & Kornell, N. (2008). The
spacing effect in children‟s memory and category
induction. Cognition, 109, 163-167.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114, 245-272.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.

Implications for Theories of Human Memory. As noted
in the introduction, one limitation of memory experiments is
that they are not commonly set up to determine and/or
isolate the specific cognitive processes that cause higher
long-term performance in difficult learning conditions.
However, the current study was designed to demonstrate the
retrieval difficulty during learning could be one mechanism
that promotes long-term performance. Consequently, this
work contributes to recent research supporting the retrieval
effort hypothesis (e.g., Pyc & Rawson, 2009).
This work also expands the retrieval effort hypothesis and
the desirable difficulty framework by suggesting that not all
retrieval attempts need to be successful in order for there to
be a benefit for long-term performance. Indeed, participants
in the 3 x 3 condition had a large number of retrieval
failures before retrieval successes. Future work should
continue to isolate the conditions under which more difficult
retrieval is beneficial for long-term learning.
Implications for Models of Learning & Development.
This work contributes to the idea that the difficulty of the
word learning problem may promote language development.
Although many tools may reduce difficulty and promote
immediate performance, this may be detrimental long-term.
Successful word learning is likely to be an optimal
combination of the factors that create and reduce
difficulty—future work should pursue this framework in
order to determine the conditions that optimize learning.
This work also highlights that learning and development
occur over time. Exploring in-the-moment learning is
essential for our understanding of (a) how information is
initially encoded and (b) how learners‟ prior experience is
brought to bear on the moment at hand. The vast majority
of research on cognitive development has focused on
children and adults‟ learning at one moment in time.
However, in some theories of development (especially
theories of language development), the common assumption
is that performance at one moment will reflect performance
at a later time. This study clearly demonstrates that this is
not always the case. As such, generalizing results from one
time point to another is dangerous.
In order to account for real-world learning, research
should incorporate learning and testing over longer timescales—over the course of weeks, months, and years. A
complete theory of development not only accounts for
learning in the moment and on each time scale, but also
integrates them in order to understand how they influence
each other over time.

794

