UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Salient in the mind, salient in prosody

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80w3h9k0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kaland, Constantijn
Krahmer, Emiel
Swerts, Marc

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Salient in the mind, salient in prosody
Constantijn Kaland (c.c.l.kaland@uvt.nl)
Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Marc Swerts (m.g.j.swerts@uvt.nl)

Tilburg centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), The Netherlands
Abstract

is more likely to use an adjective referring to that contrast.
The current paper builds on previous work to tackle a
number of issues that remain unexplored. In particular, we
explore questions related to the salience of the information
that is described, with respect to both the lexical and
prosodic characteristics of adjectives.

Research in psychology has shown that when people are told
not to think about a pink elephant they cannot avoid doing
just that. Similar results are found for language production in
that people leak information about hidden figures when
instructed to ignore those figures. It is argued that the salience
of information plays a crucial role in these effects. The
present study investigates how different factors of salience
affect speakers’ lexical and prosodic behaviour. Results
indicate that those factors affect lexical use and prosody in
different ways and, crucially, that adjectives signalling leaked
information are prosodically more prominent, as measured by
both by acoustic analysis and prominence ratings.
Keywords: prosody; ironic processes; speech production.

Introduction
A central problem in recent research on speech production
relates to the question to what extent speakers take into
account what their listeners know or do not know. Quite a
few studies report that speakers, under certain conditions,
tend to violate the Gricean maxim of quantity (Grice, 1975)
by giving more information than is strictly speaking
necessary from the perspective of a listener. Such evidence
is often provided by studies that use referential
communication tasks where some information is shared by
all interlocutors (common ground; Clark, 1996) and some
information is only available for the speaker (privileged
ground).
From the use of adjectives there is evidence that speakers
sometimes fail to adapt to listeners when describing pictures
(Wardlow Lane, Groisman, & Ferreira, 2006). For example,
to describe a mutually visible figure speakers may say “the
small triangle”, even when a big triangle is occluded for the
listener (as in Figure 1). Interestingly, when speakers are
instructed not to give information about the occluded figure,
the target figure is even more often described with an
adjective that refers to the contrast between the target and
the occluded figure. Wardlow Lane et al. (2006) concluded
that speakers leak privileged information about their own
perspective.
These findings are explained according to the theory of
ironic processes by Wegner (1994). This theory assumes
two cognitive processes; an operator process which is
responsible for running actions and a monitor process which
is in constant search for failures of the first. Instructions of
the type “do not...” cause the speaker to be aware of
unsuccessful scenarios, which then triggers counterbehaviour. Thus, ironic processes seem to boost the salience
of a contrast relation between two figures so that a speaker

Figure 1: Experimental setup of Wardlow Lane et al.
(2006). The arrow indicates the target object, the bar
indicates the occluder.
First, it remains to be seen whether the effects found by
Wardlow Lane et al. (2006) generalize to all kinds of
adjectives. As is known from theories of incremental speech
production, a speaker may start articulating without being
aware of certain contrast relations (Fry, 1969; Levelt, 1989;
Pechmann, 1989). This claim accounts for the general
finding in object naming that size adjectives are used less
often than color adjectives. That is, size refers to a feature
relative to another object, whereas color can be named when
only one object is known for the speaker. In Wardlow Lane
et al. (2006) only size was investigated. One could question
whether prohibitive instructions have an effect on naming
features that are already highly salient, such as color.
Second, it may also matter what kind of contrast relation
exists between different objects. Indeed, the information an
adjective gives about a contrast can vary. That is, big in “the
big triangle” is more informative with respect to a privileged
smaller triangle than with respect to a privileged smaller
square, the latter differing in two features from the target.
The setup of Wardlow Lane et al. (2006) does not allow for
such variation: the speaker either leaks information (i.e. by
naming the adjective) or not. We hypothesize that contrasts
consisting of one feature are more salient than contrasts
consisting of two features, since the former have fewer
similarities between the objects. So, it can be expected that
the more salient a contrast is, the more likely speakers are to
refer to it with an adjective.

261

And third, by looking at the adjectives’ frequency of
occurrence, Wardlow Lane et al. (2006) claim that ironic
processes affect the grammatical encoding stage in speech
production (Levelt, 1989) such that speakers leak
information in their utterance. However, Pechmann (1984,
1989) shows that speakers sometimes redundantly use
adjectives (overspecification). Therefore, just by looking at
its occurrence we cannot tell whether an adjective implicitly
refers (i.e. leaks) or is used redundantly. That is, leaking
implies that speakers encode the hidden information in their
utterance such that listeners can pick it up. By investigating
the prosodic realisation of adjectives we can shed light on
this question. It is known from Pechmann (1984) that under
normal circumstances (i.e. when there is no privileged
information) the adjective signalling a contrast within a
certain visual context, as in Figure 1, is not likely to be
prosodically marked. Incremental production strategies
account for that; speakers may start articulating before they
have a full cognitive representation of a visual context. Only
when such a representation is available, i.e. with respect to a
previous contrastive context, the adjective is always marked
prosodically by means of a pitch accent. The experimental
setup of Pechmann (1984), however, did not include a
setting in which the salience of one hidden member of the
contrast was boosted by ironic processes. It remains to be
seen whether ironic processes are strong enough to affect
both the formulation and articulation of an utterance, which
is expected if one assumes that speakers indeed leak
information.
To shed light on the issues mentioned above, the current
study investigates how factors of salience, such as the
communicative setting, the type of contrast and the
contrastive feature affect both the lexical use and prosodic
realisation of adjectives. A production task elicits speakers’
utterances which are analysed in terms of frequency of
occurrence, and acoustically and perceptually to explore
prominence patterns.

are included. In those settings one of the figures in the
stimulus is occluded for the listener. The privileged and
conceal setting differ in that speakers are instructed not to
give information about the occluded figure in the conceal
setting. In the privileged setting no such instruction is given.
Second, the type of contrast differs such that two figures in
a stimulus are distinguishable by either one feature or two
features. For example, the target figure can be a small
triangle contrasting with a big triangle (single contrast) or
the target figure can be a small diamond contrasting with a
big flash (double contrast), see Figure 2. The latter contrast
is assumed to be less salient than the former. Third, the
contrastive feature is either size or color. For example, the
contrast concerns a small and big triangle (size) or a red and
a grey cross (color). In the double contrasts the second
contrastive feature is always shape. That is, for example, the
contrast concerns a small diamond and a big flash (size) or a
green star and a black circle (color), see Figure 2. Four
instances of each stimulus are created such that different
shapes and colors are used. Note that for all size contrasts
figures have the same color whereas for all color contrasts
figures have the same size (Figure 2). In total, the
experiment consists of 48 stimuli (3 communicative
settings, 2 contrasts, 2 features, 4 repetitions).

Figure 2: Example stimuli per contrast (top: single,
bottom: double) and feature (left: size, right: color). The
arrow indicates the target object, the bar indicates the
occluder.

Recording procedure
Utterances are collected following the paradigm of Wardlow
Lane et al. (2006) where speakers have to describe figures
for their listeners (Figure 1). In the present study the
likelihood of uttering an adjective to refer to a contrast is
manipulated by three factors related to the salience of a
contrast: communicative setting (shared, privileged,
conceal), contrast (single, double) and feature (size, color).
First, as for communicative setting we replicate the
experimental conditions of Wardlow Lane et al. (2006) and
included an additional condition. As for the added
condition, the figures forming a contrast are accessible for
both the speaker and the listener such that the adjective had
to be named to prevent ambiguity (shared setting). The
shared setting most closely resembles the experimental
setup of Pechmann (1984) in that there is no privileged
information. To replicate the effect Wardlow Lane et al.
(2006) find, their baseline condition (henceforth privileged
setting) and conceal condition (henceforth conceal setting)

Each stimulus is prevented from contrasting minimally with
the previous stimulus, which would affect prosodic marking
(Pechmann, 1984). Therefore, two successive targets are
chosen from two different sets of shapes and colors. That is,
if one target is a blue circle the following target is never
blue colored or circle shaped (e.g. a red arrow).
A total of 42 different participants acted as speaker (31
women, 11 men, Mage = 21.3 years, age range: 18-29 years).
The same number of participants acted as listener. All
participants were native speakers of Dutch and students at
Tilburg University who had to take part as a course
requirement.

262

Table 1: Effects of communicative setting, contrast and their interactions on repeated proportion measures of size and color
adjective use after analysis of variance (matching: upper left / lower right; mismatching: upper right / lower left).
Feature
Size
Color

Factor
Setting
Contrast
Setting*Contrast
Setting
Contrast
Setting*Contrast

Size adjectives
F(2,82) = 22.74, p < .001, p2 = .36
F(1,41) = 74.45, p < .001, p2 = .64
F(2,82) = 32.48, p < .001, p2 = .44
F(2,82) = 2.65, n.s.
F(1,41) = 1.13, n.s.
F(2,82) < 1, n.s.

Color adjectives
F(2,82) = 1.21, n.s.
F(1,41) < 1, n.s.
F(2,82) < 1, n.s.
F(2,82) = 12.48, p < .001, p2 = .23
F(1,41) = 28.00, p < .001, p2 = .41
F(2,82) = 22.27, p < .001, p2 = .35

Adjective frequency analysis
Method
Adjective use is calculated separately for size and color as a
proportion so that 1 means that all participants uttered an
adjective in all four instances of a stimulus. A distinction is
made between adjectives that match and mismatch the
contrastive feature in the stimulus. That is, whenever
speakers use a size adjective when the contrastive feature is
size (or a color adjective when the feature is color)
adjectives are called matching. Whenever speakers use a
size adjective when the contrastive feature is color (or vice
versa) adjectives are called mismatching. Utterances
including both adjectives count once for size and once for
color (one matching and one mismatching). Four analyses of
Variance (ANOVAs) are performed with repeated mean
proportion measures of adjective use as dependent variables
(i.e. size and color, matching and mismatching) and with
communicative setting (3 levels: shared, privileged,
conceal) and contrast (2 levels: single, double) as within
subject factors.

Results

Figure 3: Mean proportions contrast-matching (top) and
contrast-mismatching (bottom) size (left) and color (right)
adjectives as a function of communicative setting and
contrast (white = single, black = double).

A general effect of adjective type is found in that color
adjectives (M = .61) are uttered more often than size
adjectives (M = .42): [t(2015) = 15.76, p < .001]. Main
effects of contrast and communicative setting are significant
only for adjectives that match the contrastive feature (cf.
Table 1 and Figure 3). That is, speakers are more likely to
utter a matching adjective referring to a single contrast (Msize
= .66, Mcolor = .75) than to a double contrast (Msize = .37,
Mcolor = .59). As for setting, pairwise comparisons reveal that
speakers use fewer matching adjectives in the privileged
setting (Msize = .36, Mcolor = .56), both compared to the shared
setting (size: M = .65, p < .001; color: M = .78, p < .001)
and to the conceal setting (size: M = .52, p < .01; color: M
= .69, p < .05). The interaction effect between setting and
contrast reveals that the difference between the types of
contrast is significantly larger in the shared than in the
privileged or conceal setting. This effect can be related to
the disambiguating function the matching adjective has in
the shared setting for single contrasts. In this situation
uttering only a noun would underspecify the target.
Speakers are mostly aware of this fact, as shown by
proportion values reaching 1 (Figure 3, top).

Speakers use more matching adjectives in the conceal
setting (compared to privileged), which confirms the
findings of Wardlow Lane et al. (2006). To zoom in on this
effect, ANOVAs are performed for each level of the factors
contrast and feature on repeated proportion measures of size
and color adjective use as dependent variables and with
communicative setting as within subject factor. Pairwise
comparisons reveal a significant increase between the
privileged and conceal setting both for matching size and
matching color adjectives either referring to a single
contrast (color marginally) or to a double contrast (Table 2).
The main effect sizes are larger for size than for color
adjectives (Table 1), indicating that a boost in salience
affects low salient features more than high salient features.
The overall high rate of adjectives could be the result of a
size or color contrast in all stimuli, whereas in Wardlow
Lane et al. (2006) there is a size contrast in their test stimuli
(M = .1), but not in their control stimuli (M = .009).

263

Table 2: Mean differences, standard errors and 95%
confidence intervals (after pairwise comparisons: conceal–
privileged) for proportion measures of size and color
adjective use per contrast (white = single, shaded = double)
and feature, with a = p < .001, b = p < .01, c = p < .05 and d =
n.s. after Bonferroni correction.
Feature
Size
Color

Size adjectives
MD (SE)
95% CI
.17a (.05) (.08, .26)
.15b (.05) (.05, .25)
.07d (.05) (-.03, .17)
.08d (.05) (-.02, .18)

tempo differences among participants and over different
noun lengths.
Univariate ANOVAs are performed with relative pitch
and relative duration measures of size and color adjectives
(both separately and taken together) as dependent variables
and with communicative setting (2 levels: shared, conceal)
and contrast (2 levels: single, double) as within-subject
factors.

Color adjectives
MD (SE)
95% CI
.05d (.05) (-.05, .16)
.05d (.05) (-.06, .15)
.13b (.04) (.04, .21)
.14c (.05) (.03, .24)

Results

In sum, the present results reveal that communicative
setting, contrast and feature contribute additively to the
likelihood that an adjective is uttered to refer to that
contrast. The different variables only affect the use of
contrast-matching adjectives. A fair amount of contrastmismatching adjectives confirms that speakers have a
tendency to use adjectives as overspecification (Pechmann,
1989). The next section will explore how the salience
factors influence the prosodic realisation of adjectives.

Acoustic analysis
Acoustic analysis concerns pitch, which is believed to be the
most important correlate of accent (Collier & ‘t Hart, 1981)
and duration, which correlates strongly with redundancy
(Lieberman, 1963; Aylett & Turk, 2004). Utterances consist
of contrast-matching adjectives taken from the shared and
the conceal setting, as only those adjectives'occurrence is
affected by the factors communicative setting and contrast.

Figure 4: Mean relative pitch (top) and mean relative
duration (bottom) for size (left) and color (right) adjectives
as a function of communicative setting and contrast (white =
single, black = double).

Method
Analysis is done on utterances including one adjective and a
noun; 104 utterances for size, either kleine (small) or grote
(big), and 121 for color, either groene (green) or grijze
(gray). Utterances including monosyllabic adjectives as a
result of Dutch inflection rules are excluded from analysis.
Furthermore, utterances do not include fillers such as
“uhhmm”. An additional 4 utterances in which vowel
reduction does not allow for F0-measurement are excluded
from pitch analysis (3 for size and 1 for color). Utterances
are segmented manually by auditory perception and spectral
analysis in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2010). Using a
script, the maximum F0 (Hz) and segment durations are
extracted. To abstract over gender differences and to better
represent perceived prominence by the human ear Hertz
values are converted into ERB values using the formula by
Glasberg & Moore (1990) where f is the value in Hertz:
[21.4*log10(0.00437*f+1)]. The pitch value of the noun is
subtracted from the pitch value of the adjective resulting in
a relative measure which accounts for the fact that accents
are perceived relative to each other. Durations are computed
relative to the whole utterance, which abstracts over speech

No overall differences are found between size and color
adjectives; neither for relative duration (Msize = 36.45, Mcolor
= 38.34, t(223) = -1.67, p = .09) nor for relative pitch (Msize
= .04, Mcolor = .08, t(219) = -.33, p = .75). Results show that
adjectives in the conceal setting are uttered with a higher
relative pitch (Msize = .35, Mcolor = .38) than in the shared
setting (Msize = -.08, Mcolor = -.14), see Table 3 and Figure 4.
No effects are found for contrast. The effect of
communicative setting remains significant after analysis on
the data of both size and color adjectives: [F(1,217) = 16.21,
p < .001, p2 = .06]. None of the analyses reveal significant
effects on relative duration (Table 3, Figure 4).
Although speakers produce adjectives in the conceal
setting with a higher relative pitch, it is unclear whether this
effect is strong enough to contribute to listeners’ perception
of prominence. This question will be addressed in a rating
task.

264

Table 3: Effects of communicative setting and contrast on measures of relative pitch and relative duration of size and color
adjectives after univariate analyses of variance.
Measure
Relative pitch
Relative duration

Factor
Setting
Contrast
Setting
Contrast

Size adjectives
F(1,97) = 5.09, p < .05, p2 = .05
F(1,97) = 1.42, n.s.
F(1,100) < 1, n.s.
F(1,100) < 1, n.s.

Color adjectives
F(1,116) = 8.51, p < .01,
F(1,116) < 1, n.s.
F(1,117) < 1, n.s.
F(1,117) < 1, n.s.

2
p

= .06

Prominence judgments
Utterances used for acoustic analysis (n = 225) are
presented to listeners in a prominence rating task. A total of
13 participants (10 men, 3 women, Mage = 29.8 years, age
range: 24-44) completed the task. All of them were native
speakers of Dutch without hearing problems who
participated voluntarily.

Method
Participants were asked to rate the prominence of the
adjective and the noun on a seven point scale. The task was
web-based and designed using WWStim (Veenker, 2003).
Stimuli consisted of html-pages on which the utterance
could be played as many times as needed using a button.
Utterances were presented in a random order which was
different for each participant.
Prominence scores are again computed as a relative
measure, for which the prominence value of the noun is
subtracted from the prominence value of the adjective. This
measure accounts for the fact that the perception of
prominence is dependent on surrounding material in a
phrase (Gussenhoven, Repp, Rietveld, Rump, & Terken,
1997). Furthermore, possible individual differences in the
use of the rating scale (i.e. tendencies to use only one end of
the scale) are abstracted over by such a measure. ANOVAs
are performed on repeated relative prominence measures of
size and color adjectives as dependent variable with
communicative setting (2 levels: shared, conceal) and
contrast (2 levels: single, double) as within-subject factors.

Figure 5: Mean relative prominence for size (left) and
color (right) adjectives as a function of communicative
setting and contrast (white = single, black = double).

Conclusion
This study shows that the more salient a contrast is between
figures (i.e. by communicative setting, contrast or feature)
the more likely speakers are to refer to a contrast with an
adjective. There is a clear division between matching and
mismatching adjectives in that only the former are affected
by salience factors. Such a finding is in accordance with
incremental speech production strategies; an adjective may
be uttered when the context to which it refers is not be fully
known to the speaker (i.e. mismatching). For the same
reason, the salience of the target figure, which is determined
by its context, affected the likelihood of usage only for
contrast-matching adjectives. An exception is the general
effect of feature, which is found in both contrast-matching
and contrast-mismatching data.
Looking at the salience factors one by one, we can make a
division between factors that are clear from the visual
representation of a contrast only (type of contrast and
feature) and factors for which additional cognitive
processing is needed (communicative setting). Only the
latter type affects the lexical and the prosodic behaviour of
the speaker in that the adjective is both more likely to be
used and more prominent in the conceal setting.

Results
Overall, the results for size adjectives are not significantly
different from those for color (Msize = .32, Mcolor = .34,
t(2923) = -.24, p = .81). Results indicate that adjectives in
the conceal setting were perceived with more prominence
(Msize = .90, Mcolor = .78) than in the shared setting (Msize =
-.36, Mcolor = -.01), see Table 4 and Figure 5. Pearson'
s
correlation coefficient indicates that the relative prominence
scores closely resemble the relative pitch measures: [size: r
= .45, n = 101, p < .001; color: r = .67, n = 120, p < .001].

Table 4: Effects of communicative setting and contrast on repeated measures of relative prominence on size and color
adjectives after analysis of variance.
Factor
Setting
Contrast

Size adjectives
F(1,12) = 20.17, p < .001,
F(1,12) = 13.75, p < .01,

2
p
2
p

= .63
= .53

265

Color adjectives
F(1,12) = 17.38, p < .001,
F(1,12) < 1, n.s.

2
p

= .59

References

As for salience, Brown (1983) investigated when speakers
phonologically reduce given information as opposed to new
information. Although it was found that speakers sometimes
introduced inferable information without reduction, they
always attenuate words referring to information introduced
in a previous discourse context or information evocable
from the physical situation (i.e. highly salient information).
The current results are compatible with Brown (1983) in
that prosodic behaviour is affected by what is cognitively
salient in the mind of the speaker and not necessarily by
what is visually salient in a certain context.
The correlation between F0 measures and prominence
ratings suggest that the acoustic cue listeners relied upon
was pitch. Note that other work found that loudness, which
is not taken into account here, plays the major role in the
perception of prominence (Kochanski, Grabe, Coleman, &
Rosner, 2005). Pitch is however, unlike in word stress, key
in the realization of pitch accents. Interestingly, in the
current experimental setup the contrast relation between two
figures spanned one visual discourse context. This is the
type of context for which Pechmann (1984) finds that it is
unlikely that speakers mark a contrast by means of
accentuation, which he explains in terms of incremental
speech production.
Nevertheless, the present prosodic data are compatible
with incremental production strategies (Fry, 1969; Levelt,
1989; Pechmann, 1989). That is, the prohibitive instruction
may oblige speakers to pay attention to the contrastive
occluded figure before they start articulating. In other
words, speakers plausibly have a cognitive representation of
the contrast relation upon articulation in the conceal setting
and not in the shared setting. Such an assumption could be
supported by data from eye-tracking or speech onset times,
which are left for future research.
To conclude, Wegner and colleagues (1987, 1994) show
that when people are instructed not to think of a pink
elephant, they cannot avoid doing so. Wardlow Lane et al.
(2006) find the same effect in speakers’ use of adjectives
when instructed to ignore certain information. The present
study extends this finding by showing that the more salient a
feature of a picture, the more often an adjective is used to
refer to it. It does not matter whether the feature derives its
salience from inherent characteristics (size or color), its
relation to other figures (single or double contrast) or
whether speakers’ attention is drawn towards it (shared,
conceal). However, only salience which is related to
speakers’ attention affected also the adjective’s prosodic
realisation. That is, when a feature becomes cognitively
rather than visually more salient, its reference by means of
an adjective is acoustically more prominent.

Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal
redundancy hypothesis: a functional explanation for
relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence,
and duration in spontaneous speech. Language and
Speech, 47, 31-56.
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2010). Praat: doing phonetics
by computer (Version 5.1.25).
Brown, G. (1983). Prosodic structure and the given / new
distinction. In A. Cutler & D. R. Ladd (Eds.), Prosody:
Models and Measurements (pp. 67–78). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge; New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Collier, R., & Hart, J. t. (1981). Cursus Nederlandse
intonatie. Leuven: Acco.
Fry, D. B. (1969). The linguistic evidence of speech errors.
BRNO Studies of English, 8, 69-74.
Glasberg, B. R., & Moore, B. C. J. (1990). Derivation of
auditory filter shapes from notched-noise data. Hearing
Research, 47, 103-138.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics. New York:
Academic Press.
Gussenhoven, C., Repp, B. H., Rietveld, A., Rump, H. H.,
& Terken, J. (1997). The perceptual prominence of
fundamental frequency peaks. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 102(5), 3009–3022.
Kochanski, G., Grabe, E., Coleman, J., & Rosner, B. (2005).
Loudness predicts prominence: fundamental frequency
lends little. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
118(2), 1038-1054.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking : from intention to
articulation. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lieberman, P. (1963). Some effects of semantic and
grammatical context on the production and perception of
speech. Language and Speech, 6, 172–187.
Pechmann, T. (1984). Überspezifizierung und Betonung in
referentieller Kommunikation. Unpublished Dissertation,
Universität Mannheim, Mannheim.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89-110.
Veenker, T. J. G. (2003). WWStim: A CGI script for
presenting web-based questionnaires and experiments
(Version 1.4.4): Utrecht University.
Wardlow Lane, L., Groisman, M., & Ferreira, V. S. (2006).
Don’t talk about pink elephants!: speakers’ control over
leaking private information during language production.
Psychological Science, 17(4), 273-277.
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S., & White, T.
(1987). Paradoxical effects of thought suppression.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 5-13.
Wegner, D. M. (1994). Ironic processes of mental control.
Psychological Review, 101, 34-52.

Acknowledgements
We thank Ruud Koolen, Jorrig Vogels and four anonymous
reviewers for valuable comments on previous versions of
this paper as well as all participants for their effort.

266

