UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Secret Agents or Sleeping Beauties: What Happens to Repaired Constituents?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cz7x126

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Shuval, Noa
Konieczny, Lars
Hemforth, Barbara

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Secret Agents or Sleeping Beauties:
What Happens to Repaired Constituents?
Noa Shuval (noa.shuval@gmail.com)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92774 Boulogne-Billancourt, France

Lars Konieczny (lars.konieczny@frias.uni-freiburg.de)
FRIAS, Universität Freiburg Starkenstr. 44 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Barbara Hemforth (barbara.hemforth@parisdescartes.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neuropsychologie Cognitives, CNRS, IUPPD, Université Paris Descartes,
71 ave Edouard Vaillant, 92774 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Abstract

(1) J’irai chez le boucher, euh non, le boulanger.
J’ai besoin de pain.
I’m going to the butcher, eh no, the baker.
I need some bread.

In two experiments we investigated the comprehension of
sentences with repaired NPs. In our first experiment, we
applied an acceptability task after speeded auditory
presentation of French versions of sentences with and without
repairs like “I will go to (the butcher, uh no,) the baker. I need
some bread/meat”. While repairs led to reduced acceptability
for consistent continuations, the inconsistent continuation was
more acceptable when a compatible but repaired constituent
had been mentioned before, suggesting that the to-be-repaired
constituent was not fully overwritten by the correction. In our
second experiment, the visual world paradigm was used to
auditorily present participants with the stimuli compiled for
Experiment 1, while they looked at corresponding visual
stimuli. This time, evidence from eye fixation patterns
suggests that the to-be-repaired constituent was actually
suppressed online during sentence processing. To settle this
contradicting evidence we would like to suggest that the
acceptability judgments are mainly the result of offline
reconstruction of memory traces following Gimenes et al.,
(2009).
Keywords:
Sentence
Processing;
Disfluencies;
Acceptability Judgments; Visual World Paradigm

Introduction
The human sentence processing system has to be extremely
robust since it does not only have to cope with highly
standardized and edited to correct input, but very often
(probably more often than not) also with deficient input
caused by various, often non-linguistic, situational factors.
In this paper, we will look at the comprehension of repaired
utterances like (1). It has been proposed that disfluencies
such as silent or filled pauses or repairs may lead to
undesirable effects in sentence processing, leaving
misparses harder to detect, possibly by providing cues
which are interpreted as prosodic structuring information
(Bailey & Ferreira, 2003; Maxfield, Lyon, & Silliman,
2009). For repairs, it has been proposed that the to-berepaired constituent may continue influencing listeners’
comprehension, the so-called lingering effect (e.g., Lau &
Ferreira, 2005). It is this latter effect that we investigate in
our experiments.

Disfluencies are highly frequent in natural language
production. They include editing terms such uh and um as
well as repeats (“I – uh - I wouldn’t”, e.g. Clark & Wasow,
1998) as well as revisions. Typically, in spoken language,
disfluencies can be found in about six out of 100 words
(Fox Tree, 1995). In the corpus used by Levelt (1983), 25 %
of the annotated disfluencies were repairs similar to the
structures under investigation in our studies. Of these, 62 %
included editing expressions like Dutch versions of “I
mean” or “that is” or mostly (30 % of all repairs) the Dutch
version of “uh”. Since disfluencies in general and repairs in
particular are so frequent, listeners have to find ways to
process them, they have to detect the disfluency, see what
the problem is, and edit out the part of speech to-be-repaired
to arrive at the intended meaning of the utterance.
Research on error processing in spelling has provided
evidence, that recently processed incorrect information
(Brown, 1988; Dixon & Kamisnka, 2007; Jacoby &
Hollingshead, 1990) may affect subsequent performance
even in cases, where the error has been explicitly recognized
as such (Perruchet, Rey, Hivert, & Pacton, 2006). Editing
out explicitly marked repairs may, equally, not always work
perfectly well. Lau and Ferreira (2005, see also Bailey &
Ferreira, 2003; Ferreira, Lau, & Bailey, 2004) claim that the
to-be-repaired constituent in repetitions and corrections
introduces lexical content and local syntactic structure not
fully overwritten by the correction. They studied a
disfluency involving the repair of a verb (like chosen vs.
selected) in sentences like (2 a, b).
(2) The little girl a. chosen-uh/b. picked-uh selected for
the role celebrated with her parents and friends.
Sentences like these, with verbs like “selected” which are
ambiguous between a main verb and a past participle
reading, usually lead to comprehension difficulty (e.g.,

3307

increased reading times), on the disambiguating
prepositional phrase (“for the role”), in particular when the
verb is biased for a simple main verb imperfect reading.
This garden-path disappeared when the ambiguous verb was
preceded by an unambiguous past participle (“chosen”).
Although a repaired constituent such as chosen in (2)
should be discarded from the representation of the sentence,
it has been shown across a variety of constructions that they
can influence offline acceptability judgments (e.g. Lau &
Ferreira, 2005). Garden paths as well as semantically
inconsistent sentences are judged as more acceptable when
containing a repaired element that would have rendered
them unambiguous or semantically consistent, respectively.
However, since most of the published studies only
present offline data, we cannot be sure that the acceptability
judgments reflect an online lingering effect of the repaired
element, as previously suggested, or whether they may be
due to offline reconstruction of memory traces. Gimenes,
Rigalleau, & Gaonac’h (2009), for example, show that
positive acceptability judgments do not necessarily mean
that no problem has been detected online. In their study,
conducted in French, they used a self-paced non-cumulative
reading paradigm to present participants with doubly centerembedded object relative sentences. Participants were
asked, among other things, to evaluate each sentence.
Gimenes et al. compared two conditions: In one condition
all three VPs were present in the sentence (3), whereas in
the other one the second VP (VP2) was missing (4).
(3) The Mexican meal that the gastronomic critic that the
journal hired tasted in the new restaurant had a strange
smell.
(4) The Mexican meal that the gastronomic critic that the
journal hired had a strange smell.
While the missing-VP2 sentences were rated as better
than the All-VPs sentences, they presented longer reading
times on the last VP compared to the all-VPs sentences.
This means that participants preferred the sentences with the
VP2 omissions, even though there was still an online
sensitivity to that omission. In other words, the online
difficulty was not reflected in the acceptability judgments.

Aim of current study
In our study we wished to find out whether the influence of
repaired constituents on offline acceptability judgments are
due to online lingering effect (i.e. the parallel construction
of a phrase structure compatible with the repaired element)
or to offline reconstruction. In order to do so, we chose to
first, try and replicate earlier results associated with repairs
in an offline experiment in which acceptability judgments
were collected after presenting participants with speeded
sentence with NP repairs such as “I will go to (the butcher,
uh no,) the baker. I need some bread/meat”. In these
constructions, an inconsistency (I go to the baker. I need
some meat.) is more acceptable when preceded by a

semantically consistent but repaired element (I go to the
butcher, uh no, the baker) (Hemforth, Pynte, & Bellengier,
2007). Second, we used the visual world paradigm in order
to investigate online processing of these constructions.

Experiment I
In our first experiment, we expect to find evidence for the
so-called lingering effect of the to-be-repaired constituent
(Bailey & Ferreira 2003, Hemforth et al., 2007) in the
acceptability judgments.

Design and procedure:
Participants: 24 native French undergraduate students,
from the Paris Descartes University participated in this
experiment in exchange for course credits.
Materials: We constructed 16 items each in four
conditions as in examples (5a, b) and (6a, b).
(5) Consistent/inconsistent target
J’irai chez le boulanger, J’ai besoin de a. pain/b.
viande.
I’m going to the baker, I need some a. bread/b. meat.
(6) Consistent/inconsistent repair
J’irai chez le boucher, euh non, le boulanger.
J’ai besoin de a. pain/b. viande.
I’m going to the butcher, eh no, the baker.
I need some a. bread/b. meat.
In half of the sentences participants were presented with
disfluencies in the form of an NP replacement. The second
experimental factor was the consistency of the last word of
the second sentence with the contents of the first sentence:
The object of the second sentence made this sentence either
consistent (5a, 6a) or inconsistent (5b, 6b) as a continuation
of the first sentence. Specifically, in the repair condition, the
consistent continuation was compatible with the repair,
where as the inconsistent continuation was consistent with
the to-be repaired item. For half of the participants, the NPs
were exchanged to control for plausibility effects.
We presented participants with synthesised sentences
using the Acapela© Text to Speech software in order to
make our experimental design as comparable as possible to
Hemforth et al. (2007). All utterances were produced at 22
kHz, using a female voice (Claire). Two sentences were
synthesized for each item. The second sentence was speeded
up by 30%, using the Audacity® software, keeping all other
basic parameters like frequency unchanged. The synthesized
materials were inspected by the authors as well as several
native speakers of French and judged as highly natural and
easily understandable. In a separate experiment using the
same materials but with comprehension questions,
participants answered questions correctly in more than 97%

3308

of the cases in all conditions (Shuval & Hemforth,
submitted).
Procedure: Participants were told that they would hear
sentences generated by a computer. For each experimental
item, a visual signal indicated that a sentence would be
played. Once the sentence was completed, the participant
had to judge its grammaticality on an explicit 1-4 scale
where 1 corresponded to a very poor sentence and 4 to a
very good one. Judgments were automatically recorded by
the experimental software (ExperimentBuilder© by SR
Research). Each experimental item was presented in one of
the four experimental conditions across participants. Eight
randomized lists were prepared including 15 fillers. The
filler sentences varied with respect to their syntactic and
semantic acceptability.
Predictions: Based on earlier evidence, we expect to
find that the to-be repaired constituent influences
acceptability judgments, so that sentences with inconsistent
continuations that are, however, consistent with the to-be
repaired constituents, should be judged as more acceptable
than sentences without a replacement. We therefore predict
an interaction of the experimental factors (repair vs. no
repair, and consistent vs. inconsistent).
Results
Acceptability judgments: Repaired sentences were judged
less acceptable than unrepaired sentences, though only
marginally so across participants (F11,23=3.05, p < .10;
F1,15=4.80, p < .05). Inconsistent sentences were generally
judged less acceptable than consistent sentences
(F1,23=39.94, p < .001; F1,15=45.83, p < .001). A reliable
Repair*Consistency interaction (F1,23=10.75, p <.01; F1,15=
41.05, p < .001) was established: Acceptability of consistent
sentences decreased in sentences with repairs (F1,23=16.11, p
< .01; F1,15=30.33, p < .001), whereas acceptability of
inconsistent sentences increased in the Repair condition
though only reliably so across items (F1,23=1.854, p > .18;
F1,15= 6.01, p < .03).

Figure 1: Acceptability judgments

Judgment times: Figure 2 shows the judgment times for
all four conditions. Judging the acceptability took reliably
longer for repaired sentences than for unrepaired sentences
(F11,23=6.15, p < .03; F21,15=7.11, p < .02). No other effects
turned out to be reliable.

Figure 2: Judgments times
Discussion
Obviously, the to-be-repaired items affect the
acceptability of the sentence. Interference is found in
sentences with repairs leading to increased judgment times
(although these judgment times were taken off-line,
increased sentence length in the repaired conditions might
possibly contribute to the increased judgment times). It
shows up in acceptability judgments in the consistent
condition, reducing acceptability, as well as in the
inconsistent condition, enhancing acceptability. Inconsistent
continuations become more acceptable following repairs
presumably due to the interfering constituent, whereas
consistent continuations are becoming less acceptable
possibly for the same reasons. (A plausible alternative
interpretation of the decreased acceptability of consistent
targets following repairs may simply be that repaired
constructions are less acceptable than non-repaired ones.)
Following Lau and Ferreira (2005), this interfering effect
might be due to the lingering of a partial interpretation
compatible with the to-be-repaired constituent.
There are at least two ways to conceptualize “lingering”,
however. One possibility is that the partial interpretations
that should have been suppressed remain active and thus
influence the processing of the sentence at any moment. A
second possibility compatible with the current data would
be that the partial interpretations are actually suppressed
from current working memory staying dormant until they
are reactivated in sentence wrap-up processes in cases of
emergency (garden paths, inconsistencies) or in situations
with heightened cognitive load (such as speeded
presentations). Active lingering predicts that the to-berepaired item interferes measurably with on-line sentence
processing, whereas dormant lingering predicts mostly offline effects. In order to find out whether the to-be-repaired
constituents behave more like secret agents waiting to jump

3309

in whenever possible or like sleeping beauties, only to be
woken up when necessary, we ran Experiment 2

Experiment II
In this experiment we wanted to tap into the time course of
comprehension of the repaired sentences we used in
Experiment 1. In order to do so, we used exactly the same
items as the basis for a visual world experiment (Tanenhaus,
Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, Sedivy, 1995). In this
experiment, we made the linguistic input as natural as
possible, using a natural speaker and non-speeded
presentation.
Design and Procedure: In our experiment, 32 native
French undergraduate students, from the Paris Descartes
University with normal hearing and normal or corrected to
normal vision listened to auditorily presented sentences that
were constructed for Experiment 1. This time, they were
recorded by a natural speaker and the critical regions were
cross-spliced using the PRAAT speech software for
Windows© (Boersma & Weenink, 2009) in order to control
for intonation differences between conditions (5, 6; repeated
here).

beginning of the trial. This tone was immediately followed
by an introductory slide that disappeared after four seconds
(see Figure 3b). It was replaced by a blank screen with a
centered fixation cross ‘‘+’’. The participants were asked to
fixate the cross while pressing the space bar in order to
control for the calibration before the critical image (drift
correction). The drift correction also guaranteed that the
very first fixation was always on the center of the screen.
The experimental slide appeared simultaneously with the
beginning of the auditory stimulus. Following the
experimental slide, a multiple choice comprehension
question was presented. Each experimental session took
about 30 minutes.

(5) Consistent/inconsistent target
J’irai chez le boulanger, J’ai besoin de a. pain/b.
viande.
I’m going to the baker, I need some a. bread/b. meat.
(6) Consistent/inconsistent repair
J’irai chez le boucher, euh non, le boulanger.
J’ai besoin de a. pain/b. viande.
I’m going to the butcher, eh no, the baker.
I need some a. bread/b. meat.

Figure 3b: Order of presentation

Each item was accompanied by a visual stimulus depicting
four objects (Figure 3a): the consistent (bread) and the
inconsistent (meat) objects together with a semantically
related object (lettuce) and an unrelated object (glasses).

Figure 3a: Visual Stimulus
We tracked eye movements with an SR Research EyeLink©
II eye-tracker. For each participant the dominant eye was
tracked as determined by the Miles (1930) test. The
participants were presented with the visual stimuli on a 21’’
screen and with the corresponding auditory stimuli via
earphones. Each session started with a calibration of the eye
tracking system.
Each trial set began with a short tone to mark the

Predictions: The active or dormant nature of the lingering
effect of the repaired constituent should be reflected in eye
movement behavior elicited by the inconsistent repair
condition in the following manner: In any case, we expect
more anticipatory eye movements to the consistent object
than to the inconsistent one even before the onset of the
target noun (bread/meat) (Altmann & Kamide, 1999). In the
case of an active lingering effect, we expect more
anticipatory eye movements to the inconsistent objects than
to the related baseline objects (lettuce). Following the onset
of the target noun, eye movement to the inconsistent objects
should be facilitated (start earlier and/or be more frequent)
in the repair condition compared to the non-repair condition.
If, however, the lingering effect is dormant, we expect to see
evidence of suppression as follows: Suppression of the
inconsistent object should lead to similar or lower
proportions of fixations to the inconsistent objects compared
to the related-baseline objects before the onset of the target
noun. After the onset of the target noun, fixations to the
inconsistent objects should be slowed and reduced
compared to the non-repair condition.

3310

onset of target (means)

5

Results:
We calculated the log odds for gazes on the target object at
each time step, using the formula in (7).

4
3
2
1
0

(7) Y = log2( P(CO) / P(ICO) )

0

-1

250

need some

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

meat/lettuce

-2

P(CO) refers to the likelihood of a gaze on the consistent
object and P(ICO) to the likelihood of a gaze on the
inconsistent object.
Figure 4 shows the time course of fixations starting with
the onset of the verb of the second sentence. The vertical
line at 663ms marks the mean onset of the target noun.
Values below zero represent a higher number of fixations to
the inconsistent object (meat), values above zero represent
more looks to the consistent object (bread). Error bars mark
the 95 % confidence interval. Comparing the inconsistent
conditions (filled circles: non-repaired, empty circles:
repaired), we do not see any indication of an active
lingering effect. However, we can see clear effects of
inhibition or suppression in the case of sentences with
repairs. The inconsistent target attracts reliably less fixations
in the repaired sentences than in the non-repaired sentences.
Moreover, even before target onset, there are more fixations
on the consistent target in the repair conditions, giving an
additional indication of suppression.
onset of target (means)

4
3
2
1
0
0

250

500

750

1000

1250

1500

1750

2000

-1

consistent noun

inconsistent noun

consistent repair

inconsistent repair

Figure 5: Log2odds of fixation probabilities of
inconsistent/related objects
Discussion
In sum, although acceptability judgments in the
constructions under investigation in this paper show a
lingering effect of repairs, there is no online evidence for
increased accessibility of the inconsistent target in repair
sentences. In other words, there is no evidence for active
lingering. To the contrary, the inconsistent target seems to
be even less accessible in sentences with repairs than in
sentences where no semantic expectation for it has ever
been generated. The inconsistent target is no more
accessible (and at times even less so) than the baseline
object (semantically related to the target objects, but not
predicted by the first sentence). This pattern of results
suggests that the inconsistent target may have undergone
suppression (Gernsbacher, 1990). Shuval & Hemforth
(submitted) present evidence that reducing the quality of the
input by using synthesized speech also reduces the effect of
suppression, so that we can actually conclude that the
naturalness of the materials of the current experiment plays
an important role for our results.

-2

need some

bread/meat

-3

consistent noun

inconsistent noun

consistent repair

General Discussion

inconsistent repair

Figure 4: Log2odds of fixation probabilities of
consistent/inconsistent objects
In Figure 5 values above zero represent more fixations to
the inconsistent object (meat), values below zero represent
more fixations to the related object (lettuce), which serves
as baseline. The vertical line at 663ms marks the mean onset
of the target noun. Error bars mark the 95 % confidence
interval. Comparing the inconsistent conditions (filled
circles: non-repaired, empty circles: repaired), we see
further evidence for suppression in the case of sentences
with repairs. Before the inconsistent target is mentioned, it
is not fixated more often than the semantically related but
unmentioned object (all Fs < 1). In the region between 500
and 1000 ms, it is even fixated less often (F11,31= 4.99,
p<.04; F21,15= 6.85, P<.02).

In this paper we presented two experiments investigating the
processing of repaired versus non-repaired sentences. In the
first experiment, sentences were presented in a speeded-up
version and participants had to provide acceptability
judgments at the end of the sentence. With this paradigm
and task, we found evidence for interference of the to-berepaired constituent in acceptability judgments as well as in
acceptability judgment times similar to the experiments
reported in Hemforth et al. (2007) or Lau and Ferreira
(2005). This evidence would be fully compatible with a
lingering effect of the to-be-repaired constituent.
In our second experiment, we measured online
comprehension of repaired versus non-repaired sentences
using the Visual World Paradigm. In this experiment, the
auditory stimuli were presented in normal speed. The
participants’ task was to listen to the sentences for
comprehension and to answer comprehension questions
following the sentence. In this experiment, we did not find
any evidence for active online lingering of the to-berepaired constituent. To the contrary, the to-be-repaired
constituents seemed to be suppressed or inhibited, as

3311

fixations to target items associated to them were fewer
following repairs. Inconsistent targets were at times even
less fixated than the semantically related baseline object.
This pattern of results is not compatible with active
lingering, which should have resulted in increasing the
accessibility of the inconsistent target after repairs as well as
compared to the baseline.
Following Gimenes et al (2009), we propose that
offline acceptability judgments do not necessarily reflect the
same processes at stake while a sentence is processed.
During sentence wrap-up, in particular in cases of increased
cognitive load and reduced perceptibility (speeded
presentation) memory traces not active in current working
memory may be reactivated in order to arrive at a decent
judgment. This is to be expected in particular when the
judgment is particularly difficult, as for garden-path
sentences or in the case of inconsistencies. In “ordinary”
circumstances, repairs work highly efficiently. The to-berepaired constituent is actually suppressed from the current
space of interpretations given good quality of the input and
sufficient processing time. In more demanding situations,
comprehenders may just content themselves with “good
enough” representations (Ferreira et al. 2002). This would
be compatible with an “any-time” algorithm rendering good
enough solutions within restricted time as it has been
proposed for a variety of cognitive processes (e.g.: Horsch
& Poole, 1998). Repairs do thus not act as a secret agent,
interfering with online processing, but more like the
sleeping beauty, just to be woken up to make things mend in
the end.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Joël Pynte for his highly valuable
contribution to many discussions held at the beginning of
this project. Many thanks to Catherine Rigaut for helping us
prepare the materials for the visual world experiment. We
would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments.

References
Altmann, G.T.M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation of verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Bailey, K.G.B, & Ferreira, F. (2003). Disfluencies influence
syntactic parsing. Journal of Memory and Language, 49,
183-200.
Bailey, K., & Ferreira, F. (2007). The processing of filled
pause disfluencies in the visual world. In R. P. G. van
Gompel, M. H. Fischer, W. S. Murray and R. L. Hill, Eye
Movements: A W indow on Mind and Brain, Elsevier
LTD, 486-500.
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2009): Praat: doing phonetics
by computer (Version 5.1.05) [Computer program].
Retrieved May 1, 2009, from http://www.praat.org/
Brown, A. S. (1988). Encountering misspellings and
spelling performance: Why wrong isn’t right. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 80, 488-494.

Clark, H.H., & Wasow, T. (1998). Repeating words in
spontaneous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 201-242.
Dixon, M., & Kaminska, Z. (2007). Does exposure to
orthography affect children's spelling accuracy? Journal
of Research in Reading, 30, 184-197.
Ferreira, Fernanda, Bailey, Karl.G.D, , Ferraro, Vittoria
(2002). Good-enough representations in language
comprehension. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 11, 11-15.
Ferreira, F., Lau, E.F., & Bailey, K.G.D. (2004).
Disfluencies, parsing, and tree-adjoining grammars.
Cognitive Science, 721-749.
Fox Tree, J. E. (1995). The effects of false starts and
repetitions on the processing of subsequent words in
spontaneous speech. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 709–738.
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gimenes, M., Rigalleau, F. & Gaonac’h D. (2009). When a
Missing Verb Makes a French Sentence more Acceptable.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 24 (3), 440-449.
Hemforth, B., Pynte, J., & Bellengier, E. (2007). Making
sense out of nonsense : The acceptability of repairs. In H.
Christiansen & J. Villadsen, Proceedings of the 4th
International W orkshop on Constraints and Language
Processing. Roskilde : CSRR 113, pp. 93-100.
Horsch M., C. and Poole, D. (1998). An Anytime Algorithm
for Decision Making under Uncertainty, In Proc. 14th
Conference on Uncertainty in A rtificial Intelligence
(UA I-98), Madison, W isconsin, USA , July 1998, pp 246255.
Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1990). Reading student
essays may be hazardous to your spelling: Effects of
reading incorrectly and correctly spelled words. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 44, 345-358.
Lau, E., & Ferreira, F. (2005). Lingering effects of disfluent
material on comprehension of garden path sentences.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 2005, 20 (5), 633–
666.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in
speech. Cognition, 14(1):41-104.
Maxfield, N.D., Lyon, J.M., & Silliman, E.R. (2009).
Disfluencies
along
the
garden
path:
Brain
electrophysiological evidence of disrupted sentence
processing. Brain and Language, 111, 86-100.
Perruchet, P., Rey, A., Hivert, E. & Pacton, S. (2006). Do
Distractors Interfere With Memory for Study Pairs in
Associative Recognition ? Memory and Cognition, 34,
1046-1054.
Shuval, N. & Hemforth, B. (Submitted). Understanding
repairs: The role of task, visual and auditory stimuli in the
visual world paradigm.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632–1634.

3312

