UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Selective attention and speech errors: Feature migration in time

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3gs466s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Nozari, Nazbanou
Dell, Gary

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Selective attention and speech errors: Feature migration in time
Nazbanou Nozari (nnozari2@illinois.edu)
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
405 N Matthews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Gary S. Dell (gdell@cyrus.psych.illinois.edu)
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
405 N Matthews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract
Studying speech errors has revealed much about the language
production system. We believe it can also be used to
investigate the interaction between the speech production and
other systems, such as the executive system. This paper
studies the effect of focusing attention on the production of a
single word in a sequence. We present three experiments in
which participants, while reciting four-word tongue twisters,
allocate their attention to a particular word either by
instruction to avoid errors on that word, to stress the word, or
reversely, to recite that word silently instead of overtly. The
results of all three experiments consistently show that
focusing attention on one word causes a higher error rate on
the other words in the sequence.
Keywords: Speech errors; Attention.

Introduction
To avoid mistakes, you must “pay attention”. That is what
every parent, teacher, or coach will tell you. Attending to
something, does in fact have measurable effects. Object
features, such as color, can freely move to other objects if
attention is not focused on the reported object at the time of
its perception (e.g. Treisman & Gelade, 1980). For example,
participants who were briefly exposed to an array of letters
containing a green X and a red O, might mistakenly report
having seen a red X, if the attention is diverted by some
means. However, when the to-be-reported object’s location
is precued, thus selectively focusing attention on that object,
such “conjunction errors” decrease significantly, even when
the overall difficulty of the task matches cases in which the
object was not attended to (Treisman & Schmidt, 1982).
An equivalent of feature migration is found in reading
(e.g. Allport, 1977; McClelland & Mozer, 1986; Mozer,
1983; Shallice & McGill, 1978; Shallice & Warrington,
1977), which in its extreme form manifests as attentional
dyslexia (e.g. Davis & Colthart, 2002; Friedmann, Kerbel,
& Shvimer, 2010; Humphreys & Mayall, 2001; Mayall &
Humphreys, 2002; Saffran & Coslett, 1996), a disorder in
which the high rate of letter migration between written
words makes reading very difficult to impossible. The
problem can be easily remedied by the use of a moving
window, about the size of a single word, which provides a
narrow focus for attention.
Speech production also suffers from “feature migration”,
but migration in time, rather than migration in space. Parts
of words (e.g. phonemes) move between the planned words

(e.g. Dell & Reich, 1981; Fromkin, 1971), giving rise to
speech errors such as “dig booz” instead of “big dues”.
Uncontrollable migration of phonological constituents
might in fact be the underlying cause of the “naming-incontext” disorder in which aphasic patients cannot give the
names of a sequence of pictured objects (e.g. Schwartz &
Hodgson, 2002). Similar to attentional dyslexia, the problem
is easily remedied by narrowing down attention to a single
picture at a time by the means of removing or covering the
other pictures.
In summary, attention seems to play a crucial role in both
perception and production of language. While the former
has been studied systematically, the latter has received little
scrutiny. In the same vein, models of spoken speech errors
have featured prominently in cognitive science for 25 years
(e.g. Dell, 1986; Nozari et al., 2010), but no speech-error
model takes any note of attention. The first step for
implementation of such mechanisms is to gather empirical
data on how the process of lexical access is affected by
tuning attention to a word in a sequence. It is thus the goal
of this paper to answer a basic question: If attention is
focused on one word in a sequence of words, what happens
to the other words? Does attending to a word increase the
overall accuracy of the speaker or does it come at the cost of
other words?
We present three experiments, in which we elicit speech
errors by having participants recite a series of four-word
tongue-twisters, with one (or none) of the words being
attended. In Experiment 1, participants are directly
instructed to avoid mistakes on a particular word.
Experiment 2 aims to elicit an overt manifestation of
focusing attention by asking the participants to stress a
certain word among the four words. Finally, Experiment 3
asks participants to mouth (silently recite) one of the four
words while the other words are spoken aloud normally.
Thus Experiment 3 requires attention to a particular word,
but the physical manifestation of that attention is the
opposite of the stress instruction given in Experiment 2.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants: 32 undergraduate students at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign participated for course credit.

1370

Materials: 32 pairs of tongue-twisters (total = 64) were
borrowed from Oppenheim and Dell (2008). Each tonguetwister consisted of four words with the same vowels and an
XYYX onset pattern. In half of the tongue-twisters the
onsets were dissimilar (e.g., “just rum rug jump”). Each
dissimilar tongue-twister was paired with another that
shared its middle two words, but had one onset consonant
changed so that the onsets were phonologically similar (e.g.,
“lust rum rug lump”). Four lists, each containing sixteen
tongue-twisters, were constructed, two of which were used
in the experimental and the other two, in the control
condition. One half of each pair always appeared in the
experimental condition and the other half in the control
condition, such that a phonologically similar tongue-twister
was half the time in the experimental and half the time in
the control condition. Each list contained an equal number
of phonologically similar and dissimilar tongue-twisters.
In the experimental condition, one of the four words in
the tongue twister was printed in bold and was underlined
(e.g., “just rum rug jump”). Each of the four words was so
marked with equal probability across participants. In the
control condition, no word was bold or underlined.
Procedure: Participants completed four test blocks, each of
which contained one of the four lists of tongue-twisters.
Half the subjects completed the experimental blocks first,
and the other half, the control blocks first. The experiment
was run in MATLAB. In the control condition, a single trial
consisted, first, of a familiarization display, where the four
words appeared on a computer screen and the participant
was asked to enunciate each word carefully. Necessary
corrections were made by the experimenter until the
participant successfully pronounced all four words. Next, a
rehearsal phase began, in which the same four words
appeared on the screen and a metronome played at 2
beats/sec. For four beats, the participant only listened. At
the beginning of the fifth beat, a red dot appeared under
each word, and moved to the next word at the pace of the
metronome. Participants were to read the words aloud as the
red dot moved along. They then listened for the next four
beats (without the red dot) and began reciting on the fifth as
the red dot reappeared. Four rehearsal cycles were
completed in each trial. No errors were coded at this phase.
If the participant repeatedly made an error, the experimenter
corrected the error and had them repeat the rehearsal phase
of that trial from the beginning (this was seldom required).
Finally, the test phase began. Like the rehearsal phase, there
were four cycles, each containing a silent part in which the
participants just listened to the metronome for four beats
and a speaking-aloud part, in which they had to say the
words aloud at the pace of the metronome, and along with
the visual cue (the red dot). There were two differences
between the rehearsal and the test phase though: first, the
pace of the metronome was higher in the test phase (3
beats/sec), and second, the words were no longer printed in
the center of the screen. In the silent part of each cycle, the
words appeared in a small font in gray color at the top of the

screen. Participants were encouraged to repeat the words
from memory, but were allowed to consult them if they
could not remember them. In the speaking aloud part of the
cycle, the words disappeared and the red dot appeared at the
place previously occupied by the printed words in the center
of the screen in the rehearsal phase. As the dot moved from
position 1 to 2 to 3 to 4, along with the metronome beat, the
participant had to say the words aloud. They were told to try
to repeat the words as accurately as possible on the
metronome beat.
After receiving the instructions, participants completed a
short practice block of eight trials. If the experimenter
judged their performance with regard to following the
general instructions to be unsatisfactory at the end of the
practice block, they were run through that block again.
The experimental condition was very similar, with the
exception that one of the words was bold and underlined as
soon as the participants got to the rehearsal phase. They
were instructed to try to be accurate overall, but to
especially avoid making errors on the underlined word or
else they would hear an annoying buzz (the experimenter
who monitored their performance used the buzzer from the
game Taboo). The relevant instructions were presented right
before the participants started this condition and a practice
block comprised of eight trials preceded the test blocks.
Similar to the control condition, participants did not start the
test blocks unless satisfactory performance was reached on
the practice block.
During the study, an experimenter (the first author or a
trained assistant) sat next to the participants. In the
experimental condition, s/he buzzed the participants
immediately if they made an error on the underlined word in
the test phase. Responses were digitally recorded for offline
transcription. Both the first author and the assistant
transcribed errors from the recordings. The original
agreement was 76%. In cases where the two transcriptions
differed, the recording was replayed, and if the transcribers
still disagreed, the utterance was not coded as an error.

Results and Discussion
One participant was excluded from this experiment for
failing to follow instruction. There were thus a total of
15872 spoken words from the remaining 31 participants,
each of which represents an opportunity for error. For
participants who did follow the instructions, if they
refrained from responding on 50% or more of the words in a
trial during the test phase, that trial was excluded. After
enforcing this criterion, data from four trials (64 error
opportunities), all belonging to the experimental condition,
were eliminated.
Errors consisted of substitution, addition, or deletion of
phonemes, or, less often, substitution of entire words. 82%
of all errors were within-trial migrations, meaning that a
phoneme had moved from one word to another in the same
trial, or alternatively, a word had moved to a different
position in the trial. The remaining 18% of the errors were

1371

outside intrusions (e.g. "just rub rug jump" for the target
"just rum rug jump"). Of the within-trial migrations, 29%
were word substitutions. This, however, might be an
overestimation, because coding word substitutions was
prioritized over phoneme substitutions. For example, the
first rug in "just rug rug jump" for the target "just rum rug
jump" was coded as a word substitution (there was an
identical word in the target that now appeared in the wrong
place in the error), although theoretically it could have been
a phoneme substitution.
In order to compare the experimental to the control
condition, we assigned what we called “fake” attended
status to words in the control condition. To this end, for
each half of a tongue-twister pair in the experimental
condition, we found the other half in the control condition
and assigned the word in the same position to the fake
attended status. In other words, we pretended that it had
been underlined for purposes of analysis. For example, if
“just rum rug jump” was in the experimental condition,
“lust rum rug lump” was located in the control condition
and “rug” was given the fake role of the attended word.
From now on, we use the term “attended and unattended”
for both experimental and control conditions, although in
reality, there was no difference between the four words in
the control condition.
A total of 804 errors (149 on the attended and 655 on the
unattended words) were made in the experimental condition,
and 716 errors (192 on the attended and 524 on the
unattended words) in the control condition. Since the total
opportunities for making errors differed, each number was
turned into a proportion by dividing it by the total number
of error opportunities a participant had in that condition for
that word-status. Figure 1a shows these proportions. There
were significantly more errors on the unattended than the
attended words in the experimental condition (t(30)= -3.63;
p < .001). The difference between the error rates on the
(fake) attended and unattended words in the control
condition was, however, not significant. This shows that the
experimental manipulation did have the desired effect. To
examine how focusing attention on one word affects the
processing of the unattended words, we performed
hierarchical binomial multiple regression in the statistical R
package, using a mixed model which treated subjects and
items as random effects. We also tested the need for a
randomly varying fixed effect by both subjects and items.
Random slopes for each predictor were added to the model
one by one, in a fixed order. We compared the model with
the newly added term to the preceding model by performing
a Chi-squared test of the deviance in model log likelihood.
If this was not significant, we dropped the term from the
model and continued adding other random slopes. The final
model consisted of condition (experimental vs. control),
word-status (attended vs. unattended) and the interaction of
the two as fixed effects, and subject and item random
intercepts, as well as random slopes of condition for
subjects and word-status for items as random effects.

There were more errors overall in the experimental
condition, although the difference did not reach significance
(z = 1.65, p = .10). Crucially, the interaction between
condition and word-status was significant (z = -3.43, p <
.001). Contrast-testing against a baseline of averaged (fake)
attended and unattended words in the control condition
revealed that there were significantly fewer errors on the
attended words compared to the baseline (z= 3.063; p=
.002), and significantly more errors on the unattended words
compared to the baseline (z= -2.543; p = .010)
The results of experiment 1 suggest that focusing on one
word is likely to hurt the overall performance by causing
more errors on the other words in the sequence. It is,
however, unclear what strategies the participants used in
order to avoid mistakes on the attended word. In Experiment
2 we asked them to focus on the word by overtly “stressing”
it.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants: 32 undergraduate students at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, who had not taken part in
experiment 1, participated in the study for course credit.
Materials: The materials from experiment 1 were used.
Procedure: The procedure was the same as for experiment
1, except for the instructions given for the experimental
condition. Participants were told to stress the bold and
underlined word when they pronounced it. An example was
given: “John shot two ducks”, and the experimenter showed
the participants how each word can be given emphatic stress
(modeled with the pitch accent L+H*) if the speaker meant
to emphasize a certain aspects of the message.

Results and Discussion
The exclusion criteria of Experiment 1 were enforced here
as well. In addition, if the participant could not follow the
“stressing” instructions properly after completing the
practice block twice, they were excluded. Two participants
were thus eliminated. For the remainder of the participants,
recitations during the test phase in which they did not stress
the underlined word (as judged by the two independent
transcribers) were thrown out. Overall, 336 error
opportunities were excluded for the remaining 30
participants, all belonging to the experimental condition.
The same procedure as Experiment 1 was repeated to
assign fake stressed status to words in the control condition.
1023 errors (189 on the stressed and 834 on the unstressed
words) were made in the experimental, and 943 errors (258
on the stressed and 685 on the unstressed words) were made
in the control condition. Figure 1b shows the proportion of
errors for each word-status in each condition. Similar to

1372

proportion of errors

which performance was judged. This procedure proved to be
more difficult than the other two, and four participants could
not follow the mouthing instructions even after going
through the practice block twice. Moreover, there were
many more silences in the control condition especially for
participants who had first completed the mouthing
condition, which led to the elimination of 7 trials (112 error
opportunities) in this condition, over the remaining 35
participants. Silence or failure to properly mouth the word
also led to the elimination of 271 error opportunities in the
experimental condition.

(a)

0.04

attended
0.02

unattended

0

proportion of errors

control

0.08
0.06

(b)

0.04

stressed

0.02

unstressed

0

experimental

control

0.08

Experiment 3
Methods
Participants: 39 undergraduate students at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, who had not taken part in
experiments 1 or 2, participated in the study for course
credit.
Materials: The same materials as before were used.

0.06

experimental

proportion of errors

Experiment 1, there were significantly more errors on the
unstressed, compared to the stressed words in the
experimental condition (t(29) = -3.61; p < .001 ), but no
significant difference between the stressed and unstressed
words in the control condition. A similar type of
hierarchical logistic regression model was used, and the
same procedure described in Experiment 1 was repeated to
decide which random effects to include. The final model
consisted of condition (experimental vs. control), wordstatus (stressed vs. unstressed) and the interaction of the two
as fixed effects, and subject and item random intercepts, as
well as random slope of condition for both subjects and
items, and random slope of word-status for items as random
effects. The findings were the same as Experiment 1.
Although there were overall more errors in the experimental
condition, this difference did not reach significance (z =
1.48, p = .14). However, the interaction between condition
and word-status was significant (z = -3.88, p < .001).
Similar to Experiment 1, a baseline was created by
averaging (fake) attended and unattended words in the
control condition for contrast testing. This baseline was
significantly higher than the error rate on the stressed words
in the experimental condition (z = 3.432; p < 0.001), and
significantly lower than that of the unstressed words (z= 2.604; p = 0.009).
In summary, when participants were instructed to
emphasize a certain word in a sequence of words, they made
fewer errors on that word, and more errors on the other
words, compared to when no particular word was stressed.
Is this pattern of results due to putting more emphasis on the
word, or would any kind of manipulation to a word’s
production yield comparable results? In Experiment 3, we
answer this question by asking the participants to do the
reverse of emphasis; we asked them to silently mouth one of
the four words.

0.06

(c)

0.04

mouthed

0.02

articulated

0

experimental

control

Figure 1(a-c) - Proportion of errors for each word-status
(attended vs. unattended, stressed vs. unstressed, mouthed
vs. articulated) in the experimental and control conditions in
Experiments 1, 2 and 3.

Procedure: The procedure was the same except for the
instructions in the experimental condition. Participants were
instructed to mouth the bold and underlined word, meaning
that they had to make the gesture of saying the word with
their mouth, without producing sounds.

Results and Discussion
The exclusion criteria were similar to Experiment 2, except
that mouthing, instead of stressing, was the requirement by

Words were assigned to the fake mouthed status in the
control condition in the fashion described for the other two
experiments. Participants made 969 errors on the articulated
words in the experimental condition and 832 in the control
condition. Figure 1c shows the proportion of errors to the
total error opportunities for each word-status in each
condition. Note that there is no bar for the errors on the

1373

mouthed words in the experimental condition, because by
definition, these words were not supposed to be pronounced
aloud (that recitation was excluded if they were), and
therefore, there were no objective measures to decide
whether an error was made or not. But the important
comparison is between the proportion of errors on the
articulated words in the experimental and control
conditions, which was assessed using a hierarchical logistic
model as before. Only the data for the articulated words
were entered and a final model was built with condition as
fixed effect, and random intercepts for subjects and items, as
well as random slopes for the effect of condition on both
subjects and items as random effects. This model showed
that there were significantly more errors on the articulated
words in the experimental than the control condition (z =
2.19; p = .029).

General Discussion
This paper posed the question of what happens if you focus
attention on one word in a sequence of words. In three
experiments, participants were asked to avoid mistakes,
emphasize, or mouth one of the four words in tonguetwisters. Experiments 1 and 2 provided direct evidence that
the experimental manipulation has been successful: there
were fewer errors on the words that were singled out in
some manner. However, this decrease in error rate on the
attended/stressed words did not cause an overall lower error
rate in the experimental condition. On the contrary, in both
experiments, there were numerically more errors in that
condition (although the difference did not reach statistical
significance). This means that when participants focused
their attention on one word, they made more errors on the
other words in that sequence.
Intuitively, it seems natural for people to emphasize a
word if they are more focused on it, so the purpose of
experiment 3 was to test if the results could be replicated
with attention implemented in the reverse way, namely by
de-emphasizing articulation to an extreme extent, so that no
sound is produced at all. If attention, rather than emphasis,
is the factor that modulates the error rate, we expected to
observe more errors on the articulated (unattended) words in
the experimental, compared to the control, condition. The
data supported this prediction. We conclude that regardless
of the overt manifestation (e.g. making a word more or less
prominent during articulation), focusing on a single word in
a sequence hurts the production of others words.
In summary, attention matters. When a word is singled
out in any respect, the production of other words suffers. An
intuitive account is that greater attention means more
activation on the attended word. In most production models,
greater activation on the word promotes its accurate
production, but increases the chance that that word will
harm production by creating anticipatory and perseveratory
errors on the other words (Dell, 1986). The constituents of
the strongly-activated word will migrate in time to the
unattended ones because of the relative disparity in
activation. Alternately, the greater activation associated with

the attended word could mean less activation in absolute
terms for the other words, assuming a limited pool of
activation, or active inhibition of what is not attended.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a grant from the National
Institutes of Health’s National Institute for Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders: DC000191.

References
Allport, D. A. (1977). On knowing the meaning of words
we are unable to report: The effects of visual masking. In
S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and performance VI. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Davis, C. J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). Paying attention to
reading errors in acquired dyslexia. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 359–361.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval
in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283–
321.
Dell, G. S. & Reich, P. A. (1981). Stages in sentence
production: An analysis of speech error data. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 611–629.
Friedmann, N., Kerbel, N., & Shvimer, L. (2010).
Developmental attentional dyslexia. Cortex, 46(10),
1216–1237.
Fromkin, V. A. (1971). The non-anomalous nature of
anomalous utterances. Language, 47, 27–52.
Humphreys, G. W., & Mayall, K. A. (2001). A peripheral
reading deficit under conditions of diffuse visual
attention. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 18, 551–576.
Mayall, K. A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2002). Presentation
and task effects on migration errors in attentional
dyslexia. Neuropsychologia, 40, 1506–1515.
McClelland, J. L., & Mozer, M. C. (1986). Perceptual
interactions in two-word displays: Familiarity and
similarity effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 12, 18-35.
Mozer, M. C. (1983). Letter migration in word perception.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 9, 531-546.
Nozari, N., Kittredge, A.K., Dell, G.S., Schwartz, M.F.
(2010). Naming and repetition in aphasia: Steps, routes
and frequency effects. Journal of Memory and Language,
63(4), 541-559.
Oppenheim, G. M., & Dell, G. S. (2008). Inner speech slips
exhibit lexical bias, but not the phonemic similarity
effect. Cognition, 106, 528–537.
Saffran, E. M., & Coslett, B. (1996). ‘‘Attentional
dyslexia’’ in Alzheimer’s disease: A case study.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 13, 205–228.
Shallice, T., & McGill, J. (1978). The origins of mixed
errors. In Requin J (Ed), Attention and Performance VII.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 193-208.
Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K. (1977). The possible role
of
selective
attention
in
acquired
dyslexia.
Neuropsychologia, 15, 31-41.

1374

Schwartz, M. F., & Hodgson, C. (2002). A new multiword
naming deficit: Evidence and interpretation. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 19(3), 263–288.
Treisman, A., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97- 136.
Treisman, A., & Schmidt, H. (1982). Illusory conjunctions
in the perception of objects. Cognitive Psychology,
14, 107-141.

1375

