UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic structure in improvised communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zp9x5jg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schouwstra, Marieke
Van Leeuwen, Anounschka
Marien, Nicky
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic structure in improvised communication
Marieke Schouwstra (Marieke.Schouwstra@phil.uu.nl)
UiL OTS, Utrecht University
Trans 10, 3512 JK, Utrecht, the Netherlands

Anouschka van Leeuwen (A.vanLeeuwen@uu.nl)
Nicky Marien (nickymarien@hotmail.com)
Marianne Smit (mariannesmit@gmail.com)
Henriëtte de Swart (H.deSwart@uu.nl)
Utrecht University
Utrecht, the Netherlands
Abstract

Thus, the word order of one’s native language is bypassed
in both the production and interpretation of improvised communication, and SOV ordering is preferred instead.

Recent studies have shown that people, when asked to communicate about simple events in an improvised manner, i.e.,
using only gesture and no speech, consistently use a sequencing that corresponds with SOV order. We present experimental
data showing that SOV is not the only order that emerges, and
that intensional events give rise to a different ordering: SVO.
We conclude that the semantic properties of the events that are
communicated about play a role in the sequencing of utterances in emerging language systems. Further, we hypothesise
that in simple language systems the sequencing of elements has
a communicative function. We present a second study, which
shows that different ordering of the constituents in improvised
communication sequences results in different interpretations.
Keywords: gesture; language genesis; semantics; word order

Motion events vs. intensional events

Introduction
In Goldin-Meadow, So, Özyürek, and Mylander (2008), it
is investigated how people sequence information when they
are asked to communicate about simple events using gesture
and no speech. Speakers of four languages with different
dominant word orders (English (SVO), Chinese (SVO/SOV),
Spanish (SVO) and Turkish (SOV)) were asked to describe
simple events depicted on vignettes using only gesture and
no speech (none of the participants were familiar with any
conventional sign language). Each vignette depicted a motion event: a simple event containing an actor, a patient and
an act that is generally described with a transitive sentence
containing a subject, a direct object and a verb, and in which
the act involves motion (e.g. ‘girl covers box’ or ‘captain
swings pail’).
It was found that the participants, although they were
speakers of languages with different dominant word orders,
used a consistent order for their gesturing: Actor-PatientAct. Goldin Meadow et. al. point out that this order, ActorPatient-Act corresponds with the sentence order SOV. They
conclude that Actor-Patient-Act (henceforth, SOV)1 may reflect a natural sequencing for representing events.
In Langus and Nespor (2010), it was shown that also in
gesture comprehension, SOV order is preferred: it led to the
shortest reaction times in a gesture comprehension task carried out by Turkish (SOV) and Italian (SVO) participants.
1 Following Langus and Nespor (2010), we will use SOV to refer
to Actor-Patient-Act.

Goldin Meadow et al speculate that SOV ‘may reflect a natural sequencing for representing events.’ As an explanation for
this particular order they quote results from related research,
showing that the Subject and Object might be situated before the Verb, because entities are cognitively more basic and
less relational than actions Gentner and Boroditsky (2001).
Moreover, objects and actions are cognitively tied GoldinMeadow (2003), which would link Object to Verb, and result
in the SOV order for gesturing (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2008,
p. 9166).
This explanation seems intuitive, especially for the particular kind of events that were used in the experiment described
in Goldin-Meadow et al. (2008). We found, however, that
there is a category of events, intensional events, for which the
SOV order seems less intuitive. Intensional events differ from
motion events semantically and we will hypothesise that different semantic properties lead to different gesture orderings
in the improvised communication task. But first, let us focus on the differences between motion events and intensional
events.
The events used in (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2008) are all
events in which someone does something to someone or
something else. In these situations, the ontological status of
subject and direct object are similar. E.g., in the example of
a girl covering a box, we can summarise the situation as follows: (1) there is a girl, (2) there is a box, and (3) the girl
covers the box. In other words, in order for the sentence to be
true, both the subject and the direct object need to exist, and
they need to relate to each other in the right way. Let us compare this situation with the following example: ‘a princess
wants an apple’. In this example, the ontological status of the
subject and the direct object are not equal: in order for the
sentence to be true, we need the princess to exist, but the ‘ontological demands’ on the apple are different: a princess can
want an apple without the actual apple being around, or she
can want an apple but not one in particular. It is even possible
for the princess to want something that does not exist at all.

1497

The crucial difference between the two events thus resides
in a difference between the verbs that describe the actions going on in them: both ‘cover’ and ‘want’ are transitive verbs
(they occur with a subject and a direct object), but ‘cover’ is
an extensional verb, whereas ‘want’ is an intensional verb.
Other examples of intensional verbs are ‘seek’, ‘admire’, and
arguably also ‘see’ and ‘draw’. In the literature, interesting
properties of intensional verbs have been described and inventories of intensional verbs have been made (Forbes, 2010;
Moltmann, 2008). The terms ‘intensional’ vs ‘extensional’
are used because of the role that extensions (the object a
term refers to) and intensions (the meaning of a term) play
in the interpretation of these verbs. In order to interpret an
extensional verb, the extension of its complement (the direct
object) is important, whereas for the interpretation of intensional verbs, the extension of its complement is less important
than its meaning. For a precise characterisation of intensional
verbs, see the Appendix.
Let us look again at the event ‘princess wants apple’. This
event is typically described with an intensional verb, and can
thus be called an intensional event. As pointed out, there
is something special about the direct object in such events:
the apple in the ‘want-event’ is not necessarily a concrete object. If we would make a step-by-step analysis of the event,
it would look like this: (1) there is a princess, (2) there is
something the princess wants, and (3) that is an apple. This
analysis reflects the fact that there is something special about
the direct object: it is in some sense dependent on the Subject
and the Verb.

Intensional events and gesturing order
We have described semantic differences between two kinds of
events. How will these two kinds of events behave in the improvised communication setting? An interesting link between
semantic properties and word order is provided in Jackendoff
(2002). Jackendoff suggests that in simple language systems
without full syntax, semantic principles might play an organising role in short utterances. We will assume that the gesture
strings produced in the improvised communication task are
such a ‘language system without full syntax’, and thus hypothesise that semantic properties of events are important in
the improvised communication setting and will influence the
order of the gesturing.
To test this hypothesis, we set up an improvised communication experiment where people are asked to convey the
meanings of both motion events and intensional events. We
predict that for motion events, which are all typically described by extensional verbs, participants will use SOV order, similarly to what was shown in (Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2008). In intensional events, however, there is something exceptional about the ontological status of the direct object. We
have seen above that the direct objects in such events are less
concrete, and we predict that they will be placed in the end of
the gesturing sequence, resulting in a gesturing order of SVO
for intensional events.

Experiment: Gesturing motion events and
intensional events
Method
16 participants (5 male, 11 female) were recruited from
Utrecht University and the Utrecht School of the Arts. All
were native speakers of Dutch (which is an SVO language),
and none of the participants had any knowledge of a conventional sign language.
The set of items consisted of 20 pictures of motion events
(e.g. ‘Pirate throws guitar’, ‘Princess carries vase’), and 20
pictures of intensional events (e.g. ‘Cook thinks of sock’,
‘Leprechaun sees tall building’). Each motion event had a
corresponding intensional event, with the same actor and patient, but a different action. All actors (subjects) in the pictures had particular external characteristics (e.g. a princess
with a crown, a pirate with a hat), in order to encourage participants to gesture all elements in the picture. All patients
(direct objects) were inanimate objects.2 All pictures were
pre-tested for clarity. Each picture was shown either in its
original version or as a mirror image, to control for the leftto-right order of the elements in the pictures.
For the experiment, two versions were created, each consisting of 10 pictures of motion events and 10 pictures of intensional events. The items were presented in random order.
Participants were shown pictures of events on a computer
screen. They were asked to convey the meaning of each picture to the experimenter (who could not see the computer
screen), by using only gestures and no speech. Each picture remained visible on the screen while the participant was
gesturing. Participants were told to keep gesturing until they
thought they had conveyed the meaning of the picture; no information was given about the amount of gestures to be used.
Before the actual experiment started, participants were
shown four practice items. During the practice stage of the
experiment, the experimenter gave feedback about whether
or not she understood which meaning was conveyed. No spoken feedback was given during the experiment.
After the gesturing part of the experiment, participants
were shown the pictures again, and were asked to describe
each event using a Dutch sentence.

Data analysis and results
The video recordings were coded for gesturing order by two
independent coders (80,6% agreement). All gesturing sequences for which there was no consensus were filtered out
(62 of 320 recordings). Occasionally, participants produced
gesture strings describing an action that did not match with
the intended action on the picture; these were removed as well
(10 recordings).
The overall results are shown in figure 1. The chart
shows the percentages of SOV strings, SVO strings and
2 This was done to exclude any effects of animacy described in
(Meir, Lifshitz, Ilkbasaran, & Padden, 2010).

1498

Motion events

Intensional events

gestures. We set up an experiment with a series of ambiguous gesturing sequences in two orders: SOV and SVO. If our
hypothesis that the usage of different ordering for different
semantic structure serves a communicative purpose is true,
we expect SOV strings to be interpreted as motion events and
SVO strings as intensional events (van Leeuwen, 2010).

100
90
80
% of strings

70
60
50

Method

40

We created short movie clips showing an actor gesturing simple events. The verbs were gestured in such a way that the
events acted out could be interpreted either as a motion event
or as an intensional event.

30
20
10
0
SOV

SVO

other

Figure 1: Results of the production experiment
other
other orders. SOV
The category ofSVO
‘other’ orders (which
is only
a100
minority of the totality of strings) consisted of strings like
OSV,
VSO, or strings with either less or more than three
90
gestures.
80
70
60
The data was analysed using a repeated measures ANOVA.
50 within subject factors were Picture-type (intensional or
The
40
motion)
and Order (SOV or SVO); the between subjects factor30was Version (version 1 or 2). Among 132 gesture strings
of20motion events, the proportion of SOV order was high
(M10= .735, SE = .065), whereas the proportion of SVO order
was0 low (M = .132,
SE = .069). Among 122
gesture strings
motion
intensional
of intensional events, the proportion of SVO order was high
(M = .649, SE = .056), whereas the proportion of SOV order
was low (M = .103, SE = .037).
We found a significant interaction between Picture type and
Order: F(1, 14) = 100.753, p = .000. No significant interaction was found between the main interaction and the effect of
version (F(1, 14) = .008, p = .932).

Discussion
The results were as expected: for motion events, the results
obtained in Goldin-Meadow et al. (2008) were replicated, but
for intensional events, different gesture sequencing was used:
the direct object was placed after the verb, resulting in an
SVO order. This confirms our hypothesis that semantic properties influence ordering in improvised communication.

Pilot study: interpreting SOV and SVO strings
It has become clear from the experiment described above that
the semantic differences between motion events and intensional events have an influence on gesture production in the
improvised communication task.
We hypothesise that these different orderings serve a communicative purpose. Given that communication involves both
the production of strings and their interpretation, and that we
have already seen the effects of semantic differences on the
production side, we need to find out whether different gesturing orders have an influence on the interpretation of these

Figure 2: An ambiguous action: ‘climb’ or ‘build’.
An example of the way in which these ambiguous items
were gestured is given in figure 2, in which the ambiguous
action ‘climb/build’ is shown. Thus, the gesture in the figure
can be interpreted as a climbing action, as well as a building
action. We created two videos of each ambiguous verb by
adding a gestured subject and object to the transitive event.
There were two different orders: [Subject-AmbiguousVerbObject] and [Subject-Object-AmbiguousVerb]. Thus, each
video consists of exactly the same video material, but the elements are put in two different orders.
The following ambiguous events were used; for every item
in the list, the option marked with m creates a motion event,
and the option marked with i creates an intensional event.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Pirate dropsm /searchesi ball.
Princess breaksm /sculptsi vase.
Leprechaun cutsm /drawsi pizza.
Witch eatsm /wantsi banana.
Witch paintsm /paintsi table.3
Girl sleeps onm /dreams ofi book.
Girl kissesm /thinks ofi doll.
Princess talks tom /talks abouti snowman.
Pirate throwsm /hearsi guitar.
Cook stirsm /smellsi soup.

3 In the first interpretation a witch painting an existing table is
meant; in the second a witch painting a table on a canvas.

1499

Discussion

• Leprechaun hitsm /feelsi book.
• Witch climbsm /buildsi house.

The two different gesturing orderings led people to interpret
the gesturing differently: SOV gesturing strings were more
likely to be interpreted as motion events than SVO strings
were, and SVO gesturing strings were more likely to be interpreted as intensional event than SOV strings were. So we
are safe to conclude that the order of gesturing has an influence on the interpretation of the gesture strings. This supports
our hypothesis that choosing a different ordering in order to
convey different kinds of meanings serves a communicative
purpose.

Of the 12 video pairs, two versions were created, each consisting of 6 videos in SVO order, 6 videos in SOV order. Four
fillers, items with unambiguous actions, were added to each
version. The videos were shown to participants in a two alternative forced choice task; pictures of the corresponding intensional and extensional (motion) events were shown as the
two answer possibilities.
Forty one native speakers of Dutch were recruited from the
Utrecht University library (they did not receive a monetary
compensation). They were shown videos on a laptop screen
and were asked to choose, after each video, the picture that fitted best with the event acted out on the video. First two practice items with unambiguous verbs were shown, followed by
the ambiguous items and fillers (ambiguous items and fillers
were presented in random order). The two answer possibilities were shown before each video, and again afterwards (the
order of the two answer possibilities was also randomly determined).

General discussion

Data analysis and results
Upon re-analysis of the video clips we decided to exclude two
videos from the results: ‘Pirate dropsm /searchesi ball’ and
‘Girl kissesm /thinks ofi doll’. These two videos differ from
the others in the sense that the ambiguous actions they depict
consist of two sub-gestures,4 whereas for all other ambiguous
actions, only one gesture is used.
The data was analysed using a repeated measures ANOVA.
The within subjects factor was Order (SOV or SVO), and the
within subjects factor was Version (version 1 or 2). The results are shown in figure 3
For SOV gesturing sequences, a motion answer was chosen
more often (M = .751, SE = .020) than for SVO gesturing sequences (M = .488, SE = .032). We found a significant main
effect of Order: F(1, 39) = 42.709, p = .000. No significant
interaction was found of version (F(1, 39) = .007, p = .934).

Figure 3: Results of the interpretation study
4 A drop-gesture followed by a search gesture for the former, and
a think of gesture followed by a kiss gesture for the latter.

In previous publications, similarities were pointed out
between the improvised communication task and newly
emerged sign languages like Al Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language and Nicaraguan Sign Language.5 And from these similarities it was hypothesised that results from the improvised
communication experiment can tell us something about the
emergence of language in general: it was argued that SOV
word order may reflect a natural disposition that humans exploit not only when asked to represent events nonverbally, but
also when creating language anew (Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2008, p. 9167). This in turn connects well to the claim made
in (Newmeyer, 2000), that the earliest human language had
rigid SOV word order.
The production experiment described in this paper shows
that it is not SOV word order as such that is important in the
improvised communication task, but rather the meanings that
are to be conveyed. It was shown that for gesture production,
different event types were gestured in different orders.
The interpretation study described in this paper shows that
the order of gesturing has an influence on the interpretation
of the gesture strings. This supports the hypothesis that the
distinction found in gesture production between SVO and
SOV ordering for intensional events and motion events respectively, has a communicative function.
Effects of meaning on structure in simple language systems
have been found in other linguistic phenomena where improvisation is required. In the process of acquiring a second language outside the classroom, adult learners go through a stage
that has been characterized as being (1) determined by a small
number of organisational principles, (2) largely independent
of the source or target language of the learner and (3) simple but relatively successful for communication. This stage is
called the Basic Variety (Klein & Perdue, 1997). Some examples of organisational principles of the Basic Variety are
FocusLast (‘put the information that is in focus, new information, at the end of the sentence’) and AgentFirst (‘the NP
referent with the highest control comes first’). Similar organisational principles were described for, e.g., pidgin languages
(Jackendoff, 2002).
The fact that the organisational principles described above
are found consistently in linguistic phenomena like the Ba5 See

1500

(Goldin-Meadow et al., 2008, p. 9167).

sic Variety and pidgins, and seem to be independent of the
native language of their users, makes these phenomena interesting for the language evolution debate: they might tell
us something about the structure of evolutionarily early language (Jackendoff, 2002; Schouwstra, 2010).
The circumstances under which people create systems like
the Basic Variety and pidgin are very particular and also often
undesirable. Moreover, the circumstances under which these
restricted systems emerge are not controllable, and the data
is therefore not very clean. Finally, the focus of data collection for these systems was mainly on production, and not on
comprehension. Therefore, it would be valuable to able to
collect this kind of data in a controlled environment, like in
a laboratory. The improvised communication task provides
us with exactly this: if we see the task as a setting where restricted linguistic systems are produced, we can obtain data
in the ideal way described above.
The improvised communication task can be seen as an environment where restricted linguistic systems are produced,
because the setting shares many properties with the settings
of pidgin and unsupervised second language learning. In the
experiment, like in those situations, subjects cannot use their
native language to express themselves and are forced to improvise, using whatever they have in their restricted inventory.
The improvised communication task thus offers us a way to
collect data about the earliest stages of language emergence
in a controlled manner.
Moreover, the view of the improvised communication task
as a restricted linguistic system allows us to compare the influence of semantic structures in existing studies into, e.g., the
Basic Variety and pidgin languages to that in lab situations.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown that when people are forced
to communicate in an improvised manner, this does not necessarily lead to SOV ordering of utterances. Rather, the semantic properties of verbs are decisive in the ordering of gestures in the improvised communication task. This supports
the view that in language systems without full syntax, semantic properties play an organising role, a process that is also
seen in other linguistic situations where improvisation is required (e.g. early stages in spontaneous second language acquisition and pidgin).
We have also shown that different ordering of the constituents in improvised communication sequences results in
different interpretations. This supports the view that choosing different utterance structures in order to express different
kinds of meanings has a communicative function.

Appendix: intensional transitive verbs
In order to get a more precise characterisation of the
differences between extensional and intensional transitive
verbs, we will give a brief overview of three ‘marks
of intensionality that were described in (Forbes, 2010):
substitution-resistance, the availability of unspecific readings,
and existence-neutrality.

Substitution-resistance
In sentences with extensional verbs, it is possible to substitute the direct object with one that refers to the same object,
without changing the truth value of the sentence. This is illustrated in the following examples:
(1)

John lives next to Mark Twain.

(2)

John lives next to Samuel Clemens.

Because Samuel Clemens is Mark Twain, sentence 1 is true in
exactly the same situations as sentence 2. If we substitute the
extensional verb live next to for an intensional verb, admire,
this is no longer possible.
(3)

John admires Mark Twain.

(4)

John admires Samuel Clemens.

It might be the case that sentence 3 is true, but that John
does not realise that his grumpy neighbour Samuel Clemens
is Mark Twain. In that case, ‘John admires Mark Twain is
true, while ‘John admires Samuel Clemens is false.

The availability of unspecific readings
In sentences with intensional verbs, it is possible that the direct object remains unspecific. An example of this is the following sentence:
(5)

Mary seeks a man.

For this sentence, an interpretation is possible where Mary
seeks a man, but not one man in particular. Contrast this with
the verb kiss. We cannot say
(6)

Mary kissed a man, but not one in particular.

Existence-neutrality
In sentences with intensional verbs, it is possible for the direct
object not to exist at all. By contrast, for extensional verbs,
the direct object needs to exist in order for the sentence to
make sense. It is possible to seek a unicorn, but not to stumble
across one.

Intensional items used in the experiment
Intensional verbs will always show at least one of the three
properties described above. Some verbs manifest all three
kinds of behaviour, but there are many verbs that meet only
one of the criteria. For certain verbs, it is not always clear
whether a particular criterion is met.
The verbs that were used in the production experiment are
the following (behind each subset, a name for the subclass of
verbs is given):
•
•
•
•

1501

search (‘classical’ intensional verb)
dream of, think of (psych verbs)
hear, see (perception verbs)
build, draw, knit, sculpt (creation verbs)

The class of intensional verbs is thus a rather diverse group
and there is no general agreement on either the names of the
subcategories, the verbs that should be included in them, or
even whether all categories listed above are truly intensional.
One might, for example, question the intensional properties of perception verbs: if John sees a house, doesn’t he just
see an existing external object? But the fact that a sentence
like ‘When John listened to a cello, he heard a violin’ is possible, shows that there is, after all, something special about
complements of perception verbs. In support of this view,
see the following characterisation of perception verbs, as presented in Moltmann (2008):

K. Smith (Eds.), The evolution of language (pp. 455–456).
Singapore: World Scientific.
Moltmann, F. (2008). Intensional verbs and their intentional
objects. Natural Language Semantics, 16(3), 239–270.
Newmeyer, F. J. (2000). On the reconstruction of ‘proto
world’ word order. In C. Knight, J. R. Hurford, &
M. Studdert-Kennedy (Eds.), The evolutionary emergence
of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schouwstra, M. (2010). Language evolution: the view from
second language learners. In A. Smith, M. Schouwstra,
B. de Boer, & K. Smith (Eds.), The evolution of language.
Singapore: World Scientific.

The complements of perception verbs [. . . ] do not describe the external object that may be perceived, but
rather the way the perceived object appears.
In other words, for perception verbs, like for other intensional
verbs, it is not the external object that is important for their
interpretation, but the intension. This shows that perception
verbs have at least an intensional flavor.
For our experiments, we have taken the widest definition of
‘intensional’ and included all verbs that have an intensional
flavor.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Simon Kirby, Mónica Tamariz and Marijn
Struiksma for their insightful suggestions.

References
Forbes, G. (2010). Intensional transitive verbs. In E. N. Zalta
(Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
2010 ed.).
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation, relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S. Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual development (pp. 215–256). New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Resilience of language. New
York: Psychology Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S., So, W. C., Özyürek, A., & Mylander,
C. (2008). The natural order of events: How speakers of
different languages represent events nonverbally. PNAS,
105(27), 9163–9168.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of language: Brain,
meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford University Press.
Klein, W., & Perdue, C. (1997). The Basic Variety (or:
couldn’t natural languages be much simpler?). Second Language Research, 13, 301–347.
Langus, A., & Nespor, M. (2010). cognitive systems struggling for word order. Cognitive Psychology, 60(4).
Leeuwen, A. van. (2010). Gesturing orders and their interpretation. Unpublished master’s thesis, Utrecht University.
Meir, I., Lifshitz, A., Ilkbasaran, D., & Padden, C. (2010).
The interaction of animacy and word order in human languages. In A. Smith, M. Schouwstra, B. de Boer, &

1502

