UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic, Aesthetic, and Cognitive Effects of Flashbacks in Film

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ff5c86b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sevenants, Aline
d'Ydewalle, Gery

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic, Aesthetic, and Cognitive Effects of Flashbacks in Film
Aline Sevenants (aline.sevenants@psy.kuleuven.be)
Géry d’Ydewalle (géry.dyewalle@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Principles of narrative and intellectual film editing were
investigated by assessing the semantic, cognitive, and
aesthetic consequences of inserting flashbacks. A short
narrative film was presented, either with flashbacks or in
chronological/linear order. In Experiment 1, the gravity
of the acts committed by the two main actors was
perceived to be more salient in the linear than in the
flashback version (based on Osgood’s semantic
differential ratings). Aesthetic assessment did not vary as
a function of the linearity. In reconstructing the movie
segments into the right order, the linear film condition
showed a better match with the chronological ordering
than the flashback condition. In Experiment 2, pupil size
of the viewers, as a measure of mental load, was
registered on-line. In the flashback version, mental load
was heightened due to the flashbacks disrupting the linear
story grammar. In the discussion about distinctive
advantages of intellectual versus narrative editing,
intellectual editing lost the case in the present study.
Flashbacks did not enhance aesthetic judgments, and
linearity emphasized the semantic features of the leading
actors with less consumption of mental resources.

Introduction
The year that the film was born is considered to be 1895. The
race to be the first to present “living photographs” was won
by the Skladanowsky brothers in Berlin on November 1,
1895. The presentation of the Lumière brothers with their
technically superior cinematograph in the Grand Café in Paris
on December 28 of the same year, however, is considered as
the point of departure of modern film technique. In the first
motion pictures of the 1890’s, filmmakers positioned the
camera and filmed until the spool to hold the film ran out.
This means that the entire scene consisted of one single shot,
showing continuous limited action at one place.
David Llewelyn Wark Griffith (1875-1948), often referred
to as the founding father of the classical Hollywood Cinema,
is generally recognized as the inventor of film montage. Ever
since, montage or editing (i.e., connecting different film shots
and segments) has historically been accepted by film makers
and film theorists as a crucial parameter of the film medium.
Griffith claimed that an individual shot, rather than the scene,
constitutes the central element of cinematic language. He
therefore made use of a large amount of cuts and shots. In
order to safeguard the temporal and spatial logic and linearity
despite the large number of different shots, he developed

1064

guidelines for preserving continuity, which is still the
prevailing standard in classical Hollywood cinema (Griffith,
1969). Griffith employed the new technique of montage
primarily for heightening the dramatic tension. However, the
Russian avant-garde filmmakers were the first ones to use the
montage techniques very systematically. Vsevelod Pudovkin
(1893-1953), often called the second greatest film maker next
to Sergei Eisenstein (1898-1948), considered montage as a
process of construction: Shots are like bricks that, joined
together, build a sequence (Pudovkin, 1958). He maintained
that concepts were best developed by successively presenting
shots, which refer to the same general idea. This is called
“narrative editing”. Based on several experiments with Lev
Kuleshov (1899-1970), Pudovkin suggested that viewers’
expectations, inferences, deductions, and associations guide
perception of montage sequences.
Kuleshov conducted a series of experiments, called "films
without film", and developed the notion of the "Kuleshov
effect" in which, through montage, each shot acquired a
different shade of meaning according to its place in the
sequence. He inserted identical frames of the actor Ivan
Mazouchin (1889-1939) between scenes of different events
(shots of a bowl of soup, a girl, a teddy bear, and a child's
coffin) and asked viewers to describe the actor’s facial
expression. Viewers interpreted the frames in accordance with
the nature of the adjacent events, although the actor’s facial
expression had not varied at all. Kuleshov proved that two
shots projected in succession are not interpreted separately by
the viewer; in the audience's mind, they are integrated into a
whole. The meaning of a shot depends on its context, a
general principle that has so strongly been stressed by Gestalt
psychology.
After studying Kuleshov's montage experiments, Eisenstein
became convinced that in cinema one could manipulate time
and space to create new meanings, especially if the images
were not to be merely linked to create an impression of
continuity, as Kuleshov and Pudovkin suggested, but
juxtaposed (Eisenstein, 1949). Eisenstein stressed that
montage is the basic and unique characteristic of cinema, the
basis for its distinctive power as a medium and for its
aesthetic principles. In particular, he theorized that the
collision or conflict between temporally and spatially
unrelated or unmatched shots or scenes could give rise to a
new concept eliciting special emotional and cognitive
reactions in the audience.
According to his theory, the maximum effect of screen
expressiveness can be gained if the shots do not fit together
perfectly but create a shock to the viewer. This is called
“intellectual editing”. Eisenstein proposed that the viewer

organizes the film’s spatial and temporal structures, linking
shots and scenes logically and chronologically, provoking
emotions, and creating expectations. This implies that
meaning and aesthetic experience are based on the
arrangement of film units. In contrast to Eisenstein, Pudovkin
felt that editing should be based on principles of ordinary
viewing, stressing the perceived or experienced continuity of
the story, causing Pudovkin’s films to be much closer to
Griffith and the classical narrative Hollywood cinema.
A narrative is a chain of events in cause-effect relationship
occurring in time and space. Thus, a narrative film provides
the viewer with a sequential and highly systematic input of
visual information: Each informative fact (e.g., an action, a
shot, a scene…) is not only related to the preceding and to the
following one, but also to the whole story. As the viewer
watches the film, he or she picks up cues, recalls information,
and anticipates what will follow. The film shapes particular
expectations by summoning up uncertainty, curiosity,
suspense, and surprise that has to be satisfied or cheated
during the progression of the film.
Every perturbation of the continuity of the narrative (e.g.,
by means of intellectual editing, a flashback, a
hallucination…) causes a perturbation of the interplay
between the elicited expectations and the answers provided by
the film: Spatial and visual continuity becomes distorted, and
actions and events change their meaning. This limits the
integration, the restitution of the content, and the structure of
the message. Denis (1972) showed that minor chronological
disturbances in a sequential visual message significantly
lowered the capacity of participants to recall items of
information conveyed by the message. In a second
experiment however, this effect could not be repeated and,
with even larger disturbances of the chronological order,
participants recalled almost as many items as the control
group that saw the chronological version of the visual
message.
Narrative schemata allow the viewer to identify the relative
importance of propositions and the interdependency of the
story elements. Roberts, Cowen, and MacDonald (1996)
found that not only recall of important information, but also
comprehension and impressions of the main protagonists and
their goals were influenced by the narrative structure.
Deviations from linearity had also significantly different
effects on the aesthetic judgments of the film. Viewers thus
comprehend and recall film information as a story, and not
just as an summation of facts in a certain order.
When the order of propositions in the narrative is
unconventional, comprehension and recall may become
distorted. In Cowen (1988), deviations from linear montage
produced four different versions of a short narrative film;
recall of the presented actions and the reconstruction of the
linear order of events were strongly associated with the
degree of montage linearity. Research on verbal story
comprehension leads to similar results. In Mandler and
Goodman (1982), for example, deviations from the
expectations, caused by an altered order of presentation or
context in the verbal story, affected comprehension and recall
of actions and events.
We are quite accustomed to films that present events out of
story order. A flashback is an alternation of story order in

1065

which the plot (i.e., the actual presentation of events in the
story) moves back to show events that have taken place
earlier than ones already shown. It is a portion of the story
that the plot presents out of chronological order (Bordwell &
Thompson, 2004). From the plot order, the story order is
inferred. If story events can be thought of as ABCD, then the
plot containing flashbacks presents something like BADC. In
most Hollywood films, the flashbacks are fairly simple and it
takes little mental effort to reconstruct the story order. But
some films provide us with the challenge of unpredictable
presentations of story events.
An example of the latter is Sergio Leone’s Once upon a
time in America (1984), with a non-linear plot-structure.
Spanning five decades in the lives of two men, the sprawling
story, which moves continuously among 1922, 1933, and
1968 on New York City's gangster-ruled Lower East Side, is
memorably conveyed through flashbacks, flash-forwards,
dreams, and fantasies. The film was initially released in the
US as a 2 1/4-hour, studio-edited version of the original 3 3/4hour version. This was an attempt to organize Leone's epic
chronologically to make the film “easier” and more
accessible. There are currently at least five differently edited
versions.
The distinction between narrative and intellectual montage
is at the level of the story line. At the perceptual level, there
are also mainly two opposing viewpoints, the classical and the
modern one. The classical viewpoint (e.g. the Hollywood
concept of editing; see Bretz, 1962; Mascelli, 1965; Reisz,
1953/1968; Wurtzel, 1983) is characterized by the Formal
Editing Principle: There are certain empirical rules
concerning good perceptual editing which film makers have
to follow in order to obtain smooth transition between the
images of the successive shots. These rules tell which shots
may be connected and where this may happen. The rules can
be standardized, independently of the film content. The
modern viewpoint (see Wurtzel, 1983), however, defends the
thesis that the classical film editing rules have lost a lot of
their absolute value: The viewer has already seen such an
amount of film and television that a cut that doesn't follow the
rules, will not disturb the viewing process anymore. Most
important is to have an editing that is narratively consistent,
and suits the content of the action. The French film maker
Jean-Luc Godard talks about a self-conscious camera
(Godard, 1966).
The present study is about the narrative versus intellectual
montage at the story level. Following the intellectual-editing
rules of Eisenstein, inserting flashbacks may elicit emotions
and create expectations, thus enhancing expressiveness and
aesthetic judgments. On the other hand, and in contrast to
Eisenstein, narrative editing is based on principles of ordinary
viewing, stressing the perceived continuity of experience; the
chronological/linear presentation of the narrative segments
should facilitate the semantic and cognitive processing of the
film with less consumption of mental resources.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty first-year students (23 female and 7 male)

from the Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences at
the University of Leuven, Belgium participated on a
voluntary basis. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Materials The short film in the experiment was entitled
“Salvation”, a graduation project at a Media High School in
Brussels. In the thriller (duration: 14 min 16 s, with 13 shots),
a young ballerina is assaulted by a group of men. In a fight,
the leader of the group deliberately twists her foot causing her
to give up her dancing career. As an old woman, she takes
revenge on her assailants and murders them one by one. The
film was chosen because of its narrative structure, containing
a large amount of flashbacks in its original form. A second
version of the short film was constructed by editing the shots
in a manner that restored the chronological order of the story.
Both versions had the same shots, and differed only with
regard to the montage. In the linearly edited version, the
scenes were presented in the following order:
ABCDEFGHIJKLM. In the original, non-chronological
version, the order of the scenes was HABCMDEFGKIJL.
Dependent measures and procedure Twelve seven-point
rating scales from Osgood’s semantic differential (Osgood,
Suci, & Tannenbaum, 1957) were used for assessing both the
male leader and the ballerina. The scales friendly/unfriendly,
innocent/guilty, happy/sad, and good/bad measured the
evaluation factor; strong/weak, fearless/afraid, tall/short, and
dominant/submissive were indicators of the potency factor;
and active/passive, impulsive/deliberate, violent/peaceful, and
emotional/unemotional measured the activation factor. All
participants were presented the same randomized sequence of
the 12 scales, separately for the male leader and the ballerina.
The eight rating scales for the specific aesthetic judgments
were all Likert-type and concerned the following topics:
comprehensibility of the story-line, scenario, cinematography,
originality, montage, acting of the ballerina, acting of the
male leader, and film music. Finally, they had to give a global
judgment of the film on a Likert-type scale ranging from 1
(extremely bad) to 7 (extremely good).
In the ranking task, titles of 10 of the scenes in the short
film were presented in a random order. Participants had to put
the 10 titles in chronological order, thus not necessarily in the
order they had seen them. To avoid ceiling effects, this task
was administered after Osgood’s semantic differential ratings
and the aesthetic judgments.
Participants viewed the film in small groups of four up to
eight. Sixteen participants saw the original version and 14
participants were presented the edited version. Afterwards
they immediately performed the two rating and one ranking
tasks.

Figure 1: Average rating as a function of the three semantic
differential factors and conditions (flashbacks vs. linear).
The difference between the two film conditions is
significant, F(1, 28) = 10.648, MSE = 1.783, p < .001. The
two main actors are rated higher on the three factors in the
linear condition than in the flashback condition (see Figure 1).
Separate analyses of variance on each rating scale show film
condition to be significant each time on one scale per
semantic differential factor: Both main actors are judged to be
more sad [F(1, 28) = 7.310, MSE = 1.612, p < .02; Evaluation
factor], more dominant [F(1, 28) = 5.021, MSE = 1.112, p <
.04; Potency factor], and more active [F(1, 28) = 7.616, MSE
= 1.482, p < .02; Activity factor] in the linear version than in
the original version. Clearly, the goals, intentions, and actions
of the main actors are more intelligible and transparent in the
linear version due to the chronological succession of the
events. Not only the gravity of the acts committed by the male
aggressor is magnified, but also the cruelty of the ballerina’s
activities is more salient.
The interaction between the two main actors and three
factors of Osgood’s semantic differential is also significant,
F(2, 56) = 13.498, MSE = 2.522, p < .001. Subjects rate the
male aggressor higher than the ballerina on the evaluation
factor [F(1, 28) = 41.71, MSE = 418.630, p < .01] and on the
potency factor [F(1, 28) = 17.690, MSE = 253.456, p < .01],
while no significant difference emerged on the activity
factor.1 Given the content of the film and the actions
committed by both characters, the results were to be expected.
The male aggressor in the story is depicted as the dominant
and demonic “bad guy” who has no scruples at all about
ruining the life of his victim. The ballerina on the other hand
plays the role of this victim and is characterized as a broken
woman who revenges the crime that has been done to her.
These characterizations are covered by the Evaluation and
Potency factors; the absence of an effect on the Activity
factor is not surprising.
Aesthetic assessment does not vary as a function of the
linearity of the movie sequence. Nothing significant emerges

Results and Discussion
The rating scores for each of the three factors of Osgood’s
semantic differential (evaluation, potency and activity) were
averaged; the averages were then submitted to an analysis of
variance which included the two film versions (linear vs.
flashback versions) as between-subjects variable, and the two
main actors and three semantic differential factors as two
within-subjects variables.

1066

1 Separate analyses of variance on each rating scale show male
aggressor to be judged as more unfriendly [F(1, 28) = 18.277, MSE
= 1.059, p < .001], more guilty [F(1, 28) = 40.882, MSE = 2.115, p <
.001], and more bad [F(1, 28) = 70.256, MSE = 0.916, p < .001] than
is the ballerina (Evaluation factor). The male aggressor is judged
more fearless [F(1, 28) = 14.658, MSE = 1.791, p < .001], taller
[F(1, 28) = 12.205, MSE = 1.586, p < .002], and more dominant
[F(1, 28) = 20.546, MSE = 1.704, p < .001] than the ballerina
(Potency factor).

from the multivariate analysis on the data of the eight specific
rating scales. The influence of the linearity on each of the
eight rating scales was also analyzed separately. For none of
the eight rating scales is there an influence of linearity on the
aesthetic judgments. The global judgment also fails to show a
linearity effect. Judgments were expected to be more positive
for the linear version because this version was more
intelligible and/or because knowing the resolution in advance
in the nonlinear version may spoil the pleasure of watching
the film. However, this was not the case. Whether the scales
were related to linearity (comprehensibility, scenario,
originality, editing, and global judgment), or were unrelated
to linearity (cinematography, acting of the leads and film
music), there were no significant rating differences. Maybe
the benefits of intelligibility are undone by the lack of
challenge provided by the linear version.
The rank ordering of the 10 movie segments by the
participants were correlated with the chronological ordering.
The correlations were subjected to an analysis of variance,
after appropriate Fisher z transformations. Not surprisingly,
the linear film condition shows a better match (average r =
+.868) with the chronological ordering than the nonlinear
condition (average r = +.749), F(1, 28) = 5.187, MSE = 0.036,
p < .04.

Experiment 2
For centuries, the eye pupil has been thought of as the
figurative window to one’s mind. Incidental observations of
pupillary dilation associated with increased interest or arousal
were well known, urging the poker player to wear eyeshades
obscuring any betraying pupil dilation. With the advancement
of medical sciences and physiology, the pupil began to serve
as a literal window on brain functioning. In neurology, for
instance, an examination of the pupils and their size changes
is used to establish the integrity of the brain stem nuclei and
pathways (Adams & Victor, 1981). The primary function of
the pupillary reflex is to regulate the amount of light entering
the eye, both in response to changes in the illumination and in
order to maintain visual acuity under changes in the state of
accommodation of the eye (Lowenstein & Lowenfeld, 1962).
However, under conditions of constant illumination and
accommodation, pupil size has been observed to vary
systematically in relation to a variety of physiological and
psychological factors.
The subject of “pupillometrics”, a word invented by
Eckhard Hess (Janisse, 1977), comprises the effects of
psychological influences, perceptual processes and mental
activity on the size of the pupil (Hess, 1972; Hess & Polt,
1964). Contrary to galvanic skin response that produces
conflicting results, pupillary dilation is in fact one measure of
peripheral autonomic activity that appears to be most
consistent in its relations with attention, cognitive processing,
and “mental effort” (Backs & Walrath, 1992; Deijen,
Heemstra, & Orlebeke, 1995;.Kahneman, 1973; Karatekin,
Couperus, & Marcus, 2004; Krüger, Nuthmann, & van der
Meer, 2001).
Task-evoked pupillary responses occur at relatively short
latencies, that is 300-500 ms following the onset of cognitive
processing and disappear just as rapidly once processing is

1067

terminated. The pupil size then normalizes to its baseline.
Dilations, caused by changes in light intensity or illumination
of the stimulus, occur at 200 ms following the presentation
(Hakerem, 1967). The magnitude of the task-evoked
pupillary dilation during cognitive processing is independent
of baseline pupillary diameter over a reasonable range of
values (Kahneman, Beatty, & Pollack, 1967) and reflects the
momentary effort that a task demands, rather than the total
amount of mental effort required to complete the task (Beatty,
1982; Beatty & Lucero-Wagoner, 2000).
It is hypothesized that participants viewing the flashback
version of the short film from Experiment 1 will present
pupillary dilation during the 300 to 500 ms interval following
the beginning of the scenes that are not presented in
chronological order. Viewers of the chronologically edited
version are expected to present smaller pupillary dilation
during the same time-interval because, since the scenes are
already presented to them in the linear order, viewing and
understanding the movie require less mental effort.

Method
Participants and materials Eight last-year students (5
female, 3 male) at the Faculty of Psychology and Educational
Sciences at the University of Leuven, Belgium, participated
on a voluntary basis and had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. Experiment 2 used the same movies as Experiment 1.
Dependent measures Participants’ pupil diameter was
registered with the Eyelink eye-tracking system. The Eyelink
system is based on video technology and has a sampling rate
of 250 Hz. This means that every 4 ms the Eyelink system
determines pupil size (and pupil position) of the registered
eye and the relative head position. The data are processed in
real time to compute almost instantaneously the pupil size
(and position).
The data are recorded in an EDF file (Eyelink Data File).
The EDF file is then converted to a regular text file for further
analysis. At the beginning of the registration, but also every 4
ms when the pupil size is registered, a time stamp is recorded.
The time stamps in the text files, in combination with video
output that maps the momentary true gaze position onto the
originally displayed movie and also contains a time indicator,
allow narrowing down the data files to only the relevant
portions. Therefore, pupil sizes are registered during the
period of 300-500 ms after the beginning of each scene. The
measurement is noise-limited, with a resolution of 0.015 mm
for a 5 mm pupil.
Pupil size (an integer number, in arbitrary units) is not
calibrated, as the distance from the eye to registering camera
for each participant varies. Therefore, for each participant, the
pupil size is also registered 100 ms preceding the beginning
of the first scene. This benchmark allows comparing the
relative changes in pupil size between participants
Procedure and design Participants were tested individually
in a dim room. Light intensity was kept constant within and
between participants. They were seated in a comfortable
stable chair with adjustable height, with the eyes at a distance
of about 110 cm from the television screen (i.e., the
prescribed “ideal” distance for a screen with a display size of

55 cm width). In order to minimize head movements,
participants’ heads were fixed in a specially constructed
headrest.
After the calibration (consisting of fixating a 9-point grid
with randomized target order, followed by a calibrationaccuracy validation), participants were asked to watch the
movie in the way they would do when watching television at
home.
Pupil size was registered during the 300 to 500 ms
following the beginning of the scenes which were presented
in a non-chronological order in the flashback condition (i.e.,
scenes A, D, H, I, K, L, and M). Pupil sizes, registered during
the first 300-500 ms of scenes A, D, H, I, K, L, and M in the
flashback version, were then compared to the pupil sizes
during the same interval of scenes A, D, H, I, K, L, and M in
the linear version.

Results and Discussion
An analysis of covariance was conducted on the pupil sizes
with the two movies as between-subjects variable and the
seven scenes as within-subjects variable. Participant’s pupil
size during 100 ms preceding the beginning of the first scene
served as covariate.
The interaction Scene x Movie is significant, F(6, 30) =
2.683, MSE = 2607.6, p < .04. Planned comparisons show a
larger pupil size (p < .05) in all scenes of the non-linear
condition, except in Scenes D and H (see Figure 2).
Scene H has the smallest pupil size in the non-linear movie;
similarly, Scene A has the smallest pupil size in the linear
movie. It is worth mentioning that both scenes were the first
presented ones in the two movies. Accordingly, cognitive
load is not yet heightened and therefore pupil size is not
enlarged.

Figure 2: Average pupil size as a function of scenes and
conditions (flashbacks vs. linear).
In 5 out of the 7 “flashback” scenes, pupil size, as an online
measure of mental load, is significantly larger in the flashback
version than in the linear version. In the flashback version,
cognitive load and thus pupil size are heightened due to the
flashbacks disrupting the linear story grammar: The implicit
mental ranking and integration of information as a function of
the expectations are requiring more mental effort.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, judgments about the two main actors on
Osgood’s semantic differential depended on linearity: The
actions and intentions of the main actors were more
intelligible and transparent in the linear version. Despite the

1068

fact that the acts and intentions of the main actors were so
pronounced and extreme that they could be unambiguously
interpreted in the flashback version of the movie, linearity
still magnified the effect (see Figure 1).
The study did not yield effects of linearity on esthetic
judgments which, however, had been found in a previous
paper (Roberts, Cowen & MacDonald, 1996). On the one
hand, the movie makers inserted flashbacks in order to make
the movie more attractive; hence, a more positive judgment
for the flashback version was to be expected. In the flashback
version, the resolution of the story was perhaps presented too
early, spoiling the viewers’ pleasure of watching the film. The
film should be edited into additional versions, manipulating
the amount of information concerning the outcome of the plot
offered to the observers in advance. On the other hand,
judgments could be expected to be more positive for the
linear version because this version was more intelligible.
Maybe reconstructing story order was seen as a pleasant and
challenging mental game instead of as a cognitive demanding
assignment.
In the flashback condition, it was more difficult to rank the
scenes into chronological order than in the linear condition. It
is assumed that the linear version was actually better
understood and thus caused less mental load than the
flashback version. In Experiment 2, pupil sizes of the
participants seem to confirm the presence of less mental load
in the linear condition. Generally, pupil sizes were smaller for
participants watching the linear version than for participants
watching the flashback version.
With flashbacks, movie makers deliberately shift later shots
earlier in the sequence (and/or vice versa) with the explicit
attempt to elicit reconstruction into the right sequence by the
viewers. Shuffling of the shots was also done in d’Ydewalle
and Vanderbeeken (1990, Experiment 1) but this was
scrambling the shots with the intent to destroy the narrative
structure. A television film of 8 min, involving 44 shots, was
shown in two versions. In Version 1, nothing of the film was
changed. In Version 2, all shots were re-edited in a random
way, with the restrictions that no shots followed each other
that followed each other in the original version. All
participants were required to respond manually as soon as
possible at the transition from one shot to another one. The
results indicated a significant difference between the two
versions, with 780 ms for Version 1 and 685 ms for Version
2. The explanation went into two directions. In Version 2, the
scrambling of the shots made the cuts more salient, and this
emphasis increased the response alertness. In Version 1, the
plot of the story hid more easily transitions from one shot to
another one. The same finding was also explained in terms of
the diminished availability of resources in Version 1: As the
discourse sequence of the film absorbed some resources from
the observers, fewer resources were available for the second
task, the speeded response to the transitions.
There is here an apparent inconsistency, to be solved: The
linear condition in d’Ydewalle and Vanderbeeken (1990,
Experiment 1) was assumed to use more resources than the
nonlinear condition while the present study suggests the
opposite. However, the nature of the nonlinearity in the two
studies is vastly different. In d’Ydewalle and Vanderbeeken,
the nonlinear version represented a chaotic sequence of

scrambled shots, with no perceived challenge to reconstruct
them into the right order. On the other hand, the nonlinear
condition of the present study invited implicitly the viewers to
re-arrange the order of the shots. A possible alternative
explanation of the effect on pupil size might be that the
flashback version goes along with less perceptual continuity
between scenes than the linear version. So, the higher load
could at least partly be due to more perceptual changes
between non linear scenes. It would be interesting to test
pupil size with a movie that contains a sequence of
chronologically parallel scenes which take place in
(perceptually) different contexts. This would not violate the
linear story grammar but still be perceptually less overlapping
than linear scenes in the same context.
In the discussion between Eisenstein and Pudovkin about
distinctive advantages of intellectual versus narrative editing,
Eisenstein lost the case in the present study. Flashbacks did
not enhance aesthetic judgments, and linearity emphasized the
semantic features of the leading actors with less consumption
of mental resources. Of course, in the present experiment a
short-film was used and it is uncertain whether the benefits of
a strictly linear structure are applicable to a full-length
movie? Positive effects of flashbacks on attention and
memory may be assumed. Furthermore, a rather complex
story may become confusing through flashbacks, a simple one
not. Complexity may vary in terms of number of threads,
people, places, etc. In future research, the nature and
frequency of the flashbacks need to be manipulated;
Eisenstein may be right when the flashbacks are not too
frequent and not too complex.
References
Adams, R. D., & Victor, M. (1981). Principles of neurology.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Backs, R. W., & Walrath, L. C. (1992). Eye movement and
pupillary response indices of mental workload during visual
search of symbolic displays. Applied Ergonomics, 23,
243-254.
Beatty, J. (1982). Task-evoked pupillary responses,
processing load, and the structure of processing resources.
Psychological Bulletin, 91, 276-295.
Beatty, J., & Lucero-Wagoner, B. (2000). The pupillary
system. In J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, & G. G.
Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology (pp.
142-162). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bordwell, D., & Thompson, K. (2004). Film art: An
introduction. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bretz, R. (1962). Techniques of television production. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Cowen, P. S. (1988). Manipulating montage: Effects on film
comprehension, recall, person perception and aesthetic
responses. Empirical States of the Arts, 6, 97-115.
Deijen, J. B., Heemstra, M. L., & Orlebeke, J. F. (1995).
Pupillometric assessment of compensatory effort in a
memory search task under physical and pharmacologically
induced suboptimal states. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 49, 387-396.
Denis, M. (1972). Rappel d’un matériel filmique en fonction
de la structure du message. International Review of Applied
Psychology, 21, 13-25.

1069

d'Ydewalle, G., & Vanderbeeken, M. (1990). Perceptual and
cognitive processing of editing rules in film. In R. Groner,
G. d'Ydewalle, & R. Parham (Eds.), From eye to mind:
Information acquisition in perception, search, and reading
(pp. 129-139). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers
B.V. (North-Holland).
Eisenstein, S. (1949). Film form. New York: Harcourt.
Godard, J.-L. (1966). Montage, mon beau souci. Cahiers du
Cinéma in English, 3, 45-46.
Griffith, D. W. (1969). When the movies were young. New
York: Dover.
Hakerem, G. (1967). Pupillography. In P. H. Vernables & J.
Martin (Eds.), A manual of psychological methods (pp. 335349). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hess, E. H. (1972). Pupillometrics: A method of studying
mental, emotional, and sensory processes. In N. S.
Greenfeld & R. A. Sternbach (Eds.), Handbook of
psychophysiology (pp. 491-531). New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston.
Hess, E. H., & Polt, J. H. (1964). Pupil size in relation to
mental activity during simple problem solving. Science,
143, 1190-1192.
Janisse, M. P. (1977). Pupillometry: The psychology of the
pupillary response. Washington, DC: Hemisphere
Publishing Corporation.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. New York:
Prentice-Hall.
Kahneman, D., Beatty, J., & Pollack, I. (1967). Perceptual
deficit during a mental task. Science, 157, 218-219.
Karatekin, C., Couperus, J. W., & Marcus, D. J. (2004).
Attention allocation on the dual task paradigm as measured
through behavioral and psychophysiological responses.
Psychophysiology, 41, 175-185.
Krüger, F., Nuthmann, A., & van der Meer, E. (2001).
Pupillometric indices of temporal order representation in
semantic memory. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 209,
402-415.
Lowenstein, O., & Loewenfeld, I. E. (1962). The pupil. In H.
Davson (Ed.), The eye: Vol. 3. (pp. 231-267). New York:
Academic Press.
Mandler, J. M., & Goodman, M. S. (1982). On the
psychological validity of story structure. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 507-523.
Mascelli, J. V. (1965).The five Cs of cinematography: Motion
picture
techniques
simplified.
Hollywood,
CA:
Cine/Graphic Publications.
Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. J., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1957). The
measurement of meaning. Chicago: University of Illinois
Press.
Pudovkin, V. I. (1958). Film technique and film acting.
London: Vision Press.
Reisz, K. (1953/1968). The technique of film editing. New
York: Communication Art Books.
Roberts, D. S. L., Cowen, P. S., & MacDonald, B. E. (1996).
Effects of narrative structure and emotional content on
cognitive and evaluative responses to film and text.
Empirical Studies of the Arts, 14, 33-47.
Wurtzel, A. (1983). Television production. New York:
McGraw-Hill.

