UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Regularities in Grammatical Categories: Learning Grammatical Gender in an
Artificial Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54412022

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Mirkovic, Jelena
Forrest, Sarah
Gaskell, Gareth

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Regularities in Grammatical Categories:
Learning Grammatical Gender in an Artificial Language
Jelena Mirković (j.mirkovic@psych.york.ac.uk)
Sarah Forrest (sf553@york.ac.uk)
M. Gareth Gaskell (g.gaskell@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York
York, YO10 5DD, UK
Abstract

syllable stress, whereas disyllabic verbs tend to have secondsyllable stress; stressed syllables in nouns tend to contain
back vowels more than front vowels, unlike verbs (e.g. Kelly,
1992). Grammatical categories in other languages differ
along similar dimensions (e.g. Monaghan, Christiansen, &
Chater, 2007; Shi, Morgan, & Allopenna, 1998). Processing of words in isolation as well as in a sentential context is
influenced by these properties (e.g. Farmer, Christiansen, &
Monaghan, 2006).
Importantly, both phonological and distributional properties are probabilistic: disyllabic nouns tend to have firstsyllable stress but there are exceptions (giraffe, hotel). Further, the strength of different cues varies across words. For
example, Monaghan, Chater, and Christiansen (2005) demonstrated that in English low-frequency words phonological
properties are a more reliable cue to their grammatical category than distributional properties, whereas the opposite is
true for high-frequency words.
Here we explore the contribution of probabilistic semantic cues to grammatical category assignment. We focused on
grammatical gender, a grammatical category typically considered semantically arbitrary (e.g. Brooks, Braine, Catalano,
& Brody, 1993; Caramazza, 1997). For example, ball is feminine in Spanish (la pelota), but masculine in French (le ballon). However, linguistic analyses suggest finer-grained correspondences between semantic categories and grammatical
gender (see Corbett, 1991, for a review). For example, in
German 70% of nouns denoting alcoholic drinks are masculine, and 77% of nouns denoting reptiles and amphibians are
feminine (Corbett, 1991). Moreover, in many languages natural gender is often correlated with grammatical gender (e.g.
Spanish: el hombremasc - man, la mujer f em - woman; German: der Mannmasc , die Frau f em ). Again though, there are
exceptions (e.g. German: das Mädchenneut - girl).
Our aim was to examine the contribution of semantic cues
to grammatical gender acquisition. We designed an artificial
language with two gender-like classes using distributional
and phonological cues, and investigated the contribution of
semantic regularities to learning. The effect of semantic regularities on learning what is typically considered a semantically arbitrary grammatical category would provide evidence
that semantic information is used even when only probabilistically related to grammatical category membership, and in
addition to other available cues.
The artificial language consisted of pronounceable En-

The knowledge of grammatical categories such as nouns and
verbs is considered to lie at the foundations of human language
comprehension and production abilities. Words’ distributional
and phonological properties contribute to both adult and infant
learning of grammatical categories. Here we investigate the
contribution of semantic cues to the acquisition of grammatical categories using grammatical gender. Grammatical gender
is traditionally considered a semantically arbitrary category,
however there may be finer-grained correlations between semantic categories and gender classes. We taught adult native
English speakers an artificial language with two gender-like
classes, created via distributional, phonological and semantic
properties. We demonstrate that the participants’ performance
on both an implicit and an explicit task is influenced by the
semantic regularities in the two genders. We discuss the implications of the findings for theories of grammatical category
learning and use.
Keywords: grammatical categories; grammatical gender; semantic regularities; learning; artificial language

Introduction
How do English speakers know that words like doctor, carrot and idea are nouns and jump, shine and think are verbs?
Knowledge of grammatical categories has long been argued
to be at the core of our abilities to comprehend and produce
language. But how do speakers know that such diverse words
have something in common?
Similarities in meanings of words within a grammatical
category may be an important cue: in parent-child discourse
nouns often refer to objects or persons, while verbs refer to
actions (Pinker, 1984). This mapping of meaning to category may be used to "bootstrap" grammatical categories in
language acquisition. However, word meaning is probabilistically related to grammatical categories: some nouns are
not objects or persons (idea), and some verbs are not actions (think). Distributional information, such as word cooccurrence, has been suggested as a more reliable source of
grammatical category information (e.g. Maratsos & Chalkley,
1980). For example, English nouns are often preceded by the,
but verbs rarely so. Corpus analyses show that the information about immediately preceding and immediately following
words is a reliable cue for categories such as nouns, adjectives and verbs (e.g. Redington, Chater, & Finch, 1998). This
and other kinds of distributional information are used by adult
and infant language learners as a cue to grammatical category
membership (e.g. Gómez, 2002; Mintz, 2002).
Phonological properties also provide valuable information.
In English, for example, disyllabic nouns tend to have first-

324

sistent set, the semantics->phonology mapping was inconsistent with the existing regularities in the training set: items
preceded by the determiner tib were paired with new fish,
reptiles, wild animals and "male" occupations, whereas items
preceded with the determiner ked were paired with new birds,
insects, domestic animals and "female" occupations1 . The
generalization set was presented on the final day of training,
i.e. when the participants had a good knowledge of the training set. If the participants had learned the semantic regularities associated with the two gender classes, we predicted that
their performance should be improved with the generalization items consistent with the previously learned semanticsphonology mapping relative to the inconsistent items. We
tested this effect in training using an implicit task (wordpicture matching), and post-training using determiner selection as a more explicit task of learning distributional cues associated with different genders.

glish pseudo-words, designed to form two gender-like classes
based on phonological and distributional properties of the
pseudo-words. The items were constructed such that the
words in each gender were associated with two different types
of endings, and each gender was associated with a specific
determiner preceding the words (Table 1).
Table 1: Phonological and Distributional Properties of the
Two Gender Classes.
Determiner

Ending

Example

tib
tib

eem
esh

tib vedeem
tib scoiffesh

ked
ked

ool
aff

ked borchool
ked thetaff

"Feminine"

"Masculine"

Experiment
To create semantic regularities, words in each gender were
associated with two different groups of pictures, one representing occupations or characters often associated with different natural genders (e.g. ballerina, sailor), and one representing animals. Occupations and characters depicted as female, and birds, insects and domestic animals were presented
with pseudo-words ending in esh or eem and preceded by the
pseudo-determiner tib ("feminine"). Occupations and characters depicted as male, and fish, reptiles and wild animals
were presented with pseudo-words ending in aff or ool and
preceded by the pseudo-determiner ked ("masculine"). The
choice of semantic categories was based on semantic regularities in grammatical gender systems in natural languages
(Corbett, 1991; Mirković, MacDonald, & Seidenberg, 2005).
We used cross-modal word-picture matching as the training paradigm, combined with pre and post-training crossmodal semantic priming to assess the learning of meanings
associated with the pseudo-words (Breitenstein et al., 2007;
Dobel et al., 2010). To assess the learning of the gender-like
classes, we used two tests. First, we used determiner selection, as a variant of a task often used in language production studies on grammatical gender (Schriefers & Jescheniak,
1999). This test allowed us to assess the learning of genderlike classes based on their association with a distributional
cue, similar to the use of gender-marked determiners in languages such as Spanish and French. Second, to test the contribution of semantic regularities to the learning of the two
genders, we created an additional set of items (generalization
set) with two groups of untrained pseudo-words: consistent
items conformed to the semantics->phonology mapping of
the training items, whereas the inconsistent items violated the
existing semantics->phonology mapping. Thus in the consistent set the items preceded by the determiner tib were paired
with new pictures of birds, insects, domestic animals and occupations depicted as female, and the pseudo-words preceded
by the determiner ked were paired with new fish, reptiles,
wild animals and occupations depicted as male. In the incon-

We used a paradigm developed by Breitenstein et al. (2007) to
teach participants the new language. This paradigm was originally used to assess the learning of meanings of new words.
In both our and the Breitenstein et al. study participants were
presented with pictures of objects paired with novel word
forms in a probabilistic way: over 5 days each target new
word was presented 20 times with a target picture, and twice
with a random selection of 10 other (non-target) pictures. The
participants’ task was to decide whether the word and picture
matched, and no feedback was provided. The probabilistic
pairing of the new words with the picture targets was intended
to reduce any explicit strategies participants may develop during training. In Breitenstein et al., performance improved
from 56% correct on Day 1 to 93% on Day 5. To assess how
well the new lexical items were integrated with the existing
lexical-semantic knowledge, Breitenstein et al. used a crossmodal semantic priming task. Target pictures were preceded
by 5 types of primes: new words, picture names, semantically related words, semantically unrelated words and a control set of non-learned pseudo-words. Prior to training, participants were slower to respond to target pictures when they
were preceded by the new words relative to semantically related items, and there was no significant difference between
the new words and the semantically unrelated items. However, after training the difference between the new words and
the semantically related primes disappeared, while the difference between the new words and the semantically unrelated
primes emerged. These findings were taken as evidence that
the new words had been integrated with the existing lexicalsemantic knowledge, and were further confirmed in an MEG
study using the N400 effect (Dobel et al., 2010).
We used the same method for teaching the "gendermarked" new words. Before and after learning participants
1 In none of the conditions was the determiner + suffix correspon-

dence violated, i.e. all tib items were presented with pseudo-words
ending in esh or eem, and all ked items with pseudo-words ending
in aff or ool.

325

performed semantic priming and determiner selection with
the items from the training set. Semantic priming, as well
as an English-to-new-word translation recognition task posttraining, were used to assess the learning of the meanings of
the new words. Determiner selection was used to assess the
learning of distributional properties of the gender-like classes.
To assess the contribution of semantic regularities, generalization items were presented in addition to the training items
on the final day of training, as well as in the determiner selection task subsequent to training.

recorded twice, such that different recordings were used at
training and at test. Items were presented with the determiners during the training, but without them in all other tasks.
Generalization set. Eight additional items were designed
for each gender (4 occupations, 4 animals in each gender).
Half of the items in each gender were consistent with the
training set in terms of the semantics->phonology mapping
(e.g. a picture of a female cheerleader was paired with tib
plounesh, and a picture of a male judge with ked tarbool),
and half were inconsistent (e.g. a picture of a female teacher
was paired with ked pilmool, and a picture of a male fisherman with tib perrbesh). As in the training set, two versions of
each item were recorded, one with and one without the determiner. Two recordings were made for each version, one used
on the final day of training, one at test.
Semantic Priming. There were 128 picture targets, of
which 64 were used in training (animate targets), and 64
were fillers (inanimate targets). There were four auditory
prime types: new words, English picture names, semantically related English words and semantically unrelated English words. For example, for the picture of a ballerina the
primes were: scoiffesh (new word), ballerina (picture name),
dancer (related) and crow (unrelated). All primes were digitally recorded by a native English speaker (SF).
Translation. Sixty-four pseudo-words from the training set
and 64 corresponding English words were used in the translation task.
Determiner Selection. The 64 word-picture pairs from the
training set were used as the stimuli. We used different audio
recordings of the pseudo-words in the pre-training and the
post-training tests.

Method
Participants Eleven undergraduate students from the University of York, UK, participated. All were monolingual native English speakers. They were paid up to £31 depending
on their performance on the training task (see below). Two
participants failed to complete all training sessions and were
removed from the analyses.
Stimuli Training set. The training stimuli consisted of 32
pictures in each gender class, 16 of which depicted occupations or characters, and 16 depicted animals. Birds, insects,
domestic animals, and human occupations or characters depicted as female were presented with pseudo-words ending
in esh or eem, which were preceded by the pseudo-determiner
tib. Fish, reptiles, wild animals and occupations or characters
depicted as male were presented with pseudo-words ending
in aff or ool, which were preceded by the determiner ked.
All pictures were selected from the ClipArt database (Figure
1), and were pre-tested for (English) name agreement with 7
participants who did not participate in the main study.

Procedure The schedule of tasks is presented in Table 2.
As in Breitenstein et al., to keep participants motivated we
provided a monetary reward (additional £1) for each training day that accuracy exceeded 70%. All tasks were implemented in DMDX, and a USB gamepad recorded responses.
All items were presented in a fixed random order. Pre-training
session lasted 35 min, the training sessions on Days 1-5 20
min, and the post-training session 60 min.
Semantic Priming. Participants were presented with a target picture preceded by an auditory prime and asked to make
a binary animacy judgement. Each trial started with a 500 ms
centrally located fixation cross, followed by the prime presented over headphones; 300 ms after prime onset a target
picture appeared, and it remained on the screen until either
the participant responded or a 1500 ms timeout was reached.
Experimental stimuli were preceded by 8 practice trials.
Determiner Selection. Participants were presented with a
word-picture pair and asked to press a right hand-button if
the word was a "tib" word, and a left-hand button if it was a
"ked" word (the location of the buttons was counterbalanced
across participants). Each trial started with a 500 ms centrally
located fixation cross, followed by an auditory presentation of
the target word; 200 ms after the target word onset, the associated picture was presented, which remained on the screen

Figure 1: Example picture stimuli. The picture of the ballerina was paired with tib scoiffesh, and the picture of the sailor
with ked borchool.
The pseudo-determiners (tib, ked) and the pseudo-suffixes
(esh, eem, aff, ool) were selected from the ARC database
of pronounceable English non-words (Rastle, Harrington, &
Coltheart, 2002). Each new word was created by selecting
a 3-5 phoneme long English pseudo-word, and attaching one
of the suffixes such that the resulting pseudo-word was pronounceable but did not resemble any existing English morpheme or word. Across genders, the words were equated in
length, and matched in the beginning and ending phonemes in
the stems. Two versions of each item were digitally recorded
by a native English speaker (SF), one including the determiner (e.g. tib scoiffesh) and the other only including the
pseudo-word (e.g. scoiffesh). Each version of the item was

326

Results and Discussion

Table 2: Schedule of tasks.
Day
Pre-Training
(Friday)

Tasks
semantic priming
determiner selection

Items
Ta
T

Training Day 1-4
(Mon - Thurs)

word-picture matching

T

Training Day 5
(Friday)

word-picture matching

T + Gb

Post-Training
(Monday)

semantic priming
determiner selection
translation

T
T+G
T

The time-course of learning. Performance in the wordpicture matching task improved over time: the average accuracy on the training set increased from 55% on Day 1 to
83% on Day 5 (Day 2 = 66%, Day 3 = 74%, Day 4 = 80%).
An ANOVA with the proportion of correct responses (on the
correct word-target picture pairs) as a dependent variable and
day (Day 1 or Day 5), gender (masculine or feminine) and
semantic category (occupations or animals) yielded a main
effect of day (F(1,8)=17.92, p<.01) and a marginally significant day x gender interaction (F(1,8)=5.10, p=.054). The
interaction indicated that on Day 1 participants were more
accurate with masculine targets relative to feminine (66% vs
55%), however this difference disappeared on Day 5 (masculine: 82%, feminine: 85%). On Day 1 the performance was
not significantly different from chance in any but the masculine animals condition (one sample t-test; masculine animals: t(8)=2.91, p=.02; masculine occupations: t(8)=0.67,
n.s.; feminine animals: t(8)=-0.54, n.s.; feminine occupations: t(8)=1.29, n.s.). On Day 5 the performance was significantly better than chance in all conditions (feminine animals: t(8)=5.43, occupations: t(8)=3.57; masculine animals:
t(8)=2.42, occupations: t(8)=6.64; all ps <.05).
These findings indicate that the participants learned the
items in the training set to a relatively high degree of accuracy.

a training

set; b generalization set.
Note: The pseudo-words were presented with the determiners
(e.g. tib scoiffesh) only during training.

until either the participant responded or a 1500 ms timeout
was reached. The two pseudo-determiners were presented
on the screen corners corresponding to the response buttons
throughout the trial. The experimental stimuli were preceded
by 4 practice items.
Word-Picture Matching. Participants were presented with
word-picture pairs and asked to press a right-hand button if
they matched, and a left-hand button if they didn’t. They
were encouraged to respond quickly and "based on their intuition, without thinking too much". No feedback was provided. Each trial started with a 500 ms centrally located fixation cross, followed by an auditory presentation a new word;
200 ms post-word onset a picture was presented, which remained on the screen until either the participant responded or
a 1500 ms timeout was reached. The experimental trials were
preceded by 6 practice items.
As in Breitenstein et al, on each day each new word was
presented with the correct picture (e.g. the picture of a ballerina with tib scoiffesh) 4 times, and twice with a random
selection of two other pictures. Hence over the course of 5
days the correct word-picture pairing was presented 20 times
(50%), and twice each with a random selection of 10 other
pictures.
Translation. Participants were presented with an English
word paired with a new word and asked to press a righthand button if the two matched, and a left-hand button if
they didn’t. Each trial started with a centrally located fixation
cross which remained on the screen for the duration of the
trial; 500 ms post-trial onset an English word was played over
the headphones, and 800 ms post-word offset a new word was
played. Participants had 1000 ms to respond. Each new word
was presented twice: once with the correct English translation, and once with an incorrect English word (one of the
words for other correct trials). The experimental trials were
preceded by 4 practice items.

Learning the meaning of the new words.
Semantic priming. In order to establish whether the participants acquired the meanings of the new words, we tested
whether the pre- vs. post-training animacy decisions were
influenced by different primes preceding the picture targets.
An ANOVA on decision latencies yielded a significant effect
of the time of test (pre vs. post-training), F(1,8)=10.92,
p<.05, and prime (new word, picture name in English,
semantically related word, semantically unrelated word),
F(3,24)=15.51, p<.001 (Figure 2). Planned contrasts showed
that before training, animacy decisions to the pictures were
slower after the new words relative to the semantically
related English words (F(1,8)=26.83, p<.001), but this difference disappeared after training (F(1,8)=0.25, p=.63). This
replicates the findings from the earlier studies (Breitenstein
et al., 2007; Dobel et al., 2010), and suggests that the new
words acquired meanings similar to the semantically related
English words.
Translation. We performed an additional test of the
acquisition of meaning using the English-to-new-word translation recognition task subsequent to training. The average
accuracy rate on this task was over 85%. An ANOVA with
the proportion of correct responses as the dependent variable
and gender and semantic category as independent variables
yielded no significant main effects or interactions (gender:
F(1,8)=0.61; semantic category: F(1,8)=0.22; gender x
semantic category: F(1,8)=0.57; all ps n.s.). Accuracy
rates in all conditions were significantly better than chance
(feminine animals: t(8)=7.57, occupations: t(8)=7.33;

327

600
550

RT (ms)

These findings suggest that the participants learned a distributional property of the newly formed gender classes, i.e. the
co-occurrence between determiners and the ’gender-marked’
words. The sensitivity to determiner-noun correspondences
in natural languages is often taken as one of the hallmarks of
grammatical gender processing in language acquisition and
use (e.g. Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus, & Magnuson, 2000;
Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2007; Van Heugten & Shi, 2009).
Our findings suggest that the participants learned the genderlike classes in an artificial language based on their phonological and distributional properties.

ID
Related
New Word
Unrelated

500
450
400
350

Pre-Training

Post-Training

Figure 2: Semantic priming pre- and post-training. (For example, for the target picture ballerina: ID = picture name in
English; Related = semantically related word (dancer), New
Word (scoiffesh), Unrelated = semantically unrelated word
(crow).)

Learning semantic regularities. In the final set of tests we
explored the contribution of semantic regularities to the learning of the newly formed gender classes. We predicted that
new items consistent with the existing semantics->phonology
mapping would be easier to process than new items inconsistent with the existing mapping. We tested this hypothesis
when the generalization items were first introduced on the
final day of training (word-picture matching task), and also
after training in the determiner selection task.

masculine animals: t(8)=5.26, occupations: t(8)=6.42; all
ps <.001). These findings provide additional evidence that
the participants had a good knowledge of the meanings of
the new words, that was at the same level for both gender
classes, and both semantic categories. The performance on
this task provides additional evidence of the acquisition of
meaning for the new words.

Proportion Correct

0.8

Learning distributional regularities. We tested how well
the participants encoded the newly formed grammatical gender classes using a determiner selection task. We compared
performance on the same task before and after training in an
ANOVA using the proportion of correct responses as a dependent variable and test (pre or post-training), gender and
semantic category as independent variables. The accuracy
of selecting the correct determiner after training was significantly higher than before training (F(1,8)=25.18, p=.001),
and overall better for occupations than animals (F(1,8)=9.05,
p=.017), Figure 3. Before training, participants’ performance
in all conditions was at chance (feminine animals: t(8)=1.07,
occupations: t(8)=-0.01; masculine animals: t(8)=0.42, occupations: t(8)=1.72; all ps n.s.), but significantly better than
chance after training (feminine animals: t(8)=4.90, occupations: t(8)=12.60; masculine animals: t(8)=6.67, occupations: t(8)=7.06; all ps<.01).
Pre-Training
Proportion Correct

1.0
0.9

Feminine
Masculine

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

Animals Occupations

0.4

0.3

Word-Picture Matching

Determiner Selection

As predicted, in the word-picture matching task participants were more accurate with the new items with the
semantics->phonology mapping consistent with the training
set (t(8)=2.30, p=.05), Figure 4. Participants’ accuracy on the
new word-picture pairs consistent with the training items was
better than chance (t(8)=3.83, p<.01), unlike the inconsistent
items (t(8)=-0.56, n.s.). This suggests that the participants’
performance on the new items is facilitated by the existing
knowledge of the semantics->phonology correspondences in
the training set (cf. Day 1 performance in the training set).
In the post-training determiner selection test, participants
were also significantly more accurate in selecting the correct determiner for the consistent relative to the inconsistent items (t(8)=2.62, p<.05). Interestingly, their performance
was significantly better than chance with the consistent items
(t(8)=2.42, p<.05)), but significantly worse than chance with
the inconsistent items (t(8)=-2.58, p<.05).
These findings suggest that the participants’ performance
was influenced by the semantic correlates of the gender
classes: the matching of the new item to the correct picture
was improved when it was consistent with the existing regularities. The performance on the explicit task assessing the

0.9

0.6

0.4

Figure 4: Performance on the generalization items.

Post-Training

0.8

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.8

Consistent
Inconsistent

0.7

Animals Occupations

Figure 3: Determiner selection performance on the training
items.

328

use of distributional cues further demonstrates the influence
of the semantic cues which in this case not only helped when
consistent with the existing knowledge, but also hindered performance when the cues were inconsistent with it. It is worth
noting that the post-training performance was assessed two
days post-training, with no additional training on any items
in the meantime.

Farmer, T., Christiansen, M., & Monaghan, P. (2006). Phonological typicality influences on-line sentence comprehension. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
103, 12203.
Gómez, R. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant
structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Kelly, M. H. (1992). Using sound to solve syntactic problems: The role of phonology in grammatical category assignments. Psychological Review, 99, 349-364.
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children
learning Spanish make rapid use of grammatical gender in
spoken word recognition. Psychological Science, 18, 193.
Maratsos, M. P., & Chalkley, M. A. (1980). The internal
language of children’s syntax. In K. E. Nelson (Ed.), Children’s language (p. 127-214). New York: Gardner Press.
Mintz, T. H. (2002). Category induction from distributed
cues in an artificial language. Memory & Cognition, 30,
678-686.
Mirković, J., MacDonald, M. C., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2005).
Where does gender come from? Evidence from a complex
inflectional system. Language and Cognitive Processes,
20, 139-167.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). The
differential role of phonological and distributional cues in
grammatical categorisation. Cognition, 96, 143-182.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M., & Chater, N. (2007). The
phonological-distributional coherence hypothesis: Crosslinguistic evidence in language acquisition. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 259–305.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language development. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University
Press.
Rastle, K., Harrington, J., & Coltheart, M. (2002). 358,534
nonwords: The ARC nonword database. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 55, 1339–
1362.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998). Distributional information: a powerful cue for acquiring syntactic
categories. Cognitive Science, 22, 425-469.
Schriefers, H., & Jescheniak, J. D. (1999). Representation
and processing of grammatical gender in language production: A review. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 28,
575-600.
Shi, R., Morgan, J., & Allopenna, P. (1998). Phonological and acoustic basis for earliest grammatical category assignment: a cross-linguistic perspective. Journal of Child
Language, 25, 169-201.
Van Heugten, M., & Shi, R. (2009). French-learning toddlers use gender information on determiners during word
recognition. Developmental Science, 12, 419–425.

Conclusions
In this study we taught participants an artificial language with
a grammatical gender-like system, using phonological, distributional and semantic cues. Consistent with previous research, participants encoded distributional and phonological
regularities of the newly formed gender classes. We demonstrated that their performance is further influenced by the semantic regularities associated with different genders. The use
of semantic information was not required by any of the tasks,
and was implicit in the stimuli. This finding is particularly
relevant given that the category of grammatical gender is traditionally considered semantically arbitrary.
Together the findings provide additional evidence that
when learning and using grammatical categories language
users rely on probabilistic cues correlated with grammatical
category membership, even when they are not in any way useful or necessary for the task at hand.

Acknowledgments
SF was supported by the Undergraduate Summer Bursary
from the Department of Psychology, University of York, UK.

References
Breitenstein, C., Zwitserlood, P., Vries, M. de, Feldhues, C.,
Knecht, S., & Dobel, C. (2007). Five days versus a lifetime: Intense associative vocabulary training generates lexically integrated words. Restorative Neurology and Neuroscience, 25, 493–500.
Brooks, P. J., Braine, M. D. S., Catalano, L., & Brody, R. E.
(1993). Acquisition of gender-like noun subclasses in an artificial language: the contribution of phonological markers
to learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 76-95.
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are
there in lexical access? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14,
177-208.
Corbett, G. G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge, UK: Cambrigde
University Press.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Magnuson,
J. S. (2000). Linguistic gender and spoken-word recognition in French. Journal of Memory and Language, 42,
465-480.
Dobel, C., Junghöfer, M., Breitenstein, C., Klauke, B.,
Knecht, S., Pantev, C., et al. (2010). New names for known
things: On the association of novel word forms with existing semantic information. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 1251–1261.

329

