UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sequential Integration of Object Locations in a Spatial Updating and Reasoning Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85f770rw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Bertel, Sven
Lee, Hyunkyu
Fu, Wai-Tat

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sequential Integration of Object Locations in a Spatial Updating and
Reasoning Task
Sven Bertel, Hyunkyu Lee and Wai-Tat Fu ({bertel, hyunklee, wfu}@illinois.edu)
Applied Cognitive Science Lab, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Abstract

Knauff et al., 1994; Ligozat, 1998; Ragni et al., 2005), and
spatial updating (Klatzky et al, 1998; McNamara, 2003;
Mou & McNamara; Wang & Spelke, 2000; Wang, Sun,
Johnson, & Yuan, 2005). One robust finding from the latter
group is that certain types of alignments between a reference
system in spatial memory and an externally available (e.g.,
environmental) one are easier to cognitively process than
others, particularly when body orientation or movement
play a role. In general, orientations that align with salient
axes, such as up/down, left/right, North/South, or front/back,
are processed faster than “derived” orientations (e.g.,
diagonal axes), such as up right/bottom left or Northeast/Southwest. In “you-are-here” maps, for instance,
Levine (1982) provided arguments for a mapping in which
ahead in the environment should correspond to up on the
map to facilitate orientation. Other research has looked into
more dynamic tradeoffs in navigation between track-up and
consistent north-up alignments for maps (e.g., Aretz, 1991).

We present results from an experiment studying how people
mentally integrated partial configurations of objects shown
across a sequence of displays with varying matches between
frames of reference. Consistent with previous research on
spatial updating, performance was better when the frame of
reference in the final display aligned with the main display
axes (up/down, left/right) than when it aligned with the
diagonal axes. However, we also found that spatial updating
was more efficient when the sequence of presentation of
objects was consistent with the final frame of reference from
which objects were integrated. Results suggested that spatial
updating depended on the sequence of spatial operations
required to integrate new spatial information into existing
ones. Implications to theories of spatial updating in reasoning
tasks are discussed.
Keywords: Spatial reasoning; spatial updating; frames of
reference; sequential integration; spatial abilities.

Introduction
Many spatial tasks involve situations in which spatial information will only become available over time and in parts,
and in which the person will need to mentally integrate the
parts to reason with the distributed spatial information.
Think, for example, of how a smart phone may allow you to
access a large map on a small display by moving the
display’s focus across the map. In such cases, people not
only have to mentally integrate a sequence of partial
configurations, but also align the potentially different
frames of reference to infer the spatial relations among
objects in multiple representations.
There are two main challenges in this kind of a spatial
updating task. First, spatial relations among objects in each
partial configuration need to be encoded into memory using
some forms of spatial representations. These representations
are often sensitive to the intrinsic frames of reference that
emerge from the object locations (e.g., a chair is on the left
of the table, or a building is above the subway station on a
map), or the allocentric frames of reference with respect to a
global reference axis (e.g., North/South). Second, given that
the spatial frame of reference between different
configurations may not be identical, mental rotation and
integration is needed to align and combine partial
configurations to infer the relative locations of objects in a
specific frame of reference. The current study explores
factors that influence the representations and processes
underlying such spatial updating in reasoning tasks, and the
extent to which they are related to general spatial abilities.

Main and Diagonal Axes
Previous research has examined a number of aspects of
human spatial reasoning (Barkowsky, 2007; Bertel, 2007;

Spatial Representations and Spatial Updating
When humans learn object locations in a new environment,
the initial egocentric experience (e.g., provided by the perspective of the first view), is found to regularly dominate
the mental reference system during navigation (Wang &
Spelke, 2000). Often, the initial reference system will be
kept also for subsequent views, unless these are better
aligned with prominent natural features or axes; in that case,
an updating of the mental reference system may occur
(McNamara, 2003). Related memory models elaborate,
among other aspects, relationships between choice of
reference systems and viewpoint dependency or viewpoint
invariance (Huff et al., 2007). The degree of alignment of a
spatial relation between two objects with a represented
intrinsic reference direction is then thought to influence how
well that relation will get represented in spatial memory
(Rump & McNamara, 2007). However, it is still not
sufficiently clear how a sequential presentation of partial
configurations of objects will be represented, integrated, and
updated in spatial reasoning tasks. The current study focuses
on investigating for a directional reasoning task how (a) the
constructed mental representations will be influenced by
changes in the alignment between display orientations and
orientation of content in a global reference system, and (b),
whether the updating process will be influenced by the order
of presentation of objects.

General Study Design
The current study addresses issues of reference systems in a
directional reasoning task. Specifically, we target spatial
reasoning about relative locations between objects with

3471

respect to an allocentric frame of reference. Human subjects
were presented with a series of two premise screens, each
offering a partial view of an overall 2D spatial configuration
with four colored, rotationally symmetric objects. The
partial views differed from one another in two ways: first, in
which part of the overall configuration they displayed, and
second, in their respective rotational alignment with an
underlying cardinal orientation system, which provided the
allocentric frame of reference (made explicit by the North
arrows in the displays shown in Fig. 1). In a third screen, we
tested participants’ spatial updating and spatial reasoning
abilities by asking them to name cardinal direction relations
for selected pairs of presented objects (see bottom screen in
Fig. 1). As the task required a spatial updating of the
sequentially presented displays, we refer to it as the
Sequential Spatial Updating and Reasoning Task (SSURT).
In the current study, we were chiefly interested in three
aspects: First, whether SSURT performance can be
explained by individual differences on spatial abilities. If so,
which aspects of spatial ability explain SSURT performance
best? Does SSURT depend more on the ability to reorient
one’s imagined self or to spatially manipulate imagined
objects in mind (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001)? Will selfreported spatial measures also be predictive (e.g., as found
for certain non-reasoning, spatial updating tasks; Kozlowski
& Bryant, 1977; Hegarty et al., 2002)?
Second, we were interested in effects induced by how the
display and allocentric reference frames aligned on the first
premise display and the test display. We used an 8-sector
cardinal direction system and created two alignment classes,
“main” and “diagonal”, depending on whether the depicted
north arrow was parallel with a main display axis (0º, 90º,
180º, 270º; 0º = up) or with a diagonal display axis (45º,
135º, 225º, 315º). In line with some of the basic assumptions
about spatial updating discussed above, we postulated that
more use of main displays would lead to higher
performance on SSURT than diagonal displays.
Third, we were interested in whether there was an effect
of sequence on the spatial updating process. In order to
examine this, we analyzed the data based on the temporal
sequence on the premise screens of the reference object (the
object presented at the center in the test display) and the test
object (the object presented at the question in the test
display). We expected that, if spatial updating depended on
the temporal sequence of object presentation, a pair of a
reference objects from the first premise display and a test
object from the second premise display would lead to better
performance than a pair of a reference object from the
second premise display and a test object from the first
premise display.

Method
Participants. Twenty-eight participants (13 females) from
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign were paid to
participate in one and a half hour session. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal near and far visual acuity
and were unaware of the purpose of the experiment.

Stimuli. All stimulus images were presented on a white
background. As with the examples provided in Fig. 1,
premise screens consisted of 3 colored circles and a black
arrow indicating the direction of North. The objects were
each measuring ~2° of visual angle in diameter and were
positioned on a grand circle (see Fig. 1). The distance
between adjacent objects was ~3°. The black arrow was
measuring ~1.7°. The first premise screen was centered 6°
left of the center of display, and the second premise screen
was centered 6° right of the center of display. The color of
the objects was randomly chosen from a set of four colors
('red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow'). The object at the center of the
grand circle was the same on both premise screens, while
north arrows on premise screens pointed to different
directions. The displayed configuration in the second
premise display was rotated to match the offset between the
arrows. The test screen consisted of a reference object at the
center and numbers 1 to 8 around the reference color
towards the eight possible test object locations. It also
contained a black arrow indicating the direction of North. A
question was presented at the bottom of the test screen that
read “Type in the direction of <object>” The reference and
test objects were chosen from among the non-center objects
from either first or second premise screens.
Procedure details. Participants were administered a
battery of assessment tasks in order to measure their spatial
abilities: Paper-folding test (PFT; French et al., 1963). In
each trial, a square piece of paper which was being folded
was presented, and a figure with a circle drawn on it to show
where the paper has been punched. Participants were
instructed to select the correct one among five drawings of
the fully unfolded paper. PFT has been found to be
indicative of one’s ability to spatially manipulate objects in
mind (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001).
Mental rotation test (MRT; Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978).
In each question, participants were given an object and were
asked to find the object when it was presented at different
rotational offsets within a set of dissimilar objects.
Spatial orientation test (SOT; Hegarty & Waller, 2004).
On each question, participants saw a picture of an array of
objects. Participants imagined that they were standing at an
object in the array facing another object, and indicated the
direction to a third object from this position and orientation.
Object perspective tests such as the SOT have been found to
strongly predict the ability to spatially reorient one’s
imagined self (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001).
Santa Barbara Sense of Direction (SBSOD; Hegarty et al.,
2002). Participants self-reported about spatial and
navigational abilities.
Sequential Spatial Updating and Reasoning Task (SSURT).
The procedure of a single trial is shown in Fig. 1. The first
premise screen was presented with three objects.
Participants were instructed to remember their relative
locations and to proceed to the next premise screen by
pressing a key. On the second premise screen, one of the
previously displayed objects was removed and a new object
was presented. This display’s orientation changed with

3472

respect to the direction of the North arrow, while the central
object remained fixed. Participants were instructed to
remember all presented objects and then to proceed to the
next screen. On the following screen, the test screen,
participants were asked to determine the cardinal direction
of the object shown in the question (test object) as seen
from the object presented at the center (reference object),
and to respond through keys 1 to 8 from the upper row of a
standard keyboard. The keyboard’s number pad was not
accessible, nor visible to reduce potential interferences of its
main orientation axes with those in subjects’ mental
representations of the configuration, or with their choices of
answers. For the same reasons, we selected a circular
mapping of numbers to directions; it was learned, and
learning was tested, before the main experiment.

given 8 training trials that were different from the main
experiment. There were 44 trials in the main experiment.

Results
The general accuracy of the SSURT in this study was 54%
(ranged from 9%-98%). Five participants’ data were
excluded from the analysis because of low general accuracy
(less than 20%). The exclusion of these five participants’
data did not change the general pattern of the results.
Spatial ability measures. First, in order to examine how
well the current experiment can be explained by the
participants’ general spatial ability, we ran a multipleregression analysis with the general accuracy of the SSURT
as a dependent variable and scores from the selected spatial
ability measures (MRT, PFT, SOT, SBSOD) as predictor
variables. A linear regression analysis revealed a good fit
(R2=.485), and an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
confirmed that the overall model was significant (R=.697)
(F (4,22)=4.24, p<0.05), sugesting that our SSURT task is
tapping into spatial abilities. Performance on SSURT was
especially predicted by paper-folding (see Table 1, step 2),
indicating that spatially manipulating objects in mind may
be is especially important for SSURT. The result might stem
from procedural and representational similarities between
our task and the PFT: Both require temporal and spatial
updating of a mental spatial representation either by the
sequence of premise screens or by a folding sequence, as
well as the representation’s manipulation by adding an
object (either a colored object or a hole). Table 2 shows the
correlations between accuracy in our SSURT and the
adminstered spatial ability tests.
Table 1. Regression results with general accuracy of
experiment as a dependant measure and scores of spatial
ability battery as predictors. [Note: For step 1, R2 = 289, for
step 2, R2 = .485. ∆R2 = .196, ^ p<.10* p<.05, two tailed.]

Figure 1. The procedure of the experiment. First premise
screen with class “main” North direction (top), second
premise display with “diagonal” North direction (middle)
and test display (bottom) with “main” North direction.
Conditions. (a) There were two conditions each (main and
diagonal) of the directions of the first premise screen and of
the direction of the test screen. The directions of the first
and second premise displays were always different. (b) An
additional condition coded whether the display orientation
in the test screen repeated that of one of premise screens, or
whether it was different from that of both (repeat and norepeat). (c) There were three conditions each on the origins
of the reference and test objects (first screen only, which is
an object only shown on the first screen, both screens,
which is an object presented on both premise screens, and
second screen only, which is an object newly added on the
second premise screen). The trial in Figure 1 depicts a
direction repeat condition between premise and test screens
with the reference color from the first screen only and the
test color from the second screen only. Participants were

Category
Step 1
MRT
SOT
SBSOD
Step 2
PFT
MRT
SOT
SBSOD

B

SE B

Β

.022
.008
.001

.012
.011
.004

.454^
.172
.061

.735
.004
.007
-.003

.281
.012
.010
.004

.554*
.088
.158
-198

Pearson’s correlations revealed that some of the predictor
variables were significantly correlated. Although, for our
model the Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) values were all
well below 10 (Myers, 1990) and the tolerance statistics
were all well above 0.2 (Menard, 1995), suggesting that
there was no colinearity within our data, there is still the
possiblity that the effects from MRT, SOT and SBSOD
were muffled because of high correlation between those

3473

predictor variables and the paper folding task. In order to
test if PFT accounted for SSURT performance
independently of other predictors, we ran another two-step
multiple regressions analysis, step one with the general
accuracy of the SSURT as a dependant variable and scores
for MRT, SOT, and SBSOD as predictors, and step two
with PFT scores included on the previous model. We were
interested in seeing if the inclusion of PFT on the previous
model could produce a significant contribution of PFT on
the score of SSURT independent of the other ability tasks.
Results showed that step 1 was marginally significant
(R=.538, F (3,22)=2.57, p=.084), and step 2 was significant
(R=.697, F (4,22)=4.24, p<0.05). Most importantly, the
change in F values from step 1 to step 2 was significant,
p=.017, showing that adding paper-folding as a predictor
accounts for a significant amount of variation in SSURT.
Table 2. Correlations between experiment (SSURT)
accuracy and scores of MRT, PFT, SOT, and SBSOD
[Note: * p<.05, ** p<.01, one tailed].

SSURT
MRT
PFT
SOT
SBSOD

MRT
.518**
1

PFT
.596**
.446*
1

SOT
.396*
.552**
.189
1

SBSOD
-.23
-491**
.132
-428**
1

What are the plausible explanations for this finding? First,
as suggested above, we believe that our SSURT task and
PFT may share more properties with regard to mental
processing than other spatial tasks, namely MRT and SOT.
For both the SSURT and paper folding, an initial spatial
representation of the configuration needs to be encoded that,
subsequently, not only gets updated (i.e., transformed to
reflect the results of folding operations or rotations), but its
content is also directly manipulated through additional
operations (e.g., adding new objects to the mentally
represented set of objects in a specific frame of reference).
In contrast, MRT and SOT do not require this latter kind of
operation, participants are asked to perform operations on a
static display continuously visible during the task. Secondly,
and perhaps more importantly, it seems likely that
performance in both SSURT and PFT can benefit from
being well able to maintain the temporal sequence of past
spatial transformations in memory. In the PFT, this
corresponds to memory about the folding sequence, which
should help in mentally performing the unfolding operations
and infer the location of the hole; in the SSURT, it
corresponds to memory about the presented configuration
from previous partial displays. We will see further down in
this analysis that our data did indeed point to differences in
the ways in which objects from the first and the second
display were encoded. Such differences can be well
explained by a mental representation that encodes more
details than just the current state after mental
transformations, notably details regarding the relative

locations of objects in the sequence of partial configurations
and the sequence of operations required to update the
integrated representation. Neither MRT nor SOT would
benefit from such memory traces. Third, it may be that the
SSURT and PFT are simply cognitively more demanding
than the other spatial tasks. Whereas, in the MRT, it is
sufficient to compare a current mental model to an external
representation, SSURT also requires querying the mental
representation for a relation and – following our previous
discussion – may potentially benefit from keeping track of
how the current configuration came about. Measuring the
correlation between performance and working memory
capacities, especially for visuo-spatial working memory
capacities, should help to shed more light on this issue.
Main vs. diagonal axes. Next, we tested the effect of axis
alignment type of the first premise and test screens. Mean
accuracies were analyzed via a within-subject analysis of
variance, with the orientation of the first premise and the
question screens (main axes and diagonal axes) as
independent variables. The main effect of the orientation of
the first premise screen was not significant, F(1,22)=.20,
p>.1, while the main effect of the orientation of the question
screen was significant, F(1,22)=9.04, p<.01. In other words,
participants showed better performance with main than with
diagonal axis orientation on the question screen. The
interaction between the first premise and question screens
was not significant, F(1,22)=1,67, p>.1 (see Table 3).
Clearly, an alignment of main axes in the configuration’s
cardinal direction system with main display axes was
beneficial to performance. This seems consistent with
previous findings about spatial updating on advantages to
cognitive processing of those mental representations that are
aligned with salient external axes over those that are not.
However, as neither an interaction of display orientations,
nor the orientation of the first display significantly predicted
performance, our data did not support the hypothesis that
the initially constructed mental representation was based on
the orientation of the first display. Rather, it supports the
notion that mental representations (and processes) were
preferred when the main axes of the two (intrinsic and
allocentric) reference systems matched, independent of
whether the first display also had this property.
Table 3. The accuracy results based on the first premise and
test screen orientations (standard deviations in parentheses).

Test Screen main
Test Screen, diagonal

First Screen
main
66 (31.0)
59 (25.5)

First Screen
diagonal
68 (25.9)
55 (31.3)

Considering the high variation of participants’
performance on our SSURT task, there might be a
possibility that participants recruited different strategies to
perform the SSURT and led to differences in performance.
In order to examine this possibility, we formed two groups
based on the performance level (high and low) by way of a

3474

median split. Mean accuracies were analyzed with the
orientation of the first premise and the question screens
(main and diagonal axes) as within-subject factors and with
performance level as between-subject factor. The result
showed that there was no significant interaction between
orientation of the first and the question screen, and
performance group, F(1,21)=2.19, p>.1. We thus found no
qualitative differences between the performance groups in
terms of the orientation of the first and question screens.
Repetition of orientations. In order to further assess the
influence that rotational updating had on our SSURT task,
we tested if the repetition of an orientation from one of
premises displays in the question display would help
performance. Mean accuracies were analyzed with withinsubject analysis of variance, with the repetition of
orientation as a factor (accuracies with standard deviations
in parentheses: repeat, 63 (26.8); no-repeat, 61 (25.3)). The
main effect of the repetition of orientation was not
significant, F(1,22)=.786, p>.1, showing that pure repetition
of the orientation of any of the premise displays in the test
display did not improve task performance. Processes of
rotational updating of the mentally held representation thus
did not seem to play an overly important role in determining
the accuracies in the SSURT. This further supported the
findings that the mental rotation and SOT tasks were only
relatively poor predictors of task performance. Second, this
result suggests that rote memory retrievals of displays
(retrieval without mental rotation) may not have played as
strong a role in this task as speculated above, even though
memory processes were necessary to maintain the
representations. If it had been, we should have found
increased task performance when the questions displays
repeated a previous orientation. It was therefore possible
that the operations performed on the encoded
representations in memory were more critical for
performance in the current SSURT than memory retrievals,
possibly because the number of objects was small.
Cross-display integration. In order to further examine the
role of being able to keep track of how the configuration
changes across the display sequence, the origin of the two
objects that were queried on the question display was
examined (first screen only, both screens and second screen
only, see Table 4). Again, the reference object is the one
presented in the center of the question screen; the test object
is given in the question at the bottom. Results showed that
the condition in which the reference object stemmed from
the first display and the test object from the second showed
higher performance (66.7%) than the condition in which the
reference object came from the second display and the test
object from the first display (57.6%), F(1,22)=6.66, p<.01.
These results again suggest that the process of spatial
updating and reasoning might depend on the temporal
presentation sequence of reference and testing objects.
The main effect of the origin of the reference object was
significant, F(2,44)=3.28, p<.05. Participants showed
highest accuracy on the task with the reference object
presented on both the first and the second screens (67%),

followed by the reference object from the first screen only
(65%). Performance was worst when the reference object
was from the second screen only (58%). Planned comparisons showed that the differences between the second screen
only and the first screen only, and that between the second
screen only and both screens were significant (p=.028,
p=.055, respectively). The main effect of the origin of test
color was not significant, F(2,44)=1.44, p>.1.
These findings do point to an asymmetry of how objects
from the first and second screens are represented in
memory. Presenting the task on the question screen in a way
that mimics the temporal sequence of the premise screens’
presentation (e.g., such that the first-screen object is used as
the reference object from which the second-screen object is
seen) helps performance. We interpret this as evidence that
when subjects reached a question screen, their memory of
the configuration did not just reflect the spatial properties of
the most recently updated configuration – it also structurally
reflected the sequence of information presentation.
Retrieving contents from working memory in congruence
with that the sequence of presentation was believed to be
easier as it led to higher accuracy than retrieving content
against the flow of events (Anderson, Bothell, Lebiere,
Matessa, 1998). Memory for spatial transformation
sequences was also important for performance in the paperfolding task, which explains why PFT was such a good
predictor for task performance in our task. Given that it was
not as important for performance in MRT and SOT,
performance in these tasks therefore did not predict
performance in the SSURT as well.
Table 4. Accuracy results based on the origin of reference
and test objects. Standard deviations in parentheses.

Reference
color
Test color

First only
65 (24.8)

Both
67 (26.5)

Second only
58 (29.6)

60 (28.3)

59 (34.3)

65 (23.3)

Conclusions and Discussion
This paper presented original work on spatial reasoning in a
sequential updating task, which required the integration of
information across partial spatial representations and the
drawing of spatial inferences. Consistent with previous
work, we found that an alignment of the main display axes
in the test screen of our experiment with the main axis of an
underlying allocentric frame of reference in the displayed
content improved performance. In addition, the order of
object presentation was found to influence performance on
the spatial inference task: Performance was improved if the
reference object came from the first premise display. We
believe that this effect is, to a large part, due to a mimicking
of the original presentation order by the inference task, to
the extent that the object presented first is used as the
reference object from which the relative direction of a later
presented object needs to be determined. Such sequence-

3475

based interpretation also offers a plausible explanation of
the third finding that PFT performance predicts SSURT
performance much better than performance on the other
included spatial ability measures. Performance in both PFT
and SSURT seems to highly depend on subjects’ abilities to
spatially manipulate objects in mind.
This paper introduced the SSURT task and it shed new
light on spatial updating for sequences of partial spatial
representations that are used for spatial reasoning.
Particularly, our finding on object presentation order for
reasoning performance has interesting implications to our
understanding of how objects are mentally represented
depending on when they are introduced in a display
sequence. The finding that objects which were introduced
earlier are better suited for the role of a reference object than
later ones suggests that not all steps in a sequential
directional reasoning task lead to object representations that
can be used equally well in the different roles of a spatial
query. We argue that, by the time participants see a test
screen, the processes involved in reading off a directional
relation from the integrated mental representation fit the
structure of that representation better when the reference
object in the query had been introduced early on.
Assuming that future research on SSURT tasks will
expand the validity of the current findings (e.g., by
investigating other spatial inference tasks, longer sequences,
more objects, or different spatial perspectives of the
displays), our current findings have additional implications
for the design of multimodal system in human-computer
interaction for spatial tasks: the order of the original object
presentation and the orientation of displays may, for
instance, be of relevance for effectiveness and efficiency of
interactions with map-based navigation systems which also
verbally communicate spatial relations among objects that it
reads off from the map.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Sarah Connor for her help with the study.

References
Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Lebiere, C., Matessa, M.
(1998). An Integrated Theory of List Memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 38, 341-380.
Aretz, A. (1991). The Design of Electronic Map Displays.
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 33 (1), 85-101.
Barkowsky, T. (2007). Modeling mental spatial knowledge
processing: An AI perspective. In F. W. Mast & L. Jäncke
(Eds.), Spatial processing in navigation, imagery, and
perception (pp. 67-84). New York: Springer.
Bertel, S. (2007). Towards attention-guided humancomputer collaborative reasoning for spatial configuration
and design. In Foundations of Augmented Cognition.
LNCS (pp. 337-345). Berlin: Springer.
French, J. W., Ekstrom, R. B., & Price, L. A. (1963). Kit of
reference tests for cognitive factors. Princeton, N.J.:
Educational Testing Service.

Hegarty, M. Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace,
K & Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a Self-Report
Measure of Environmental Spatial Ability. Intelligence,
30, 425-447.
Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2004). A dissociation between
mental rotation and perspective-taking spatial abilities.
Intelligence, 32, 175-191.
Huff, M., Schwan, S, & Garsoffky, B. (2007). The Spatial
Representation of Dynamic Scenes, An Integrative
Approach. In B. Barkowsky, et al. (Eds.), Spatial
Cognition V, (pp. 140–155). Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Kozhevnikov, M., & Hegarty, M. (2001). A dissociation
between object manipulation spatial ability and spatial
orientation ability. Memory & Cognition, 29 (5), 745-756.
Klatzky, R. L., Loomis, J. M., Beall, A. C., Chance, S. S., &
Golledge, R. G. (1998). Spatial updating of self-position
and orientation during real, imagined, and virtual
locomotion. Psychological Science, 9, 293–298.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C. (1995). Preferred
mental models in qualitative spatial reasoning. In Proc.
17th Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc. (pp. 200-205). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kozlowski, L. T., & Bryant, K. J. (1977). Sense-ofdirection, spatial orientation, and cognitive maps. J. Exp.
Psych.: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 590–598.
Levine, M. (1982). You-Are-Here Maps, Psychological
Considerations. Environment & Behavior, 14(2), 221-237.
Ligozat, G. (1998). Reasoning about cardinal directions.
Journal of visual languages and computing, 9, 23-44.
McNamara, T. P. (2003). How Are the Locations of Objects
in the Environment Represented in Memory? In C. Freksa
et al. (Eds), Spatial Cognition III, LNCS 2685 (pp. 174191). Berlin: Springer.
Menard, S. (1995). Applied logistic regression analysis.
Saga university paper series on quantitative applications
in the social sciences, 07-106. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Myers, R. (1990). Classical and modern regression with
applications (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Duxbury.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal Exp. Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 162–170.
Ragni, M., Knauff, M., & Nebel, B. (2005). A
computational model for spatial reasoning with mental
models. In B. G. Bara et al. (Eds.), 27th Conf. Cogn. Sci.
Soc. (pp. 1797-1802). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rump, B. & McNamara, T. P. (2007). Updating in Models
of Spatial Memory. In B. Barkowsky et al. (Eds.), Spatial
Cognition V, (pp. 249–269). Berlin: Springer.
Vandenberg, S. G. & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotation,
group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual & Motor Skills, 47, 599-604.
Wang, R. F., & Spelke, E. S. (2000). Updating egocentric
representations in human navigation. Cognition, 77, 215–
250.
Wang, H., Sun, Y., Johnson, T. R., & Yuan, Y. (2005).
Prioritizing spatial updating in the intrinsic frame of
reference. Spatial Cognition & Computation 5(1), 89-113.

3476

