UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sequential similarity and comparison effects in category learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rr9w72w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Carvalho, Paulo
Goldstone, Robert

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sequential similarity and comparison effects in category learning
Paulo F. Carvalho (pcarvalh@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
Order effects in category learning have been previously
demonstrated. Specifically, alternation between exemplars of
two categories has been shown to improve category learning
and discrimination, compared to presenting exemplars of each
category in separate blocks. However, the mechanisms underlying order effects are still not completely known. Remaining
issues pertain to the relevance of within and between category
similarities, and the role of comparing sequentially presented
objects. We present two experiments: in Experiment 1 withinand between-category similarity are manipulated simultaneously with presentation schedule. In Experiment 2, alternation
between categories is compared to two blocked conditions:
one in which very similar stimuli are presented successively,
and another in which they are dissimilar. Our results show a
clear overall advantage of low similarity in categorization
performance, but no effect of presentation schedule. Also, alternation between categories is shown to result in better performance than the blocked condition with more dissimilar
stimuli. Keywords: category learning; order effects; spacing;
perceptual learning.

Introduction
The ability to discriminate between two similar stimuli has
been shown to be influenced by the way stimuli are presented. Take, for example, two categories A and B. Exemplars
from these two categories can be presented interleaved, i.e.,
A B A B A B. Another way to present the same exemplars
is to show all exemplars of category A before starting
presentation of the exemplars from category B, i.e., A A A
B B B. This exemplar ordering manipulation can have a
great impact on the ability to discriminate between A and B.
Indeed, results show that performance improves considerably with interleaved exposure to the stimuli (e.g., Dwyer,
Hodder, & Honey, 2004; Lavis & Mitchell, 2006).
This effect has been replicated several times, using different tasks, stimuli, and sensory modalities both in humans
and other species. Improved discrimination for interleaving
presentations also seems to be highly transferable to new
situations that make use of the same kind of knowledge
(Mitchell, Kadib, Nash, Lavis, & Hall, 2008) and to result in
better deductive extraction of the relevant categories, such
as painter identities (Kornell & Bjork, 2008). In light of this
evidence, alternation of exemplars has been described as
highly beneficial for discrimination learning, and can be
potentially implemented in several informal and formal
learning contexts (Rohrer & Pashler, 2010; Taylor &
Rohrer, 2010).

However, a full description of how the interleaving advantage occurs has not yet been provided. Some authors
have argued for the long-known mnemonic powers of
spaced rather than massed practice (Kornell, 2009; Kornell
& Bjork, 2008; Vlach, Sandhofer, & Kornell, 2008) and
have made a connection between interleaving and spacing.
When different presentations of A are interleaved with B
presentations, then the A presentations will be more spaced.
However, evidence inconsistent with this proposal has been
presented. Mitchell, Nash, and Hall (2008), for example,
presented three highly similar stimuli, A, B and C, to participants. In one condition A and B were interleaved and C
was presented spaced. In the spaced condition, two instances of C were separated by an interval during which no information was presented. The duration of this interval was
equivalent to the presentation of another stimulus. This manipulation still resulted in better discrimination for stimuli
presented interleaved (for a similar demonstration using
paitings see Kang & Pashler, in press). In a follow-up experiment, the authors added a new stimulus, D. This stimulus
was very different from A, B and C. Interleaving A and B
resulted in better performance than interleaving C and D.
Mitchell and collaborators (Mitchell, Kadib, et al., 2008;
Mitchell, Nash, et al., 2008) suggested that the advantage of
interleaving might still result from different memory encodings promoted by each presentation schedule. Their proposal is that when highly similar stimuli are alternated, then
the features that they share will be presented several times
in a row, and thus attention shifts towards the differences,
enriching the memory trace for the differences between the
two categories. When stimuli are blocked, however, all of
the features of each category, both those unique to each category and those that are shared across categories, are presented several times in a row, resulting in a relative decrease
in attention to unique features and a poorer memory trace
for the purposes of discrimination.
Also central to Mitchell and collaborators’ proposal
(Mitchell, Kadib, et al., 2008; Mitchell, Nash, et al., 2008) is
the process of comparison that results from shifting attention to discriminating features. The importance of comparison in the sequence of object presentations was also proposed by Eleanor Gibson (1969) in her influential theory of
perceptual learning. Gibson proposed that the opportunity to
compare the stimuli was crucial in facilitating a process of
differentiation that would result in better discrimination.
Unfortunately, the mechanism through which this differen-

2977

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Seventy-one Indiana University undergraduate
students participated in this experiment in partial fulfillment
of a class requirement. Participants were randomly distributed on an on-arrival basis to one of two similarity conditions: high similarity vs. low similarity. All participants
completed all the phases of this experiment and 9 were excluded for not reaching 50% correct responses during category learning.
Face 3

Face 4

Dimension 2
A

Face 2

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

1
2
3

Dimension 1

tiation process might occur was never fully articulated.
Nonetheless, recent work supports Gibson’s proposal by
demonstrating that simultaneous presentation of two highly
similar stimuli results in better discrimination than interleaving them (Mundy, Honey, & Dwyer, 2007, 2009).
Thus, the advantage of interleaving seems to stem in part
from the similarity between successively presented stimuli
and an observer’s ability to compare them. Furthermore, we
propose that, if comparison is important for the advantage of
interleaving, blocking stimuli from the same category
might, under certain situations, also provide an opportunity
for key comparisons – resulting in equally good performance.
For this purpose, two experiments were conducted. In
both experiments, morphed pictures of human faces were
used (see Figure 1). Similarity between these is easily manipulated because stimuli closer in the matrix are more similar than those farther apart. In Experiment 1 we manipulate
both the between- and within-category similarity among the
stimuli and presented them in either a blocked condition or
an interleaved condition. We predict that performance will
be improved for interleaved presentation in the high similarity condition. According to Mitchell et al. (Mitchell, Kadib,
et al., 2008; Mitchell, Nash, et al., 2008), interleaving accentuates between-category differences, resulting in an improved ability to distinguish the categories. There are two
ways in which the similarity between objects could affect
categorization difficulty. First, as objects within a category
become more similar, categorization is expected to become
easier because it is easier to see what the category members
have in common. Second, as objects from different categories become more similar, categorization is expected to become more difficult because it is harder to distinguish the
categories. If interleaving accentuates features that discriminate between categories, then this would be expected to particularly benefit situations in which all objects are similar to
one another because of the difficulty in identifying discriminating features.
In Experiment 2 we approach the importance of comparisons by contrasting performance in the interleaved condition
with two blocked conditions. In both conditions, stimuli
from the same category are presented in separate blocks but
in one condition only highly similar stimuli are presented
successively and in the other only more dissimilar stimuli
are presented successively. We propose that these three
conditions offer opportunities for three different kinds of
comparisons: while interleaving allows for comparisons
between the two categories, blocking allows for comparisons within the category. Moreover, within-category comparisons might be more informative when the successively
presented stimuli are highly similar (R. Goldstone, 1996).
This situation will allow the creation of a good representation of the common features of that category and performance similar to interleaving the two categories.

4
5
6
7
8

Face 1

9
10
Category A

Category B

Figure 1: Example of a set of stimuli used in Experiments 1
and 2; two other matrices were created using the same
method. These stimuli varied along 2 arbitrary dimensions
creating a 10 x 10 matrix of morphed faces. Stimuli shaded
in dark grey were only presented in the low similarity condition of Experiment 1 and stimuli shaded in black were only
presented in the high similarity condition of Experiment 1
and in Experiment 2. Notice that high and low similarity
conditions shared 4 stimuli that, although shaded in black,
were also presented in the low similarity condition (C3, C8,
H3 and H8). The line between columns E and F represents
one of the possible category boundaries used during the
experiments (the other possibility was a line between rows 5
and 6).
Stimuli The stimuli were morphs of bald male faces selected from Kayser (1997) using the blending technique outlined in Steyvers (1999). The faces varied along two arbitrary dimensions (see Figure 1). Each dimension was
achieved by creating negative contingencies between two
faces. For example, along Dimension 1, the more of face 1
is present in each morphed face, the less there is of face 2.
These two contingencies are independent, i.e., the proportion of face 1 relative to face 2 is independent of the propor-

2978

learned. The generalization task was composed of 100 trials,
corresponding to the presentation of all the faces in that 10 x
10 matrix. On each generalization trial a face was presented
for 500 ms after which participants had to indicate the Club
to which the face belonged. There was a 1000 ms inter-trial
interval, after which a new face was presented. There was
no response feedback in this task.

Results

0.70

0.75

0.80

Blocked Low Similarity
Interleaved Low Similarity
Interleaved High Similarity
Blocked High Similarity

0.65

Mean Proportion of Correct Responses

0.85

0.90

The graph in Figure 2 depicts the main results from Experiment 1 regarding category learning across the 4 learning
blocks and generalization accuracy, for each combination of
presentation schedule (interleaved and blocked) and similarity (high similarity and low
similarity).
Results
for Experiment 1

0.60

tion of face 3 relative to face 4, resulting in a set of blended
faces that differed only in the proportion of each of the 4
original faces. Using 8 different original faces, two different
10 x 10 matrices were created. Not all faces from each 10 x
10 grid were presented to participants. Indeed, for each
group only 16 faces (8 from each category) were presented
to participants. Which faces from the 10 x 10 grid were presented depended upon the experimental group. Participants
in the High Similarity condition saw faces that were closer
together in the matrix (black squares in Figure 1). Conversely, participants in the Low Similarity condition saw only
faces that were farther apart in the matrix (grey squares in
Figure 1). Notice that this similarity manipulation was both
within and between categories, thus there are two clusters of
4 faces in each category for each similarity condition. This
manipulation will be relevant for the modifications introduced in Experiment 2.
Procedure This experiment had 2 phases. Each phase was
composed of two tasks: a category learning task and a generalization task regarding the categorization learned. Each
phase differed only in the face matrix used and in the way
stimuli were presented during category learning.
Category Learning Each category learning task was composed by 4 blocks with 64 training trials each. On each trial,
a face was presented in the center of the computer screen for
500 ms. After the face was removed, the participant was
tasked with classifying it into one of the two possible
‘Clubs’, by pressing the corresponding key (each key was
attributed to one Club: Q vs. P and A v.s L) in the computer
keyboard. After the participant’s response the face was presented again for 2000 ms together with the presentation of
feedback relative to the accuracy of participants’ response
and the category of the face. Afterward, there was a 1000
ms inter-trial interval and then a new trial would start.
The two category learning tasks differed in the order of
presentation of category exemplars. In the interleaved condition, the exemplars alternated 75% of the time between
one category and the other. In the blocked condition, alternation between categories occurred only 25% of the time.
Thus, while in the interleaved condition the probability of a
trial with a face from one category being followed by a trial
with a face from that same category was low, in the blocked
condition this probability was high. We used this probabilistic approach rather than creating purely interleaved or
blocked conditions in order to diminish the possibility that
participants noticed the pattern of alternation in responses,
which would affect categorization accuracy. Furthermore, if
a purely blocked condition was used there would be no way
to guarantee subjects’ attention to the task, as there would
be no uncertainty in response and all faces would belong to
the same ‘Club’. This approach has been used before, in
similar tasks with successful results (R. Goldstone, 1996).
Which condition was presented first in the experiment was
counterbalanced across participants, as was the allocation of
one of the 10 x 10 matrices to each condition.
Generalization Each category learning task was followed
by a generalization task regarding the two categories just

Block 1

Block 2

Block 3

Block 4

Generalization

Figure 2: Mean proportion of correct responses in Experiment 1. Performance improves across learning blocks and is
overall better for the High Similarity condition with no effect of presentation schedule or interaction. There is no effect of either similarity or schedule of presentation in the
generalization task. Error bars indicate standard errors.
A 2 x 2 x 4 mixed ANOVA with similarity condition
(high vs. low similarity) as a between-subjects factor and
presentation schedule (interleaved vs. blocked) and learning
block (1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs. 4) as within-subject factors revealed
a significant improvement in accuracy during category
learning, regardless of presentation schedule or similarity
condition, F (3,180) = 45.33, p < .0001, MSE = 0.02. Likewise, a significant main effect of similarity revealed that
participants’ accuracy is higher for the low similarity condition when compared to the high similarity condition, F (1,
60) = 13.02, p = .0006, MSE = 0.15. However, participants’
accuracy is comparable between interleaved and blocked
presentation schedules, with no main effect of presentation
schedule found, F (1,60) = 0.22, p = .64, MSE = 0.26.
Likewise, there is no interaction between similarity condition and presentation schedule, F (1,60) = 0.01, p = .91,
MSE = 0.26, similarity condition and learning block, F (3,
180) = 0.99, p = .40, MSE = 0.02 or presentation schedule

2979

and learning block, F (3,180) = 0.21, p = .89, MSE = 0.02.
Additionally, the interaction between the 3 variables was
also not significant, F (3, 180) = 1.01, p = .39, MSE = 0.02.
Regarding the generalization task, a 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA
was performed with similarity condition as a betweensubjects factor and presentation schedule as a withinsubjects factor, considering only trials with novel stimuli.
This analysis revealed that participants perform equally well
regardless of presentation schedule or similarity condition.
There is no main effect of similarity, F (1, 60) = 2.44, p =
.12, MSE = 0.04, or schedule of presentation, F (1, 60) = 0.
Likewise, no interaction between these two variables was
found, F (1,60) = 0.2, p = 0.67, MSE = 0.05. However, a 2 x
2 x 5 mixed ANOVA with similarity condition as betweensubject factor and presentation schedule and distance of the
stimuli to the category border (i.e., the position in the grid
relative to the category limit: 1 vs. 2 vs. 3 vs. 4 vs. 5) as
within-subjects factors, revealed an improvement in performance with the increase in distance, F (4, 276) = 126.20, p
< .0001, MSE = 0.02, as well as an interaction between distance and similarity condition, in which the advantage of the
low similarity condition over high similarity increases with
the increase in distance to category boundary, F (4, 176) =
3.43, p = .01, MSE = .02. All the other effects were nonsignificant.
In sum, these results show that decreasing the similarity
between exemplars of the two categories increases participants’ performance, even if within-category similarity also
decreases. While an advantage for categorization might be
expected from decreasing between-category similarity because it makes discrimination easier, the decreased withincategory similarity could have equally detrimental results by
making categories very heterogeneous. Thus, one might
expect the advantage of decreasing between-category similarity to be nullified by the increase in within-category similarity. However, our results show that the beneficial influence of decreasing between-category similarity outweighs
the detrimental influence of decreasing within-category similarity. One might also have expected that interleaving exemplars of both categories in the high similarity condition
would be particularly beneficial by accentuating the differences between the two categories and thus reducing the difficulty in discriminating very similar categories. Yet, the
results of Experiment 1 do not show any improvement in
performance when exemplars of both categories are interleaved, which is surprising given the wealth of evidence for
the advantage of interleaving.
One of the possible reasons for this null result might be
the opportunity for comparisons that can take place during
blocked presentation. Although interleaving allows more
opportunity for inter-category comparisons, there has been
some evidence for the importance of within-category comparisons (R. Goldstone, 1996). Looking specifically at the
interleaving-blocking phenomenon, one might argue that not
all blocked presentation schedules are equivalent. Consider,
for example, a situation in which (a) the comparison is possible between two stimuli that, although in the same catego-

ry have many differences in contrast to (b) the comparison
is only possible between two stimuli that are in the same
category and are very similar. The two within-category
comparisons offer the opportunity to extract different kinds
of information. While the first might highlight irrelevant
information about within-category dissimilarities, the latter
might emphasize relevant within-category similarities. It is
possible that one of these comparison processes approaches
the advantageous effect of interleaving stimuli from two
similar categories. Given that we did not control for these
two possible comparisons opportunities during blocked
presentation in Experiment 1, Experiment 2 will approach
this question in more detail.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Seventy-six undergraduate students from Indiana University participated in this experiment in partial fulfillment of a class requirement. All participants completed
all the phases of this experiment and 17 were excluded for
not reaching 50% correct responses during category learning.
Stimuli In this experiment we used the same two 10 x 10
matrices used in the first experiment and also a third one,
constructed in the same way as the other two, using 4 new
faces from Kayser (1997). As in Experiment 1, not all 100
faces from each matrix were presented during category
learning. Only faces that were closer to each other and to the
category boundary were presented (i.e., those corresponding
to the high similarity condition from Experiment 1).
Procedure This experiment had 3 phases. Each phase was
composed of a Categorization task followed by a generalization task based on the categorization done before. Each
phase differed only in the way stimuli were presented in the
Categorization Task as well as which matrix of faces was
used.
Category Learning Each category learning task was composed of 3 blocks of 64 trials each (8 exemplars of each
category repeated 4 times). There were 3 different category
learning conditions: interleaved, blocked-close and blockedfar. Each of these consisted in the categorization of the faces
in one of 3 pairs of ‘Clubs’ (P vs. Q, A vs. L, and Z vs. M).
The interleaved condition consisted in high alternation rate
of the categories within each block (75% category change
from trial to trial). Blocked-close and blocked-far both consisted in low alternation conditions (25% category alternation). They differed, however, in the proximity of the stimuli presented in sequence. In the blocked-close condition each
stimulus from one category would only be followed by a
stimulus of the same category if that stimulus was from the
same within-category cluster (see Figure 1 for an illustration). In the blocked-far condition each stimulus would only
be followed by a stimulus from another within-category
cluster. This resulted in a manipulation of the withincategory similarity between the stimuli being shown successively in the blocked conditions. The order of these condi-

2980

tions was randomized across participants as well as which
10 x 10 matrix was used in each one of them. Every other
detail not stated here was the same as in Experiment 1.
Generalization Each category learning task was immediately followed by a generalization task in which participants
classified each presented face in one of the two groups previously learned, without feedback. This generalization task
was similar to the one in Experiment 1 except for the number of stimuli presented. In this Experiment, generalization
consisted of 84 trials corresponding to the faces from the 10
x 10 matrix that had not been presented during category
learning.

Results

Interleaved
Blocked - Far Comparisons
Blocked - Close Comparisons

0.70
0.65
0.60

General Discussion

0.50

0.55

Mean Proportion of Correct Responses

0.75

0.80

The graph in Figure 3 depicts the main results from Experiment 2 regarding category learning and generalization tasks
for each one of the learning conditions: interleaved,
blocked-close and blocked-far.
Results from Experiment 2

(1,57) = 8.74, p = .005, MSE = 0.7, but not significantly
higher than for the Blocked-Close condition, F (1,57) =
2.91, p = .09, MSE = 0.8. Finally, no interaction between
categorization improvement and presentation condition was
found, F (2, 114) = 0.20, p = .83, MSE = .02.
For the results of the generalization task, a within-subjects
ANOVA with presentation schedule as the only factor was
performed. This analysis revealed that participants are
equally good at categorizing new stimuli into one of the
categories they had just learned, regardless of how the categories had been presented before, with no main effect of
presentation schedule, F (2,114) = 0.85, p = .43, MSE =
0.05. However, analyzing performance as a function of the
stimuli distance to the border revealed a significant improvement in performance with greater distances, regardless
of presentation schedule, F (4, 228) = 58.72, p < .0001,
MSE = 0.04, but no main effect of presentation schedule, F
(2, 114) = 0.54, p = .58, MSE = 0.23, or interaction between
the two variables, F (8, 456) = 0.90, p = .51, MSE = 0.03.
These results demonstrate that interleaving the presentation of exemplars from two categories results in better categorization performance than blocked presentation, but only
if just dissimilar exemplars from the same category are presented in successive trials. This result contributes to the notion that successive comparisons play an important role in
the interleaved advantage and category learning as a whole.

Block 1

Block 2

Block 3

Generalization

Figure 3: Mean proportion of correct responses for Experiment 2. Participants’ performance improves across learning
and is overall better in the interleaved condition than in the
blocked-far condition. There is no difference between the
interleaved and blocked-close conditions. During generalization there are no differences between any of these conditions. Error bars indicate standard errors.
A 3 x 3 within-subjects ANOVA with both learning block
(1 vs. 2 vs. 3) and presentation schedule (interleaved vs.
blocked-close vs. blocked-far) as within-subjects factors
was performed. This analysis revealed a main effect of
learning block, F (1,57) = 83.54, p < .0001, MSE = 0.02. As
it can be seen in Figure 3, there is an overall improvement in
categorization accuracy throughout category learning.
Moreover, there is also a main effect of presentation schedule during category learning, F (2,114) = 4.25, p = .02, MSE
= 0.11. A set of planned comparisons further shows that
response accuracy is significantly higher for the Interleaved
condition as compared with the Blocked-Far condition, F

In Experiment 1, although there was no effect of presentation schedule, a strong effect of similarity in categorization
accuracy was found. More precisely, the advantage of decreasing between-category similarity in the low similarity
condition outweighs the disadvantage of the accompanying
decrease in within-category similarity, resulting in better
performance relative to the high similarity condition, in
which both within- and between-category similarities were
high. These results are, however, contrary to previous results showing that a high similarity condition results in better categorization accuracy than a low similarity condition
(R. L. Goldstone, Lippa, & Shiffrin, 2001). This opposing
pattern of results might be related to the greater overall
similarity between the stimuli in our experiments when
compared with Goldstone et al. (2001), in which the low
similarity condition involved the presentation of four completely different faces. In a matrix like the ones we used
here, between-category similarity seems to have a greater
impact on categorization accuracy than within-category similarity. This greater overall similarity is also expected to
result in more interrelated concepts, each category being
defined in opposition to the other (R. Goldstone, 1996). This
proposal is also consistent with the results of Experiment 2
showing that interleaving resulted in better performance
than blocked-far, but not blocked-close. Moreover, it is also
consistent with the results from the generalization task in
both experiments, showing that regardless of similarity condition, participants are better in classifying faces more distant from the category border. This result suggests the crea-

2981

tion of a caricature representation of each category, i.e., a
representation that is not the central tendency of that category but departs from it in the opposite direction from the central tendency of the concept simultaneously learned, characteristic of interrelated concepts (R. Goldstone, 1996).
One of the possible reasons for the similar results between
interleaved and blocked-close conditions in Experiment 2
might be related to the kind of comparisons they allow. As
stated in the Introduction, current theories of order effects in
perceptual learning propose that interleaving stimuli from
different categories allows the participants to more directly
identify differences between the two categories. However,
we argued that blocked presentation might also offer an
opportunity to establish informative comparisons. When
two very similar stimuli from the same category are presented in a sequence, their similarities will be highlighted (R.
Goldstone, 1996), resulting in performance that approaches
that seen after interleaved study of the categories. Unfortunately, the results presented here do not allow for a direct
comparison between the two blocked conditions in Experiment 2. Nonetheless, a case could be made that the two are
less favorable for category learning than interleaving – thus
the proximate lower values of accuracy. This disadvantage
can, in turn, be eased by presenting only very similar stimuli
successively in the blocked condition.
In sum, the characteristics inherent to the categorization
tasks presented here make between-category similarity the
better overall predictor of good categorization performance,
contrary to some previous evidence using similar stimuli.
However, performance in the high similarity condition can
be improved by alternating exemplars from each category or
by sequentially presenting very similar stimuli from the
same category. These results point to the creation of interrelated concepts and the representation of each category in
opposition to one another. The work presented here also
shows that whether interleaving or blocking is more beneficial is probably the result of an interaction between the
characteristics of the stimuli and the comparisons that the
observer is able to establish. Interleaving two similar stimuli
seems to result in good performance, presumably because it
allows for a better contrast between the distinguishing features of each stimulus. Similarly, blocking very similar
stimuli approaches that performance by allowing for a better
identification of the features of that category.

Acknowledgments
Research supported in part by a Fulbright Research Fellowship to the first author, and by National Science Foundation
REESE grant 0910218. The authors would like to thank
Akshat Gupta for his help collecting the data.

References
Dwyer, D., Hodder, K., & Honey, R. (2004). Perceptual
learning in humans: roles of preexposure schedule,
feedback, and discrimination assay. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Comparative
and
Physiological Psychology, 57(3), 245-259.

Gibson, E. (1969). Principles of perceptual learning and
development. New York: Apleton-Century-Crofts.
Goldstone, R. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 24(5), 608-628.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001). Altering
object representations through category learning.
Cognition, 78(1), 27-43.
Kang, S. H. K., & Pashler, H. (in press). Learning painting
styles: Spacing is advantageous when it promotes
discriminative contrast. Applied Cognitive Psychology.
Keyser, A. (1997). Heads. New York: Abbeville Press.
Kornell, N. (2009). Optimising learning using flashcards:
Spacing is more effective than cramming. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 1297-1317.
Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. (2008). Learning concepts and
categories: is spacing the "enemy of induction"?
Psychological Science, 19(6), 585-592.
Lavis, Y., & Mitchell, C. (2006). Effects of preexposure on
stimulus discrimination: an investigation of the
mechanisms responsible for human perceptual learning.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
59(12), 2083-2101.
Mitchell, C., Kadib, R., Nash, S., Lavis, Y., & Hall, G.
(2008). Analysis of the role of associative inhibition in
perceptual learning by means of the same-different task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 34(4), 475-485.
Mitchell, C., Nash, S., & Hall, G. (2008). The intermixedblocked effect in human perceptual learning is not the
consequence of trial spacing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(1),
237-242.
Mundy, M., Honey, R., & Dwyer, D. (2007). Simultaneous
presentation of similar stimuli produces perceptual
learning in human picture processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
33(2), 124-138.
Mundy, M., Honey, R., & Dwyer, D. (2009). Superior
discrimination between similar stimuli after simultaneous
exposure. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62(1), 18-25.
Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent Research on
Human Learning Challenges Conventional Instructional
Strategies. Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406-412. doi:
10.3102/0013189X10374770
Steyvers, M. (1999). Morphing techniques for manipulating
face images. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 31(2), 359-369.
Taylor, K., & Rohrer, D. (2010). The Effects of Interleaved
Practice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(6), 837-848.
doi: 10.1002/acp.1598
Vlach, H., Sandhofer, C., & Kornell, N. (2008). The spacing
effect in children's memory and category induction.
Cognition, 109(1), 163-167.

2982

