UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shared Representations of Belief and Their Effects on Action Selection: A Preliminary
Computational Cognitive Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9xn088fv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Bello, Paul

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shared Representations of Belief and Their Effects on Action Selection: A
Preliminary Computational Cognitive Model
Paul F. Bello (paul.bello@navy.mil)
Office of Naval Research, 875 N. Randolph St.
Arlington, VA 22203 USA

Abstract
New evidence from cognitive development suggests that
action selection is contingent not only on one’s own mental
states (e.g. beliefs, etc.), but may also be affected by one’s
representation of the beliefs of others (Kovacs et al. 2010).
Herein, I propose a preliminary computational model
accounting for the general pattern of results in the recent
study by Kovacs et al. that is broadly simulation-theoretic in
nature, and briefly discuss its implications for computational
cognitive architecture.
Keywords: Mindreading; Cognitive Architecture; Simulation
Theory; Cognitive Development

Introduction
One of the key features of any complete computational
theory of human cognitive architecture is a process-level
explanation of how it represents and reasons about the
contents of others’ minds. This key question is driving a
host of research projects in social neuroscience,
developmental psychology, linguistics, philosophy of
psychology and more recently in computational modeling of
cognition. Many of the results to date in this area are due to
a series of studies undertaken by cognitive developmental
psychologists aimed at uncovering when in the
developmental process children are able to reason about the
false beliefs of others. Historically, these experiments have
relied on tasks having verbal components that (in some
cases) require the subject to understand what the word
“think” or “believe” means. The results of this work
indicate that children younger than roughly four years of age
do not possess an adult “theory of mind” – or more clearly,
a mature capacity to understand the beliefs of others.
Recently, a number of researchers have been using socalled non-verbal false belief tasks to perform the same sorts
of experiments (Onishi & Baillargeon 2005). Strikingly,
non-verbal false belief tasks seem to be passable by children
as young as fifteen months, calling into question the original
findings regarding a developmental transition at four years
of age.
In a recent study published in Science magazine, Agnes
Kovacs and colleagues suggest that along with adults,
infants as young as seven months old have some
appreciation of the beliefs of others (Kovacs et al. 2010).
The results of their study seem to suggest that subjects
automatically compute representations of others’ beliefs and
maintain them over time, even in the absence of the other.
Further, these maintained representations of others’ beliefs
seem to affect reaction-times for the adult subjects on a

simple button-pushing task and affect habituation times for
infants in a similar way. All taken together, the paper
concludes that maintaining representations of others’ beliefs
and having them be available to our practical reasoning
system (e.g. planning, action-selection etc.) afford us faster
socio-cognitive computations, and thus the ability to be
more effective teammates or competitors. More specifically,
the study also suggests that the representational format of
our beliefs about the beliefs of others is the same as that of
our own beliefs, and thus should be available to our actionselection systems. In this paper, I first explore Kovacs’
results, and then try to account for them in the context of an
extant cognitive-architectural account of belief ascription
(Bello et al. 2007). Finally, I conclude with some
speculative remarks regarding the counterintuitive nature of
Kovacs conclusions, and what they might say about human
performance on other kinds of cognitive tasks.

The Kovacs Experiments
The aim of the study by Kovacs and colleagues is to explore
the possibility that our beliefs about the beliefs of other
agents are represented in the same format as we represent
beliefs about our environment. If this is the case, as the
authors argue, our beliefs about the beliefs of others should
affect our action-selection mechanisms, just as our beliefs
about our environment clearly do. To test this hypothesis,
Kovacs et al. designed a simple visual object detection task,
and gave it to both adults (experiments 1-3) and sevenmonth old infants (experiments 4-7). The task involves the
human participant P watching a scenario unfold along with
another agent A. Each scenario consists of four stages. In
the first stage, A enters the scene, and both A and P see a
ball roll behind an occluder. In stage two, both A and P see
the ball either stay behind the occluder, or roll out of view.
In stage three, A leaves the scene and the ball either (i) stays
behind the occluder, (ii) stays out of view, (iii) rolls from
behind the occluder somewhere out of view, or (iv) rolls
from out of view back to its place behind the occluder. In
the fourth stage of the scenario, A returns to the scene and
the occluder is removed. The adult participant’s task is to
press the space bar on a keyboard as soon as they detect the
ball. Crucially, completion of this task has nothing
whatever to do with the beliefs of A.
The four conditions in stage three correspond to four
configurations of P’s beliefs about A’s beliefs. In the first
condition, the ball moves and stays behind the occluder,
even while A is gone from the scene, resulting in both P and

2997

A having a true belief about the location of the ball. I adopt
the Kovacs et al. notation, and refer to this situation as
P+A+. In the second condition, the ball initially rolls
behind the occluder, then rolls out of the scene with A still
present. A leaves, and then returns, with the ball remaining
out of view for both A and P, meaning that both A and P
have true beliefs about the ball’s location. I refer to this
situation as P-A-. In the third condition, the ball initially
rolls behind the occluder, A leaves the scene, and then the
ball rolls from behind the occluder out of view, leaving A
with a false belief about the ball’s current location. I refer
to this situation as P-A+. Finally, the fourth condition
involves the ball initially moving behind the occluder,
rolling out of the scene in A’s presence, A then leaving the
scene, and while A is gone, the ball returns to its’ initial
position behind the occluder, resulting in a false belief on
A’s part with regard to the ball’s current location. This
situation is labeled P+A-. The + symbol generally
designates a belief that the ball is behind the occluder, and
the – symbol generally designates a belief that the ball is
somewhere out of the scene, so P+A+ or P-A- designates
both agents having true beliefs about the ball’s location
behind the occluder or out of view (respectively), whereas
mismatches such as P-A+ or P+A- indicate a false belief on
the part of A.
Kovacs et al. hypothesized that reaction times
involved with detecting the ball would be lower in situations
where the ball was behind the occluder in a well-defined
location, rather than when it had rolled out of the scene to
parts unknown. Seven experimental conditions were run.
For the sake of brevity, we will only concern ourselves with
conditions one, two and three from a computational
modeling perspective. The results of the first three
experiments are as follows:
1.

2.

3.

No significant differences were detected in
reaction times when the participant had either (i)
a belief that the object was behind the occluder,
or (ii) a belief that A believed the object to be
behind the occluder.
In stage four, rather than the agent returning, a
pile of boxes returns to the scene. As in
experiment one, no significant differences were
detected.
In experiment three, the pile of boxes replaces A
through all four stages. Reaction times were
faster when the participant believed the ball to be
behind the occluder, and slower in the other two
conditions.

Experiments four through seven involved replicating the
results of the three experiments above using seven month
old infants, and a looking-time paradigm common to
developmental studies. While these are interesting in their
own right, they add little in terms of computational
requirements over and above what would be needed to

account for the results of experiments one, two and three.
What the results of these experiments seem to show is that:
•

•

•

The presence of an agent A (rather than boxes)
induces participant P to automatically construct
representations of the beliefs of the agent. This
follows directly from the contrast between results
from experiments one and three.
Insofar as there seem to be no significant
differences in reaction time when (i) P believes the
ball to be behind the occluder and (ii) P believes
that A believes the ball to be behind the occluder
(even in false belief conditions where the ball has
rolled away); the results suggest that both P’s
beliefs and A’s beliefs are stored in the same
representational format and are equally accessible
to P’s action-selection systems for use in the
detection task. This follows from the results of
experiment one.
P’s beliefs about A are maintained over time, even
in A’s absence, and have an effect on P’s reaction
time in the detection task. This follows from the
manipulation in experiment two whereby a pile of
boxes replaces A in stage four of the scenario, yet
the reaction time results remain similar to those in
experiment one.

I now turn to the task of providing a computational
account of these general patterns of data, following prior
work in constructing a cognitive-architectural account of
belief ascription (Bello et al. 2007). As a disclaimer on
what follows, I am not aiming to provide a quantitative
data fit to Kovacs’ results. To my knowledge, no
computational model of belief ascription and tracking
exists having millisecond-scale fidelity. I only seek to
replicate the general functionality demonstrated by
participants, and the effects of manipulations such as the
replacement of A with a pile of boxes in experiment two
and the total absence of A in experiment three.

Cognitive Architecture
The model of belief ascription used herein is developed
within the Polyscheme computational cognitive architecture
(Cassimatis 2002). Polyscheme was originally developed to
give a competence-level account of infant physical
reasoning, and has since been extended to applications in
both natural language understanding and aspects of social
cognition involving mental-state attribution
While some cognitive architectures including ACT-R,
Leabra and 4CAPS make structural commitments about
their components as being grounded in the literature on
cognitive psychology and neuroscience; Polyscheme’s
structure is primarily inspired by the literature on “core
knowledge” in child development along with the literature
on embodied cognition. Polyscheme’s basic set of services
include components for reasoning about time, space,
identity, categories, part-whole relations, causal relations,

2998

and hypothetical/counterfactual situations. These domaingeneral cognitive capabilities are Polyscheme’s so-called
cognitive substrate, and it is the coordination of these
capabilities through Polyscheme’s cognitive focus of
attention that realizes complex cognition and resultant
behavior. Polyscheme is designed such that each of the
aforementioned components can be implemented using
special-purpose data structures and algorithms.
For
example, temporal reasoning is implemented using
constraint graphs, category hierarchies are implemented
using the usual tree-like structures found in ontologies, and
causal relations are captured using a probabilistic-relational
formalism. The domain-general cognitive components are
linked to one another through a relational interlingua that
allows them to communicate with Polyscheme’s cognitive
focus of attention, which polls the components for their
opinions on what is currently in focus, combines those
opinions, and broadcasts the result back out to each
component. Inference in Polyscheme takes the form of
abduction which finds the most likely set of outputs given a
set of inputs and sets of component-specific knowledge
about the world. This process is discussed in greater detail
elsewhere (Cassimatis et al. 2010).

Formal Preliminaries
Atoms in Polyscheme are the basic units of
knowledge representation. Atoms are relational structures
of the form Rel([arg1, .. argi], t, w), with Rel being the name
of the relation, argx being relata, t being a temporal interval
over which the relation holds (e.g. has a truth value), and w
being the world in which the relation holds. In the
presented models w will always have the default value R,
though this won’t be important for the purpose of our
discussion. More importantly, atoms will have different
values for t that determine when the atoms hold true/false,
etc. Some atoms will have the value E substituted in for t,
signifying that the relation holds over all temporal intervals
and doesn’t change through the course of computation.
Other atoms will have specific timepoints such as t1, t2, etc.
as a temporal interval. These atoms are called fluents, and
their truth-values can change from timepoint to timepoint.
As an example, the atom Color(sky, blue, E, R) represents
the unchanging fact that the sky is blue, while
Weather(outside, rainy, t3, R) states that at time t3, the
weather outside is rainy. Many (but not all) of the atoms
comprising the models I will present have an argument
corresponding to the perspective in which the atom holds
true. An example might be Location(ball, unknown,
selfworld, t4, R). The third argument of the relation, called
“selfworld” represents that from the model’s perspective,
the Location of the ball at time t4 is unknown. This
argument isn’t necessarily restricted to representing the
model’s perspective on the world; it can also represent the
model’s perspective of another agent’s perspective on the
world. For instance, Location(ball, garage, otherworld, t4,
R) states that Polyscheme believes that from the perspective
of another agent, the location of the ball is in the garage at

time t4. We rely on this notational convention throughout
the set of presented models to represent what Polyscheme
believes the world to be like and what Polyscheme believes
about the beliefs of other agent.

Belief Ascription
One of the central features of the Kovacs’ tasks is
that subjects seem to be automatically ascribing beliefs to
other agents and maintaining them over a period of time,
even in the agents’ absence from the subjects’ immediate
view. In prior work, my collaborators and I have developed
a broadly simulation-theoretic account of belief ascription
within Polyscheme (Bello et al. 2007). In short, simulationtheoretic ascription of beliefs involves the ascriber
constructing an internal simulation of the mental states of a
target agent, and then using their own practical reasoning
system within the context of the simulation to make
predictions about what the target agent might do or think.
The methods by which these simulations get populated vary
across different simulation-theoretic accounts, and is, as of
the present, an open research question. Our particular
account of belief ascription relies on Polyscheme’s ability to
reason about categories, identity, constraints (both causal
and non-causal), and counterfactual worlds. The models
presented in this paper are constructed to explicitly
represent counterfactual inferences in rule-based form in
order to simplify presentation. The process of belief
ascription begins when Polyscheme sees another agent. At
this point, it creates a counterfactual world corresponding to
the perspective of that agent, and also infers an identity
relationship between itself and the agent that holds in its’
own perspective.
These atoms generally look like:
IsA(other, Agent, E, R), IsCounterfactual(otherworld,
selfworld, E, R) and SameAs(self, other, E, R).
Polyscheme’s representation of other agents’ perspectives is
counterfactual due to the fact that other agents may have
beliefs about the world that differ from its’ own. The rest of
the ascription process is constituted by figuring out what to
populate the other agent’s perspective with, given what
Polyscheme knows about the agent. The population process
is called inheritance (figure 1), and corresponds to rules that
govern how to populate Polyscheme’s counterfactual
simulation of the other agent’s perspective.
Once
populated, atoms in the counterfactual simulation
corresponding to Polyscheme’s beliefs about the target
agent’s beliefs are reasoned about using all of Polyscheme’s
components, similar to the way Polyscheme reasons about
the atoms comprising its’ own perspective. Notice that
inheritance rules such as those shown in figure 1 serve as
filters through which self assumes the perspective of other.
By themselves, these rules aren’t pass-through filters that
merely duplicate self’s beliefs and assign them to the other
agent. In figure 1, the inheritance rules detect when there
are mismatches between events in the world as they are
perceived by self and other. When such mismatches arise
(as they do in Kovacs’ false-belief conditions), the

2999

inheritance rules serve to suppress the inheritance of self’s
beliefs about events as they unfolded into “otherworld.”
Instead, “otherworld” gets populated with beliefs that
capture the state of the world as “other” has perceived it to
be. To borrow from the philosophical literature, inheritance
rules are what implements the so-called opacity of mental
states. Opacity is understood for our purposes to mean
privacy and accounts for the basic intuition that different
agents can have different beliefs about the same
propositional content; in this case whether or not certain
events in the world concerning ball motion have occurred.
On this definition, being able to entertain the false belief of
another agent requires the ability to maintain two opaque
contexts (e.g. selfworld and otherworld).

Model: Experiment 1
The task knowledge required for Kovacs’
experiments is minimal, and is represented in figure 1.
Briefly, there are a set of rules that govern events and their
effects, a set of rules corresponding to action-selection, and
a final set of rules defining the inheritance process. The
rules governing events consist of a rule stating that if an
object is at a particular location at some time t, then it likely
will remain there; a rule stating that if an object rolls from
behind an occluder out of view, then the object’s new
location is unknown and no longer behind the occluder; and
finally that if an object rolls into view and behind an
occluder, then its’ new location is behind the occluder and is
no longer unknown. Since both the agent and participant

Figure 1: Inheritance of mutually perceived events from selfworld to otherworld
Crucial to the results presented here, Polyscheme’s actionselection mechanisms are simply rules, and therefore apply
in both the selfworld and agentworld perspectives, allowing
beliefs in agentworld to possibly have an effect on actionselection (figure 1). The motivation for this particular
feature will be made clear in the general discussion.
Differences in reaction time between when either self or
other believe the ball to be behind the occluder versus when
they believe the ball to be elsewhere are produced by having
self posit the existence of a new unlabeled location when the
ball is presumed to be elsewhere. The newly posited
location invites Polyscheme to spend extra cycles trying to
evaluate whether or not the ball might be at this unlabeled
location rather than behind the occluder.

both know the object to initially be behind the occluder, I
have simplified and not represented both of them seeing the
object initially roll behind the occluder, as it contributes
nothing to the task. We developed four sets of inputs
corresponding to the four scenarios in Kovacs’ experiments.
In the P+A+, the input to the model consists of:
Sees(self, agent, selfworld, t1, R)
IsA(agent, Agent, E, R)
Location(ball, behindOcc, selfworld, t1, R)
Location(ball, behindOcc, otherworld, t1, R)
-Sees(self, BallRollsAway, selfworld, t1, R)
-Sees(other, BallRollsAway, selfworld, t1, R)
-Occurs(BallRollsAway, selfworld, t1, R)
-Sees(self, BallRollsBehindOccluder, selfworld, t3, R)
-Sees(other, BallRollsBehindOccluder, selfworld, t3, R)

3000

-Occurs(BallRollsBehindOccluder, selfworld, t3, R)

between the model results and a rough estimate of the
reaction times reported in Kovacs’ experiment 1 data is r =
.939, p = .031.
As reported in Kovacs et al, the P-A- condition
corresponding to both agents having no idea where the ball
is consumes both the largest number of computational
cycles in the model and generates the longest reaction time.
In this condition, the model doesn’t press the space bar until
time t5, after the occluder is completely lowered. The
P+A+, P-A+, and P+A- conditions produce both cycle times

Goal(self, detectBall, selfworld, t4, R)
-Satisfied(detectBall, selfworld, t4, R)
HalfLowered(occluder, selfworld, t4, R)
FullyLowered(occluder, selfworld, t5, R)
In this case, the ball remains behind the occluder for the
duration. Neither self nor other see the ball roll away. The
atoms Goal(self, detectBall, selfworld, t4, R) and -

Figure 3: Model dynamics for P-A+ condition in Experiment 1
Satisfied(detectBall, selfworld, t4, R) state that at time t4,
self has the goal of detecting the ball, and the goal is
unsatisfied. The atoms describing the state of the occluder
are self-explanatory and are meant to capture the fact that if
Polyscheme knows at t4 where the ball is, it can press the
space bar to detect the ball before the occluder is fully
lowered. In the case where it doesn’t know where the ball
is, it waits for the occluder to be fully lowered before
pressing the space bar. Similar configurations of inputs
specify the P-A-, P-A+ and P+A- conditions. Given the P/A
notation, Polyscheme takes the place of P, and the other
agent whose beliefs are being reasoned about is A. The
inheritance rules shown in figure 1 populate agentworld
with event occurrences and non-occurrences conditioned on
whether the event is mutually observed by P and A, or
whether the event is solely observed by P.

Experiment 1 Results
The results of the model runs across all four
scenarios are captured in figure 3. As hoped for, the
qualitative pattern of Kovacs’ results are accounted for in
terms of the number of computational cycles Polyscheme
uses to make inferences in each condition. As a disclaimer,
I assume no isomorphism between Polyscheme’s
computational cycles, and the reaction-time measure used in
the Kovacs experiments, however, the computed correlation

and reaction times that aren’t significantly different from
one another, since at least one of the agents believes (either

Figure 2: Model execution times vs. reported human
Reaction Times for Experiment 1
truly or falsely) that the ball is behind the occluder at time
t4, resulting in the space bar being pushed at time t4, before
the occluder is completely lowered. In the P+A- condition,
Polyscheme’s action-selection rules have access to A’s
beliefs at time t4, and can use them to press the space bar, if
warranted. The model execution trace for an example
condition (P-A+) is given in figure 2, with blue lines
representing when the corresponding fluent on the y-axis is
true during model execution.

Experiments 2 and 3 Results

3001

Similar models were run in service of replicating
results from Kovacs’ experiments 2 and 3. Since the
inheritance process is begun as soon as Polyscheme
encounters another agent, and that it continually populates
its’ counterfactual simulation “otherworld” even in the
absence of the agent, the results of Kovacs’ experiment 2
are almost identical to the results of experiment 1. The only
difference is that Polyscheme perceives an inert pile of
boxes in the room at time t4 in place of the agent, but this
has no effect on the ongoing counterfactual simulation.
Cycle times for this condition are: P+A+ = 305, P-A- = 330,
P-A+ = 300 and P+A- = 310. Correlation with rough
estimates of Kovacs’ experiment 2 data is reported as r =
.689, p = .156. In experiment 3, the pile of boxes is present
for the entire duration, and Polyscheme never encounters
another agent.
As expected, it doesn’t construct a
counterfactual simulation corresponding to another agent’s
perspective, and cycle times are predictably lower. In
addition, the model data captures the general trend of longer
reaction time when P doesn’t know where the ball is in
comparison to the conditions in which P knows the ball to
be behind the occluder. Cycle times for this condition are:
P+A+ = 343, P-A- = 419, P-A+ = 343 and P+A- = 419.
Correlation with rough estimates of Kovacs’ experiment 2
data is reported as r = .968, p = .016.

General Discussion
I have shown how a computational cognitive
architecture equipped with no special representations for the
beliefs of other agents can account for the data presented in
(Kovacs et al. 2010) through the use of a general purpose set
of inheritance mechanisms. While the inheritance process
can be used to facilitate reasoning about the mental states of
others, it is also the key component that enables reasoning
about hypotheticals, future states of affairs, and
counterfactuals. In the case of mental state attribution,
inheritance is used in coordination with assertions about
identity (e.g. self=other), categorization of others as agents,
and general rules that govern action-selection to make
predictions about what other agents might think and do.
Rules that govern action selection take the following general
form:
Precondition1(?x1, ?y1, ?world, ?t, R) ^
Precondition2(?x2, ?y2, ?world, ?t, R) ^ .. ^
Precondition_N(?xN, ?yN, ?world, ?t, R) 
Do(?actionname, ?t, R)
The italicized relation names correspond to appropriate
atoms that represent Polyscheme’s beliefs (e.g. Loc(ball,
behindOcc, t1, R)) and/or desires (e.g. Goal(self, detectBall,
selfworld, t4, R)), and the action that might follow from
those (e.g. Do(pressKey, t4, R)). Notice that the ?world
argument is a free variable, and can be bound by any
available object that is a world. This allows Polyscheme’s
action-selection mechanism access to the beliefs of other
agents, insofar as entertaining them helps to promote actionselection. The unsettling implication from Kovacs et al.

suggests that the false beliefs of others might affect our
action-selection. On the face of it, this is certainly not an
adaptive feature, at least in some sorts of social interaction.
But if we consider for a moment that when we perform a
speech act corresponding to an assertion, the presumed
effects of asserting include our interlocutor believing what
we’ve asserted, and us having the belief that our interlocutor
believes the assertion. The selection of future speech acts
presumes the success of the transaction I just described. One
way this might happen is through allowing our actionselection system access to these presumed beliefs of others.
Since we usually don’t make (intentionally) false assertions,
such a mechanism seems like it would be very useful for
pragmatic communication, at least when we aren’t being
intentionally deceptive.
The interesting and surprising results of the
modeling work I’ve presented is that general purpose
cognitive mechanisms which we assume present in infancy
are sufficient to capture the general pattern of data
uncovered by Kovacs and colleagues. Inferences about
time, places, differences, identity, animate vs. inanimates,
and hypothetical states of affairs are widely believed to be
available to infants. When sequenced appropriately, this
modeling effort shows them to be capable of enabling
computations about the mental states of other agents.
Further, and in general agreement with Kovacs, models such
as the one developed in this paper ought to make us think
twice about postulating innate cognitive modules to infants
that are specialized for mental-state reasoning.

References
Kovács, Á.M., Téglás, E. & Endress, A.D. (2010). The
social sense: susceptibly to others' beliefs in human
infants and adults. Science, 330, 1830-1834.
Onishi, K.H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308, 255-258.
Bello, P., Bignoli, P. & Cassimatis, N. (2007). Attention and
Association Explain the Emergence of reasoning About
False Belief in Young Children. Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling. (pp.
169-174). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cassimatis, N. (2002). Polyscheme: A Cognitive
Architecture for Integrating Multiple Representation and
Inference Schemes. Doctoral Dissertation, Media
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA.
Cassimatis, N., Bignoli, P., Bugajska, M., Dugas, S., Kurup,
U., Murugesan, A., & Bello, P. (2010). An Architecture
for Adaptive Algorithmic Hybrids. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B, 4(3), 903 – 914.

3002

