UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shared pattern of face preferences in human infants and pet dogs
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4sg9w70g
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Yoon, Jennifer M.D.
Range, Friederike
Huber, Ludwig
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

     Shared pattern of face preferences in human infants and pet dogs
                                                Jennifer M.D. Yoon
                                                  Stanford University
                                                 Friederike Range
                                                  University of Vienna
                                                  Ludwig Huber
                                                  University of Vienna
                                                  Gergely Csibra
                                              Central European University
                                                   Zsofia Viranyi
                                                  University of Vienna
Abstract: Human eyes are unique. Unlike other primates whose pupils are masked by a dark sclera, the human
eye highlights a dark pupil against a white sclera. Newborn infants look longer at schematic stimuli with three
blobs arranged in a face-like configuration – but only if the blobs match the dark-on-light phenotype of the human
eye. If a visual preference for faces with human-like eyes is innately specified, it is a candidate for selection across
domestication. Over thousands of years of evolution, wolves became dogs who are adept at working and living with
us. We report visual preference data showing that adult pet dogs prefer to look at face-like stimuli with a human-like
eye phenotype, even though this phenotype is not prevalent in dogs – just as human infants do. Convergence in
this visual preference suggests sensitivity to human eyes is an important behavioral adaptation for social partnership
with humans.
                                                          2313

