UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shifting attention to a thought: electroencephalographic dynamics during a modified word
generation task.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/63f83823
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Cosmelli, Diego
Moenne, Cristobal
Labbe, Hernan
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                  Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

    Shifting attention to a thought: electroencephalographic dynamics
                          during a modified word generation task.
                                                  Diego Cosmelli
              Escuela de Psicologı́a, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Centro Interdiciplinario de
                                Neurociencias, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
                                                 Cristobal Moenne
            Programa de Doctorado en Ciencias de la Ingenierı́a, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
                                                   Hernán Labbé
                            Escuela de Psicologı́a, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
                                                    Karim Jerbi
                         Brain Dynamics and Cognition Lab, INSERM U821, Lyon, France.
                                                  Vladimir López
              Escuela de Psicologı́a, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Centro Interdiciplinario de
                                Neurociencias, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
                                                 Francisco Aboitiz
             Laboratorio de Neurociencia Cognitiva, Departamento de Psiquiatrı́a, Escuela de Medicina,
            Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Centro Interdiciplinario de Neurociencias, Pontificia
                                              Universidad Católica de Chile
Abstract: What happens if you are asked to come up with a word that includes the letters R, B and F in it? Does
the answer pop up spontaneously? Or do you somehow actively orient yourself towards your thoughts, searching for a
possible match? In other words: does voluntarily thinking about something involve first an attentional shift? Here we
approach this question using electroencephalographic recordings in a modified word-generation task. Modulation of
early visual event-related potentials to an attentional probe presented before subjects find the target word, indicates
that thinking voluntarily about something requires a certain amount of withdrawal of attention from the immediate
external context. Fronto-parietal activity during the initial phase of the task suggests that a supra-modal attentional
network is involved when one voluntarily orients to a relevant aspect of experience, regardless of whether this is
external, in the environment, or internal, in one’s mental space.
                                                           2929

