UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating a route with your index finger: Effect of mental rehearsal on spatial memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/21q2n807

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
So, Wing Chee

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Paper_So

Simulating a route with your index finger:
Effect of mental rehearsal on spatial memory
Wing Chee So (PSYSWC@Nus.Edu.Sg)
Department of Psychology, 9 Arts Link
National University of Singapore

Abstract
This paper examines which rehearsal method (physical
practice vs. mental practice) can better strengthen spatial
memory. Participants were asked to learn four routes that
navigated from starting points to destinations in four different
maps. Then they were asked to rehearse the routes by using
one of the following methods: 1) mental practice by
simulating the routes in their mind; 2) physical practice by
drawing the routes on papers; 3) physical practice by having
index fingers trace the routes in air with eyes closed; and 4)
physically practice by having index fingers trace the routes in
air with eyes open. Finally, they verbally recalled the routes.
The findings showed that physical practice with index fingers
tracing the routes in air while keeping the eyes closed
outperformed other rehearsal methods. Thus, tracing
directions in air without any visual inputs can help
participants to retain the visuo-spatial memory.
Keywords: Spatial memory; Rehearsal methods; Mental
simulation; Navigation; Mental representation

Introduction
“After you turn left, you go straight and turn right”. When
navigating from one place to another in a new environment,
we have to find the route, learn the direction, and retain it in
our visuo-spatial working memory (VSWM). VSWM is
specialized for processing and retaining visual and spatial
information (Baddeley & Logie, 1999; Logie, 1995).
However, maintenance of visual and spatial information
requires rehearsal process. The question of interest is what
type of rehearsal method can better strengthen VSWM.
One way to rehearse spatial and visual information is to
simulate the route in our mental representation, i.e., mental
practice. Mentally represented objects and actions share
similarities with the actual ones (Kosslyn, Pick, Fariello,
1974; Decety, Jeannerod, & Prablanc, 1989). Previous
findings reported that mental practice strengthens memory
in learning sport-related activities like dart throwing
(Mendoza & Wichman, 1978; Surburg, Sultive, & Porretta,
1995). Mental practice is also found to be effective in
enhancing actual performance in athletics (Jones & Stuth,
1997). When learning directions of a route, mental
simulation allows us to form a visual image of geometric
properties of the layout of the route (e.g., Finke, 1989;
Kosslyn, 1980, Shepard & Cooper, 1982). In addition, it
activates motor imagery whereby we imagine ourselves
tracing the sequence of the direction in our visual imagery
(e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Jeannerod, 1995; Kosslyn, Ball, &
Reiser, 1978; Parsons, 1987; Shepard & Metzler, 1971).

Activation of visual and motor processing can maintain
visual and spatial information in working memory.
However, mental practice normally does not involve any
overt body movements (Richardson, 1967). While we are
simulating a route in our mind, we can draw the to-beremembered route on a paper, i.e., physical practice.
Physical practice is an external memory aid that refers to
writing down the to-be-remembered information. Previous
research found that participants who jogged notes recalled
more information than those who did not (FrosterLee, et al.,
2005). Yet there is no consensus of whether physical
practice is more effective than mental practice. While
Intons-Petersons and Fournier (1986) suggested that the use
of physical practice resulted in higher recall of words than
the use of mental practice, Dyer, Riley, and Yekovich (1979)
reported the opposite pattern. Tigner (1999) argued that the
combination of physical and mental practices is the best way
of rehearsal. The first aim of the present study is to examine
whether participants recall directions more accurately when
they are performing mental practice, compared to those who
are performing physical practice.
Other than drawing to-be-remembered route on a paper,
we can indeed draw it in air as an alternative form of
physical practice. Specifically, we can use our index fingers
to trace the route in abstract space. The way we move our
hands should reflect the direction of the simulated route in
our mental representation (e.g., Hinton & Parsons, 1988;
Jeannerod, 1988; Parsons, 1994). To some extent, these
hand movements resemble gestures (hand movements that
are produced spontaneously when talking). There is
abundant evidence showing that gestures reflect individuals’
thoughts and knowledge (Goldin-Meadow, 2003; McNeill,
1992), particularly spatial representation (Hostetter &
Hopkins, 2002; Hostetter & Alibali, 2008; but see Wagner,
Nusbaum, & Goldin-Meadow, 2004). Previous findings
further showed that gestures not only reflect thinking but
also bring out implicit knowledge from mental
representation during the process of learning (Broaders, et
al., 2007). According to this view, using index finger to
trace in air makes mental simulation of a route explicit,
thereby enhancing spatial memory. The second aim of the
present study is to compare the number of directions
correctly recalled when participants draw the route on a
paper to that when they draw it in air.
If tracing the route in air is an effective rehearsal method,
then do participants have to track the route in eye gaze when
they trace it in air? We do so when we draw the route on a
paper in physical practice. One the one hand, visual inputs
are important in spatial perception and learning during the

2252

Paper_So

process of navigation (Loomis, et al., 1993). Specifically,
tracing the route in air with eyes open might help
participants to visualize the route simulated in their mental
representation, and thus providing them feedbacks for
altering the route. However, hand movements might be
sufficient to send signals to our mind that in turn, evokes a
motor image of the actual movement (Wehner, Vogt,
Stadler, 1984). Indeed, visual inputs, especially those are
not relevant, might cause visual interference (e.g., Logie,
1986; Quinn, 2008; Quinn & McConnell, 2006). While we
are tracking the movement of our index fingers in eye gaze,
other visual information (e.g., spatial layout and furniture
setting of the room) might involuntarily enter our visual
buffer, resulting in interference in our visual imagery. The
third aim of the present study is to examine whether visual
inputs play an important role in physical practice when
participants trace the routes in air.
Overall, the present study examined whether different
rehearsal methods facilitate spatial recall. There were four
methods – 1) mental practice in which participants
simulated the routes without hand movements; 2) physical
practice in which participants simulated the routes and draw
them on papers; 3) physical practice in which participants
simulated the routes and draw them in air while keeping
their eyes closed; and 4) physical practice in which
participants simulated the routes and draw them in air while
keeping their eyes open. The study adopted a betweensubject design with types of rehearsal methods as the
independent variable and number of direction recalled as the
dependent variable.
To date, very few studies have been done in investigating
whether mental practice and physical practice enhance
performance in navigation. This research aims to examine
whether participants recall directions more accurately if they
are performing mental and physical practices. Theoretically,
it gains insights into how spatial information is represented
in our memory. Practically, the findings guide us to design
educational programs that specifically help students to
navigate.

open). Of all the participants, fifty-three of them were righthanded and the rest were left-handed.

Stimuli
Four maps were created by the software “Edraw Max”
(Figure 1a shows one of the maps). All the maps were
placed on the grids and each of them had seven vertical lines
and ten strokes (either horizontal, diagonal, curly, or doublelined) connecting or not connecting with the vertical lines.
Landmarks (except those for the starting points and
destinations) were not provided.
Each map featured a direct and only route navigating
from the starting point to the destination. As shown in
Figure 1b, after traveling from the starting point, one should
move down, then move diagonally downwards, move up,
move to right, move down, move to right, move down, cross
the curly road, move up, move diagonally upwards, move
down, cross the bridge, and finally move to the destination.
There were in total thirteen steps in each map.

Method
Participants
Sixty-two participants (half male and half female) aged 18
to 23 participated in this experiment to fulfill course
requirements. They were undergraduates at National
University of Singapore, Singapore. None of them had
sensory problems. The participants were randomly assigned
to one of the four experimental conditions. There were
eighteen participants in the mental practice condition
without overt hand movements (MP), thirteen participants in
the physical practice condition where they drew the routes
on papers (PP on papers), sixteen participants in the
physical practice condition where they drew the routes in air
eyes closed (PP in air with eyes closed), and fifteen
participants in the physical practice condition where they
drew the routes in air with eyes open (PP in air with eyes

Figure 1. The top figure shows one of the maps tested in this
experiment. The bottom figure shows the route navigating
from the starting point to the destination.
The locations of the starting point were different across
the four maps. It was situated at top left corner in Map 1,
bottom right corner in Map 2, bottom left corner in Map 3,
top right corner in Map 4. The destinations were situated at
the opposite side of the starting points in each map.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually in each condition with
four maps. The order of the maps was counterbalanced
across participants. Each participant went through three

2253

Paper_So

phases in each condition. The whole experiment was
videotaped.
The procedures in the learning and memorizing phase
were the same in all the conditions. They were presented
with a map (see Figure 1a), and asked to learn and
memorize the directions of the route by tracing them with a
highlighter (see Figure 1b). After the first time of drawing, a
new but the same map was presented for them to draw the
route for the second time. They were told to highlight every
direction and not to pause at any junctions of the routes.
After finishing drawing the route of the first map, the
participants entered rehearsal phase. The procedures in this
phase were different across the conditions. Figure 2 shows
what the participants did in the four conditions. In the MP
condition, the participants were asked to hold a softball
(hence, that their finger movements were restricted) and
given 20 1 seconds to mentally rehearse the route. In the PP
on paper condition, the participants were given an empty
map (i.e., a map without the vertical lines and strokes) and
asked to draw the routes from the starting points to the
destinations. In the PP in air with eyes closed condition, the
participants were asked to close their eyes and use the index
fingers of their preferred hands to draw the routes in air. In
the PP condition with eyes open, the participants opened
their eyes while drawing the routes with their index fingers
of the preferred hands in air.

Figure 2. Mental practice (MP, top left), physical practice
on paper (PP on paper, top right), physical practice in air
while keeping eyes closed (PP in air with eyes closed,
bottom left), and physical practice in air while keeping eyes
open (PP in air with eyes open, bottom right).
After the rehearsal phase, the participants were asked to
describe the directions of the route from the starting point to
the destination based on an aerial perspective in English to
the experimenter in the recall phase.

1
We had run a pilot study and found that the participants spent
around 20 seconds to trace a route in air.

After then, a second map was presented and participants
were asked to learn and memorize the directions of the route,
rehearse them in the respective conditions, and recall them
to the experimenter. Same procedures were adopted for the
third and fourth maps.
At the end of the experiment, an online Corsi Block Test
was administered to examine the participants’ spatial
memory span (Orsini, Grossi, Capitani, Laiacona, Papagno,
& Vallar, 1987). In this test, the participants viewed a black
dot sequentially flashed in random squares on a computer
screen, with each dot flashing approximately 1000ms. After
viewing the sequence, they had to click on the squares that
showed the dots in the same order. All the participants
started with watching the sequences in which three dots
were flashing (i.e., level 3). After they clicked the squares
correctly over two consecutive trials, they progressed to the
next advanced level (i.e., four dots). The task was
discontinued when participants erroneously recalled the
order of the visual dot sequence presentation in two
consecutive trials. The most advanced level that the
participants could achieve was recorded.

Scoring and coding
We recorded the duration of rehearsal for each participant
by counting the number of seconds spent on rehearsing the
complete route from the starting point to the destination in
each map. The duration included all the pauses, hesitations,
and self-corrections. We also looked at to what extent the
participants rehearsed the routes accurately. For the
participants in the PP on paper condition, we compared the
directions and orders of the steps drawn on the papers to
those on the maps. For those in the PP in air conditions, we
drew the routes on papers based on the directions of their
imagined hand movements followed by examining the
directions and orders. A step was considered to be correctly
rehearsed if its direction and order matched with that in the
map. Steps that were not found in the maps but rehearsed
(i.e., false memory) were excluded from the analyses. The
participants got 1 point for each correct step but zero for a
missing step and a step in which its direction and / or order
was wrongly rehearsed. There were 13 steps in each map,
and thus, the total point each participant could get in all the
four maps was 52. Note that the mental rehearsal of the
participants in the MP condition could not be evaluated due
to the absence of overt hand movements.
The participants verbally described the route to the
experimenter in the recall phase. All speech produced in the
recall phase was transcribed by the coders who were native
English speakers. Then the coders identified the steps the
participants mentioned in speech and evaluated whether the
directions and their orders were accurately recalled. A step
was considered to be correctly recalled if its direction and
order matched with that in the map. Steps that were not
found in the maps but recalled (i.e., false memory) were
excluded from the analyses. Same as the scoring procedures
in the rehearsal phase, the participants got 1 point for the
recall of each correct step. The total point for all the four

2254

Paper_So

maps was 52. We then calculated the proportion of correct
directions recalled for each participant.
Reliability was assessed by having a second coder code
20% of the data. Inter-rater agreement for measuring the
time spent on rehearsal was 98% (Cohen’s Kappa = .96);
determining the accuracy of rehearsal was 90% (Cohen’s
Kappa = 88); describing directions in speech was 95%
(Cohen’s Kappa = .91); and determining the accuracy of
steps recalled was 96% (Cohen’s Kappa = .94).

MP condition, p = .04, that in the PP on papers condition, p
= .03, and that in the PP in air with eyes open condition, p
= .05. There was no significant difference between other
pairs.
Table 2: Average amount of time (in seconds, SD) spent
on verbal recall and proportion of directions (SD) correctly
recalled.
Condition

Results
On average, the participants recalled a sequence of six dots
(SD = 1.19, ranging from 4 to 9 dots) in the Corsi Block
Test. The individual variations in the spatial span might
influence the participants’ performance in our experiment.
Hence, we put it as a controlled variable in all the following
analyses.
Table 1 shows the average time (in seconds, SD) spent on
different types of rehearsal and the average proportion of
directions (SD) correctly rehearsed. The participants spent
comparable amount of time on the rehearsal in the PP on
papers, PP in air with eyes closed, and PP in air with eyes
open conditions, F(2, 39) = .32, p = ns. However the
accuracy of their rehearsed routes differed across the
conditions, F(2, 39) = 8.82, p = .001. The proportion of
directions correct rehearsed was higher in the PP in air with
eyes closed than in the PP in air with eyes opened, p = .001.
There was no significant difference between other pairs.

PP on papers
PP with
closed
PP with
open
MP

eyes
eyes

Average
amount of
time spent
(in seconds,
SD)
134.15
(77.04)
140.19
(82.26)
104.29
(28.12)
140.83
(55.45)

Proportion
of directions
correctly
rehearsed
(SD)
.63 (.12)
.74 (.10)
.66 (.08)
.64 (.10)

Discussion

The first aim of the present study was to examine whether
participants recalled directions more accurately when they
were performing mental practice, compared to those who
were performing physical practice. Our findings showed
that physical practice with index finger tracing the route in
Table 1: Average amount of time (in seconds, SD) spent
air with eyes closed yielded higher recall rate than mental
on rehearsal and proportion of directions (SD) correctly
practice. In other words, mental simulation is more effective
rehearsed.
when it is accompanied by hand movements in air than
when it is not. So how do these hand movements in air
Condition
Average
Proportion
strengthen memory? There are several possibilities. Tracing
amount of of directions the route with index finger in air helps the participants to
time spent correctly
reveal the simulated route, thus making it more explicit.
(in seconds, rehearsed
Moreover, it might help the participants to stay focused on
SD)
(SD)
the simulated image and prevent them from being lost in
PP on papers
107.31
.75 (.10)
their mind. It might also allow the participants to maintain
(61.55)
the simulated route active and longer before the image fades,
PP in air with 96.25
.83 (.10)
thereby making memory traces stronger and more robust.
eyes closed
(80.07)
To some extent, tracing routes with index finger looks
PP in air with 74.57
.72 (.08)
similar to gestures that we produce when we are talking. In
eyes open
(40.57)
fact, some participants reproduced the tracing hand
MP
80
N/A
movements when they were verbally recalling the route.
(N/A)
These hand movements, which were referred to gestures as
they were co-occurring with speech, might help the
Next, we looked at whether the types of rehearsal
participants to retrieve the directions that were rehearsed
influenced spatial recall in speech. Table 2 shows the
earlier. Previous research found that reproducing gestures
average time (in seconds, SD) spent on the recall and
that learners have encoded earlier facilitates learning and
average proportion of directions (SD) accurately recalled in
memory recall in a variety of tasks (Cook, Mitchell, &
all the four conditions. The participants spent comparable
Goldin-Meadow, 2008; Tellier, 2008).
amount of time on verbal recall in all the four conditions,
The second aim of the present study was to compare the
F(3, 55) = 2.41, p = ns. However, the recall accuracy was
proportion of directions correctly recalled when participants
different across the conditions, F (3, 55) = 3.30, p = .027.
drew the routes on papers to that when they drew them in air
The proportion of directions correctly recalled in the PP in
with eyes opened. Our findings showed that the proportion
air with eyes closed condition was higher than that in the
of directions recalled in these two kinds of physical practice

2255

Paper_So

was comparable. In other words, it does not make a
difference in recall rate when participants drew the routes on
papers or in air. Indeed, the proportions of directions
recalled in these two kinds of physical practice were even
similar to the proportion in the mental practice condition,
suggesting that hand movements with eyes open were not
particularly effective in enhancing memory recall. Such
result was in contrary to previous findings which showed
that overt hand movements can serve as an enactment and
enhance memory recall (Zimmer & Englekamp, 2003). One
possibility is, when keeping their eyes open, participants
involuntarily processed other kinds of visual inputs that
were not relevant with the spatial layout of the routes. Thus,
it might cause interference in visual processes (e.g., Logie,
1986; Quinn, 2008; Quinn & McConnell, 2006). In fact, we
noticed that some of the participants in the physical practice
with eyes open condition chose not to look at their hands
during rehearsal. Perhaps they tried to avoid processing
irrelevant visual inputs.
Finally, our findings showed that hand movements in air
strengthened spatial memory only when the participants
kept their eyes closed. Our findings showed that the
participants rehearsed and recalled better when they closed
their eyes than when they opened their eyes. A prior we
expected that visual feedbacks could provide the
participants feedbacks of the routes they simulated.
However, they might be redundant or even interfering
mental simulation. Hand movements instead can send
signals to the brain, which evokes the motor image and
assesses the accuracy of the simulated directions (Wehner,
et al., 1984). Using eye gaze to track the simulated route
might add extra burden to the participants who had to
process sensory and motor inputs simultaneously.
To summarize, using an index finger to trace the route in
air with eyes closed was the best rehearsal method for
spatial recall. We can apply this finding to educational
setting where students try to remember the geographical
locations of countries or recall the visual-spatial information.
The present study has two limitations. First, participants
in the physical practice in air with eyes closed condition
outperformed those in the mental practice condition. Such
difference might not be necessarily attributed to the lack of
hand movements in the mental practice condition. Rather, it
can be explained by the lack of visual inputs in the physical
practice condition. In the present study, most participants
kept their eyes open when they were doing mental practice.
However, such rehearsal method might not be effective as it
might arouse visual interference. Hence, in future research,
we should also compare mental practice with eyes open to
that with eyes closed. Second, the rehearsal time in the
mental practice condition was shorter than that in the
physical practice conditions (drawing routes on papers and
tracing routes in air with eyes closed). Such difference
might explain why participants recalled directions less
accurately in the mental practice condition. Further study
should consider how rehearsal time interacts with the type
of rehearsal method in memory recall.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Phoebe Lim, Qi-Ting Vong,
Terence Ching, Clarence Seow, Si-Ning Yeo, Xiao-Qin
Cheng, Soo-Hui Khoa, Jerlyn Leong, and Tan Wei Ling for
data collection and coding. This research was supported by
R581000074133 to WCS at National University of
Singapore. We also thank the comments given by three
anonymous reviewers.

References
Baddeley, A.D. & Logie, R.H. (1999). Working memory:
The multiple component model. In A. Miyake & P. Shah
(Eds.) Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptions of perceptual
symbols. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22, 4, 637-660
Broaders, S., Cook, S.W., Mitchell, Z., & GoldinMeadow, S. (2007). Making children gesture reveals
implicit knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 539-550.
Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008).
Gesturing makes learning last. Cognition, 106, 1047-1058.
Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., & Prablanc, C. (1989). The
timing of mentally represented actions. Behavioural Brain
Research, 34, 35-42.
Dyer, J. W., Riley, J., & Yekovich, F. R. (1979). An
analysis of three study skills: notetaking, summarizing, and
rereading. Journal of Education Research, 73, 3-7.
Finke, R.A. (1989). Principles of mental imagery.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ForsterLee, R., ForsterLee, L., Horowitz, I. A., & King,
E. (2006). The effects of defendant race, victim race, and
juror gender on evidence processing in a murder trial.
Behavioral Sciences & The Law, 24, 179-198.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Hearing gesture: How our
hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hinton, G. E. & Parsons, L. M. (1988). Scene-based and
viewer-centered
representations
for
comparing
shapes. Cognition, 30, 1-35.
Hostetter, A. B. & Hopkins, W. D. (2002). The effect of
thought structure on the production of lexical movements.
Brain and Language, 82, 22-29.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible
embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 15, 495-514.
Intons-Peterson, M. J., & Fournier, J. (1986). External
and internal memory aids: When and how often do we use
them? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115,
267-280.
Jeannerod, M. (1988). The neural and behavioral
organization of goal-directed movements. New York:
Oxford University Press
Jeannerod, M. (1995). Mental imagery in motor cortex.
Neuropsychologia, 33, 1419-1432.

2256

Paper_So

Jones, L., & Stuth, G. (1997). The uses of mental imagery
in athletics: An overview. Applied & Preventive
Psychology, 6, 101-115.
Kosslyn, S. M., Pick, H., Fariello, G. R. (1974) Cognitive
maps in children and men. Child Development, 45, 707-716.
Kosslyn, S. M., Ball, T. M., & Reiser, B. J. (1978). Visual
images preserve metric spatial information: Evidence from
studies of image scanning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 47–60.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1980). Image and Mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Logie, R. H. (1986). Visuospatial processing in working
memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
38, 603-618.
Logie, R.H. (1995). Visuo-spatial working memory. Hove,
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Loomis, J. M., Klatzky, R. L., Golledge, R. G., Cicinelli,
J. G., Pellegrino, J. W., & Fry, P. A. (1993). Nonvisual
navigation by blind and sighted: Assessment of path
integration ability. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 122, 73-91.
McNeill, D. 1992. Hand and Mind: what gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mendoza, D., & Wichman, H. (1978). Inner darts: Effects
of mental practice on performance of dart throwing.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 1194-1199.
Orsini, A., Grossi, D., Capitani, E., Laiacona, M.,
Papagno, C., & Vallar, G. (1987). Verbal and spatial
immediate memory span: Normative data from 1355 adults
and 1112 children. Italian Journal of Neurological Science,
8, 539–548.
Parsons, L.M. (1987). Imagined spatial transformations of
one's hands and feet. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 178-241.
Parsons, L. M. (1994). Temporal and kinematic properties
of motor behavior re
ﬂected in mentally simulated action.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 20, 709–730.
Quinn J. G. (2008). Movement and visual coding: the
structure of visuo-spatial working memory. Cognitive
Processing, 9, 35-43.
Quinn, J. G. & McConnell, J (2006). The interval for
interference in conscious visual imagery. Memory, 14, 241252.
Richardson, A. (1967). Mental practice: a review and
discussion. Research Quarterly, 38.
Shepard, R and Metzler. J. (1971) Mental rotation of three
dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-3.
Shepard, R and Cooper, L. (1982). Mental images and
their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Surburg, P. R., Sutlive, V., & Porretta, D. L., (1995). Use
of imagery practice for improving a motor skill. Adapted
Physical Activity Quarterly, 12, 217-226.
Tellier, M. (2008). The effect of gestures on second
language memorisation by young children. Gesture, 8, 2,
219-235.
Tigner, R. B. (1999). Putting memory research to
good use. College Teaching, 47, 149-152.

Wehner, T., Vogt, S., & Stadler, M. (1984). Task-specific
EMG characteristics during mental training. Psychological
Research, 46, 389-401
Zimmer, H. D. & Engelkamp, J. (2003). Signing enhances
memory like performing actions. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 10, 450-454

2257

