UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simultaneous Online Tracking of Adjacent and Non-adjacent Dependencies in Statistical
Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6t33v8tm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Vuong, Loan
Meyer, Antje
Christiansen, Morten

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simultaneous Online Tracking of Adjacent and Non-adjacent Dependencies in
Statistical Learning
Loan C. Vuong (loan.vuong@mpi.nl)
Antje S. Meyer (antje.meyer@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Uris Hall, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract

effect, which is the finding that high variability in the
material embedded between the non-adjacent dependent
elements facilitates non-adjacent dependency learning
compared to low variability (Gómez, 2002; see also Onnis,
Christiansen, Chater, & Gómez, 2003). In the relevant
studies, participants were trained on an artificial grammar of
the form aXb, in which the non-adjacent pairing between the
first and third element (a-b) was fixed at the perfect level
(non-adjacent transitional probability = 1.0), while the
adjacent pairing between the first and second element (a-X)
was variable. Across participant groups, the size of the
adjacent set varied from 2 (yielding an adjacent transitional
probability between the first and second element of .50) to
24 (yielding an adjacent transitional probability of .04). The
participants listened to the sequences during training and
later took a surprise grammaticality judgment test that
assessed their non-adjacent dependency learning. Results
showed significantly worse non-adjacent dependency
learning at the smaller than at the larger adjacent set sizes.
In light of the above findings, Gómez (2002) proposed
that learners might initially have a default focus on adjacent
dependencies (henceforth, the adjacency-first view). When
the adjacent set has relatively low variability (with a smaller
adjacent set size), adjacency learning continues to
predominate. By contrast, when the adjacent set has high
variability (with a large adjacent set size), learners might
soon “seek out alternative sources of predictability” (e.g.,
non-adjacent dependencies) (pg. 435). Statistical learning is
therefore partially flexible, as the adjacency bias could be
overridden given high variability in the adjacent set.
However, a trade-off between adjacency and non-adjacency
learning that favors adjacency learning might result when
adjacent-set variability is low. This proposal thus elegantly
accounts for the poorer non-adjacency learning performance
at the smaller adjacent set sizes despite the still perfect nonadjacency statistics in those conditions. Note that not all
observed effects of adjacent on non-adjacent dependency
learning are negative. Later studies (Lany & Gómez, 2008;
Lany, Gómez, & Gerken, 2007) have shown that if the nonadjacent dependency to be learned has been encountered
earlier as an adjacent pair, then non-adjacent dependency
learning is facilitated (see also, e.g., Newport & Aslin,
2004; Creel, Newport, & Aslin, 2004 for other facilitating

When children learn their native language, they have to deal
with a confusing array of dependencies between various
elements in an utterance. Some of these dependencies may be
adjacent to one another whereas others can be separated by
considerable intervening material. Research on statistical
learning has begun to explore how such adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies may be learned—but in separate
studies. In this paper, we investigate whether both types of
dependencies can be learned together, similarly to the task
facing young children. Statistical learning of adjacent and
non-adjacent dependencies was assessed using a modified
serial-reaction-time task. The results showed (i) increasing
online sensitivity to both dependency types during training,
and (ii) non-adjacent dependency learning being highly
correlated with adjacent dependency learning. These results
suggest that adjacency and non-adjacency learning can occur
in parallel and that they might be subserved by a common
statistical learning mechanism.
Keywords: Statistical learning; Non-adjacent Dependencies;
Adjacent Dependencies; Artificial Grammar Learning; Serial
Reaction Time

Introduction
It is generally assumed that statistical learning, a domaingeneral mechanism that encodes statistical regularities
across space and time, plays a role in language acquisition
(see Saffran, 2003, for a review). The extent to which
statistical learning can support language acquisition is,
however, a point of controversy (e.g., Marcus, Vijayan, Rao,
& Vishton, 1999, Seidenberg & Elman, 1999; Yang, 2002).
This is in part because in natural languages dependencies
can concern adjacent elements (e.g., dependencies between
verb stems and inflectional morphemes as in learning) or
non-adjacent ones (e.g., dependencies between auxiliaries
and inflectional morphemes as in is learning), but studies of
artificial grammar learning have shown that adults and
children are highly sensitive to the former type of regularity
(e.g, Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996) and considerably
less sensitive to the latter (e.g., Gómez, 2002; Newport &
Aslin, 2004).
Why are non-adjacent dependencies hard to learn? One
proposal is that this might be due to a default bias towards
adjacent dependencies (Gómez, 2002). Evidence for this
hypothesis comes from studies demonstrating the variability

	  
964

factors). In either case, existing evidence suggests a heavy
influence of adjacent on non-adjacent dependency learning.
In the current study, we aimed to assess this interaction
between adjacency and non-adjacency learning by reexamining the learning of non-adjacent dependencies under
a small adjacent set size condition thought to be favorable to
adjacent dependency learning, and less favorable to nonadjacent dependency learning (Gómez, 2002; Onnis et al.,
2003). Previous studies used an offline judgment task to
measure learning of non-adjacent dependencies (e.g.,
Gómez, 2002, Onnis et al., 2003), or they used an online
task but measured learning of adjacent and non-adjacent
dependencies in different experiments (Misyak &
Christiansen, 2010; Misyak, Christiansen, & Tomblin,
2010), or they trained participants on adjacent and nonadjacent dependencies within the same experiment but in a
serial manner (Lany & Gómez, 2008; Lany, Gómez,
& Gerken, 2007). By contrast, we tracked online learning of
both
adjacent
and
non-adjacent
dependencies
simultaneously in the same task as learning progressed.
Training materials were similar in structure to those used
in Lany et al. (2007, Experiment 3) and consisted of four
non-adjacent dependency pairs with an adjacent set size of 6
(e.g., aX1-6b). To track learning online, we adopted the
artificial grammar learning-serial reaction time (AGL-SRT)
paradigm (Misyak et al., 2010, see Figure 2). The
participants listened to triplets of sound sequences, such as
jom - namie - mig. On the computer screen, they saw the
written versions of the stimuli along with three distractors.
They listened to the strings one element at a time and made
a mouse click response to select the corresponding element
on the visual display. We measured the latencies from the
presentation of each element in the string and tracked the
participants’ developing sensitivities to adjacent and nonadjacent dependency patterns by computing adjacency and
non-adjacency facilitation scores. These scores were derived
by taking the reaction time (RT) to the first, non-predictable
targets as baseline and subtracting from it the RTs to the
predictable second and third targets, respectively. In this
paradigm, increasing sensitivity manifests itself in
increasing facilitation scores, averaged across each training
block.
In order to provide an opportunity for non-adjacent
dependency learning to develop, we used more training
trials than usual in this kind of study (two sessions on
successive days totaling over 1000 trials compared to
typical training regimes consisting of a single session under
500 trials). As in Misyak et al. (2010), the penultimate block
of each session featured only ungrammatical sequences in
which both previously trained adjacent and non-adjacent
pairings were violated. Because the first element in the
ungrammatical block was no longer predictive of the second
and third elements, the prediction-based benefits in RT
should be eliminated, thus leading to a drop in the
facilitation scores towards baseline in this block. The final
block of each session was a recovery block in which the
original pairings were reinstated. If participants had learned

the dependency patterns well, there should be a rebound in
the facilitation scores because the first element was again
predictive in this block. After completing the AGL-SRT
task, participants were asked to complete a prediction task
as well as a standard grammaticality judgment task.
Given that the probabilities used in this study favored
non-adjacent dependencies, one may perhaps expect better
non-adjacency than adjacency learning eventually.
However, the critical prediction concerns the learning time
course of the two patterns. As the current adjacent set size
was relatively small (and would not fall into the category of
"high variability" in Gómez's (2002) study), the adjacencyfirst view would predict that learners first focus on adjacent
dependencies and then on non-adjacent dependencies (if at
all). Therefore, according to this view, we should find an
early emergence of sensitivity to adjacent and a later
emergence of sensitivity to non-adjacent dependencies.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-two Dutch native speakers recruited from local
universities in Nijmegen, the Netherlands (mean age = 20.8,
SD = 2.2, 5 men) participated in exchange for monetary
compensation (8 Euros/hour).

Materials
Training materials consisted of spoken three-element strings
of Dutch pseudowords. In keeping with previous materials
for comparison purposes (Gómez, 2002), the first and third
element of the strings were monosyllabic (lin, pes, zol, taf,
bur, jom, mig, vun), whereas the second one was disyllabic
(namie, hufel, hagix, dazan, fenar, gunis, dosef, witus, sluro,
kapek, worat, ruxot). Assignment of tokens to target
elements was randomized across participants. The stimuli
were recorded by a female Dutch native speaker. The
average durations were 373 ms (SD = 48) for the
monosyllabic items and 546 ms (SD = 46) for the disyllabic
items.
The first and third element of the training strings formed
four fixed non-adjacent dependency pairs (a-b, c-d, e-f, and
g-h; non-adjacent transitional probability = 1.0). Similar to
Lany et al. (2007; Experiment 3), the non-adjacent
dependency pairs were divided into two subsets, each
sharing the same set of six intervening items in the second
position (aX1-6b and cX1-6d vs. eY1-6f and gY1-6h; adjacent
transitional probability = .17, see Figure 1). Therefore, for a
given participant, two non-adjacent dependency pairs (e.g.,
jom-mig and zol-vun) were only combined with one secondelement subset (e.g., namie, sluro, hagix, worat, ruxot, and
kapek), whereas the other two non-adjacent dependency
pairs (e.g., taf-bur and pes-lin) were only combined with the
remaining subset of second elements (e.g., hufel, fenar,
dosef, witus, dazan, and gunis).

	  
965

Subset 1!

a!
c!

Subset 2!

e!
g!

area containing the target as quickly and accurately as
possible. Immediately following the participants' response,
the second target was played and the participants made a
second mouse click response. The same procedure applied
to the third target, after which the current trial was brought
to an end. A different random order of trials was used for
each participant.

X1-6 !! b!
X1-6 !! d!
Y1-6 !! f!
Y1-6 !! h!

adjacent pairs!
nonadjacent pairs!

JOM!

NAMIE !

BUR!

PES!

HUFEL!

MIG!

Target 1!

jom!

Figure 1: Structure of the training materials.
On the computer screen, the participants saw written
versions of the targets along with three distractors drawn
from items at the same element position of the other
stimulus subset (e.g., only the second-element, but not the
first- or third-element items, from the other subset could
serve as distractors for a given second-element target). Each
pseudoword appeared equally often as a target and as a
distractor. For the ungrammatical block, both adjacent and
non-adjacent pairs were violated such that the second targets
were switched between subsets while the third targets
between pairs within the same subset (e.g., *aYd: jom-fenarvun, *eXh: taf-ruxot-lin).
For the prediction task, correct target elements were
presented together with distractors as in training (see
Procedure). For the grammaticality judgment task, half of
the strings contained intact adjacent and non-adjacent pairs
(e.g., aXb: jom-namie-mig), while the other half contained
intact adjacent but violated non-adjacent pairs with the third
elements being switched between subsets (e.g., *aXh: jomnamie-lin).

JOM!

NAMIE !

BUR!

PES!

HUFEL!

MIG!

Target 2!

namie!

JOM!

NAMIE !

BUR!

PES!

HUFEL!

MIG!

Target 3!

mig!

Figure 2: Example of a series of events in a training trial.
The gray arrows indicate the targets.
Following the training trials in the second session,
participants were told that the triplets heard on training trials
had followed certain patterns on which they would be tested
in two short tasks. In the prediction task, the same procedure
was followed as during training for the first two elements,
but for the third element the participants were asked to
select the appropriate target without any auditory
information. In the grammaticality judgment task, they
heard a stimulus triplet and responded by pressing one of
two keys to indicate whether or not it followed the
previously trained patterns. The materials were presented in
a different randomized order to each participant.

Procedure
Participants were tested in two sessions, with the second
session taking place within 24 +/-3 hours after the first. In
each session, participants went through six training blocks
of 96 trials each (4 non-local pairs x 6 local pairs x 4
repetitions), followed by an ungrammatical block of 24
trials (4 non-local pairs x 6 local pairs), and a recovery
block of 96 trials (4 non-local pairs x 6 local pairs x 4
repetitions). In the second session, they were also
administered two surprise tasks, a prediction task and a
grammaticality judgment task (24 trials each).
Similar to previous AGL-SRT studies (see Misyak et al.,
2010 for details), target items were presented along with
distractors in a rectangular grid display on the computer
screen (see Figure 2). The first, second, and third target
appeared in either the upper or lower row of the first,
second, and third column, respectively. Target positions
were counterbalanced such that each target was as likely to
occur in the upper as in the lower row. Each training trial
started with the presentation of a fixation cross in the center
of the computer screen for 750 ms. Then the visual display
was shown until the end of the trial. 250 ms after the onset
of the display, the first target was played. The participants
were asked to make a mouse click inside the rectangular

Results
Participants were 98% accurate on average (SD = 1.17) in
making mouse click responses during training. Correct
reaction times (RT) beyond 2000 ms were excluded from
analysis (0.20% of the data). As the auditory targets differed
in length, we corrected for length by performing a linear
regression predicting each participant's correct RTs from the
targets’ spoken durations (Ferreira & Clifton, 1986). We
then computed each participant's average residual RT per
block. Adjacency and non-adjacency facilitation scores were
computed by subtracting average second- and third-target
residual RTs, respectively, from first-target residual RTs for
each block and participant. Positive adjacency facilitation
scores indicate faster responses to the second than to the
first target. Likewise, positive non-adjacency facilitation
scores indicate faster responses to the third than to the first
target. A summary of the facilitation scores is shown in
Figure 3.

	  
966

the adjacent or non-adjacent dependencies. However in the
second session, clear evidence for non-adjacent dependency
learning emerged (last training vs. ungrammatical block: 49
ms facilitation; t (21) = 6.19; recovery vs. ungrammatical
block: 40 ms facilitation. t (21)=3.99, both ps < .001). The
facilitations scores for adjacent dependency learning were
likewise significant (last training vs. ungrammatical block:
24 ms, t (21) = 3.08, p < .01; recovery vs. ungrammatical
block: 16 ms, t (21)= 2.37, p < .03).
Although an earlier emergence of sensitivity to adjacent
dependencies was not evident in the online data averaged
across blocks, such a pattern might have emerged and then
faded extremely early during training, so that the adjacencyfirst pattern could be revealed only if the earliest training
trials were examined. To assess that possibility, we divided
the first training block into four sub-blocks (24 trials each)
and tracked adjacency and non-adjacency facilitation scores
across the sub-blocks. As Figure 4 shows, the data did not
support the adjacency-first hypothesis, as the adjacency
facilitation scores were overall lower than the nonadjacency facilitation scores (however, none of the
facilitation scores were significantly above the first-target
baseline in any of the sub-blocks).

Figure 3: Mean adjacency and non-adjacency facilitation
(msec) across training blocks and days (ungram =
ungrammatical block, rec = recovery block).
There were two clear patterns in the data. First, the two
facilitation curves showed remarkably similar increasing
trends across the grammatical training blocks (except for
block 6 in session 1, featuring an unexpected drop in
facilitation perhaps due to fatigue). Second, there was more
non-adjacency than adjacency facilitation, especially in the
second session. Results from a 2 (Type: adjacency vs. nonadjacency facilitation) x 2 (Day: 1 vs. 2) x 8 (Block: 1 to 8)
within-subject ANOVA on mean facilitation scores per
block confirmed that, overall, facilitation scores changed as
a function of blocks in both the training sessions (main
effect of Block, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected for violation
of sphericity assumption: F (4.72, 99.02) = 8.63, p < .001).
The overall amount of non-adjacency facilitation indeed
exceeded that of adjacency facilitation (19 ms difference,
main effect of Type: F (1, 21) = 10.49, p = .004), and this
difference was significantly larger in the second than in the
first training session (Type x Day interaction was
significant: F (1, 21) = 7.73, p = .01). Analyses of simple
effects showed that the difference between the adjacency
and non-adjacency facilitation scores was only marginally
significant in the first session (12 ms difference, p = .07),
but highly significant in the second session (25 ms
difference, p = .001). No other interaction effects were
significant.
To assess learning further, we focused on the final three
training blocks of each session and performed two planned
comparisons (last training vs. ungrammatical block, and
recovery vs. ungrammatical block) on the adjacency and
non-adjacency facilitation scores. Significantly greater
facilitation in the last training and recovery block compared
to that in the ungrammatical block would indicate that the
participants had acquired the trained patterns. In the first
session, neither the adjacency nor the non-adjacency
facilitation scores in the last training or recovery block
differed significantly from the score in the ungrammatical
block (ts ≤ 1), indicating that participants had not learned

Adjacency facilitation

Non-adjacency facilitation

30

Facilitation (msec)

20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
SUBBLOCK1

SUBBLOCK2

SUBBLOCK3

SUBBLOCK4

Figure 4: Mean adjacency and non-adjacency facilitation
(msec) across sub-blocks of block 1.
Participants scored an average of 64% correct (SD = 20.2)
on the prediction task and 62% correct (SD = 20.6) on the
judgment task. Consistent with the positive RT non-adjacent
dependency learning results in the second session,
performances were significantly above chance level (i.e.,
50%) on both tasks (t (21) = 3.34, p = .003, and 2.81, p =
.01, respectively).

Discussion
The participants acquired the adjacent dependencies, as
evidenced by the significantly greater facilitation in the last
training and recovery block compared to that in the
ungrammatical block in the second session. They also
acquired the non-adjacent dependencies, as evidenced by
the significant facilitation and accuracy results in the same

	  
967

session. Consistent with prior studies that trained
participants in one session only (e.g., Gómez, 2002), we
found no evidence of non-adjacent dependency learning in
the first session. The significant learning found in the
second session demonstrates that extended training is
worthwhile if the goal is to track gradual acquisition of
complex patterns.
In accordance with the higher informativeness of the nonadjacent statistics compared to the adjacent statistics used in
this study, the non-adjacent dependencies were learned
better than the adjacent ones. Importantly, at no point during
training was sensitivity to adjacent dependencies greater
than sensitivity to non-adjacent dependencies. Despite the
relatively small adjacent set size, participants did not first
focus on adjacent dependencies and then on non-adjacent
dependencies during learning. The current results therefore
do not support the adjacency-first view of non-adjacent
dependency learning (Gómez, 2002). Instead, they suggest
that adjacent and non-adjacent dependency learning
processes can run in parallel as learners are exposed to
strings containing learnable adjacent and non-adjacent
dependencies. It should, however, be noted that we used
quite different probabilities for the two dependency types,
much higher for non-adjacent than for adjacent
dependencies (in keeping with the smaller adjacent set size
conditions in Gómez, 2002). It remains to be seen whether
an adjacency-first bias would arise when the relative
strengths of the two dependency types are more comparable.
An issue that is yet to be settled is whether adjacent and
non-adjacent dependency learning involves the same or
different mechanisms. In a brain-imaging AGL study,
Friederici, Bahlmann, Heim, Schubotz, and Anwander
(2006) found additional recruitment of Broca’s area (BA
44/45) in the processing of trained sequences that contained
hierarchically nested non-adjacent dependencies (e.g.,
A1A2B2B1), as compared to the brain activation pattern for
the processing of trained sequences containing adjacent
dependencies (e.g., A1B1A2B2). This suggests a specific brain
area, and presumably a separate mechanism, for the
computation of hierarchical non-adjacent dependencies (see
also Bahlmann, Schubotz, & Friederici, 2008, but see de
Vries, Monaghan, Knecht, & Zwitserlood, 2008).
Weakening that claim, however, are convergent findings
from a number of recent studies showing that Broca’s area
is also engaged in artificial grammar learning that does not
involve
hierarchical
non-adjacent
dependencies
(Christiansen, Kelly, Schillcock, & Greenfield, 2010;
Petersson, Folia, & Hagoort, in press; Uddén et al., 2008).
The time course data in our study do not reveal whether
learning the adjacent and non-adjacent dependencies
engaged one learning mechanism, which simultaneously
extracted both patterns, or whether distinct learning
mechanisms were involved. To explore the relationships
between adjacent and non-adjacent dependency learning in a
different way, we computed by-subject online learning
scores using the RT facilitation in the first training block as
baseline and subtracting it from the facilitation obtained in

the last training block of the second session (block 14; see
also Misyak et al., 2010). We found a strong positive
correlation between the adjacency and non-adjacency online
learning scores across participants (r = .78, p < .001, see
Figure 5)1. While the absence of a correlation or a negative
correlation would have pointed towards distinct learning
mechanisms, the presence of correlation cannot be
unambiguously interpreted. It certainly suggests a shared
learning mechanism, but it could also be the case that the
acquisition of adjacent and of non-adjacent dependencies
both depends on a trait or ability that was not assessed in
our study (see, e.g., Kaufman, DeYoung, Gray, Jiménez,
Brown, & Mackintosh, 2010).

Adjacency learning (msec)

150
125
100
75
50
25
0

r = .78
p < .001

-25
-50
0

25

50

75

100 125 150 175

Non-adjacency learning (msec)
Figure 5: Correlation between adjacency and non-adjacency
learning.
Finally, we found better learning in the second than in the
first training session. This is somewhat reminiscent of
consolidation effects found in other verbal learning tasks
(e.g., Davies & Gaskell, 2009; Dumay & Gaskell, 2007),
though we can, of course, not separate the effects of
increased practice and memory consolidation over time nor
do we know whether sleep was essential for obtaining any
consolidation effects. The finding that learning increments
in the second session were larger for non-adjacent than for
adjacent dependencies may point towards the involvement
of different learning or consolidation mechanisms.
Alternatively, the divergence in learning rates in the second
session might simply reflect cumulative differences with
extended exposure that stemmed directly from the
difference in statistical strength for the adjacent vs. non1

A similar correlation obtained (r = .74, p < .001) when
adjacency and non-adjacency learning scores were computed
without involving the common first element in the baseline, by
subtracting second-element residual RTs at the final training block
from those at the first training block (adjacency learning), and by
subtracting third-element residual RTs at the final from those at the
first block (non-adjacency learning).

	  
968

adjacent dependencies. To assess these options future
studies are required, where one could, for instance,
systematically vary the retention intervals between training
sessions, the timing of the sessions (with/without
intervening sleep), and the adjacent and non-adjacent
dependencies in the training sequences.
In sum, the current study demonstrates the usefulness of
obtaining online data for assessment of statistical learning
(see also Misyak & Christiansen, 2010; Misyak et al.,
2010). Through this approach, we obtained compelling
evidence for simultaneous adjacent and non-adjacent
dependency learning in an extended artificial grammar
learning task. Thus, our results suggest that statistical
learning is both more powerful, making it possible to learn
multiple types of dependencies simultaneously, and more
robust, allowing non-adjacent dependencies to be learned
without high adjacent-set variability, than previously
thought. This provides further support for the hypothesis
that statistical learning may play a crucial role in the
acquisition of long-distance dependencies in natural
language.

non-human grammars: Functional localization and
structural connectivity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103, 2458–2463.
Gómez, R. L. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant
structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431–436.
Kaufman, S. B., DeYoung, C. G., Gray, J. R., Jimenez, L.,
Brown, J., & Mackintosh, N. (2010). Implicit learning as
an ability. Cognition, 116, 321-340.
Lany, J., & Gómez, R.L. (2008). 12-Month-Olds Benefit
from Prior Experience in Statistical Learning.
Psychological Science, 19, 1274-1252.
Lany, J., & Gómez, R.L., & Gerken, L.A. (2007). The role
of prior experience in language acquisition. Cognitive
Science. 31, 481-507.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Rao, S. B., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule learning by seven-month-old infants.
Science, 283(5398), 77-80.
Misyak, J. B., & Christiansen, M. H. (2010). When ‘more’
in statistical learning means ‘less’ in language: individual
differences in predictive processing of adjacent
dependencies. Proceedings of The 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2686 –
2691).
Misyak, J.B., Christiansen, M.H. & Tomblin, J.B. (2010).
On-line individual differences in statistical learning
predict language processing. Frontiers in Psychology.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00031.
Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Learning at a
distance I. Statistical learning of non-adjacent
dependencies. Cognitive Psychology, 48(2), 127−162.
Onnis, L. Christiansen, M., Chater, N. & Gómez, R. (2003)
Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential learning:
Evidence from artificial language learning. Proceedings
of The 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. (pp. 886-891). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Petersson, K. M., Folia, V., Hagoort, P. (in press). What
artificial grammar learning reveals about the neurobiology
of syntax. Brain and Language.
Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical language learning:
Mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 12, 110–114.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Seidenberg, M. S., & Elman, J. L. (1999). Do infants learn
grammar with algebra or statistics? Science, 284, 434435.
Uddén, J., Folia, V., Forkstam, C., Ingvar, M., Fernández,
G., Overeem, S., Van Elswijk, G., Hagoort, P., &
Petersson, K. M. (2008). The inferior frontal cortex in
artificial syntax processing: An rTMS study. Brain
Research, 1224, 69-78.
Yang, C.D. (2004). Universal grammar, statistics or both?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 451–456.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Katrin Scheibe and Ceci
Verbaatschoot for assisting with the preparation of the
materials and with participant testing. We also thank three
anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on an
earlier version of this paper.

References
Bahlmann, J., Schubotz, R. I., & Friederici, A. D. (2008).
Hierarchical artificial grammar processing engages
Broca‘s area. NeuroImage, 42, 525–534.
Christiansen, M. H., Kelly, L.M., Shillock, R., &
Greenfield, K. (2010). Impaired artificial grammar
learning in agrammatism. Cognition, 116(3), 382-393.
Creel, S. C., Newport, E. L., & Aslin, R. N. (2004). Distant
melodies:
Statistical
learning
of
non-adjacent
dependencies in tone sequences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30(5),
1119−1130.
Davis, M. H. & Gaskell, M. G. (2009). A complementary
systems account of word learning: neural and behavioural
evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B, 364, 3773-3800.
De Vries, M. H., Monaghan, P., Knecht, S., & Zwitserlood,
P. (2008). Syntactic structure and artificial grammar
learning: The learnability of embedded hierarchical
structures. Cognition, 107, 763–774.
Dumay N., Gaskell M. G. (2007). Sleep-associated changes
in the mental representation of spoken words.
Psychological Science, 18, 35–39.
Ferreira, F., & Clifton, C. (1986). The independence of
syntactic processing. Journal of Memory and Language,
25(3), 348-368.
Friederici, A. D., Bahlmann, J., Heim, S., Schubotz, R. I., &
Anwander, A. (2006). The brain differentiates human and

	  
969

