UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Capital and Language Acquisition during Study Abroad

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bm3c4kj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Smith, Matthew
Giraud-Carrier, Christophe
Dewey, Dan
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Capital and Language Acquisition during Study Abroad
M. Smith (m.smithworx.com) and C. Giraud-Carrier (cgc@cs.byu.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602 USA

D. Dewey (ddewey@byu.edu), S. Ring (ring.spencer84@gmail.com) and D. Gore (d.gore@byu.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602 USA
Abstract
We study the role of social capital in language acquisition during study abroad. Using data collected from 204 participants
in Japanese study abroad programs, we show that students who
leverage social capital through bridging relationships feel they
achieve higher levels of language improvement. Furthermore,
an analysis of the topics participants discuss with locals suggests that there are significant differences between students
who have a tendency to build close-knit networks and students
who cast a broader net.
Keywords: Social Capital; Second Language Acquisition;
Study Abroad.

Introduction
Research in second language acquisition during study abroad
has dealt with a number of issues including language use, proficiency development (Badstübner & Ecke, 2009; Mendelson,
2004), and language socialization (Fraser, 2002; Campbell,
1996). Language socialization involves becoming integrated
into a community that allows one to practice the second language in meaningful social contexts (Wang, 2010). Language
socialization is a complex process affected by a range of variables, including motivation, attitudes, interlocutor attributes,
and a range of other variables (Isabellı́-Garcia, 2006), and the
few studies conducted to date suggest that socialization can
affect language acquisition (Mendelson, 2004; Whitworth,
2006).
One particularly interesting measure of social networks,
which has been popularized and aggressively pursued in the
past couple of decades, is social capital (Coleman, 1988; Lin,
2001; Putnam, 2000). Unlike most other forms of capital that
tend to emphasize what people possess individually, social
capital is an inherently social measure that focuses on the relationships that exist among people. Indeed, social capital
attempts to quantify the value of such relationships in achieving some individual or group benefit based on the resources
present in the underlying network (Borgatti, Jones, & Everett,
1998; Adler & Kwon, 2002).
An analysis of language acquisition during study abroad
from the social capital perspective is unprecedented within
the existing body of second language acquisition and study
abroad research. Although social capital might be more traditionally thought of by some as future employment opportunities or the capacity to secure social favors, an individual’s ability to acquire and utilize social capital during study
abroad would appear to be consequential in second language
acquisition, primarily as a means of exposure to the second

language. From this, it is clear that an exploration of second
language acquisition and study abroad in the context of social
capital merits the critical consideration of those researching
second language acquisition and language socialization. We
present one such exploration here for a Japanese study abroad
program involving over 200 participants.
The paper is organized as follows. We first provide a brief
overview of our social capital framework and show how it is
specialized to the context of our language acquisition during
study abroad analysis. We then present our data and methodology, and show how a number of indicators such as perceived
language proficiency and conversation topics vary based on
students’ social behavior. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the novel insight into language acquisition provided
by the social capital perspective.

Social Capital Framework
Space does not permit us to give a full account of our computational framework for social capital. We give only a brief
description of its main components and state the simplifying
assumptions we make to apply it here. Further details about
the framework are in (Smith, Giraud-Carrier, & Purser, 2009;
Smith & Giraud-Carrier, 2010).
Social capital is grounded in relationships, individuals’ attributes, and available resources. To exploit this information,
we find it useful to distinguish between two types of relationships among individuals, as follows.
• An explicit connection links one individual to another
based on some purposive action (e.g., sending an email,
visiting) or a well-defined relationship (e.g., being a friend
of, collaborating with). Individuals thus linked are aware
of the explicit connections among them.
• An implicit affinity connects individuals together based on
loosely defined affinities, or inherent similarities, such as
similar hobbies or shared interests. Individuals may not
be aware of the similarities in attitudes and behaviors that
exist among them.
We call explicit social networks (ESNs), social networks
built from explicit connections and implicit affinity networks (IANs), social networks arising from implicit affinities (Smith, Giraud-Carrier, & Judkins, 2007). Social capital
is naturally interested in implicit affinities, since it clearly has
some relation to shared affiliations or activities among individuals (Belliveau, O’Reilly, & Wade, 1996). On the other

2030

hand, social capital can really only accrue, or be realized,
when individuals are aware of it, that is, when they establish
explicit connections among themselves. It follows that hybrid
networks, i.e., networks that include both implicit affinities
and explicit connections, play a key role in the definition and
analysis of social capital.
Note that in a strict sense, social capital is only realized
once actions are taken and their result evidences the presence
of said social capital. Hence, typical studies of social capital
are retrospective. Within our framework, however, we wish to
use the notion of social capital to reason about how one could
leverage one’s relations. For example, given that X and I are
friends, that X is a headhunter and that I am looking for a job,
I would probably want to ask X to help me find a job. While
evidence of any social capital will truly become apparent only
if and when X chooses to help me, it seems most reasonable
for me to try to take advantage of my friendship with X. For
simplicity here, we equate the presence of an explicit link
with the presence of social capital.
We also find it useful to adopt Putnam’s high-level dichotomy of social capital into bonding social capital and
bridging social capital to provide a general characterization of
individuals’ (here, learners’) behaviors (Putnam, 2000; Putnam & Feldstein, 2003). Bonding refers to the tendency that
individuals may have to associate with others who are similar to them, leading to homogeneous groups. Bridging occurs when individuals associate with others who are not like
them, leading to heterogeneous groups. The types of links
connecting individuals give rise to bonding and/or bridging
social capital, as follows.
1. Implicit affinities only. In this case, the individuals have
much in common (e.g., similar occupation or hobbies) but
they are unaware of it. If they were to connect explicitly,
they would be bonding, but since they have not yet, we say
that there is only potential for bonding social capital.
2. Implicit affinities and explicit connections. In this case,
the potential for bonding social capital is now realized as
similar individuals connect to one another explicitly.
3. No implicit affinities and no explicit connections. In this
case, the individuals have nothing in common and they are
unaware of each other. If they were to connect explicitly,
they would be bridging, but since they have not yet, we say
that there is only potential for bridging social capital.
4. No implicit affinities but explicit connections. In this case,
the dissimilar individuals are now connected to one another
(e.g., colleagues collaborating across disciplines or members of a church choir). Hence, we say that there is realized
bridging social capital.
The foregoing treats affinities and explicit connections as aggregate binary entities that are either present or absent. In
practice, of course, these links may exist with varying degrees
of strength. For example, two individuals may have some

things in common and others not. Shared attributes, attitudes
and behaviors represent opportunities for bonding, while differences among the same represent opportunities for bridging. Thus, there is generally both bonding and bridging social
capital between individuals. Furthermore, while it seems appropriate for implicit affinities to be “undirected,” since two
people either share or do not share a specific affinity, it is
not so for explicit edges. Indeed, it is clear that the value
of some (explicit) relationships is not necessarily reciprocal
and may vary among participants. For example, one person
may consider another person as their best friend, while that
other person may look at the first as only a good friend. Thus,
our framework recognizes that the amount of social capital
an individual i may realize from a relationship with another
individual j is not predicated upon the value that i places in
the relationship, but rather upon the value that j places in it.
While i may think highly of that connection, for example in
the context of obtaining a job reference from j, the reference
will only be as strong as j thinks of i, and not the other way.
We can now turn to a formal account of social capital in
hybrid networks. Let sIAN
∈ [0, 1] be the strength of the imij
plicit affinity, or measure of similarity, between individuals i
and j. It follows that sIAN
stands for the potential for bondij
ing that exists between i and j, while its reciprocal, 1 − sIAN
ij ,
stands for the potential for bridging that exists between i and
j. Similarly, let sESN
be the strength of the explicit connecij
tion between individuals i and j. sESN
may be as simple as 1
ij
or 0, to reflect the presence or absence of a link, but may also
range over [0,1] to capture degrees of connectivity (e.g., best
friend vs. casual friend vs. acquaintance). Finally, let Ind be
the set of individuals in the network.
The bonding social capital realized by a node i, when (explicitly) connecting with node j, is naturally given as the
product of the strength of the implicit affinity between i
and j by the strength of the explicit edge connecting j to i:
ESN
sIAN
ij sji . As expected, if j is unaware of i, even when i may
be aware of (and possibly even count on) j, there is no social
capital available for i from that relationship. The (realized)
bonding social capital of an individual i is then the sum of
its realized bonding social capital with all other individuals.
That is,
ESN
b(i) = ∑ sIAN
ij sji
j∈Ind, j6=i

Likewise, the (realized) bridging social capital of an individual i is the sum of its realized bridging social capital with
all other individuals. That is,
br(i) =

∑

ESN
(1 − sIAN
ij )sji

j∈Ind, j6=i

Methodology
Participants were 204 former recipients of Bridging Scholarships for study abroad in Japan (101 male and 103 female,
average age 21.3 years, SD = 2.90). These students had studied Japanese for an average of 2.07 years (SD = 1.87) prior

2031

to their departure for Japan. They spent an average of 8.4
months (SD = 3.70) in Japan, taking 13.2 hours per week
(SD = 5.27) of Japanese language courses in 38 language programs across 22 different cities.
To capture learners’ perspectives regarding gains in speaking proficiency over study abroad, we had students complete a Then-Now self-assessment (Rohs & Lagone, 1997),
based on an oft-used self-assessment instrument designed by
Clark (1981). Then-Now measurement is common in educational research as a means of measuring the effectiveness
of program interventions and although not as objective as
traditional standardized tests of language proficiency, results
correlate at moderate degrees with such standardized measures and yield highly reliable results (Dewey, 2002; Lam &
Bengo, 2003). Our Then-Now survey presents tasks based
on the ACTFL Speaking Proficiency Guidelines (BreinderSanders, Lowe, Miles, & Swender, 2000) ranging from
Novice-Level to Superior-Level, and asks learners to rate
their ability on a 1 (not at all able) to 5 (quite easily) scale.
Then-Now reliability estimates were high (Cronbach’s Alpha=.97 for Then and .96 for Now).
We measured language use via a web-based version of the
Language Contact Profile (LCP), a survey created by Freed et
al. (Freed, Dewey, Segalowitz, & Halter, 2004). Social network information was obtained via a thirteen-question version of the Study Abroad Social Interaction Questionnaire
(SASIQ) developed by Dewey et al. (2011). The SASIQ consists of items designed to allow the computation of various
social network measures, such as size, intensity and dispersion (Scott, 2000). The version of the SASIQ we used also
contained items asking learners to identify their friends together with the topics about which they spoke with each one
of them. The social network for each participant is thus best
represented as a star network (see Figure 1), where the central node is the participant, and the nodes around the periphery represent individuals listed by the participant as friends.
The survey allowed for a maximum of 20 friends, but only 56
participants listed 20 friends.

Figure 1: Participants’ Social Network

Social Capital for Language Acquisition
Due to the nature of the application, we must specialize our
general social capital framework. In particular, we make the
following assumptions. (Note: we are only interested in realized social capital, so there is no need to consider implicit
links with those not listed as friends.)
1. The only explicit links are between participants and their
listed friends. These links are assumed to be undirected
and of strength 1, that is,
sESN
= sESN
=
ij
ji



1
0

for each participant i and friend j
otherwise

2. Implicit links are determined only by the topics discussed
with friends. Indeed, we have no other information about
friends that would allow further affinities to be considered.
Each topic of discussion is a possible affinity between individuals.
3. The set Ti of topics discussed by Xi with all of its listed
friends is the complete set of possible affinities among
them, i.e., we assume that the friends have no other topics of conversation than those pursued with Xi .
4. If Ti is the set of all topics discussed by Xi and Tij ⊂ Ti is
the set of topics that Xi discusses with X j , then
(a) both Xi and X j are interested in the topics in Tij , so that
the topics in Tij make up the implicit affinities between
Xi and X j , and
|T |

(b) the ratio |Tiji | can be used as a measure of the strength of
the affinity between Xi and X j , that is,
sIAN
ij =

| Tij |
| Ti |

Bonding and bridging social capitals are then computed as
per the general framework’s equations. Intuitively, if Xi discusses similar topics with all of his/her friends (i.e., Tij ' Ti
for all X j with whom Xi is connected), then Xi has a tendency
to bonding, while if Xi discusses different topics with different friends (i.e., Tij 6= Tik for X j 6= Xk ), then Xi has a tendency
to bridging.
The reader may have noticed that our definition of bridging social capital may be impacted by the number of friends a
participant has. Indeed, there is a strong correlation (r = 0.95,
p < .0001) between these two quantities as shown in Figure 2.
However, we wish to point out that, in general, bridging social capital is a finer and richer measure as manifested by the
vertical dispersion of points on the figure. One extreme case
is highlighted by the points labeled a and b. Both of these
have 17 friends, and hence would be considered the same under that measure. Yet, b has high bridging, while a has very
low bridging.

2032

60
50

15

40
30
0

10

20

Language Improvement

10
5

Bridging

a

0

b
5

10

15

Bridgers

20

Bonders
Group

Number of Friends

Figure 2: Bridging vs. Number of Friends

Figure 3: Influence of Social Capital on Language Improvement

Summary of Findings
average participants within the bonders group had discussed
7 different topics, while those within the bridgers group discussed 11 topics (4 more).

In this section, we show how learners’ self-reported language
proficiency and conversation topics vary based on their social
behavior.
The aggregate language improvement score is the sum of
the differences in the pre- and post- of the 21 self-evaluated
language scores. For our participants, the language improvement scores range from -4 to +59.
Rather than carry two scores, one for bonding social capital
and one for bridging social capital, we grouped participants
into “bonders” and “bridgers” based on their tendency to either behavior. That tendency was computed as the difference
between their bonding and bridging social capital values. Individuals with values greater than (or equal to) the mean tendency value were labeled as “bonders”, while those with values less than the mean were labeled as “bridgers.”

Table 1: Number of Conversation Topics by Social Capital
Group
Group
Bonders
Bridgers

Self-Perceived Gains in Language Proficiency
Figure 3 shows the box-plots comparing the bonders and
bridgers groups, with respect to their language improvement.
ANCOVA results indicated a significant effect of social capital (bridging vs. bonding) on language improvement (gains
from pre- to post-) after controlling for pre-departure proficiency estimate and time in Japan (both found to be predictors of gains in studies cited previously), F(1, 201) = 12.53,
p < .0001. Bridgers (N = 90, M = 26.4, SD = 12.4) fared
significantly better than bonders (N = 114, M = 21.9, SD =
12.1).

Topic and Group Analysis
Table 1 shows the number of topics used within each of the
groups, the number of participants, and the average number
of topics that each participant used within each group. On

Topics
786
992

Participants
114
90

Topics / Participant
6.89
11.02

Although each topic was discussed by at least one person within each group, some topics were discussed more frequently by participants within each group. Figure 4 shows
each topic and which group discussed it most frequently. The
upper region of the plot shows the topics that bridgers used
more often than bonders, while the lower region shows the
topics that bonders used more often than bridgers. The scale
represents how many more bridgers/bonders used the given
topic. For example, the “life views and ideals” topic (in the
upper region of the plot) was discussed by 20 more bridgers
than bonders. On the other hand, the “business and economics” topic (in the lower region of the plot) was discussed
by five more bonders than bridgers. Topics having the same
difference in participants are separated by a slash (‘/’).
According to this ranking, the most disparate topics were
“many topics” and “academics”. The two topics used more
frequently by bridgers are “many topics” and “random topics”, which suggest that students within this group talked
about a larger variety of topics than others. On the opposite
end, it seems that “academics” is a safe topic for any student

2033

30
25
20
15

many topics
random topics

life views and ideals
literature and art
conversation about each other
language / smoking and drinking

fashion / parties and night life / relationships and people
health / work and careers
geography / hobbies and entertainment
technology
outdoors and nature

Bridgers

confrontation / home
culture

Bonders

0

5

everyday conversation
current events and society / spiritual topics and religion
joking / shopping

lifestyles
business and economics

academics

15

10

5

Participant Difference

10

cuisine

Figure 4: Bridger vs. Bonder Topics
as it is discussed in classes and is something that could possibly even limit who they speak to.

on a variety of topics in formal and informal settings from
both concrete and abstract perspectives,” whereas learners
one level below (Advanced) “cannot sustain performance at
that [abstract] level across a variety of topics,” but “are more
comfortable discussing a variety of topics concretely” (pp.
14-15). The complexity and variety of topics learners are able
to control in the second language decreases with lower level
abilities, a pattern in line with the connections between topic
range and perceived proficiency level in our research.
This work also has implications for pre-departure preparation. If students are better prepared both linguistically and
mentally to engage in a variety of topics while abroad, their
chances of making gains while abroad are likely to improve.
Those who practice a variety of topics to the extent that
they are able to participate in discussions even haltingly prior
to going abroad are more likely to be able to bridge while
abroad, discussing a variety of topics with a variety of people (DeKeyser, 2007) and taking fuller advantage of a setting
where “perhaps the most crucial intervention is to give [students] assignments that force them to interact meaningfully
with [locals] and overcome their fear of speaking” (p. 218).
Overcoming this fear of speaking may have also been partially responsible for the bridgers’ ability to discuss a variety
of topics in the second language. In this study we did not
measure personality–a weakness we are addressing in followup research, where we have collected data investigating the
roles of personality, motivation, and affective variables in the
creation of social capital during study abroad. Naiman and his
colleagues (1996) observed that extroversion and sociability
are important in learning one’s second language. It is possible that highly extroverted learners are more likely to discuss
a variety of (often less familiar) topics than less extroverted
learners. We hope to elucidate the role of personality in our
ongoing and future work.

Discussion
The above analysis highlights the potential of social capital as
an explanatory variable in study abroad research. While factors such as time abroad, pre-departure proficiency, and grammatical knowledge have received relatively large amounts
of attention in study abroad research (Davidson, 2010), social capital and its role in social networking have yet to be
explored. Previous studies have shown that developing social networks with native speakers while abroad via volunteer work, part-time employment, club membership, etc. can
facilitate language acquisition (Isabellı́-Garcia, 2006; Whitworth, 2006). Our research adds to this knowledge by demonstrating that it may not simply be a matter of developing social
networks, but also bridging with others by conversing about
a range of topics.
The ACTFL Speaking Proficiency Guidelines (BreinderSanders et al., 2000) contain a number of descriptions of
higher levels of proficiency that indicate learners who wish to
become more proficient can benefit from discussing a range
of topics. For example, learners at the Superior level are expected to “participate fully and effectively in conversations

Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has explored social capital as it pertains to second language acquisition. Our framework has allowed us to consider participants’ language socialization according to their bridging and bonding social capital. By this,
we have attempted to assess whether bridging or bonding better predicts improvement in language skills. This method of
analysis is valuable from a social capital perspective, as increased language abilities can potentially open doors to new
venues for relationship development. Also, the results we
have presented confirm the notion that social capital, in terms
of bridging and bonding, can provide important insights into
language socialization and acquisition.
The information we base our conclusions on is limited to
the conversation topics reported by our participants in the survey heretofore discussed. We are currently engaged in additional research investigating the nature of conversations learners have (length and type of discourse, etc.). Additional work
might also look at other forms of data or investigate if similar trends explain connections between language socialization

2034

and acquisition that occurs via the Internet. Surely, there are a
multitude of potential environments in which the implications
of this model can be observed that have yet to be considered.

Acknowledgments
Data collection for this research was funded by a grant from
the U.S. Department of Education (International Research
and Studies Program, P017A080087).

References
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S.-W. (2002, January). Social Capital:
Prospects for a New Concept [Accepted Paper Series]. The
Academy of Management Review, 27(1), 17.
Badstübner, T., & Ecke, P. (2009). Student expectations,
motivations, target language use, and perceived learning
progress in a summer study abroad program in germany.
Die Unterrichtspraxis/ Teaching German, 42(1), 41-49.
Belliveau, M., O’Reilly, C. I., & Wade, J. (1996). Social
capital at the top: Effects of social similarity and status
on CEO compensation. Academy of Management Journal,
39(6), 1568-1593.
Borgatti, S. P., Jones, C., & Everett, M. G. (1998, 2). Network
measures of social capital. Connections, 21(2), 27-36.
Breinder-Sanders, K., Lowe, P., Miles, J., & Swender, E.
(2000). ACTFL proficiency guidelines: Speaking, revised
1999. Foreign Language Annals, 33(1), 13-18.
Campbell, C. (1996). Socializing with the teachers and prior
language learning experience: A diary study. In K. Bailey & D. Nunan (Eds.), Voices from the classroom (p. 201223). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, J. (1981). Language. In T. Barrows (Ed.), College
students knowledge and beliefs: A survey of global understanding. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human
capital. American Journal of Sociology, 94, S95–S120.
Davidson, D. (2010). Study abroad: When, how long, and
with what results? new data from the Russian front. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 6-26.
DeKeyser, R. (2007). Study abroad as foreign language
practice. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.), Practice in a second language: Perspectives from applied linguistics and cognitive
psychology (p. 208-226). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dewey, D. (2002). Self-assessment: Possible uses in a
standards-based classroom. Presentation given at the Annual Convention of the American Council on the Teaching
of Foreign Languages (ACTFL), Salt Lake City, UT.
Dewey, D., Bown, J., & Eggett, D. (2011). Japanese language
proficiency, social networking, and language use during
study abroad: Learners’ perspectives. Under Review.
Fraser, C. (2002). Study abroad: An attempt to measure the
gains. German as a Foreign Language Journal, 1, 45-65.
Freed, B., Dewey, D., Segalowitz, N., & Halter, R. (2004).
The language contact profile. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 26, 349-356.

Isabellı́-Garcia, C. (2006). Study abroad social networks,
motivation, and attitudes: Implications for second language
acquisition. In M. Dufon & E. Churchill (Eds.), Language
learners in study abroad contexts (p. 231-258). Clevedon,
UK: Multilingual Matters.
Lam, T., & Bengo, P. (2003). A comparison of three retrospective self-reporting methods of measuring change in
instructional practice. American Journal of Evaluation,
24(1), 65-80.
Lin, N. (2001). Social capital: A theory of social structure
and action. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Mendelson, V. (2004). Spain or bust? assessment and
student perceptions of out-of-class contact and oral proficiency in a study abroad context. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Paper AAI3136758.
Naiman, N., Fröhlich, M., Stern, H., & Todesco, A. (1996).
The good language learner. Toronto: The Ontario Institute
for Studies in Education.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: the collapse and revival of american community. New York, NY, USA: Simon
& Schuster.
Putnam, R. D., & Feldstein, L. M. (2003). Better together:
Restoring the american community. New York, NY, USA:
Simon & Schuster.
Rohs, F., & Lagone, C. (1997). Increased accuracy in measuring leadership impacts. Journal of Leadership Studies,
4(1), 150-158.
Scott, J. P. (2000). Social network analysis: A handbook.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Ltd; 2nd edition.
Smith, M., & Giraud-Carrier, C. (2010). Bonding vs. bridging
social capital: A case study in twitter. In Proceedings of
the 2nd international symposium on social intelligence and
networking (p. 385-392).
Smith, M., Giraud-Carrier, C., & Judkins, B. (2007). Implicit Affinity Networks. In Proceedings of the 17th annual
workshop on information technologies and systems (p. 16).
Smith, M., Giraud-Carrier, C., & Purser, N. (2009). Implicit
affinity networks and social capital. Information Technology and Management, 10(2–3), 123–134.
Wang, C. (2010). Toward a second language socialization
perspective: Issues in study abroad research. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 50-63.
Whitworth, K. (2006). Access to learning during study
abroad: The roles of identity and subject positioning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The Pennsylvania State
University.

2035

