UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Space, Time and Causality: Some Neural Observations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9pc338q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Chatterjee, Anjan

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Space, Time and Causality: Some Neural Observations
Anjan Chatterjee
University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, PA 19104
Abstract: Knowledge of events involves understanding the way that objects occupy space, exist in time, and relate
to each other. I will consider behavioral, fMRI and lesion studies that explore how space, time and causality are
structured and interact in our brains. Tentatively, I propose the following. 1) The perception and conception of
space has a parallel organizational structure. Evidence for this claim comes from the finding that the distinction
between path and manner of motion as expressed linguistically is also processed with an analogous dorsal ventral
neural organization. 2) Perception of space and time can be tightly linked. Behavioral data show that we are
spatial-temporal synaesthetes. The perception of spatial distance and the perception of temporal duration interact
highly. 3) The right hemisphere is biased to process space and the left to process time despite bilateral overlap in
neural underpinnings of these processes. This assertion is based on data from size discrimination and temporal order
judgment tasks, which we regard as markers of space and time granularity. The hypothesis also bears out in data
examining the contributions of space and time to perceptual causality. 4) Time, compared to space, has a privileged
relationship to causality. In making judgments about perceptual causality, people are more sensitive to temporal
offsets than to spatial deviations. When listening to short narratives with sequential events, the neural circuits
engaged by causality subsumes neural circuits engaged by time much more so than the neural circuits engaged by
space.
Investigating interactions between space, time, and causality can reveal the rich texture of events.

686

