UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Cognition Adapts to Social Context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d27v9gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Duran, Nicholas
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Cognition Adapts to Social Context
Nicholas D. Duran (nduran@memphis.edu)

Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)

Department of Psychology, The University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, 38152
Abstract
We present a dynamical systems model that captures human
perspective-taking behavior in a visuospatial mental rotation
task. The task requires participants to interpret an ambiguous
request for a visual referent, either by taking their own perspective (egocentric; “the referent is on my right”) or the perspective of the requester (other-centric; “the referent is on your
right”). Our primary interest lies in how perspective-taking behavior and spatial cognition adapt to socially-driven information. To do so, we manipulate whether the participant shares
the same social status as their assumed interaction partner. We
report critical influences of social role on response choice and
on the processing demands required to enact the response. Furthermore, we discuss these results in the context of our computational model, showing that simple socially-induced constraints can produce rich behavioral patterns.
Keywords: social perspective-taking; visuospatial processing;
social roles; dynamical systems model

Introduction
In this paper we present a human experiment and computational model that demonstrate a simple message: Social and
spatial cognition may interact in deep and interesting ways. It
is already known that spatial cognition is used on a regular basis during linguistic interaction. For example, if seated across
from another person at a dinner table, instructions to pass the
salt may require mindful preparation, noting the relative position of sender and receiver in order to disambiguate spatial
perspectives. Previous work has shown how perspectives are
coordinated actively during linguistic interaction. In this paper, we show that the connection between social and spatial
processing may be deeper: For whom you are retrieving the
salt may influence underlying spatial perspective-taking processing (e.g., an authority figure vs. someone of the same
social status). In this paper we illustrate, using a dynamical
systems model, that spatial cognition adapts in this way to
social status. And in a human experiment, we show that this
intuition bears out in real human performance.

Background
During linguistic interaction, a primary goal is to understand
and to be understood. To do so, language users are likely
to consider what another knows or is likely to know, as well
as their needs or abilities, i.e., “common ground,” to tailor
messages that will maximize mutual understanding (Brennan,
Galati, & Kuhlen, 2010; Clark, 1996). In doing so, speakers draw on a variety of pragmatic and contextual sources
of information, as in whether their partner is young or old
(Newman-Norlund et al., 2009; Horton & Spieler, 2007), or
comes from the same geographic region (Isaacs & Clark,
1987). By doing so, partner cues allow for more fine-tuned
expectations in how to best adapt to unique audiences (Fussell
& Krauss, 1992)

One cue that is easily tracked is a person’s social role.
Social roles have been shown to be powerful memory cues
in remembering who said what in a conversation (Senay &
Keysar, 2009; Stangor, Lynch, Duan, & Glass, 1992), and are
also responsible for source misattributions where statements
from people of the same race or gender are often confused
(Senay & Keysar, 2009). These studies suggest that expectations based on role are used to predict what another knows, or
what perspective they are likely to take. Indeed, even in culturally imposed roles, as in between a boss and a employee,
subordinates are quite accurate in gauging an authority’s internal thoughts and feelings, and adjusting their own behavior
to better accommodate the authority’s perceived needs (Snodgrass, 1992).
Because social role is a categorical distinction that one either possesses or does not, it is a salient constraint on linguistic behavior, and is similar to cues of a statistical, phonological, or prosodic nature found in probabilistic models of
sentence processing (MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg,
1994). Accordingly, being exposed to simple, often single “bits” of social information can easily guide perspectivetaking modes of responding (see Brennan et al., 2010; Galati
& Brennan, 2010).
To explore how partner information can influence both human and model spatial cognition, we developed a spatial
perspective-taking task, motivated by Schober (1993), that allows systematic manipulation of the social role of a virtual
partner. The task simulates a hypothetical interaction where a
person, standing around a table, is asked by someone else for
one of two objects laid out on the table. If the person making the request (i.e., speaker) says, “Give me the one on the
right”, and is standing directly across from the seated person
(i.e., addressee), the proper response is ambiguous. Does the
addressee assume their “right” (egocentric) or the speakers
“right” (other-centric)? Moreover, if the participant shares a
social role with a speaker, is the participant likely to assume
that the speaker is more apt to take their perspective?
To create distinct and naturally occurring social roles, we
turned to a novel paradigm based on Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (www.mturk.com). This service allows users connected
via Internet to participate in simple tasks, or “HITs”, that require human expertise. In this set-up, those that post HITs
are called “Requesters” and those that do the HITs are called
“Workers.” Thus, social roles that naturally occur in Mechanical Turk can be put to use. In the current study, participants
are told that that they will be connected to either a fellow
worker or to the requester. In actuality, both these social
agents are simulated, but a carefully controlled ruse leads the
majority of participants into believing that these agents are
real. The social roles of worker and requester can be distin-

1111

guished along a subordinate/authority dimension, where participants interact with a fellow worker (“same-status” condition), or with a requester (“authority-status” condition). We
consider the requester to have greater authority because this
is the person who recruits and pays participants for each HIT,
and thus has the power to withhold payment if the HIT is not
satisfactorily completed.
In the sections that follow, we provide several hypotheses on how participants might interpret ambiguous requests
in the absence of explicit feedback. In general, if interpretations are made with mutual understanding in mind, we expect
listeners to use partner specific information to guide spatial
perspective-taking - both in the endpoint response (i.e., egocentric or other-centric) and the processing time involved in
making the response. We then detail a dynamical systems
model and summarize experimental results.

However, the principle of collaborative effort is not the
only influence on communicative interactions. In other research, it has been shown that when a status difference exists
between two social agents, the subordinate actor will allocate
greater cognitive resources to assessing the other’s intentions,
at least to a greater extent than the authoritative actor will do
for the subordinate (Rutherford, 2004). This account suggests
there will be tension between the egocentric and other-centric
response choice, with at least some participants willing to invest greater cognitive effort to take the requester’s perspective
(who is in the authority role). We predict that participants interacting with a requester are just as likely to be egocentric or
other-centric. On the other hand, for participants interacting
with a same-status worker, the social attributes of their partner
are less likely to elicit a particular perspective choice. In the
absence of any such constraints, and given that the egocentric
response is easiest, we expect greater egocentric responding
in the same-status condition.
We can also make predictions about the processing time required to take a partner’s perspective. In general, egocentric
responders will be much faster than other-centric responders.
But for other-centric responders alone, those interacting with
the authority-status requester will be faster in making mental rotations. One reason for this is that “authority-status”
participants are simply more motivated to track the other’s
perspective.
In what follows, we briefly describe a dynamical systems
model that can capture the predictions made here in an implemented framework that uses simple cognitive parameters.
We then describe an experiment in which participants believe
they are interacting with a same-status or authority-status
partner.

Hypotheses for Effect of Status
In the spatial perspective task described above, greater cognitive effort is involved in taking another’s perspective. This
is because, from trial to trial, the partner’s location moves
around the table while the participant’s location remains
fixed, creating a situation where the partner can be offset from
the participant by 90 and 180 degrees. To take the other’s perspective, the participant must “see” the table from the other’s
visual perspective, and this requires a participant to mentally
rotate to the other’s line of sight (also see Schober, 1995).
Such an ”other-centric” process of visuospatial transformation is cognitively taxing because the greater the rotation - as
in going from 0 to 180 degrees versus 0 to 90 degrees - the
greater the spatial distance to traverse (see Zacks & Michelon, 2005, for a review). As such, we expect other-centric responders to have generally slower processing times than egocentric responders. However, we also expect response choice
and response time to be modulated by the social status of the
conversational partner. But how might this unfold? Will participants interacting with an authority- or same-status partner
be more or less other–centric, and will mental rotation become more or less easier? For possible answers, we consider
several hypotheses motivated by past research.

Dynamical Systems Model

Authority-Status vs. Same-Status Affiliation. In communicative interactions where partners are attempting to establish mutual understanding, they do so with the goal of minimizing the processing effort for each other (Clark, 1996). But
if it appears that one of the partners is failing to understand,
the other will expend greater cognitive effort to ensure mutual understanding (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986, principle of
least collaborative effort). Conversely, if one of the partners
is deemed to be more competent or to be in greater control of
the interaction, the other might assume that this partner will
invest greater effort. In terms of the current study, this means
that participants interacting with the authority-status partner
(i.e., the “requester”) are more likely be egocentric because
the requester has greater perceived command over the interaction.

The model is an integration of a prominent dynamical system that captures two-choice decisions (Tuller, Case, Ding,
& Kelso, 1994) with a diffusion-type model that accumulates
activation over iterated time until a threshold is reached (Ratcliff, 1978). Duran, Dale, and Kreuz (2010) used the model to
capture basic perspective-taking decisions (other- vs. egocentric choices), and found that it fit both endpoint-response distributions and the real-time dynamics of the decisions themselves. The model effectively treats a decision process as the
dynamics of a single state, x(t), as it descends over time into
one or another fixed-point attractor (see Equation 2, explained
below). As this descent occurs, the model accumulates activation to a threshold in order to determine the decision (akin
to reaching a threshold in a diffusion model). Space restrictions limit our simulation of the current data, but the model
permits an explicit computational instantiation of the socialrole hypotheses.
The model is exemplified in Figure 1a-c as a potential landscape, characterized by Equation 1 and is solved by Equation 2.

1112

b

k = .25
1

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0
ï0.2

other

ï0.4

ego

1

0.4
0.2
0

other

ego

ï0.4

ï0.8
0

0.6

x0

ï0.2

ï0.8
ï1

0.8

ï0.2

ï0.6

ï2

2

3

k = ï.25
1

0

ï0.6

ï1
ï3

c

k=0
1

0.8

V

a

ï1
ï3

other

ï0.4
2

V = kx −
ï2

ï1

0

4

x
x
+
2
4
1

ego

ï0.6
ï0.8
2

3

ï1
ï3

ï2

ï1

0

1

2

3

x

Figure 1: The potential landscape with two attractor basins.

x2 x4
V = kx − +
2
4

(1)

xt+1 = xt + λ(−kt + xt − xt3 ) + ξ

(2)

The xt = x0 parameter value represents the model’s initial
state bias, reflecting whether models are slightly more egocentrically or other-centrically biased at the time-scale of individual decisions. Under a subtle noise signal, ξ, the model
descends from the saddle point between potential wells until it falls into one or another attractor. Under noise, x(t)
may briefly fluctuate around the saddle point before this occurs, capturing initial indecision when the model first faces
the task. Once a decision is made, the potential parameter
k, which produces a bias to respond on one side or another
(see Equation 3), is shifted from trial to trial in response to
one choice or another (e.g., descending on the left causes k to
bias the system towards future leftward responses).
kt+1 = kt + δ

(3)

Trial-by-trial change in k can reflect the gradual commitment of strategy that participants tend to exhibit in spatial
perspective-taking tasks (Carlson, 1999).
These models capture a range of two-choice behaviors
(Raczaszek-Leonardi, Shapiro, Tuller, & Kelso, 2008; Rooij,
Bongers, & Haselager, 2002), and we used it to model the
choice between other-centric and egocentric choices in the
current task. The purpose is to examine the influence of different sets of parameters on (1) the response distribution of
participants in two different social-role conditions, and (2) the
response time of the individual decisions in these two conditions. The parameter sets we chose explicitly represent the
hypotheses as framed in the previous section: same-status
affiliation vs. authority-status affiliation. These hypotheses
lead to the questions: Does working with a perceived authority figure result in competing biases for other-centric and egocentric responding that are not present with someone of a similar social status? Does one get more efficient at responding
in the spatial perspective of an authority figure, or someone

of the same status? Of course, if these social identities do not
influence spatial perspective-taking biases or processes, then
no effects could be modeled (nor present in the study). A set
of illustrative parameters (shown in Figure 2) shows how the
model behaves if social status causes a shift in these cognitive
parameters of the model. In summary, this model (Duran et
al., 2010) naturally captures the intuition that two interactive
systems converge dynamically to produce endpoint-response
and response-time changes in ways consistent with what we
(verbally) predicted in the previous section.

Human Experiment
Method
Participants were led to believe that they were being connected to another Mechanical Turk worker (at random), or
to the requester (who, incidentally, was paying the participant for their service). These partners could communicate to
participants in a “one-way chat” environment. The partners
explained the task as an attempt to debug software within an
arbitrary instruction-following task environment. Both partners were recordings of the same male speaker, but as the
worker, the speaker claimed he was reading directions from
a script - another factor that gives the worker less authority
when compared to the requester.
A trial began by automatically placing a participant’s
mouse cursor underneath an empty table (Figure 3, Position
1). Identical verbal instructions were then given by one of the
two simulated partners that directed the participant to select
one of the folders placed on the tabletop. At this time, the
participant pressed a “GO” button (also located at the bottom of the screen), and the folders and the partner’s location
appeared. Folders were arranged diagonally (as shown in Figure 3, Position 2 and 3), vertically, or horizontally. The participant was to then drag the selected folder to the simulated
partner who was located somewhere around the table, either
at the other sides of the table (as shown in Figure 3, Position
4). Based on the layout in this ambiguous example, if the participant heard, “Give me the folder on the right,” and selected
the folder at Figure 3, Position 3, they would have interpreted

1113

500
40
30
20
0

10

!"#$"%&'(")*+),"-.*%/"#-

8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0

<&="#ï$"%&#;$

6*#7"#

,"89"-&"#

5.0

5.5

Response Time (iterations)

100
80
60
40
20
0

Percentage of Responders

:(*$"%&#;$

Worker Requester

Other Ego
Worker

Other Ego
Requester

Figure 2: Sample model results, Worker: x0 = .2, k0 = .1; Requester: x0 = .2, k0 = .2. The endpoint response distribution do
not vary for authority-status (“requester”) condition, and fewer cycles are required to process other-centric responses.
the instructions egocentrically. However, if the participant selected the folder at Figure 3, Position 2, he or she would have
interpreted the instructions other-centrically.1 As participants
were moving toward and selecting a folder, we were rapidly
sampling the x,y coordinates of their mouse cursor at every
25 ms (a sampling rate of 40Hz). Response time analysis are
based on the time between pressing “GO” and selecting an
initial folder.
The partners verbal instructions (“right,” “left,” “front,”
and “back”) were strategically paired with particular
folder/partner location combinations to create 20 sharedperspective and 20 critical ambiguous trials. It is during the
critical trials that a participant’s perspective interpretation is
revealed. The analysis below are based on these trials.

3
4

Participants
Eighty Amazon’s Mechanical Turk “workers” participated in
this study and were paid 75 cents for their effort. We only
included participants that believed that they were interacting
with a real partner. In a series of follow-up questions after the
experiment, participants who indicated in any way that the
speaker was not real had their data discarded. We achieved a
nearly 75% deception rate, retaining 59 participants. In addiTuesday, February 1, 2011
tion, 60 trials, or 2.58% overall, were removed because they
exceeded three standard deviations above the response time
mean for selecting an initial folder (i.e., 3892.06 ms).

Results
Participant’s Response Choice
Participants were identified as being consistently othercentric, egocentric, or a mixture of these two response types.
A proportion score for egocentric responding was computed
for each participant, with a score over 70% resulting in an
1 A version of the game can be accessed at:
tive.org/perspectiveTask

cognac-

2

1
Figure 3: The experimental interface for capturing egocentric
or other-centric behavior in a single computerized task. Note:
Numbered circles were not seen by participants but are shown
for explanatory purposes only.
egocentric identification, and a score below 30% resulting
in an other-centric identification. A score between 30% and
70% was mixed. In the same-status/worker condition, there
were 15 egocentric, 7 other-centric, and 1 mixed responder.
In the authority-status/requester condition, there were 23 egocentric, 10 other-centric, and 3 mixed responders. Figure 4
shows the proportion of these responder types across social
status.
Chi-square tests conducted between egocentric and othercentric responders in the same-status/worker condition
show a significant preference for responding egocentrically,

1114

χ2 (1) = 5.12, p = .02, and in the authority-status/requester
condition there was no strong preference for a particular perspective choice, χ2 (1) = 2.91, p = .09, although the preference for egocentrism is approaching significance. As predicted, the two conditions do vary slightly in their relative
distributions. It should also be noted that a fairly large proportion of participants were willing to take their partner’ s
perspective, comparable to rates reported in related spatial
perspective-taking studies (see Tversky & Hard, 2009).
100

responder type (egocentric vs. other-centric), beta = 0.59,
p < .01, and a significant interaction between responder
type and social status (same-status/worker vs. authoritystatus/requester), beta = 0.82, p = .01. Given the significant
interaction between the two factors, follow-up simple main
effects were conducted for social status at each responder
type. For the same-status/worker condition, other-centric responders were 1002.13 ms slower than egocentric responders,
beta = 1.28, p < .001, and in the authority-status/requester
condition, other-centric responders were 394.32 ms slower
than egocentric responders, beta = 0.77, p < .01. Lastly, we
compared differences between responder type across social
status. We found that other-centric responders are 549.65 ms
slower when interacting with what they believe to be a Mechanical Turk worker, beta = 0.74, p = 0.02. There are no
statistically significant differences for egocentric responders.
2500

p = .09

60

*

2000

40

***

**

Worker

Requester

Figure 4: The response choices of human participants as a
function of interacting with another Mechanical Turk worker
or requester.

1500
1000

0

Response Time (ms)

20

Percentage of Responders

80

Egocentric
Otherïcentric
Mixed

500

**

NS

The time taken for consistent egocentric and other-centric responders to select a folder in the critical trials was recorded
and subjected to a mixed-effects statistical analysis, comparing differences between responder type and social status (as
fixed factors).2 We also included random factors for subject and item,3 ensuring that the addition of each variable resulted in a best-fitting model through a stepwise model comparison, using log-likelihood ratio tests (see Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The analysis were conducted using the
lmer package in the R statistical software. In this package, pvalues are computed with 10,000 Monte Carlo Markov Chain
simulations, using lmer’s pvals.fnc function. We report these
p values, as well as the standardized effects from each model.
The overall model revealed a significant main effect for
2 For time taken, we collapsed over partner positions at 0, 90, and
180 degrees. In a separate analysis not reported here, there was evidence for mental rotation by other-centric responders, with a monotonic increase of response time from 0 to 90 to 180 degrees.
3 Item corresponds to the four orientations of the folder configuration.

0

Participant’s Response Times
Other

Ego

Other

Worker

Ego

Requester

Figure 5: Participant response times and standard errors in selecting an initial folder during critical trials. Other-centric responders take greater time, particularly when interacting with
a Mechanical Turk worker, the same-status partner.

General Discussion
In this paper, we take seriously the notion of Brennan and
colleagues that single sources of partner-oriented information
are rapidly assimilated during language use, influencing both
perspective choice and processing demands (Brennan et al.,
2010; Brennan & Hanna, 2009). We did so by uniquely focusing on an addressee’s ability to interpret another’s perspective
in a visuospatial mental rotation task - with particular emphasis on how interpretations are shaped by a partner who shares

1115

the same social role, or is in a position of authority.
The first set of hypotheses we introduced was that participants would exhibit greater egocentric responding when interacting with what they believed to be an authority, a partner
who presumably could take responsibility in working toward
mutual understanding. However, we also acknowledged that
in the authority-status condition there might be an opposing
force balancing out the processing task. Participants are also
likely to assume that they should take on an authority figure’s
perspective, which as been discussed by previous research (as
reviewed in Schober, 1993). For those in the same-status condition, there is no similar opposition at play. And given that
there was no “correct” perspective and that the egocentric was
easiest, perspective choice should be weighted toward egocentric responding. These hypotheses were somewhat supported by the data, but were weakened by the marginally significant tendency for those in the authority-status condition
to prefer egocentric responses. Future work will explore the
social modulation in greater detail, using partners who are
more “authoritative” (thus increasing egocentric responding),
or partners who is more subordinate (thus increasing othercentric behavior).
For our second set of hypotheses, the results were more
conclusive. Here, our theoretical claim was that some participants will orient toward an other-centric response mode,
and when they do, response times will be facilitated when interacting with a authority-status partner compared to a samestatus partner. Indeed, this was found, and was expected as
subordinates have been shown to be highly motivated to respond to a superiors’ perceived intentions. Indeed, this could
not have been merely overall motivation to satisfy the authority’s needs, because the same was not true of those who responded egocentrically: The conditions did not differ. Thus,
the speed with which spatial cognition was operating seems
to have more rapidly adapted to the partner with an authoritative social status.

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390-412.
Brennan, S. E., Galati, A., & Kuhlen, A. K. (2010). Two
minds, one dialog: Coordinating speaking and understanding. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, 53, 301-344.
Brennan, S. E., & Hanna, J. E. (2009). Partner-specific adaptation in dialog. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 274-291.
Carlson, L. A. (1999). Selecting a reference frame. Spatial
Cognition and Computation, 1, 365-379.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Computational Linguistics, 23.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.

Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of
knowledge in communication: Effects of speakers’ assumptions about what others know. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 62, 378-391.
Galati, A., & Brennan, S. E. (2010). Attenuating information in spoken communication: For the speaker, or for the
addressee? Journal of Memory and Language, 62, 35-51.
Horton, W. S., & Spieler, D. H. (2007). Age-related differences in communication and audience design. Psychology
and Aging, 22, 281.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N. J., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). Lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution.
Psychological Review, 101, 676-703.
Newman-Norlund, S. E., Noordzij, M. L., Newman-Norlund,
R. D., Volman, I. A., Ruiter, J. P., Hagoort, P., et al. (2009).
Recipient design in tacit communication. Cognition, 111,
46-54.
Raczaszek-Leonardi, J. R., Shapiro, L. P., Tuller, B., & Kelso,
J. A. S. (2008). Activating basic category exemplars in
sentence contexts: A dynamical account. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 37, 87-113.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.
Rooij, I. van, Bongers, R. M., & Haselager, W. (2002). A nonrepresentational approach to imagined action. Cognitive
Science, 26, 345-375.
Rutherford, M. D. (2004). The effect of social role on theory
of mind reasoning. British Journal of Psychology, 95, 91103.
Schober, M. F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Schober, M. F. (1995). Speakers, addressees, and frames
of reference: Whose effort is minimized in conversations
about locations? Discourse Processes, 20, 219-247.
Senay, I., & Keysar, B. (2009). Keeping track of speaker’s
perspective: The role of social identity. Discourse Processes, 46, 401-425.
Snodgrass, S. E. (1992). Further effects of role versus gender on interpersonal sensitivity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 62, 154-158.
Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B. (1992). Categorization of individuals on the basis of multiple social
features. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 207-218.
Tuller, B., Case, P., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. (1994). The
nonlinear dynamics of speech categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 3-16.
Tversky, B., & Hard, B. M. (2009). Embodied and disembodied cognition: Spatial perspective-taking. Cognition, 110,
124-129.
Zacks, J. M., & Michelon, P. (2005). Transformations of visuospatial images. Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience
Reviews, 4, 96-118.

1116

