UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Thinking in Physics: Longitudinal Impacts of 3-D Spatial Training

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7p6978b8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Miller, David I.
Halpern, Diane F.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Thinking in Physics: Longitudinal Impacts of 3-D Spatial Training
David I. Miller (David.Miller@berkeley.edu)
Graduate School of Education, University of California – Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Diane F. Halpern (Diane.Halpern@cmc.edu)
Department of Psychology, Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, CA 91711 USA
Abstract
In previous research, we found that twelve hours of 3-D
spatial training, compared to a randomized control condition,
improved the spatial skills and physics exam scores of gifted
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduates (n = 55) directly after training. This paper
reports on longitudinal findings of this training study. After
eight months, training differences did not exist for spatial
skills, physics grades, or physics self-efficacy. Large gender
differences, favoring males, existed for some spatial skills,
physics self-efficacy, and physics grades. Correlational
analyses found that mental rotation performance, not spatial
working memory, predicted physics self-efficacy and some
physics learning outcomes. These results suggest that
sustained exposure to spatially enriching activities over
several semesters or years may be necessary to address
concerning gender gaps in spatial skills among those most
likely to pursue advanced educational and occupational
positions in physics.
Keywords: spatial thinking; physics problem-solving; skill
acquisition; individual differences

Introduction
Although frequently neglected in traditional education, 3-D
spatial skills are critical to success in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields (Wai,
Lubinski, & Benbow, 2009) especially physics (Hake, 2002;
Kozhevnikov, Motes, & Hegarty, 2007). Based on decades
of evidence, a recent National Science Board (NSB, 2010)
report concluded that individuals skilled in spatial thinking
are “an untapped pool of talent critical for our highly
technological society” (p. 20). Men consistently outperform
women on many spatial tasks especially mental rotation
(Silverman, Choi, & Peters, 2007; Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden,
1995); these results present alarming concerns to STEM
educators and policy makers who aim to increase the
proportion of women in STEM fields (Halpern et al., 2007).
Fortunately, recent research has found that spatial
experience such as action video games (Feng, Spence, &
Pratt, 2007) and formal spatial coursework (Sorby, 2009)
can robustly improve spatial skills. However, most prior
research has failed to investigate how long these effects last
and how spatial training can improve outcomes for students
majoring in STEM fields (Uttal et al., under review).
With several self-selected cohorts of undergraduate
engineering students, Sorby (2009) found that spatial

training was associated with higher engineering retention
rates for women and higher grades in future STEM courses
including engineering graphics, calculus, and physics.
However, Sorby’s studies were mostly quasi-experimental
and therefore confounded the effects of self-selection (and
hence also motivation, diligence, etc.). Similar differences
in GPA and retention rates were found for randomized
studies although as Sorby noted, “sample sizes for the
randomly selected groups were generally too small to infer
statistical significance” (p. 476).
Therefore, in Miller and Halpern (2010), we randomly
assigned gifted STEM undergraduates from a highly
selective science and engineering college to either a training
condition that completed twelve hours of spatial training or
a control condition. Results indicated that that twelve hours
of spatial training (1) improved the skills to mentally rotate
and visualize cross-sections of 3-D objects, (2) narrowed
gender differences in spatial skills perhaps because of
ceiling effects, and (3) improved examination scores in
introductory calculus-based Newtonian physics by nearly
one-third of a letter grade (d = 0.38) but not for other STEM
courses. This paper reports on longitudinal research that
investigated (1) whether these training effects are stable
across eight months and (2) how to further explain the
improvements in physics examination scores.
As Uttal et al. (under review) noted, demonstrating stable,
durable training effects is critical for designing effective
spatial curriculum and educational policies. Out of the 217
research studies reviewed by Uttal et al., only three studies
measured spatial performance more than one month after
training. These studies are two randomized studies with
non-STEM undergraduates (Feng, Spence, & Pratt, 2007;
Terlecki, Newcombe, & Little, 2008) and one withinsubjects study (with no control condition) with middle
school and high school atmospheric science students
(Hedley, 2008). These three studies found large, durable
training improvements (average d = 0.67) for three to five
months after training. Furthermore, these longitudinal
studies found little decrement in spatial skills between the
immediate and delayed spatial post-tests suggesting these
effects could persist for even longer than five months.
Perhaps most encouragingly, Terlecki et al. (2008) found
durable transfer to untrained spatial tasks (e.g., the stimuli
in the transfer test bore little resemblance to the stimuli in
the training tasks). These longitudinal results strongly
suggest that improvements in spatial skills can be longlasting up to at least five months, although it remains

3465

unclear whether these effects would also generalize to gifted
STEM undergraduates. We contribute to the durability
literature by measuring spatial performance eight months
after training and measuring physics learning outcomes ten
months after training.
In this paper, we also aimed to further understand the
improvements that we previously found in physics course
grades. Kozhevnikov and colleagues (Kozhevnikov,
Hegarty, & Mayer, 2002; Kozhevnikov, Motes, Hegarty,
2007; Kozhevnikov & Thornton, 2006) have provided
insightful data regarding the role of spatial thinking in
physics learning. With quantitative, protocol analysis, and
eye fixation data, Kozhevnikov et al. (2007) argued that,
“multidimensional
physics
problems
and
spatial
visualization tasks require the problem solver to
simultaneously process multiple pieces of spatial
information that tax the supplies of visual/spatial working
memory resources” (p. 576). In explaining the correlation
between spatial skills and physics problem solving,
Kozhevnikov et al. downplayed the importance of the
unique skills required for individual spatial skills tests and
instead focused their theoretical explanations on the variance
that general spatial working memory shares with spatial
skills tests and physics problem solving. We call this
explanation the working memory hypothesis. Although this
remains an interesting hypothesis, Kozhevnikov et al. did not
measure spatial working memory and, to our knowledge, no
prior study has directly investigated the relationship between
spatial working memory and physics problem solving.
Alternatively, the correlation between spatial skills and
physics problem solving could be in part explained by
common specific strategies and cognitive skills. We call this
explanation the specific spatial skills hypothesis. In this
vein, the choice of spatial tests and physics outcomes
matters greatly when investigating the role of spatial

thinking in physics. In Miller and Halpern (2010), we found
an interesting result regarding the type of physics outcome
we analyzed: for the training group, we found improvements
in physics course exam performance, but no improvements
on the Force Concept Inventory – a commonly used
measure of qualitative, conceptual understanding of physics
(Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992). These two types
of assessments require substantially different processes for
applying physics knowledge; for instance, the course
examination questions required extensive application of
mathematical problem solving skills including calculus (see
Figure 1). In contrast, the conceptual questions assessed
students’ qualitative, not mathematical, understanding of
physics principles. With regards to spatial thinking, the most
important differences between the two assessments are: the
course examination problems often provided no visualspatial diagrams of the physical situations (students would
have to generate their own diagrams, or attempt to solve the
problems without such diagrams) and typically involved
more complex motion (including rotational and sometimes
3-D motion) compared to the conceptual questions.
Furthermore, the role of spatial thinking in physics might
be highly dependent on specific physics courses and topics.
All of the research discussed previously investigated the
role of spatial thinking in specifically kinematics which is
the physics of how objects move in space over time.
Research on other physics topics have suggested that
specifically mental rotation may play a small and sometimes
nonsignificant role in learning introductory electricity and
magnetism (Saglam, & Millar, 2006; Watkins, Dowd, &
Mazur, 2010).
This current research investigated the longitudinal
impacts of spatial training. We hypothesized that, after eight
months, the training group would continue to have higher
spatial skills and higher physics grades compared to the

Figure 1: Example qualitative, conceptual kinematics problem (left – from Kozhevnikov, Motes, & Hegarty, 2007)
and a typical mathematical, physics examination problem (right).

3466

control group. We collected grades data for introductory
electricity and magnetism - the course directly following
introductory Newtonian physics. Furthermore, to help better
understand the improvements in physics, we hypothesized
that the training group would have higher self-efficacy for
solving highly spatial physics problems. For instance, it is
possible that spatial training could have improved students’
self-efficacy for applying spatial strategies on highly spatial
physics problems which could have improved physics exam
scores (Bandura, 1997; Cooke-Simpson & Voyer, 2007).
Finally, to test the working memory and specific skills
hypotheses, we had students complete a measure of spatial
working memory. The working memory hypothesis would
predict that spatial working memory and physics learning
outcomes would share unique variance, and the specific
skills hypothesis would predict that individual measures of
spatial skills and physics learning outcomes would share
unique variance.

Students were randomly assigned to a training condition (12
female, 18 male) in which they completed six two-hour
spatial training sessions (one session per week), or a control
condition (10 female, 15 male) in which they did not. The
spatial training heavily emphasized developing spatial skills
by sketching 3-D objects (see Figure 2); these materials
were developed and tested by Sorby (2009). Sorby has found
large improvements in spatial skills with engineering
undergraduates with initial low spatial skills. Students
completed measures of spatial skills prior to training (pretest),
one week after the last spatial training session (immediate
posttest), and eight months after training (delayed posttest).
This paper reports on the delayed posttest data.

Method
Participants
STEM undergraduate majors (22 women, 33 men) were
recruited during their first-year at a small, highly selective
liberal arts college with a strong STEM focus. Forty-nine
percent of students' mothers and 60% of students' fathers
had received an advanced graduate or professional degree.
All participants were either 19 years old (n = 45) or 20 years
old (n = 10) at the time of this longitudinal assessment. SAT
– Mathematics (M = 762, SD = 39), SAT – Critical Reading
(M = 728, SD = 49), and SAT – Writing (M = 710, SD = 57)
scores indicated exceptionally high academic aptitude.
Furthermore, pre-test scores on standardized measures of
spatial skills indicated substantially higher initial spatial
skills compared to more average populations (Miller &
Halpern, 2010). We choose to focus on such an extremely
gifted STEM population because such undergraduates are
disproportionately more likely to become future STEM
innovators (NSB, 2010). For instance, Wai, Lubinski, and
Benbow (2009) found that 45% of all STEM PhDs in their
longitudinal study (n = 400,000) were within the top 4% of
spatial skills in high school. Our longitudinal subsample
represented 71% of the original pre-test sample (n = 77) and
missing data analyses indicated that retention rates did not
significantly differ in terms of experimental assignment
(χ2(1) = 1.17, p = .280), gender (χ2(1) = 1.10, p = .294),
initial spatial skills (all F’s < 1), or SAT scores (all F’s < 1).
With a fixed significance level of 0.05, power analyses
showed that 23 students per condition yield a statistical
power of 80% or greater for detecting an effect size of d =
0.74 or greater for a one-tailed independent samples t-test.
Analyses also revealed 72% power for detecting the average
effect size of d=0.67 found in previous longitudinal studies.

Materials and Procedure

Figure 2: Sample workbook problem from the spatial
training. On 2-D sketch paper, students are asked to
mentally rotate the left 3-D object 90 degrees around the
indicated axis and sketch the correct rotation (shown in
red) on the dot paper to the right (from Sorby &
Wysocki, 2003).

Measures
Spatial skills – Mental rotation. The Mental Rotation Test
(Peters et al., 1995, Form C) measured students’ skills to
mentally rotate 3-D objects about two or more axes. Students
completed Form A of the Mental Rotation Test during preand post-testing and hence have not encountered the specific
stimuli on Form C before. For the immediate posttest, we
previously found greater improvements on Form A for the
training group. The test consisted of 24 problems.
Spatial skills – Mental cutting. The Mental Cutting Test
(CEEB, 1939) and Novel Cross-Sections Test (Hegarty et
al., 2009) measured students’ skills to visualize crosssections of 3-D objects cut by a specified 2-D plane.
Students completed the Mental Cutting Test during pretesting and post-testing and hence were familiar with the
specific stimuli on that test, but not familiar with the Novel
Cross-Sections Test. For the immediate posttest, we had
found greater improvements on the Mental Cutting Test for
the training group. We included the Novel Cross-Sections
Test to test whether spatial training improved the construct
of mental cutting, not such test performance on one specific
test. Each test consisted of 10 problems.

3467

Spatial working memory. The Spatial Working Memory
test (Kane et al., 2004, complex rotation span) measured
participants’ cognitive capacity to simultaneously process
and store novel spatial information. On computers, students
judged whether a set of individually presented letters were
normal or mirror-imaged (processing task) while
simultaneously remembering the locations of a sequence of
short and long arrows radiating from the center of a
computer screen (storage task). At the end of a trial, the
students recalled the positions of the arrows in the order
they were presented. Set sizes ranged from two to six letterarrow displays per trial (with 3 trials per set size for 15 trials
total). We scored the recall data using the partial credit
procedure advocated by Conway et al. (2005).

validity. Because of these solid psychometric properties, we
computed a composite physics self-efficacy scale by
summing the standardized z-scores for each scale.

Results
Table 1 contains intercorrelations, internal consistencies
(Cronbach’s α), and descriptive statistics for all four spatial
measures. Notice the low internal consistencies for the
Mental Cutting Test and Novel Cross-Sections Test.
Furthermore, those two scales were only modestly
correlated with one another (r = .30) although they aim to
measure the same construct. For these reasons, we interpret
results with those two measures cautiously.
Measure
1. MRT
2. MCT
3. NCST
4. SWM
α
M
SD

Physics outcomes. Final grades in introductory electricity
& magnetism were converted to numerical scores by
assigning “A” = 4.0, “A-” = 3.667, and so on; these grades
reflect student work completed six to ten months after
training. From the previous semester, we also had physics
examination scores and pre/post measures of physics
conceptual understanding (Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer,
1992, Force Concept Inventory) for introductory Newtonian
physics/kinematics. For this previous semester, physics
examination scores contributed 80% of the final mechanics
course grades; these mechanics scores reflect student work
completed during training to two months after training.
Physics self-efficacy. Three different Likert scales
measured student’s self-efficacy for solving physics
problems. Two of these scales asked for students’ strength
of agreement with different statements such as, “If I get
stuck on a physics problem on my first try, I usually try to
figure out a different way that works” (Adams et al., 2006,
Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science Survey –
Problem Solving Confidence Subscale, 4 items; Çalişkan,
Selçuk, & Erol, 2007, Physics Self-Efficacy Scale – Solving
Physics Problems Subscale, 10 items). Furthermore using
recommendations specified by Bandura (1997), we
constructed a physics problem solving self-efficacy scale by
presenting students with four math-intensive kinematics
problems (the problem on the right of Figure 1 is one of
those problems) and asked students to rate on a 1-10 scale
their confidence in “correctly solving the above problem
during a physics examination in which an equation sheet is
provided.” All the physics self-efficacy scales showed good
internal consistency (α’s = .74 to .93) and were highly
correlated with one another (r’s = .64 to .87) demonstrating
convergent validity. All of the scales significantly correlated
with SAT – Mathematics scores (r's = .34 to .41, all p's <
.01) which is expected since physics problem-solving is
often highly mathematical. However, none of the scales
significantly correlated with SAT – Critical Reading and
SAT – Writing scores (r’s = -.01 to .23, all p’s > .05)
demonstrating discriminate validity. Furthermore, all selfefficacy scales highly correlated with the physics outcomes
described above (r’s = .49 to .71) demonstrating criterion

1

2

3

4

.41**
.41**
.48**
.81
72.1
13.0

.30**
.10**
.57
86.0
15.3

.44**
.61
70.2
21.3

.78
57.7
13.9

Table 1: Intercorrelations, internal consistencies
(Cronbach’s α), and descriptive statistics for all four
spatial measures. MRT = Mental Rotation Test,
Spatial
dataCutting
on the Test,
four dependent
measures
MCT =skills
Mental
NCS = Novel
Cross-of
Sections Test, SWM = Spatial Working Memory.
*p<.05 (one-tailed), **p<.01 (one-tailed). All scores
have been normalized to maximum score of 100.
The four spatial dependent measures were analyzed with a
two-factor between subjects 2 × 2 (Assignment [control,
training] × Gender [men, women]) multiple analysis of
variance (MANOVA). Results indicated a main effect of
gender (F(4, 48) = 2.74, p = .039) but no main effect of
assignment (F < 1) or interaction Assignment × Gender (F <
1). For individual measures, the effect sizes for training
differences were generally small: Mental Rotation Test (d = 0.09), Mental Cutting Test (d = 0.08), Novel Cross-Sections
Test (d = 0.05), and Spatial Working Memory test (d = 0.37). A positive effect size indicates an advantage for the
training group. Since the main multivariate effect of gender
was significant, we conducted a set of one-factor ANOVAs
to analyze the main effects of gender across the four tests.
Results indicated that men outperformed women on the
mental rotation test (F(1, 53) = 6.40, p = .014, d = 0.71) and
mental cutting test (F(1, 53) = 8.46, p = .005, d = 0.82) but
not on the novel cross-sections test (F(1, 53) = 1.49, p =
.228, d = 0.34) or spatial working memory test (F < 1).
A similar set of Assignment × Gender ANOVAs
indicated no main effect of assignment or interaction
Assignment × Gender on either physics self-efficacy or
electricity and magnetism grades. However, results
indicated a main effect of gender on physics self-efficacy
(F(1, 51) = 5.59, p = .022, d = .70) and electricity and
magnetism grades (F(1, 50) = 8.69, p = .005, d = .85).

3468

Physics
Measure
Force Concept Inventory – Pre
Force Concept Inventory – Post
Newtonian Physics Exam Score
Physics Self-Efficacy
Electricity & Magnetism Grades

Spatial Measure
SWM
MRT
.16
.55**
.02
.53**
.17
.42**
.11
.42**
.05
.20

Table 2: Correlations between physics outcome measures
and spatial working memory (SWM) and mental rotation
(MRT). *p<.05 (one-tailed), **p<.01 (one-tailed).
To investigate the working memory and specific skills
hypotheses, hypotheses, we correlated physics outcomes
with working memory and spatial skills measures (see Table
2). For these analyzes, we only used mental rotation as an
indicator of spatial skills because of the questionable
construct validity of the two mental cutting measures. As
shown in Table 2, spatial working memory correlated with
none of the physics outcomes, in direct opposition with the
working memory hypothesis. However, mental rotation
correlated with all physics outcome measures except for
electricity and magnetism grades. Except for introductory
Newtonian physics grades, correlations between mental
rotation and physics outcome measures remained significant
after controlling for SAT – Mathematics, SAT – Critical
Reading, and SAT – Writing scores. Hence, the significant
correlations between mental rotation and some physics
outcomes were not because of general academic aptitude,
bolstering the specific skills hypothesis.

Discussion
Although the training group, compared to the control group,
had higher spatial skills and physics examination scores
directly following training (Miller & Halpern, 2010), these
training effects did not persist after eight months. However,
after eight months, men substantially outperformed women
on some spatial measures, had greater physics problemsolving self-efficacy, and achieved higher grades in
electricity and magnetism. These results match other studies
that have found particularly large gender differences in
physics learning (AAUW, 2010, p. 9), although some
empirically validated approaches can narrow these gender
differences (Miyake et al., 2010). This study adds to this
literature by finding that gender differences in mental
rotation shares variance with gender differences in physics
self-efficacy and some measures of physics learning
(although perhaps not for electricity and magnetism grades).
However since we did not find long-term improvements in
spatial skills, these data are correlational and therefore we
cannot make strong conclusions regarding the causal
relationship between mental rotation and physics outcomes.
This study has important theoretical implications for the
role of spatial thinking in physics and possibly for other
STEM fields. This study’s results suggest that specific

spatial skills, not general spatial working memory, may
affect physics self-efficacy and some physics learning
outcomes. This result opens up a wide body of research to
investigate the relationships between specific spatial skills
measures and specific physics topics. However, we are
cautious in generalizing our results to other populations
because of this study’s group of extraordinarily gifted
STEM undergraduates; results may differ for more average
populations.
Why did we find no evidence of lasting improvements
when other researchers have? For example, past longitudinal
research with about ten hours of training (Feng et al., 2007;
Terlecki et al., 2008) has found little decrement in spatial
skills after four months; this suggests that the improvements
were stable and likely to last for eight months as well.
Furthermore, Sorby (2009) found long-term improvements
in STEM course grades and engineering retention rates,
although those results could be because of self-selection
effects. Our extraordinarily talented STEM population may
help explain this divergence from past research. Our sample
had extremely high initial spatial skills and students with
more average spatial skills may have benefited more from
the same amount of spatial experience.
One general limitation of this study is its small sample
size. Hence, the null results for non-physics courses and the
null results for the 8–10 month longitudinal data could
perhaps be explained by a lack of statistical power. However,
we note that the effect size magnitudes for these null results
were typically small (most d < 0.20) and varied in direction
(e.g., the control group sometimes nonsignificantly
outperformed the training group), suggesting a lack of
statistical trends for these null results. Furthermore, power
analyses indicated that our statistical tests were sufficiently
powered to detect the large average effect size of d = 0.67
found in previous longitudinal training studies (Feng et al.,
2007; Hedley, 2008; Terlecki et al., 2008).
Interestingly, in online surveys, participants reported that
the training exercises were challenging and appropriate to
their learning needs (Miller & Halpern, 2010); this study
finds that the activities were challenging enough to produce
short-term, but not long-term, improvements. This result
suggests that sustained exposure to spatially enriching
activities over several semesters or years may be necessary
to address concerning gender gaps in spatial skills among
gifted STEM populations. A promising direction for future
research is to investigate how spatial enriching activities
like sketching can be integrated into existing STEM courses
like physics; such an approach could help learners
systematically improve their spatial skills over an extended
period of time and also help improve STEM learning
outcomes (National Research Council, 2006; Newcombe,
2010). This study suggests that such a sustained and
systematic approach may be necessary to improve long-term
outcomes and narrow gender gaps among students who are
the most likely to pursue advanced STEM educational
degrees and occupational positions.

3469

Acknowledgments. This research was funded by the
Shanahan Student-Directed Research Funds at Harvey
Mudd College. We also thank Peter N. Saeta for his helpful
advice and mentoring, Wendy Menefee-Libey for her
support from Harvey Mudd’s Academic Excellence
program, Joseph J. Williams for comments on a draft of this
paper, and Alyssa Dray, Brendan Folie, and Neal Pisenti for
their time in teaching the spatial training program.

References
Adams W. K., Perkins K. K., Dubson M., Finkelstein N.D., &
Wieman C.E. (2006). New instrument for measuring student
beliefs about physics and learning physics: the Colorado
learning attitudes about science survey. Physical Review Special
Topics - Physics Education Research, 2, 1–14.
American Association of University Women (2010). Why So Few?
Women in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.
Washington, DC.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. W. H.
Freeman: New York.
Çalişkan, S., Selçuk, G. S., & Erol, M. (2007). Development of
physics self-efficacy scale. Proceedings of the 2007 American
Institute of Physics Conference, Vol. 899, pp. 483 - 484.
CEEB Special Aptitude Test in Spatial Relations, developed by the
College Entrance Examination Board, USA, (1939).
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick, D. Z.,
Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working memory span
tasks: A methodological review and user’s guide. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12(5), 769–786.
Cooke-Simpson, A., & Voyer, D. (2007). Confidence and Gender
Differences on the Mental Rotations Test. Learning and
Individual Differences, 17, 181-186.
Feng, J., Spence, I., Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action video game
reduces gender differences in spatial cognition. Psychological
Science, 18, 850–855.
Halpern. D. F., Aronson, J., Reimer, N., Simpkins, S., Start, S., &
Wentzel, K. (2007). Encouraging girls in math and science.
Washington, DC: U. S Department of Education. NCER 20072003.
Hedley, M. (2008). The use of geospatial technologies to increase
students' spatial abilities and knowledge of certain atmospheric
science content. (Doctoral dissertation). Available from
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No.
3313371)
Hegarty, M., Keehner, M., Khooshabeh, P. & Montello, D. R.
(2009). How spatial ability enhances, and is enhanced by, dental
education. Learning and Individual Differences, 19, 61–70.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M. & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force Concept
Inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-151.
Kane, M. J., Hambrick, D. Z., Tuholski, S. W., Wilhelm, O.,
Payne, T. W. & Engle, R. W. (2004) The generality of working
memory capacity: A latent variable approach to verbal and
visuospatial memory span and reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133(2), 189–217.
Kozhevnikov, M., Hegarty, M. & Mayer, R. (2002). Visual/spatial
abilities in problem solving in physics. In M. Anderson, B.
Meyer & P. Olivier (Eds), Diagrammatic Representation and
Reasoning, pp. 155-173. Springer-Verlag.

Kozhevnikov, M., Motes, M. A., & Hegarty, M. (2007). Spatial
visualization in physics problem solving. Cognitive Science, 31,
549-579.
Kozhevnikov, M. & Thornton, R. (2006). Real-time data display,
spatial visualization ability, and learning force and motion
concepts. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 15,
113-134.
Kustusch, M. B., & Beichner, R. J. (2010). Student difficulties
with right hand rules. Poster presented at the 2010 Physics
Education Research Conference, Portland, OR.
Miller, D. I., Halpern, D. F. (2010). Improving the 3-D spatial
skills of gifted STEM undergraduates. The General
Psychologist, 45(2), 42.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J.,
Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010). Reducing the gender
achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of
values affirmation. Science, 330, 1234-1237.
National Science Board (2010). Preparing the next generation of
STEM innovators: Identifying and developing our nation’s
human capital. Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
National Research Council (2006). Learning to think spatially.
Washington D. C.: The National Academies Press.
Newcombe, N.S. (2010). Picture this: Increasing math and science
learning by improving spatial thinking. American Educator:
Summer 2010, 29-43.
Peters, M., Laeng, B., Latham, K., Johnson, M., Zaiyouna, R., &
Richardson, C. (1995). A redrawn Vandenberg and Kuse Mental
Rotations Test: Different versions and factors that affect
performance. Brain and Cognition, 28, 39-58.
Saglam, M., & Millar, R. (2006). Upper high school students’
understanding of electromagnetism. International Journal of
Science Education, 28(5), 543–566.
Silverman, I., Choi, J., & Peters, M. (2007). The hunter-gatherer
theory of sex differences in spatial abilities: Data from 40
countries. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 261–268.
Sorby, S.A. (2009). Educational Research in Developing 3-D
Spatial Skills for Engineering Students. International Journal of
Science Education, 31, 459-480.
Sorby, S.A., & Wysocki, A.F. (2003). Introduction to 3-D spatial
visualization: An active approach. Clifton Park, New York:
Thomson-Delmar Learning.
Terlecki, M. S., Newcombe, N. S., & Little, M. (2008). Durable
and generalized effects of spatial experience on mental rotation:
Gender differences in growth patterns. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 22(7), 996–1013.
Uttal, D.H., Liu, L.L., Marulis, L.M., Lewis, A.R., Warren, C.M.
(in press). Training spatial skills: What works, for whom, and
for how long? Psychological Bulletin.
Voyer, D., Voyer S., Bryden, M.P. (1995). Magnitude of sex
differences in spatial abilities: A meta-analysis and
consideration of critical variables. Psychological Bulletin, 117,
250–270.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial Ability for
STEM Domains: Aligning Over 50 Years of Cumulative
Psychological Knowledge Solidifies Its Importance. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 101, 817-835.
Watkins, J., Dowd, J., & Mazur, E. (2010). Gender, Mental
Rotations, and Introductory Physics. Poster presented at the
2010 Physics Education Research Conference, Portland, OR.

3470

