UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Demonstratives, Perceptual Space, and Linguistic Diversity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sd8n11h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Coventry, Kenny
Hamilton, Colin
Griffiths, Debra

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Demonstratives, Perceptual Space, and Linguistic Diversity
Kenny R. Coventry (kenny.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk), Colin Hamilton
(colin.hamilton@northumbria.ac.uk), and Debra Griffiths (debbie.griffiths@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, Northumbria University,
Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, United Kingdom

Keywords: Spatial and temporal demonstratives; peripersonal
versus extrapersonal space; object location memory

Extended Abstract
Communication involves a combination of speech and
gestures, which afford joint attention between speaker and
interlocutor (Tomasello, 1999, 2003; Kita, 2003).
Characterizing the mapping between language and the
vision and action systems is therefore essential in order to
understand both normal and disordered communication. In
a series of five experiments we target this mapping with
respect to one the most central components of natural
language semantics - spatial demonstratives.
Although there is a large literature on the mapping
between spatial language and space, including prepositions
and space, (e.g. Burigo & Coventry, 2010; Coventry &
Garrod, 2004; Coventry, Cangelosi, Monrouxe, Joyce, &
Richardson, 2010; Coventry, Tenbrink & Bateman, 2010)
and quantifiers and space (e.g. Coventry, Cangelosi,
Newstead, & Bugmann, 2010), there is a notable absence
of empirical work on demonstratives. Yet spatial
demonstratives, such as this and that, are more closely
associated with deictic gestures than any other linguistic
items (Diessel, 2006; Enfield, 2003; Levinson, 2004), they
occur in all languages, are among the most frequent terms
within a language, appear early in child language
acquisition, and philologically emerge as the earliest
traceable words in languages (Deutscher, 2005; Diessel,
2006). Therefore demonstratives are a natural place to start
to examine how language and vision and action map onto
one another, and whether they are associated with the same
or different underlying representations.
The absence of work on demonstratives in cognitive
science generally is even more surprising when one
considers that demonstratives occur in spatial and nonspatial contexts. This can be used to refer to objects or
events in close temporal proximity, while that can be used
to refer to such objects and events out of temporal focus
(see Diessel, 1999 for discussion). In the context of work
examining the extent to which space acts as a structuring
tool for non-spatial domains (see for example Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008),
demonstratives therefore afford an excellent test domain
within which to examine the relationship between different
uses of the same lexical items.
Recently Coventry, Valdés, Castillo, and GuijarroFuentes (2008; see also Bonfiglioli et al., 2009) tested the
mapping between perceptual space and demonstrative use
for the first time using a new methodology designed to

elicit spatial demonstratives without speakers realizing that
their language was being tested. Participants played a
‘memory game’ where the goal of the game was to
remember the positions of objects (colored shapes) placed
on 12 colored dots along the midline of a large conference
table. Participants were informed that they were taking part
in an experiment on the effects of language on memory for
object location and that they were in the ‘language
condition.’ They were first told that cards would be read
out with a placement instruction (e.g., “You place green
triangle on red dot”). Following placement, participants
were instructed that they had to point to each object
naming it using a combination of just three words: a
demonstrative, a color and a shape (e.g., this/that red
triangle), so that everyone in the ‘language condition’
experienced the same level of language coding. Coventry
et al. manipulated the distance between the participant and
placed object, whether participants used their hand or a
70cm stick when pointing at the objects placed, and who
placed the object. These latter two manipulations were
motivated by neuropsychological work suggesting contact
with objects is important for the extension of peripersonal
space. Berti and Frassinetti (2000) document the case of a
patient who showed a dissociation between near and far
space in the manifestation of neglect, illustrated by
impaired performance on a line bisection task in near space
but not in far space when using a light pen to perform the
task. However when the participant performed the same
task using a stick, performance on the task in far space
deteriorated, mirroring the performance in near space.
Berti and Frassinetti argue that the stick extended the body
remapping far space as near space. The results of this first
study using the memory game method revealed that the use
of the stick extended the use of this in English and este in
Spanish to the region beyond the end of the hand to the end
of the stick, mirroring the effects found for the extension of
near space in neglect patients.
While it would seem intuitive that there is a mapping
between near-far space and the use of spatial
demonstratives, this view has been challenged (Kemmerer,
2006). Notably while a proximal versus distal contrast
appears to be the most common demonstrative contrast
across languages (Diessel, 2005), languages make a range
of more diverse contrasts in their demonstrative systems,
including person centered contrasts (Japanse), whether an
object is visible or not (Tiriyó), and whether is owned by
the speaker (Supyire)(Diessel, 1999, 2005).
In this talk we report the results of five experiments
using the memory game paradigm designed to 1) tease

1260

apart the mapping between perceptual space and spatial
demonstratives, and 2) test whether English demonstratives
are subject to the influence of variables that are lexicalized
in other languages. Experiment 1 manipulated whether
contact is necessary between a tool and an object for an
extension of this to occur (as in Coventry et al., 2008). This
was motivated by neuropsychological work indicating that
an extension of near space to far space with tool use occurs
when the tool is used to functionally interact/make contact
with an object (e.g., Iriki et al., 1996; Farnè et al, 2005;
Witt et al., 2005). Experiment 2 examined the influence of
deictic centre on demonstrative choice, Experiment 3
tested whether demonstrative choice is affected by whether
an object is occluded or not, Experiment 4 tested whether
ownership affects demonstrative choice, and Experiment 5
tested whether object familiarity affects demonstrative
choice.
The results of these experiments show that spatial
demonstrative choice in English is much more similar to
demonstrative contrasts in other languages than a simple
binary proximal-distal contrast in English would suggest.
Put simply, lexical distinctions for these terms are not
diagnostic of the parameters that affect their usage.
Moreover the results reinforce the importance of the
mapping between peripersonal and extrapersonal space and
demonstrative choice – but with an enriched
conceptualization of what peripersonal space entails.
Consequences of this for the relationship between spatial
and temporal uses of demonstratives will be discussed.

Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by grant number RES-062-232752 from the Economic and Social Research Council
(UK) awarded to the first two authors.

References
Berti, A., & Frassinetti, F. (2000). When far becomes near:
Remapping of space by tool use. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 415-420.
Bonfiglioli, C., Finocchiaro, C., Gesierich, B., Rositano,
F., & Vescovi, M. (2009). A kinematic approach to the
conceptual representations of this and that. Cognition,
111, 270-274.
Burigo, M., & Coventry, K. R. (2010). Context affects
scale selection for proximity terms. Spatial Cognition
and Computation, 10, 292-312.
Casasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the Mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579593.
Coventry, K. R., Cangelosi, A., Newstead, S. N., &
Bugmann, D. (2010). Talking about quantities in space:
Vague quantifiers, context and similarity. Language and
Cognition, 2(2), 221-241.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Seeing, Saying
and Acting. The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis: Hove
and New York.

Coventry, K. R., Lynott, D., Cangelosi, A., Monrouxe, L.,
Joyce, D., & Richardson, D. C. (2010). Spatial language,
visual attention, and perceptual simulation. Brain &
Language, 112(3), 202-213.
Coventry, K. R., Tenbrink, T., & Bateman, J.
(Eds.)(2009). Spatial Language and Dialogue. Oxford
University Press. Oxford, UK.
Coventry, K. R., Valdés, B., Castillo, A., & GuijarroFuentes, P. (2008). Language within your reach. Near-far
perceptual space and spatial demonstratives. Cognition,
108, 889-895.
Deutscher, G. (2005). The unfolding of language: an
evolutionary tour of mankind’s greatest invention.
MacMillan.
Diessel, H. (1999). The morphosyntax of demonstratives in
synchrony and diachrony. Linguistic Typology, 3, 1-49.
Diessel, H. (2005). Distance contrasts in demonstratives. In
Haspelmath, Dryer, Gil, & Comrie (Eds.), World atlas of
language structures (pp. 170–173). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Diessel, H. (2006). Demonstratives, joint attention, and the
emergence of grammar. Cognitive Linguistics, 17, 463489.
Enfield, N. J. (2003). Demonstratives in space and
interaction: data from Lao speakers and implications for
semantic analysis. Language 79(1), 82-117.
Farnè, A., Iriki, A., & Làdavas, E. (2005). Shaping
multisensory action-space with tools: Evidence from
patients with cross-modal extinction. Neuropsychologia,
43, 238–248.
Iriki, A., Tanaka, M., & Iwamura, Y. (1996). Coding of
modified body schema during tool use by macaque
postcentral neurones. Neuroreport, 7, 2325–2330.
Kemmerer, D. (2006). The semantics of space: Integrating
linguistic typology and cognitive neuroscience.
Neuropsychologia, 44, 1607-1621.
Kita, S. (Ed.) (2003). Pointing: where language, culture,
and cognition meet. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Deixis and pragmatics. In Horn &
Ward (Eds.), The Handbook of Pragmatics, 97-121.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human
Cognition. Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A UsageBased Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard
University Press.
Witt, J. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Epstein, W. (2005). Tool use
affects perceived distance, but only when you intend to
use it. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance. 31(5), 880-888.

1261

