UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spoken Nursery Rhymes Have a Fractal Rhythmic Structure - Evidence from Patterns of Slow
Amplitude Modulation (AM)
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3cv587w6
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Leong, Victoria
Turner, Richard
Stone, Michael
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

        Spoken Nursery Rhymes Have a Fractal Rhythmic Structure -
        Evidence from Patterns of Slow Amplitude Modulation (AM)
                                                 Victoria Leong
           University of Cambridge, Department of Experimental Psychology, Centre for Neuroscience in
                                                     Education
                                                 Richard Turner
          University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Computational & Biological Learning Lab
                                                 Michael Stone
           University of Cambridge, Department of Experimental Psychology, Auditory Perception Group
                                                 Usha Goswami
           University of Cambridge, Department of Experimental Psychology, Centre for Neuroscience in
                                                     Education
Abstract: Children’s knowledge of nursery rhymes predicts later phonological and reading skills (Maclean et al,1999).
This developmental relationship may be mediated by rhythmic and prosodic structure: nursery rhymes have been
described as perfect metrical poems. Here we investigate the hypothesis that nursery rhymes are rhythmically fractal.
27 nursery rhymes were spoken in a rhythmic or non-rhythmic (’reporting’) style by 5 speakers. The speech envelope
from each sample was passed through a low frequency (0-50 Hz) 8-channel amplitude modulation (AM) filterbank
and channels were analysed for temporal patterning. For rhythmically-spoken rhymes, modulations in adjacent
channels were strongly phase-locked so that one modulation cycle in a given channel typically encompassed two full
cycles in the next channel. This phase-locked pattern extended across multiple modulation frequencies resulting in
a hierarchically-nested, fractal structure. Non-rhythmic samples showed lower phase-locking. The fractal temporal
structure of rhymes may serve to optimally entrain neural oscillatory activity for rhythm detection.
                                                         943

