UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Shifts in Perceived Similarity Affect Consumer Valuation and Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mg941c3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Urminsky, Oleg
Bartels, Daniel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Shifts in Perceived Similarity Affect Consumer Valuation and Choice
Oleg Urminsky (oleg.urminsky@chicagobooth.edu)
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Daniel M. Bartels (dmb2199@columbia.edu)
Columbia University, Uris 502
3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027 USA
Abstract
Building on research that examines the nature of similarity processes,
we suggest that (i) assessments of the similarity between objects shifts
systematically depending on the basis used to evaluate similarity,
which is influenced by contextual factors; (ii) judgments and choices
can be affected by the perceived similarity relations between items in
a set; and (iii) such shifts in similarity can therefore play a key role in
inferences impacting valuation and choice. In three studies, we show
that changes in temporal framing (near future vs. distant future)
impact evaluation and choice due to shifts in the basis of perceived
similarity, leading to effects that would otherwise be unanticipated. In
particular, we find that manipulating temporal context impacts
evaluation and choice via its influence on which attributes form the
basis of perceived similarity between choice alternatives, in addition
to any direct influence it might have on preferences.

Introduction
Similarity is implicated in nearly every fundamental
cognitive process (e.g., perception—Wertheimer 1923,
recall—Hintzman 1984; categorization—Medin and
Schaffer 1978; inductive inference—Hummel and Holyoak
1997; analogy—Gentner and Markman 1997). Therefore,
any factor that influences perceived similarity is likely to
have a profound impact on cognition more generally and on
decision making specifically. Despite the parallels between
similarity and choice processes, as well as the role of
similarity in structuring informational inputs to decisions
(Medin, Goldstone and Markman 1995; Markman and
Loewenstein 2010), similarity has played a far less central
role in research on evaluation and choice than other factors,
such as subjective utility and decision weights. In early
work, similarity was often treated as simply another fixed
attribute, determined by concrete features of the objects
under consideration. Thus, for example, work on the
substitutability of objects often implicitly assumes that the
comparative similarity in features determines choice
cannibalization (i.e., the degree to which two alternatives
swap out for each other in a market; Rumelhart and Greeno
1971; Huber and Puto 1983). Similarly, research has
suggested that the degree to which consideration of one item
influences predictions and estimates about a second item
depends on the degree of comparative similarity, defined
over the features of the items (Gilovich 1981; Read 1983;
Loken, Ross and Hinkle 1986).
In recent years, decision researchers have explored the
impact of a wide range of contextual factors external to the
decision (as opposed to the context defined by the choice
options themselves). One particularly influential stream of

research has been work on how different forms of
psychological distance (including temporal context) affect
construal level and shift relative preference for concrete vs.
abstract benefits (see Trope, Liberman and Wakslak 2007
for a detailed review). According to construal level theory,
contextual factors that induce a sense of psychological
distance (including but not limited to time) prompt a higher
level of abstraction in subsequent judgments. Therefore,
when people are thinking about concepts at great
psychological distance (e.g., in a distant future context),
they tend to think of them in abstract, holistic, and gist-like
terms. In contrast, when thinking of concepts at greater
psychological proximity (e.g., in a near future context),
people think in more concrete, more detailed terms.
There is some initial evidence that construal level can
affect how people think about similarity. Day and Bartels
(2008) asked participants to judge the similarity of pairs of
events, such as visiting the dentist and joining a health club
(which are both health-promotion behaviors) or visiting the
dentist and getting a tattoo (which share the concrete
features of a reclining chair, needles and pain). They found
that pairs of events sharing abstract commonalities (e.g.,
dentist and health club) were judged more similar with
greater temporal distance while the opposite trend held for
pairs sharing low-level concrete features (e.g., dentist and
tattoo). These similarity findings suggest an unstudied
impact of construal level on representation, distinct from the
widely studied impact of construal on how abstract and
concrete benefits are valued.
We propose that people thinking about distant future
choices are likely to engender more abstract representations
of the choice alternatives and thus put more emphasis on
attributes with abstract or intangible benefits when judging
similarity and that people thinking about near future choices
are more likely to engender more detailed, concrete
representations and thus put more emphasis on attributes
with concrete tangible benefits in evaluating similarity.
These shifts in the similarity relations between choice
alternatives, in turn, can affect the inferences underlying
valuation and choice.

Study 1: Shifts in the Basis of Similarity Due
to Temporal Context Affect Willingness to Pay
In this study, we demonstrate a parallel between how an
“ideal” option (with high values on all the relevant
attributes) influences both similarity and preference
evaluations (Medin, Goldstone and Markman 1995; Kaplan

2872

Table 1: Stimuli Used In Study 1
Durability
Ride Feel
Bike J
4.4
3.7
Bike K
8.5
9.3
Bike L
6.7
9.3
Bike M
8.5
6.8

Retail Price
$350
$1,300
?
?

Method.
One hundred twelve participants filled out a brief
questionnaire in exchange for a nominal cash payment. This
study employed a two-condition (temporal context: near vs.
distant future), between-subjects design. Participants were
asked to imagine buying a bicycle either in a week (near
future condition) or in a year (distant future condition).
Then, they rated the similarity (on a nine point scale) of an
ideal object in the category (Bike K, with the highest ratings
on both durability and ride feel) and each of three other
objects. The exact attribute rating values were provided to
the participants and retail prices were provided for the two
non-target items (see Table 1). Providing the actual values
helps to control for possible effects of temporal context on

different inferences or interpretations that might occur with
more natural feature descriptions. Participants then
indicated their willingness to pay for the ideal object and
both target objects.
The objects were described such that Bike J was
dominated by all three competing objects. Bike L matched
the ideal object (Bike K) on the desirability attribute (ride
feel) but was inferior on the pragmatic, feasibility
dimension (durability). Conversely, Bike M matched the
ideal object on the feasibility dimension but was inferior on
the desirability dimension. The test of our hypothesis was
whether Bike L (the more desirable, less practical option)
and Bike M (the less desirable, more practical option) would
be perceived as relatively more or less similar to the
relatively expensive ideal object, and whether these
similarity relations would then affect people’s willingness to
pay for Bikes L and M.

Results and Discussion.
6

700
Bike M

Willingness to Pay

Rated Similarity to Ideal

and Medin 1997). Furthermore, we show that temporal
context can affect the perception of similarity between
products within a category, with consequences for how an
ideal option influences judgments about other choice
options. In particular, when a product is seen as more
similar to a high-priced ideal product, we predict that people
will have a higher willingness-to-pay for the product,
compared to when it seems less similar to the ideal.
We will contrast features that relate to practical concerns
(e.g., the durability of the object) and those features that
relate directly to the enjoyment of consuming the object.
This distinction is closely linked to an early distinction
drawn in the literature on construal level theory between
“feasibility” and “desirability” (Liberman and Trope 1998).
In those terms, desirability concerns to the value of an
experience (e.g., “that’s a fun car to drive), whereas
feasibility concerns the ease or difficulty of achieving the
experience (e.g., “but it’s always in the repair shop”).
Previous studies have shown that people give more weight
to feasibility-related concerns for near future choices and
more weight to desirability-related concerns for distant
future choices.
In this study, we manipulate similarity via changes in
temporal context and show that this change in the
underlying similarity relations produces changes in people’s
valuation of choice alternatives. If thinking about the near
future makes pragmatic feasibility considerations more
prominent as a basis of similarity, the products that perform
similarly on dimensions relating to the practical use of the
product should be perceived as relatively more similar in the
near future than in the distant future. In contrast, if thinking
about products in the distant future leads to a focus on
desirability, then products which are similarly enjoyable
should be perceived as relatively more similar in the distant
future than in the near future.

5

4

Bike L
$611

600

Bike L

Bike M

$593 $576

$546

500

03

0
400
week

year

week

year

Figure 1: Effect of time on similarity, willingness to pay
Pretest. As part of a larger separate study, 82 participants
were presented with two attributes for each of a set of
product categories and were asked to rate “to what extent
does this attribute determine the product’s desirability”
versus “to what extent does this attribute determine the
product’s feasibility” on a one (desirability) to six
(feasibility) scale. On the basis of this pretest, we selected
bicycles described in terms of durability and ride feel for the
main study. In particular, participants distinguished
durability (M = 4.77) from ride feel ratings (M = 2.77,
paired-t (81) = 8.34, p < .001) along the feasibility and
desirability dimensions. Durability was rated significantly
above the midpoint of the scale (and thus, seen as
determining the product’s feasibility; t = 8.31, p < .001) and
ride feel was rated significantly below the midpoint of the
scale (seen as determining desirability; t = -4.34, p < .001).
Similarity ratings. In the study itself, as can be seen in the
left panel of Figure 1, in the near future the high feasibility,
low desirability bike is seen as more similar to the ideal than
the low desirability, high feasibility bike. In the distant
future, the pattern reverses. A 2 (condition: near vs. distant
future) x 2 (object: Bike L vs. Bike M) ANOVA finds two
main effects and the predicted interaction. Overall, people
thought Bike M was more similar to the ideal (M = 5.42)
than was Bike L (M = 5.02, F (1, 110) = 5.79, p < .05), and

2873

they perceived greater similarity overall in the distant future
than in the near future (F (1,110) = 4.69, p < .05). Most
importantly, the perceived relative similarity of the two
target objects to the ideal shifted over time, as revealed by
the significant interaction term (F (1,110) = 14.84, p < .001)
Willingness to pay. As predicted, temporal context shifts
the relative willingness to pay for the two target objects. As
can be seen in the right panel of Figure 3, in the near future,
people are willing to pay more for the high feasibility, low
desirability bike than the low desirability, high feasibility
bike. In the distant future, however, the pattern reverses. A 2
(condition: near vs. distant future) x 2 (object: Bike L vs.
Bike M) ANOVA finds the only the predicted interaction (F
(1, 110) = 6.36, p < .0) and no main effects for object or
temporal context (both ps > .1).
We next ran a mediation analysis using each participant’s
difference in rated similarity (SimML= rated similarity of
Bike M to the ideal - rated similarity of Bike L to the ideal)
and each participant’s difference in buying prices for the
focal objects (WTPML = willingness to pay for Bike M willingness to pay for Bike L). Using a Sobel test, we find
that the effect of the manipulation is significantly reduced
when controlling for difference in similarity (z = 2.18, p
=.02), suggesting that it is the shift in similarity that
mediates the impact of the timing manipulation on
willingness to pay.
Study 1 demonstrates that temporal context systematically
changes the willingness to pay for bikes defined by
feasibility vs. desirability benefits. Moreover, our findings
suggest that temporal context operates by changing the
underlying perceived similarity within the option set,
between the target objects and the ideal object. This
supports our proposition that temporal context can affect
valuation indirectly via representational change, rather than
by directly affecting the perceived value of attributes.

values of an inferior option while holding all other options
constant. Participants were asked to imagine buying a
bicycle in the intermediate future (in six weeks). Then, they
were shown the durability and ride feel ratings for four
bikes, with an ideal bike K and an inferior bike J. In the
extended durability condition, item J was inferior due to a
very low rating on durability. In the extended ride-feel
condition, item J was inferior due to a very low rating on
ride feel. The stimuli each participant saw consisted of
Bikes K, L and M from Study 1 (Table 1), as well as one of
the two new versions of Bike J (Table 2), depending on the
condition.
Table 2: Stimuli Used For Bike J in Study 2
Ride
Durability
Feel
Extend durability:
1.2
9.3
Extend feasibility:
8.5
1.2
Bike K, L, M as in Table 1

Retail
Price
$350
$350

Participants rated the similarity on a nine point scale
between the ideal product in the category (Bike K) and each
of three other products. Then, they indicated their
willingness to pay for the ideal product and both target
products. We assume that Bike J’s low score will extend the
range on one dimension (either durability or ride feel,
depending on the condition) and will therefore make the
target bike that scores high on that dimension seem more
similar to the ideal (cf. Parducci 1965). Thus, we predicted
that Bike L (the more desirable, less practical option) would
seem more similar to the ideal and be higher valued in the
extended ride-feel condition and that Bike M (the less
desirable, more practical option) would seem more similar
to the ideal product and would have higher valuation in the
extended durability condition.

Results and Discussion.

Study 2: Shifts in Similarity Due to Attribute
Range Affect Willingness to Pay
A limitation of Study 1 is that we cannot fully distinguish
our proposed order of causality (construal affects similarity,
which influences willingness to pay) from other possible
relationships. To provide further support, in this study, we
manipulate the attributes of a clearly inferior option to
demonstrate that changes in the comparisons prompted by
the consideration set impact how similar to the ideal a target
product seems to be, which, in turn, drives valuations of the
target product. In this study, we demonstrate this effect
using a range manipulation which manipulates similarity
directly, but does not involve temporal construal.

Method.
One hundred thirteen participants completed this study.
We employed a two-condition between-subjects design,
manipulating the perceived range of either the durability
ratings or the ride-feel ratings by changing the attribute

Similarity ratings. The high feasibility, low desirability
Bike M is seen as directionally more similar to the ideal
Bike K in the extended ride-feel condition (when Bike J has
low ride-feel) than in the extended durability condition
(when Bike J has low durability; M = 5.2 vs. M = 6.0).
Conversely, the high desirability, low feasibility Bike L is
seen as directionally more similar to the ideal Bike K in the
extended durability condition than in the extended ride-feel
condition (M = 6.6 vs. M = 6.3). A 2 (condition: extended
ride-feel vs. durability) x 2 (product: Bike L vs. Bike M)
mixed ANOVA finds a significant interaction (F(1,111) =
8.1, p < .01), as well as a significant main effect of the
product (F(1,111) = 36.3, p < .01). There was no main effect
of manipulating the attribute values of the inferior option
Bike J (e.g., extending ride-feel vs. durability, F < 1). Thus,
we conclude that the manipulation was successful in shifting
the perceived similarity of the two products to the ideal
product.

2874

Willingness to pay. Correspondingly, the manipulation of
the inferior option shifts the relative willingness to pay for
the two target products. A 2 (condition: extended ride-feel
vs. durability) x 2 (product: Bike L vs. Bike M) ANOVA
finds the predicted interaction (F(1, 111) = 6.1, p < .05) as
well as a main effect of the product (F(1, 111) = 23.4, p <
.01), but no main effect of the manipulation (F < 1.5, p >
.1). In particular, consumers had a higher valuation for the
desirable Bike L than for the feasible Bike M, but the
difference was fairly small in the extended ride-feel
condition and was much larger in the extended durability
condition (where Bike L was seen as more similar to the
ideal). We have argued that this occurs because
manipulating the range shifts the perceived similarity to the
more expensive ideal product, impacting the degree to
which the price of the ideal bike is incorporated into the
judgment of willingness to pay.
To further support this interpretation, we ran a mediation
analysis using each participant’s difference in rated
similarity (SimML= rated similarity of Bike M to the ideal
- rated similarity of Bike L to the ideal) and each
participant’s difference in buying prices for the focal
products (WTPML = willingness to pay for Bike M willingness to pay for Bike L). First, we confirm that the
range manipulation (extending durability vs. ride-feel)
impacts the difference in similarity (β = .68, t = 2.9, p < .01)
in a simple regression. Second, we confirm that the range
manipulation likewise impacts the difference in willingness
to pay (β = 66.3, t = 2.5, p < .05) in a simple regression.
Lastly, in a multiple regression predicting difference in
willingness to pay, we find a significant effect of difference
in similarity (β = 34.5, t = 3.4, p < .01) and a non-significant
effect of the attribute range manipulation (β = 42.9, t = 1.6,
p = .11). Using a Sobel test, we find that the effect of the
manipulation is significantly reduced when controlling for
difference in similarity (z = 2.2, p <.05), suggesting that it is
the shift in similarity that mediates the impact of the timing
manipulation on willingness to pay.

Study 3: Shifts in the Basis of Similarity and
Differential Substitution
In the prior study, we demonstrated that shifts in similarity
due to temporal context yield changes in how the price of an
ideal impacts valuation. Next, we investigate how temporal
construal interacts with similarity-based context effects in a
choice set. In Study 3, we distinguish between the direct
effect of temporal context on preferences in two item
choices (where we replicate prior effects) and how temporal
context impacts three-item choices via shifts in similarity
among the options, yielding patterns of choice different
from what is predicted as a direct effect of temporal context.
Participants were asked to choose the internship they
would prefer from a set of possible internships, which
varied along the dimensions of how enjoyable the everyday
experiences were and how consistent or inconsistent the
internship was with the participants’ higher-order goals. Our
design makes use of the distinction between commonalities

in concrete experiences vs. commonalities in how behaviors
relate to higher-order abstractions (goals). Internships with
commonalities in features relating to everyday experiences
are expected to be perceived as more similar in the near
future than in the distant future (Day and Bartels 2008).
While such shifts in similarity are not likely to impact
choices between two items, the addition of a third option to
the choice set induces a more complex assessment that can
hinge on the similarity relations between items in a set (see,
e.g, Dhar and Glazer 1996). We focus primarily on
substitution effects (i.e., similarity effects, per Tversky
1972, Huber and Puto 1983), in which one choice option
can differentially cannibalize choice of the more similarseeming of two other options. The “desirable” internship
(A) was designed to be relatively unattractive with respect
to daily activities (feasibility) but attractive in terms of the
intern’s higher-order goals (desirability). A second
“feasible” internship (B) was designed to be relatively
attractive with respect to daily activities but be relatively
unattractive in terms of the participant’s higher-order goals.
Some participants were also offered a third internship (C),
designed to have intermediate levels for both dimensions.
We expect that, in the binary choice conditions, temporal
distance will have a direct effect on preferences, such that
thinking about internships in the distant future will increase
the relative share of the most desirable internship (Liberman
& Trope, 1998). We predict that relative choice will reverse
with the addition of a third (intermediate) option, due to a
higher tendency to cannibalize the most desirable internship.

Method.
One
hundred
thirteen
native-English
speaking
undergraduate participants who self-identified as politically
moderate or liberal completed a short survey in a campuswide research lab for monetary compensation. This study
employed a 2 (temporal context: near vs. distant future) x 2
(choice set: 2 vs. 3 options), between-subjects design.
Participants were either asked to choose between serving
one of two (A or B, below) or between one of three
internships. After making their choice, they were asked to
rate all pair-wise similarities among the options they had
read about. The descriptions were as follows:
A:“Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Administrative
Intern—Interns provide clerical assistance (copying, filing and
maintaining office supplies) and receptionist support to Associates
working on the Carnegie Endowment’s projects such as nonproliferation, democracy building, trade, China-related issues,
South Asian issues and Russian/Eurasian studies.”
B: “Exxon, Advertising and Social Events Intern—Exxon is the
world's largest publicly traded international oil and gas company.
Interns provide day to day direction to ad agency counterparts on
project basis, attend filming of commercials and organize social
events.”
C:“Target Corporation, Marketing Intern—Target is the fifth
largest retailer in the U.S. Interns will assist in the development of
marketing programs, analyze current consumer trends, business
results and competitor activities and help develop presentations to
the object management teams.”

2875

In the 2-choice conditions, we expect to replicate the
findings of Liberman and Trope (1998), such that temporal
distance induces a preference for the desirable (A) over the
feasible (B) internship. Half of our participants read about
these two internships while half considered all three.
Participants imagined having to make a choice about which
one to serve starting either next week or next year. We will
compare how temporal context affects the similarity
relations among the internships and relative choice shares of
internships A and B in the two vs. three-choice conditions.
Table 3: Results of Study 3
Carnegie
(A)

Exxon
(B)

Target
(C)

43

57

--

Three options Week
Relative share:

61
81

14
19

25

Two options

60

40

--

34
61

22
39

44

Share of Choice (%):
Two options

Week

Year

Three options Year
Relative share:

Results and Discussion.
Two-choice conditions. We predicted that because people
would focus more on higher-order aspects than on everyday
experiences in the distant future, people would prefer
internship A over internship B in this condition. For the near
future condition, we predicted that people would focus more
on concrete experiences than on the broad implications, and
thus would prefer the enjoyable job (B) over the goalcongruent job (A). We observed a non-significant effect in
the predicted direction. Participants favored internship A
(over internship B) when it started in a year, but not when it
started in a week (60% vs. 43%, p = .17, one-tailed exact
test). This is in the same direction as the original Lieberman
and Trope finding, but not significant due to the small
sample size.
Three-choice conditions: similarity. Next, we analyze the
similarity relations between the intermediate option (C) and
each of the focal options. A pretest indicated that internship
C was rated higher for “concrete experiences” than for
“broad implications”, similar to internship B. However,
internship C’s ratings for “broad implications” were similar
in value to internship A. Thus, we predict that in the distant
future, people would base their similarity judgments more
on the higher-order aspects of the job and therefore see C as
intermediate between A and B. However, in the near future,
when concrete experiences are highlighted, people would
see C as more similar to B than to A. A 2 (near vs. distant
future) x 2 mixed within-between ANOVA (similarity of C
to A vs. B) finds the predicted interaction (F = 5.0, p < .05)
as well as a main effect of comparison internship (F = 94.7,
p < .001) but no main effect of temporal context (F < 1). In
the near future, the intermediate internship C is seen as

more similar to internship B than it is to internship A (M =
3.5 vs. M = 1.9). In the distant future, however, the
difference in internship C’s similarity to internship B vs.
similarity to internship A is significantly reduced (M = 3.2
vs. 2.1), based on a 2 x 2 mixed within-between ANOVA (F
= 5.0, p < .05).
Three-choice conditions: choice shares. Among those who
chose either A or B in the distant future condition, the
relative choice share for B over A was 61% (vs. 60% in the
two-choice condition). In the near future, however, when
people focus more on the concrete experiences as the basis
for similarity, internship C is viewed as substantially more
similar to the internship B than it is to internship A. The
choice share results indicate that this shift in perceived
similarity creates a substitution effect whereby C
cannibalizes the share of B more than the share of A.
Among those who chose either A or B in the distant future
condition, the relative choice share for B (over A) was only
19% (down from 57% in the two-choice condition; p < .01,
Fisher exact test). A logistic regression confirms that the
degree of cannibalization differs in the near future vs.
distant future conditions. We found a significant interaction
(time x choice set,  = -1.7, Wald = 3.3, p < .05 onetailed) as well as main effects of choice set and time (SET =
2.4, Wald = 3.2, p < .10 and TIME = 3.4, Wald = 5.3, p <
.05).
Note that people’s preferences in the three option
conditions cannot be explained by construal level
differentially affecting decision weights for lower-order and
higher-order attributes, which would instead predict
polarization—that people would instead choose the option
which dominates the other two on the dimension highlighted
by the temporal context. Rather, our results are explained by
the shift in the basis of similarity judgments—in the near
future, the intermediate option does not affect the choice
share of the original options, but in the distant future this
option is seen as highly similar to one and thus differentially
cannibalizes its share.

Discussion
In this paper, we have argued that the malleability of
perceived similarity plays an important, and under-studied,
role in people’s valuations and choices. Changes in
temporal context, in particular, affect the basis of perceived
similarity, shifting from a focus on concrete, feasibility
attributes to more abstract, desirability attributes, which
then has downstream effects on decision making processes.
The similarity of an item to a salient ideal version has
been discussed as a potential key factor in judgments
(Barsalou 1985, Kahneman and Miller 1986) and choices
(Medin, Goldstone and Markman 1995). In Study 1, we
presented direct evidence for exactly such a role,
demonstrating that the perceived similarity to a category
ideal impacts willingness to pay, holding constant the
objective features of the objects. Furthermore, the perceived
similarity to the ideal is malleable, shifting systematically

2876

with the temporal context. This finding is further supported
by Study 2, in which we directly manipulate similarity.
While we explicitly present an ideal object in the option set
in our studies, in general, the consideration of such ideals
may be spontaneously prompted by recalled objects or by
ideals implied by the combination of the best attribute
values present in the choice set, yielding similar effects on
valuation.
Our findings support the view that similarity to options
within the choice set is implicated in some context effects
(Dhar and Glazer 1996). In particular, while cannibalization
(or, equivalently, similarity) effects have been found to be
relatively weak when providing quantified attribute
information (Huber and Puto 1983), we provide evidence
for this effect in a choice set with naturalistic descriptions
(e.g., where attribute levels are inferred from the
description, rather than explicitly provided). Furthermore,
we provide evidences that this effect on choice depends, in
part, on factors in the external context (e.g., temporal
framing), which change the perceived similarity among the
choice options.
These findings also have implications for research on
psychological distance. It is important to note that the
effects we demonstrated are not necessarily limited to the
impact of temporal context. Our hypotheses arise from the
general effects of psychological distance on similarity and,
via shifts in similarity, on decision making. We would
predict that other dimensions of psychological distance,
such as physical or social distance, probability, or
hypotheticality, are likely to produce similar effects. In fact,
these studies suggest that the psychological-distance-based
effects of such factors on decision making might be thought
of as either a direct effect of construal level (e.g., as
changing the weights given to features involved in
desirability and feasibility) or as an indirect effect, via shifts
in similarity among either the explicit choice options
themselves or between choice options and spontaneously
generated comparison items.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, Central Tendency, and
Frequency of Instantiation as Determinants of Graded
Structure in Categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629654.
Day, S. B., and D. M. Bartels (2008). Representation Over
Time: The Effects of Temporal Distance on Similarity.
Cognition, 106, 1504-1513.
Dhar, R. and R. Glazer (1996). Similarity in Context:
Cognitive Representation and Violation of Preference and
Perceptual
Invariance
in
Consumer
Choice.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
67, 280-293.
Gentner, D. & A. B. Markman (1997). Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity. American Psychologist 52, 45-56.
Gilovich, T. (1981). Seeing the Past in the Present: The
Effect of Associations to Familiar Events on Judgments

and Decisions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 40(5), 797-808.
Hintzman, D. L. 1984. MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human
memory.
Behavior
Research
Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 16, 96–101.
Huber, J. and C. Puto (1983). Market Boundaries and
Object Choice: Illustrating Attraction and Substitution
Effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 10, 31-44.
Hummel, J. E. and K. J. Holyoak (1997). Distributed
Representations of Structure: A Theory of Analogical
Access and Mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427466.
Kahneman, D. and D. T. Miller (1986). Norm Theory:
Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives. Psychological
Review, 93(2), 136-153.
Kaplan, A., & M., Douglas (1997). The coincidence effect
in similarity and choice. Memory and Cognition, 25, 570576.
Liberman, N. and Y. Trope (1998). The Role of Feasibility
and Desirability Considerations in Near and Distant
Future Decisions: A Test of Temporal Construal Theory.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 5–18.
Loken, B., I. Ross and R. L. Hinkle (1986). Consumer
Confusion of Origin and Brand Similarity Perceptions.
Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 5, 195-211.
Markman, A. B. and J. Loewenstein (2010). Structural
Comparison and Consumer Choice. Journal of Consumer
Psychology, 20, 126-137.
Medin, D. L., R. L. Goldstone and A. B. Markman (1995).
Comparison and Choice: Relations Between Similarity
Processes and Decision Processes. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 2(1), 1–19.
Medin, D. L. and M. M. Schaffer (1978). Context Theory of
Classification Learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207238.
Parducci, Allen (1965). Category judgment: A rangefrequency model. Psychological Review, Vol 72(6), 407418.
Read, S. J. (1983). Once is Enough: Causal Reasoning From
a Single Instance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45 (August), 323-334.
Rumelhart, D. L. and J. G. Greeno (1971). Similarity
Between Stimuli: An Experimental Test of the Luce and
Restle Choice Models. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 8, 370–381.
Trope, Y., N. Liberman, and C. Wakslak (2007). Construal
Levels and Psychological Distance: Effects on
Representation, Prediction, Evaluation, and Behavior.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 17(2), 83–95.
Tversky, A. (1972), Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of
Choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281-299.
Wertheimer, M. (1923/1958). Principles of perceptual
organization. In D. C. Beardslee & M. Wertheimer (Eds.),
Readings in perception. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand (pp.
115–135).

2877

