UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The modulation of word type frequency on hemispheric lateralization of visual word
recognition: Evidence from modeling Chinese character recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80d3m6pm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen
Cheung, Kit

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The modulation of word type frequency on hemispheric lateralization of visual word
recognition: Evidence from modeling Chinese character recognition
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Kit Cheung (ckit@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
604 Knowles Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
that makes the readers opt to obtain phonological
information from the right side of a character, and thus the
automaticity of phonological processing in the recognition
of SP characters is superior to PS characters; consequently
SP character processing involves more LH phonological
modulation (Maurer & McCandliss, 2007).

Abstract
In Chinese orthography, a dominant structure exists in which
a semantic radical appears on the left and a phonetic radical
on the right (SP characters); the minority, opposite
arrangement also exists (PS characters). Recent studies
showed that SP character processing is more left hemisphere
(LH) lateralized than PS character processing; nevertheless, it
remains unclear whether this is due to phonetic radical
position or character type frequency. Through computational
modeling with artificial lexicons, in which we implement a
theory of hemispheric asymmetry in perception but do not
assume phonological processing being LH lateralized, we
show that the difference in character type frequency alone is
sufficient to exhibit the effect that the dominant type has a
stronger LH lateralization than the minority type. This effect
is due to higher visual similarity among characters in the
dominant type than the minority type, demonstrating the
modulation of word type frequency on hemispheric
lateralization.

Figure 1: Examples of Chinese SP and PS characters. The
two characters have the same phonetic radical and the same
pronunciation [cai3] in Pinyin; their phonetic radicals also
have the same pronunciation [cai3].
Here we aim to examine whether this lateralization
difference between SP and PS characters can emerge purely
due to the difference in their character type frequency in the
lexicon, without assuming phonological processing being
LH lateralized. We use a model (Hsiao, Shieh, & Cottrell,
2008) that implements a theory of hemispheric asymmetry
in perception, Double Filtering by Frequency (DFF; Ivry &
Robertson, 1998). The theory posits that visual information
coming into the brain goes through two frequency-filtering
stages: the first stage involves selection of a task-relevant
frequency range, and at the second stage, the LH amplifies
high spatial frequency (HSF) information, whereas the RH
amplifies low spatial frequency (LSF) information. We
introduce our model below.
In human visual pathways, the visual field is divided
vertically into two hemifields, which are initially
contralaterally projected to different hemispheres. Hsiao et
al. (2008) conducted a computational modeling study
aiming to examine at which processing stage this split
information converges. They proposed three models with
different timings of convergence: early, intermediate and
late (Figure 2), and examine whether the model could
account for the effect that a chimeric face made from two
left half-faces (from the viewer’s perspective) are usually
judged more similar to the original face than the one made
from two right half-faces (e.g., Gilbert & Bakan, 1973).
They showed that both the intermediate and late
convergence models were able to account for the effect,
whereas the early convergence model was not.
Hsiao et al.’s (2008) model adopted several known
observations about visual anatomy and neural computation:
Gabor filter responses over the input images were used to
simulate neural responses of cells in the early visual system
(Lades et al., 1993); Principal Component Analysis (PCA),

Keywords: hemispheric asymmetry, word type frequency,
Chinese character recognition, computational modeling.

Introduction
Chinese phonetic compound characters are a major type of
characters in Chinese orthography; they comprise about
81% of the 7,000 frequent characters in a Chinese dictionary
(Li & Kang, 1993). A phonetic compound consists of a
semantic radical and a phonetic radical. The semantic
radical usually has information about the character meaning,
whereas the phonetic radical usually has information about
the character pronunciation. Most phonetic compounds have
a left-right structure; a dominant arrangement exists in
which a semantic radical appears on the left and a phonetic
radical on the right (SP characters). This character type
comprises about 90% of all left-right structured phonetic
compounds. The opposite, minority (10%) arrangement also
exists (PS characters; Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006; Figure 1).
Recent studies have suggested that SP and PS characters
are processed differently in the brain. For example, Hsiao,
Shillcock, and Lee (2007) showed that in a homophone
judgment task, SP characters elicited larger N170 ERP
amplitude in the left hemisphere (LH) than the right
hemisphere (RH), whereas PS characters elicited similar
amplitude in both hemispheres. Consistent with this finding,
Hsiao and Liu (2010) showed a right visual field (RVF)/LH
advantage in naming SP characters and no hemispheric
lateralization in naming PS characters. This result suggests
that SP character processing is more LH lateralized than PS
character processing. The authors argued that this effect
may be due to the dominance of SP characters in the lexicon

891

a biologically plausible linear compression technique
(Sanger, 1989), was used to simulate possible information
extraction processes beyond the early visual area; this PCA
representation was then used as the input to a two-layer
neural network (Figure 3). They also implemented the DFF
theory in the model by using two sigmoid weighting
functions to assign different weights to the Gabor filter
responses in the two hemispheres (Figure 3).

no systematic mapping between word components and
pronunciation components. Consequently, word recognition
in this condition does not require decomposition of word
input into components, and thus is more RH lateralized.
This result is consistent with the literature: the processing of
visual word recognition in alphabetic languages is usually
more LH lateralized (e.g., English: McCandliss, Cohen, &
Dehaene, 2003; Spanish: Hernandez, Nieto, & Barroso,
1992; Hebrew: Bentin, 1981; Japanese phonetic script kana:
Hanavan & Coney, 2005; Korean Hangul words: Endo,
Shimiza, & Nakamura, 1981) compared with the processing
of Chinese characters, a logographic language (e.g., Tzeng
et al., 1979; Leong et al., 1985).
Thus, because of the dominance of the SP structure in
the Chinese lexicon, it is possible that (a) SP characters may
look visually more similar to each other compared with PS
characters, leading to a stronger LH lateralization.
Alternatively, it may also be that (b) Chinese readers opt to
decompose an SP character into radicals, map the right
radical to the corresponding pronunciation, and use this
information to facilitate the retrieval of the character
pronunciation; in contrast, they may not attempt to
decompose a PS character since they are not used to
obtaining phonological information from the left radical.
This decomposition effect may lead to a stronger LH
lateralization in SP character processing than PS characters.
Here we test these two hypotheses through
computational modeling, since models give us good control
over variables that are difficult to tease apart in human
studies. In the Chinese orthography, in addition to character
type frequency, SP and PS characters differ in at least three
other aspects: (1) Position of the phonetic radical; (2)
Character configuration in terms of visual complexity: since
semantic radicals usually have fewer strokes than phonetic
radicals, SP characters tend to have a right-heavy
configuration, whereas PS characters usually have a leftheavy configuration. (3) Character information structure (in
terms of entropy): Since there are more phonetic radical
types than semantic radical types (the ratio is about 8 to 1;
Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006), in SP characters there is more
information on the right, whereas in PS characters there is
more information on the left 1. To examine the influence of
character type frequency on hemispheric lateralization, in
Experiment 1 we created artificial lexicons with SP and PS
structures and manipulated their character type frequency
(equal frequency vs. SP dominant vs. PS dominant) with all
the other three factors controlled. To examine how position
of the phonetic radical influence lateralization, in
Experiment 2, in addition to character type frequency, we
also manipulated position of the phonetic radical, with both
radical visual complexity (factor (2)) and character
information structure (factor (3)) controlled.

Figure 2: Hemispheric models with different
timing of convergence (Hsiao et al., 2008).

Figure 3: Hsiao et al.’s model (2008).
Here we apply Hsiao et al.’s intermediate convergence
model (2008) to visual word recognition and examine
whether the hemispheric lateralization difference between
SP and PS character processing can emerge purely due to
their difference in character type frequency in the lexicon.
Cheung and Hsiao (2010) recently used the same model and
demonstrated that visual and task characteristics of a writing
system alone could account for hemispheric asymmetry
difference in visual word recognition between different
languages, without assuming phonological processing being
LH lateralized. Specifically, they showed that (a) the more
similar the words are in the lexicon, the more HSFs are
required, leading to a stronger LH lateralization; and (b)
alphabetic mapping from orthography to phonology requires
more HSFs than logographic mapping, resulting in a
stronger LH lateralization. In alphabetic mapping, visual
word recognition involves a systematic mapping from word
components to corresponding components in the
pronunciation (i.e. grapheme-phoneme correspondence). In
this condition, word recognition requires decomposition of
word input into components in order to map them to
corresponding phonemes, and thus requires more HSFs. In
contrast, in logographic mapping, each word input is
mapped to a pronunciation at the syllable level and there is

1

Another difference between SP and PS characters is that the
percentage of regular characters is higher in SP characters than in
PS characters (a regular character has the same pronunciation as its
phonetic radical). Here we focus on structural differences and do
not aim to examine the factor of pronunciation regularity; in the
artificial lexicons we assume all characters are regular.

892

projected (e.g. Jordan & Paterson, 2009). Thus, in separate
simulations we projected the same word input to both
hemispheres (i.e. the bilateral model) and compared it with
the split architecture.

Modeling Methods and Results
In our model we first applied a 10 x 10 rigid grid of 2D
Gabor filters (Daugman, 1985) to the character images; at
each grid point we applied Gabor filters with 8 orientations
and 5 frequency scales (following Hsiao et al., 2008;
Cheung & Hsiao, 2010). Gabor filter responses in different
scales were subsequently given different weights; two
conditions were created: (1) the unbiased condition, in
which Gabor responses in all scales were given equal
weights in both visual hemifields, and (2) the biased
condition, in which larger weights were given to HSF
responses in the RVF/LH, and larger weights were given to
LSF responses in the left visual field (LVF)/RH (the second
stage of the DFF; the weights were determined by a sigmoid
function (Figure 3)). The difference in the model’s behavior
between the two conditions thus reflected the influence of
frequency bias (DFF) on the lateralization effects.
The LVF and RVF Gabor representations were then
compressed by PCA separately into two 50-element
representations (100 elements in total; Hsiao et al., 2008),
which were then z-scored to equalize the contribution of
each element. The z-scored PCA representation was then
used as the input to a two-layer neural network (NN). The
NN was trained to recognize input images by mapping them
to corresponding pronunciations at the syllable level (the
pronunciation of each Chinese character only has one
syllable); there were 15 nodes in the output layer,
corresponding to pronunciations of 15 phonetic radicals;
each character had the same pronunciation as its phonetic
radical1. The training continued until the performance on the
training set reached mean-square-error 0.001 or until it
could not be further improved. Gradient descent with an
adaptive learning rate was used as the training algorithm. To
measure lateralization effects, we damaged either the LH
PCA or the RH PCA representation of the test images by
setting the representation to zeros; a LH lateralization index
was defined as the accuracy difference between recognizing
a RH/LVF damaged character (only LH/RVF representation
was available) as the original image and recognizing a
LH/RVF damaged character (only RH/LVF representation
was available) as the original image. A higher index hence
corresponded to a stronger LH lateralization and indicated
the model’s reliance on HSF information.
In the following experiments, for each condition we ran
the model with 20 different lexicons, each containing 100
pseudo-characters; for each character there were 8 images in
different fonts, with 4 of them used for training and the
other 4 for testing (counterbalanced across simulation runs).
The image size was 60 x 60 pixels. For each lexicon, 10
different sets of NN weight initialization were used, and the
average accuracy over the 10 runs was used for data
analysis. This was to minimize the fluctuation in accuracy
caused by the random weight initialization. These 10 sets of
weight initialization were the same across different
conditions to closely match the models.
Although our model assumed split architecture (i.e. the
split model; see Ellis & Brysbaert, 2010), some have argued
that the fovea representation for reading is bilaterally

Experiment 1
Here we examined the influence of character type frequency
on hemispheric lateralization of character processing, with
all the other three factors controlled: (1) position of the
phonetic radical, (2) character configuration, and (3)
character information structure. We created artificial
lexicons with pseudo-characters and manipulated the
proportions of SP and PS characters. Each pseudo-character
was generated by concatenating two mirror-symmetric
radicals. To control for factor (1), characters formed a topbottom configuration (Figure 4) so that the phonetic radical
was not biased to either the LVF or RVF. One of the two
radicals was randomly chosen from a “P list” (phonetic
radicals), while the other was randomly chosen from “S1
list” (semantic radicals) if it was placed on the top (SP
characters, for the current purpose), or from “S 2 list” if it
was placed on the bottom (PS characters). Each list
contained 15 radicals, so there were 15x15 (225) possible
combinations in total for either SP or PS characters. This
was to simulate the Chinese orthography in which SP and
PS characters may have the same phonetic radicals, but the
semantic radicals are usually different.

S1P
PS2
Experiment 1

S1P
PS2
Experiment 2

Top-Bottom Configuration
Choices S1:15 S2:15 P:15

Left-Right Configuration
Choices S1:15 S2:15 P:15

Figure 4: Stimuli images for the 2 experiments.
Each artificial lexicon contained 100 pseudo-characters.
The SP characters were randomly selected from different
combinations of S1-list radicals and P-list radicals; the
semantic radicals (S2-list) of the PS characters had the same
combinations with P-list radicals as those in the SP
characters. When a majority type of characters existed, the
combinations used for the minority type was randomly
selected from those for the majority type. The radical
choices in S1 and S2 lists were counterbalanced across
simulation runs. The radicals used were all existing stroke
patterns in Chinese, and the numbers of strokes of the
radicals in the 3 lists were matched (about 6.4 strokes on
average; factor (2)). The same number of radicals was used
for the P list and S lists, so that the amount of information
for recognition defined by entropy on either side of the
characters was balanced (i.e. factor (3)). Mirror images were
used in half of the simulation runs to counterbalance
possible low-level featural differences between the two
sides of the characters.
There were 3 variables in the design: Spatial frequency
(SF) bias (unbiased vs. biased), character type (SP vs. PS),
and type frequency (SP Dominant (90% SP, 10% PS) vs. PS

893

Dominant (10% SP, 90% PS) vs. equal frequency (50% SP,
50% PS))2 . The dependent variable was LH lateralization
index. The results showed a significant SF bias effect (F(1,
35) = 3509.536, p < 0.001; Figure 5, top row): In the biased
condition, the model exhibited less LH lateralization (LSF
preference), consistent with the literature showing a RH
(LSF) lateralization in Chinese character recognition (e.g.,
Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009). In addition, there was an
interaction between SF bias, character type, and type
frequency (F(2, 70) = 101.427, p < 0.001; Figure 5, top
row): in the unbiased condition, there was no effect of
character type or type frequency. In contrast, in the biased
condition, there was an interaction between character type
and type frequency (F(2, 72) = 222.974, p < 0.001): when
SP and PS characters had an equal type frequency, there was
no LH lateralization difference; when SP type was
dominant, SP character processing was more LH lateralized
(t(39) = 13.646, p < 0.001), whereas when PS type was
dominant, PS character processing was more LH lateralized
(t(39) = 12.534, p < 0.001). Thus, consistent with our
prediction, the dominant type had a stronger LH (HSF)
lateralization. Similar effects were also obtained in the
bilateral models.
To test whether the above effects were due to the
existence of a phonetic radical that biased phonological
information to one component (i.e. whether decomposition
was required), in a separate simulation, instead of mapping
each character systematically to the pronunciation of its
phonetic radical, we mapped each character to a randomly
assigned pronunciation in the output layer (i.e. logographic
mapping). The results (figure 5, bottom row) showed a
similar interaction between SF bias, character type and type
frequency (F(2, 72) = 79.881, p < 0.001): no effect of
character type or type frequency was observed in the
unbiased condition; in contrast, in the biased condition there
was an interaction between character type and type
frequency (F(2, 72) = 165.902, p < 0.001): the dominant
character type had a stronger LH lateralization than the
minority type. This result suggested that the type frequency
effect does not require the existence of a phonetic radical; it
emerged when the phonological information was not biased
to one radical and thus no decomposition was required.
When we compared the two mapping methods (regular vs.
logographic mappings) in the biased condition, there was a
significant mapping method effect (F(1, 72) = 101.161, p <
0.001): the regular mapping condition had a stronger LH
lateralization, suggesting that when the phonological
information was biased to one radical, and thus
decomposition of a character into radicals might be
required, the model had a stronger LH (HSF) lateralization.
A further analysis showed that the stronger LH
lateralization in the dominant character type was related to a
higher visual similarity among characters in the dominant
type compared with the minority type. The single linkage

(shortest distance) method was used to calculate the shortest
distance between the Gabor responses of a character and all
the other characters, as a measure of how similar this
character was to the other characters (e.g., Mardia, Kent, &
Bibby, 1980); the average of this shortest distance was used
as the similarity measure for each character type in the
lexicon. The results showed that characters in the dominant
type had a higher similarity among each other compared
with those in the minority type (SP dominant: t(60.348) =
7.829, p < 0.01; PS dominant: t(60.391) = -9.686, p < 0.001).
In addition, in both the regular and logographic mapping
conditions, the LH lateralization was significantly correlated
with the similarity measure: the more similar the characters
were in a character type, the stronger the LH lateralization
was in processing the character type (Regular Mapping: r =
-0.117, p = 0.01; Logographic Mapping: r = -0.131, p <
0.01). This effect suggests that the level of LH lateralization
in different character types may be mainly due to visual
similarity among characters.

Figure 5: LH lateralization index in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Here we used the same settings and radicals as Experiment
1, except that the radicals were arranged horizontally to
form left-right structures (Figure 4). We examined the
factors of type frequency and position of the phonetic
radical (i.e. factor (1); no mirror images were used here
since the position of the phonetic radical was manipulated).
In contrast to Experiment 1, the results showed that in
both unbiased and nonbiased cases, there was an interaction
between character type and type frequency (unbiased: F(2,
76) = 151.836, p < 0.001; biased: F(2, 76) = 167.338, p <
0.001; Figure 6): in general, SP character processing was
lateralized to the RVF/LH, where the phonetic radical
appeared, whereas PS character processing was lateralized
to the LVF/RH, regardless of SF bias. This effect was also
modulated by type frequency: this lateralization effect due
to position of the phonetic radical was weaker in the

2
We also included 2 Latin-square variables to account for the
counterbalance of S1 and S2 lists, and using original or mirror
images (see, e.g., Brysbaert, 2007). Greehouse-Geisser correction
was applied whenever the assumption of sphericity was not met.

894

minority character type than the dominant type. In addition,
this interaction was stronger in the unbiased than the biased
condition (SF bias x character type x type frequency, F(2,
76) = 9.765, p < 0.001), suggesting additional influence
from the SF bias .
In contrast to the split model, in the bilateral model, the
character type by type frequency interaction was only
observed in the biased (F(2, 76) = 362.069, p < 0.001) but
not in the unbiased condition (n.s.); there was a significant
three-way interaction between SF bias, character type, and
type frequency (F(2, 76) = 312.876, p < 0.001). In the
biased condition, the dominant character type had a stronger
LH lateralization (SP dominant: t(39) = 14.354, p < 0.001;
PS dominant: t(39) = -17.558, p < 0.001; equal frequency:
t(39) = -1.111, n.s.); in contrast, in the unbiased condition,
no effect of character type or type frequency was observed.
This effect was similar to that in Experiment 1, in which the
two sides of the model also received the same amount of
information about the character pronunciation. Here the split
and bilateral models provided different testable predictions
that can be further examined by human experiments.

frequency content that is important for recognizing a
dominant or minority character type in the lexicon.
Through computational modeling, in which we
implemented a theory of hemispheric asymmetry in
perception (the DFF theory) but did not assume a LH
lateralized phonological processing center, we showed first
in Experiment 1 that when all the other possible factors that
may influence lateralization were controlled, including (1)
position of the phonetic radical, (2) visual complexity of the
radicals, and (3) character information structure defined by
entropy, hemispheric lateralization differences could emerge
purely due to a difference in character type frequency: the
dominant character type had a stronger LH (HSF)
lateralization than the minority type (in the biased condition,
Figure 5); this effect was obtained regardless of whether the
model assumed a split architecture or a non-split, bilateral
projection. In addition, this effect did not require the
existence of a phonetic radical that biased phonological
information to one component, as this effect also emerged in
the logographic mapping condition, in which there was no
systematic relationship between phonetic radicals and
character pronunciations. Further analysis suggests that this
effect was mainly due to higher visual similarity among
characters in the dominant type than those in the minority
type. With a fixed number of radicals, when we gradually
increased the number of characters in a character type, it
became more likely that some characters shared common
radicals and thus were visually similar to each other. This
effect was consistent with the previous finding that visual
similarity among words in a lexicon can influence
hemispheric lateralization in visual word recognition
(Cheung & Hsiao, 2010).
Using a similar model, Cheung and Hsiao (2010) have
previously shown that when a visual word recognition task
requires decomposition of a word into components in order
to map them to phonemes/pronunciation components (e.g.
alphabetic reading), more HSF information is required
compared with when this decomposition is not required (e.g.,
logographic reading). Consistent with this finding, the
current data also showed that in the regular mapping
condition, in which the phonetic radical consistently
provided information about the character pronunciation, the
model had a stronger LH lateralization than the logographic
mapping condition (in the biased condition, Figure 5); this
effect may be due to the existence of a phonetic radical
encouraged decomposition of a character into radicals in
order to identify the phonetic radical, leading to a higher
demand on HSF information.
In Experiment 2, we examined the effect of position of
the phonetic radical. The data showed that in the split model,
position of the phonetic radical modulated the lateralization
effect, regardless of whether the DFF theory was applied.
This effect was due to phonological information being on
one side of a character, and thus the processing was
lateralized to one visual hemifield; in addition, this phonetic
radical position effect was weaker in the minority character
type than in the dominant type. In contrast, this effect was
not observed in the bilateral model, since the character input
was bilaterally projected and thus the phonetic radical was

Figure 6: LH lateralization index in Experiment 2.

Conclusion and Discussion
Here we investigated the modulation of word type
frequency on hemispheric lateralization of visual word
recognition through modeling Chinese phonetic compound
recognition. We contrasted the processing of SP and PS
characters, in which the phonetic radical appeared in
opposite positions. Previous studies have shown that SP
character processing involves a stronger LH lateralization
than PS character processing; nevertheless, it remains
unclear whether this effect is because the processing of the
dominant SP structure has stronger automaticity of LH
phonological processing than that of the minority PS
structure, or simply due to differences in the spatial

895

available in both hemispheres. The results of the bilateral
model were consistent with Experiment 1: The dominant
character type had a stronger LH lateralization when the
DFF theory was applied. Here our data predicted different
behavior between the split and bilateral models; this
difference may be useful for resolving the controversy over
whether foveal representation is split and contralaterally
projected, or bilaterally projected (e.g. Ellis & Brysbaert,
2010; Jordan & Paterson, 2009).
Thus, our modeling data suggest that the stronger LH
lateralization in SP character processing than PS character
processing in Chinese character recognition can emerge
without assuming phonological processing being LH
lateralized (cf. Hsiao & Liu, 2010). More specifically, this
effect may be due to a higher visual similarity among SP
characters than PS characters, because of a much greater
number of SP characters than PS characters in the lexicon
(Experiment 1). In addition, under the split fovea
assumption, this effect may also be influenced by position
of the phonetic radical in a character (Experiment 2).
In summary, through modeling Chinese phonetic
compound recognition, here we show that hemispheric
lateralization of visual word recognition can be modulated
purely by word type frequency. This effect is due to a higher
visual similarity among words in the dominant type than the
minority type. Further investigation will examine other
factors that may influence lateralization effects in visual
word recognition, and whether this word type frequency
effect can also be found in other languages.

Gilbert, C. & Bakan, P. (1973). Visual asymmetry in
perception of faces. Neuropsychologia, 11, 355-362.
Hanavan, K., & Coney, J. (2005). Hemispheric asymmetry
in the processing of Japanese script. Laterality, 10(5),
413-428.
Hernandez, S., Nieto, A., & Barroso, J. (1992). Hemispheric
specialization for word classes with visual presentation
and lexical decision task. Brain Cognition, 20, 399-408.
Hsiao, J. H. & Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all expertise is
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychological Science, 20(4),
455-463.
Hsiao, J. H., & Liu, T. (2010). Position of phonetic
components may influence how written words are
processed in the brain: Evidence from Chinese
phonetic compound pronunciation. Cognitive, Affective,
& Behavioral Neuroscience, 10, 552-559.
Hsiao, J. H., Shieh, D., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008).
Convergence of the visual field split: hemispheric
modeling of face and object recognition. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 2298-2307.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2006). Analysis of a Chinese
phonetic compound database: Implications for
orthographic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 35, 405-426.
Hsiao, J. H., Shillcock, R., & Lee, C. (2007). Neural
correlates of foveal splitting in reading: evidence from
an ERP study of Chinese character recognition.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 1280-1292.
Ivry, R. & Robertson, L. C. (1998). The Two Sides of
Perception. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jordan, T. R. & Paterson, K. (2009). Re-evaluating splitfovea processing in visual word recognition: A critical
assessment of recent research. Neuropsychologia, 47,
2341–2353.
Leong, C. K., Wong, S., Wong, A., & Hiscock, M. (1985).
Differential cerebral involvement in perceiving
Chinese characters: Levels of processing approach.
Brain and Language, 26, 131-145.
Li, Y., & Kang, J. S. (1993). Analysis of phonetics of the
ideophonetic characters in Modern Chinese. In Y.
Chen (Ed.), Information analysis of usage of
characters in modern Chinese (pp. 84–98). Shanghai:
Shanghai Education Publisher (in Chinese).
Mardia, K. V., Kent, J. T., & Bibbi, J. M. (1980).
Multivariate analysis (probability and mathematical
statistics). Academic Press.
Maurer U., & McCandliss, D. (2007). The Development of
visual experticse for words: the contribution of
electrophysiology. In E.L. Grigorenke & A. Naples
(Eds.). Single-Word Reading: Cognitive, behavioral
and biological perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McCandliss, B. D., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2003). The
visual word form area: expertise for reading in the
fusiform gyrus. Trends Cogn. Sci., 7, 293-299.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Hung, D. L., Cotton, B., & Wang, S. Y.
(1979). Visual lateralization effect in reading Chinese
characters. Nature (London), 282, 499-501.

Acknowledgment
We are grateful to the HKU Seed Funding Program for
Basic Research (project #10400471 to J.H. Hsiao) and the
Research Grant Council of Hong Kong (project code: HKU
744509H and 745210H to J.H. Hsiao). We thank Dr. Antoni
B. Chan for helpful comments.

References
Bentin, S. (1981). On the representation of a second
language in the cerebral hemispheres of right handed
people. Neuropsychologia, 19: 599-603.
Brysbaert, M. (2007). “The language-as-fixed-effect
fallacy”: Some simple SPSS solutions to a complex
problem (Version 2.0). Royal Holloway, University of
London.
Cheung, K. C. F., & Hsiao, J. H. (2010). Visual and Task
characteristics may explain hemispheric asymmetry in
visual word recognition. Proc. of the 32rd Annual
Con-ference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ellis, A. W., & Brysbaert, M. (2010). Split fovea theory and
the role of the two cerebral hemispheres in reading: A
review of the evidence. Neuropsychologia, 48(2), 353365.
Endo, M., Shimizu, A., & Nakamura, I. (1981). Laterality
differences in recognition of Japanese and Hangul
words by monolinguals and bilinguals. Cortex, 17(3),
391–399.

896

