UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The computational costs of recipient design and intention recognition in communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56n6s4g6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Blokpoel, Mark
Kwisthout, Johan
Wareham, Todd
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The computational costs of recipient design and
intention recognition in communication
1 Mark

Blokpoel (m.blokpoel@donders.ru.nl), 2 Johan Kwisthout
Wareham, 1 Pim Haselager, 1 Ivan Toni, 1 Iris van Rooij

3 Todd
1 Radboud

University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour, The Netherlands
University Nijmegen, Institute for Computing and Information Sciences, The Netherlands
3 Department of Computer Science, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada

2 Radboud

Abstract

In this paper we present a formal model of communication and prove that even under highly restricted conditions
recipient design is intractable. This proof of intractability of
recipient design establishes that even though recipient design
can make intention recognition tractable, the computational
demands of recipient design are such that the speed of everyday communication is not yet explained. This finding indicates that communicators must exploit constraints to make
recipient design tractable, and in the second part of the paper we illustrate a methodology suitable for identifying such
constraints.

Understanding the communicative intentions of others based
on their behavior can be seen as an ‘inference to the best explanation’, a.k.a. abduction. As abduction is often an intractable
task, it has been suggested that communicators alleviate the
work of an addressee by performing recipient design, adapting their behavior to the presumed beliefs and knowledge of
the addressee. In this paper we show that communicators performing recipient design inherit the computational load of their
addressees. Thus, recipient design in itself cannot explain the
speed of everyday human intentional communication.
Keywords: Bayesian network; communication; recipient design; simulation; abduction; inference; NP-hard; tractable.

Introduction

Computational-level Models

Humans have the ability to understand the intentions underlying communicative actions of others. This is a remarkable
ability given that intention recognition involves reasoning
from effects (observed actions) to their likely causes (hypothesized intentions) and is therefore best seen as a form of ‘inference to the best explanation’, a.k.a. abduction (Levinson,
2006; Sperber & Wilson, 1995; Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum,
2009; Charniak & Goldman, 1991; Peirce, 1931–1966; Lipton, 2004). Computational models of abduction are notorious for their computational intractability, meaning that the
inferences postulated by these models require exponential
amounts of time (Abdelbar & Hedetniemi, 1998; Thagard
& Verbeurgt, 1998; Kwisthout, 2010; Blokpoel, Kwisthout,
van der Weide, & van Rooij, 2010; Bylander, Allemang,
& Tanner, 1991; Nordh & Zanuttini, 2005). Evidently, intractable models cannot explain the speed of intention recognition as we observe in everyday communication.
It has been suggested that the computational demands of
intention recognition in human communication could be alleviated through recipient design, in which communicative
actions are constructed according to what addressees are supposed to know and believe (see Box 1; Sperber and Wilson
(1995); Grice (1989); Clark (1996)). This idea is generally
consistent with theoretical work showing that intention recognition can be tractable given specific constraints (Blokpoel et
al., 2010), and with empirical work qualifying the conditions
under which recipient design is used (Clark, 1996; Keysar,
Barr, & Horton, 1998; Newman-Norlund et al., 2009). However, the idea also raises a so far neglected question: If recipient design is assumed to make intention recognition tractable
for addressees, does it not simply move the computational
load from the addressee to the agent generating the communicative action?

In this section we present a formal computational-level model
of communication based on the Bayesian Inverse Planning
(BIP) model of action understanding by Baker et al. (2009)
and on the statistical learning model by Shafto and Goodman (2008). Empirical evidence presented by these authors
shows that these models seem to capture fundamental principles underlying intention recognition and recipient design
respectively. Our model of communication combines these
two models and will as a result inherit some of their simplifying assumptions. Consequently, our analyses will yield at
worst a lower bound of the computational demands posited
by more general models of communication.
The communication model we present assumes that a communicator generates communicative behavior by choosing
actions to achieve certain goals. These goals can be divided in two types: instrumental (e.g. ‘make the mosquito
go away’) and communicative (e.g. ‘signal the taxi driver to
come here’). Because some actions can lead to the achievement of more than one (type of) goal (e.g. ‘waving one’s
hand’ can make a mosquito go away, but also signal a taxi
driver), recognizing communicative intentions involves abduction. Furthermore communicators also perform recipient
design, choosing their actions on the basis of world states,
instrumental goals and communicative goals, but also on the
basis of a prediction of the likely inferences their audience
could make given the action sequence they intend to produce.
These characterizations of R ECIPIENT D ESIGN and I N TENTION R ECOGNITION can be summarized by input-output
mappings. A communicator generates a sequence of actions
that will (a) most likely lead to the achievement of the instrumental goals and (b) will lead his/her audience to attribute the
correct communicative goals to the communicator’s behav-

465

Box 1: An illustration of recipient design.
To illustrate recipient design, consider the following example. Bob and Mary are chatting, while suddenly Bob’s favorite
composition by Bach sounds faintly in the background. Bob wants to communicate three things to Mary:
i. He wishes her to be quiet;
ii. He wants her to listen to the music;
iii. He wants to signal he is listening to the music.
Now suppose that Bob knows that Mary knows they both enjoy Bach very much. To communicate (i), (ii) and (iii) to her he
might simply just put his finger in front of his mouth (a).

(a) Bob-Mary

(b) Bob-Ann

(c) Bob-Ann

Placed in a different situation talking to Ann, Bob might communicate differently. He knows Ann likes to keep talking and
that she is not interested in music. He put his finger in front of his mouth to signal Ann to be quiet (i), but he also closes
his eyes to tell her he is listening (iii) (b). To emphasize he is listening (iii) even more, Bob then tilts his head slightly
and puts his finger up in the air, signaling Ann to pay attention and listen to the music (ii) (c). [Illustrations by Bas Maes.]

R ECIPIENT D ESIGN
Input: A Bayesian network B = (N, Γ), a value assignment gI for GI and a value assignment gC for GC encoding the communicator’s goals.
Where, S, A, GI , GC ∈ N; the probabilistic dependencies
in N are illustrated in Figure 1; and Γ is an arbitrary conditional probability distribution over N.
Output: A value assignment a to A, such that a =
argmaxa Pr (A = a | GI = gI ) and I NTENTION R ECOG NITION (B , a, s) = gC , or ∅ if no sequence of actions a
is possible. Here s = argmaxs Pr (S = s | A = a), i.e. the
most likely states s to follow from the actions.

ior. This inference is based on the probabilistic dependencies
between actions and world states (including how these dependencies change over time) and zero or more instrumental goals and one or more communicative goals. The addressee infers a combination of communicative goals that best
explains the observed communicative behavior given what
he/she knows about the probabilistic dependencies between
actions, goals and world states (including how these dependencies change over time).
We define the following variables that we use to formalize the input-output mappings for R ECIPIENT D ESIGN and
I NTENTION R ECOGNITION.1

I NTENTION R ECOGNITION
Input: A Bayesian network B = (N, Γ), similar as in
the Recipient Design network, a value assignment a for
A and a value assignment s for S encoding the observed
actions and states.
Output:
The most probable value assignment gC to the communicative goals GC , i.e.
argmaxg Pr (GC = gC | S = s, A = a),
or
∅
if
Pr (GC = gC | S = s, A = a) = 0 for all possible values for GC .

• S = {S1 , . . . , ST }, a sequence of T state variables that can
encode values of state sequences s;
• A = {A1 , . . . , AT −1 }, a sequence of T − 1 action variables
that can encode values of action sequences a;
• GI = {GI1 , . . . , GI j }, a set of instrumental goal variables
that can encode the values of the communicator’s instrumental goals gI ; and
• GC = {GC1 , . . . , GCk }, a set of communicative goal variables that can encode the values of the communicator’s
communicative goals gC .

Recipient Design is Intractable
To investigate the computational (in)tractability of R ECIPI ENT D ESIGN we adopted complexity-theoretic proof techniques (see e.g. Garey and Johnson (1979)). Using these

1 In

the Bayesian formalism capital letters denote variables,
whereas small letters denote values; bold letters denote sets of variables or values, whereas non-bold letters denote singletons.

466

S1

S2

A1

GI1

...

S3

A2

...

GIj

GC1

even more demanding than the simplified R ECIPIENT D E SIGN function.
Though Result 1 serves to illustrate the non-trivial nature
of explaining the speed of communication, we certainly do
not wish to suggest that it is in principle impossible to explain
the speed of communication in everyday life. Result 1 merely
establishes that a computational explanation of the speed of
communication will require that one incorporates one or more
explicit hypotheses about situational constraints that make the
(otherwise intractable) recipient design task performed by a
communicator tractable. In the next section we present and
illustrate a methodology that communication researchers may
adopt to model and test the validity of such constraints.

ST

...

AT-1

...

GCk

Figure 1: The Bayesian network showing the dependencies
between the variables in the R ECIPIENT D ESIGN and I NTEN TION R ECOGNITION models. Arrows denote dependencies,
e.g. if Bob has his eyes open (St =‘Bob eyes open’), then
closes his eyes (At =‘close eyes’), then St+1 has a high probability of Bob having his eyes closed (Pr(St+1 =‘Bob eyes
closed’|St =‘Bob eyes open’, At =‘close eyes’) = 0.9).

A Method for Identifying Tractability
Conditions
In order to find constraints on the input domain of R ECIPI ENT D ESIGN that render the (restricted) model tractable, we
adopt methods derived from parameterized complexity theory
(Downey & Fellows, 1999; van Rooij & Wareham, 2008).
Parameterized complexity theory is an extension of classical complexity theory motivated by the observation that it is
sometimes possible that an NP-hard function M : I → O can
be computed by algorithms whose running time is polynomial in the overall input size n and non-polynomial only in
some aspects of the input called input parameters. In other
words, the main part of the input contributes to the overall
complexity in a “good” way, whereas only the input parameters contribute to the overall complexity in a “bad” way. In
such cases, the function M is fixed-parameter tractable for
that respective set of parameters. The following definition
states this idea more formally.

techniques, we proved the following (see online supplementary materials for the full proofs2 ):
Result 1. R ECIPIENT D ESIGN is NP-hard.
This result implies that there does not exist any algorithm
that can compute the recipient design input-output function in
polynomial time for all its inputs (i.e., a time upper bounded
by some function nc where n is a measure of input size and
c is some constant).3 In other words, all algorithms solving
R ECIPIENT D ESIGN will run in exponential time or worse for
a non-empty set of inputs (i.e., a time at best upper bounded
by some function cn , where n is again a measure of input
size and c a constant). As exponential time algorithms run
unrealistically long for all but very small inputs they are generally considered computationally intractable (Garey & Johnson, 1979). To illustrate this point, consider an exponentialtime algorithm running in a time proportional to 2n . Such an
algorithm would need to make on the order of 1,000,000,000
computational steps for an input of size n = 40, which is more
milliseconds than there are in a millennium.
Our NP-hardness result is quite sobering, given that the recipient design model already incorporates several simplifying
assumptions. For instance, the model assumes communicators have perfect (probabilistic) knowledge of the world and
the audience; states and goals are probabilistically independent; and there is no higher-order reasoning by communicator and audience about each other’s beliefs(Verbrugge, 2009;
Shafto & Goodman, 2008). This means that Result 1 probably underestimates the computational complexity of recipient
design under less restricted conditions—i.e., other more general models of recipient design may well be computationally

Definition 1. Fixed-parameter (fp-) tractability. Let M :
I → O be an input-output function with input parameters
k1 , k2 , . . . , km . Then M is said to be fixed-parameter tractable
for parameter-set K = {k1 , k2 , . . . , km } if there exists at least
one algorithm that computes O for any input of size n in time
f (k1 , k2 , . . . , km )nc , where f (.) is an arbitrary computable
function and c is a constant. If no such algorithm exists then
M is said to be fixed-parameter intractable for parameter-set
K.
Note that if an intractable function M is fp-tractable for
parameter-set K, then M can be efficiently computed even for
large inputs, provided only that all the parameters in K are
small. This means that if M is postulated as an explanation of
the functional form of the input-output mapping computed by
a given process, then the speed of that process in certain situations can be explained by postulating that the parameters in
K are small exactly in those situations (see also van van Rooij
and Wareham (2008)). This strategy for rendering (otherwise
intractable) theories tractable has been successfully applied in
various domains (van Rooij, Evans, Müller, Gedge, & Wareham, 2008; Müller, van Rooij, & Wareham, 2009; Wareham,
Evans, & van Rooij, 2010; van Rooij, 2008; van Rooij, Stege,
& Kadlec, 2005), including the Bayesian Inverse Planning

2 http://www.dcc.ru.nl/

˜irisvr/suppl2011.pdf
interpretation assumes that the P 6= NP conjecture is true.
This mathematical conjecture is unproven to date, but widely believed by mathematicians on both theoretical and empirical grounds
(Fortnow, 2009; Garey & Johnson, 1979).
3 Our

467

model (Blokpoel et al., 2010). In the next section we report
on our investigation of parameters that do and do not render
R ECIPIENT D ESIGN tractable.

as R ECIPIENT D ESIGN (Result 1)—in that its computation
requires superpolynomial time. Result 4 shows that I NTEN TION R ECOGNITION can be computed efficiently even for
large inputs provided only that two parameters |GI | and |GC |
are both relatively small. As both these parameters seem to be
under the control of the communicator, Result 4 presents the
first formal explication of the hypothesis that a communicator
may make the task of the audience to infer his/her intentions
easier and even tractable.
Note furthermore that relative to the parameters that we
consider (i.e., {|GI |, |GC |, |A|}), Result 3 and 4 combined
show that the parameter set {|GI |, |GC |} is not only sufficient but also necessary for fp-tractability. That is, I NTEN TION R ECOGNITION is fp-intractable for all proper subsets
of the {|GI |, |GC |, |A|} and for other subsets that do not include {|GI |, |GC |}.
Having identified constraints that a communicator may utilize to render I NTENTION R ECOGNITION tractable, a natural
question to ask is whether recipient design is tractable under
these same constraints. The following result shows this is not
the case.

What Makes Recipient Design Tractable?
The R ECIPIENT D ESIGN model has several parameters that
we will consider for our fixed-parameter (fp-)tractability
analyses. Table 1 gives an overview of these parameters and
their example values in the illustration in Figure 2. Proofs of
all these results can be found in the Supplementary Materials
published online.4
Parameter
|GC |
|GI |
|A|

Description
The number of communicative
goals
The number of instrumental goals
The number of observed or planned
actions

Value
3
0
2

Table 1: Overview of the parameters, the given value is based
on the Bob-Ann example in Box 1.

be quiet

i'm
listening

listen

close
eyes

Result 5. R ECIPIENT D ESIGN is fp-intractable for the parameter sets {|GI |, |GC |}, {|GI |, |A|} and {|GC |, |A|} .
Result 5 shows that R ECIPIENT D ESIGN is strictly more
difficult than I NTENTION R ECOGNITION, as the former is
not tractable under conditions that make the latter tractable.
It also means that the computational intractability of recipient design cannot be attributed solely to the complexity of
simulating the audience’s intention recognition processes as
a subroutine.
We conclude with the following result:

point and
tilt head

Result 6. R ECIPIENT D ESIGN is fp-tractable for the parameter set {|A|, |GI |, |GC |}.
Result 6 shows that R ECIPIENT D ESIGN can be computed efficiently provided that all three parameters |GI |, |GC | and |A|
are relatively small. Note, however, that restricting all three
parameters at the same time effectively ensures the whole input network is small, and hence the parameters cannot figure
in an explanation of how communication can be tractable for
large input networks. As shown in Table 2, no proper subset of {|A|, |GI |, |GC |} suffices to make R ECIPIENT D ESIGN
fp-tractable. Although other parameters than the ones considered here may figure in an explanation of the speed of communication, our findings highlight the nontrivial problem of
finding such an explanation.

Figure 2: An example network with all values filled in. Here
Bob would have to find actions given his communicative
goals and Ann would have to infer Bob’s communicative
goals given his actions and states.
We start by considering conditions that render intention
recognition tractable. The following results are relevant for
our purposes.
Result 2. I NTENTION R ECOGNITION is NP-hard.
Result 3. I NTENTION R ECOGNITION is fp-intractable for
parameter sets {|A|, |GC |} and {|A|, |GI |}.

Discussion

Result 4. I NTENTION R ECOGNITION fp-tractable for the parameter set {|GI |, |GC |}.

As with many other core human abilities, intention recognition appears a fairly straightforward phenomenon, at least
until we interact with other humans having communication
deficits, or until we try to build artificial cognitive agents
that can effectively implement flexible intention recognition
in a communicative setting. The astronomical computational
powers required for abductive processes such as intention

For an overview of further fp-(in)tractability results implicated by Results 3 and 4, see Table 2.
Result 2 establishes that without any constraints on the input domain, I NTENTION R ECOGNITION is intractable—just
4 http://www.dcc.ru.nl/

˜irisvr/suppl2011.pdf

468

I NTENTION R ECOGNITION
—
|GC |
|GI |
|GC |, |GI |
R ECIPIENT D ESIGN
—
|GC |
|GI |
|GC |, |GI |

—
NP-hard
fp-intract.
fp-intract
fp-tractable
—
NP-hard
fp-intract.
fp-intract.
fp-intract.

|A|
fp-intract.
fp-intract.
fp-intract
fp-tractable
|A|
fp-intract.
fp-intract.
fp-intract.
fp-tractable

render the tasks of communicator and audience tractable. We
have presented a methodology for implementing this strategy and illustrated its use for our models. We found that if
the communicator has only a few communicative and instrumental goals, I NTENTION R ECOGNITION is tractable. These
special circumstances are, however, not yet sufficient to also
make R ECIPIENT D ESIGN tractable. The additional circumstance where a communicator is able to construct short action
sequences to convey his/her message does make R ECIPIENT
D ESIGN tractable. In other words, under the simplifying assumptions of our models, people might exploit these special
conditions to achieve speedy communication.
These conditions may not suffice to explain the speed of
communication in general, since some of our simplifying assumptions most probably will be violated in real world situations. Yet this underscores that richer models of recipient design—with less simplifying assumptions, e.g., including higher-order reasoning—will presumably be even more
computationally demanding. Therefore richer models would
also require an analysis of their computational demands.
The utility of the current approach can also be assessed
empirically by creating experimental set-ups which do meet
the simplifying conditions (Galantucci, 2005; de Ruiter et al.,
2010; Scott-Phillips & Kirby, 2010). In such experimental
set-ups it can then be tested if the constraints that we identified as necessary and sufficient for tractability of communication are confirmed by the success or failure of communication
as observed in the lab.
It might be relevant to emphasize that the present results
converge with several intuitions of classic pragmatic theories such as the Gricean Maxims (Grice, 1989). For example, the Maxim of Quantity states that people should not
make their contribution more informative than is required. In
the current models, “informativeness” could be operationalized as the number of communicative goals a communicator
tries to convey. The Maxim of Quantity can then be interpreted as not having too many communicative goals, which
is equivalent to one of the constraints necessary for tractability of the communication models. Grice’s Maxim of Relation
states people should be relevant. Relevance in our models
can be indexed by the number of instrumental goals that influence one’s communicative behavior. Having few instrumental goals increases the communicative relevance of the
communicator’s behavior, making it easier for an audience
to perform intention recognition. This principle is similar to
the necessary constraint of pursuing few instrumental goals
highlighted by the current tractability analysis.
The strong convergence between Grice’s Maxims and the
current results suggests that the communicator and audience
models capture at least some fundamental aspects of communication and recipient design. It also suggests that the current approach could provide a formal account of the cognitive mechanisms described by those maxims, enabling more
systematic empirical analyses.
To conclude, we showed that by performing recipient de-

Table 2: Complexity results for I NTENTION R ECOGNTION
(above) and R ECIPIENT D ESIGN (below).
recognition are in contrast with the speed of everyday communication. To explain this contrast, it has been suggested
that intention recognition may be made easier if communicators use recipient design (Sperber & Wilson, 1995; Grice,
1989). The aim of our research was to assess to what extent
this idea merely shifts the computational complexity of communication from the audience to the communicator. Specifically, we questioned whether computational models of recipient design inherit the computational load they aim to take
away from the audience.
To address this question we formalized the tasks of communicator and audience as computational-level models. We
ensured that our modeling choices did not lead to an artifactual overestimation of the computational complexity of
communication by incorporating several simplifying assumptions. There are two main findings. Both the audience
model (i.e, I NTENTION R ECOGNITION) and the communicator model (i.e, R ECIPIENT D ESIGN) are intractable (NPhard). This means that, notwithstanding our simplifying assumptions, the computations postulated by our models require an unrealistic amount of time for their completion.
The intractability result for I NTENTION R ECOGNITION reiterates what has long been assumed. Namely, given that intention recognition is a form of abduction, the speed at which
we can use this ability in our everyday life is comparably difficult to explain. Replicating this result in such a simplified
model underscores the non-triviality of explaining the speed
of intention recognition. The main novelty of this study lies
in defining the computational demands of recipient design,
an undeservedly overlooked issue given the centrality of this
ability to several accounts of communication (Sperber & Wilson, 1995; Clark, 1996). The intractability result for R ECIPI ENT D ESIGN shows that even if communicators can make intention recognition easier by performing recipient design, the
model by itself cannot explain the speed of every day communication. These results set the stage for both theoretical
and empirical follow-up research.
From a theoretical perspective, the intractability results
raise the question how the speed of everyday communication
can be reconciled with the apparent complexity of the tasks
performed by communicator and audience. This question can
be addressed by identifying the situational constraints that

469

sign, a communicator may reduce the computational load of
her addressees, but this then leaves the communicator facing
an intractable task. The fact that this result is based on highly
simplified models greatly underscores the non-triviality of explaining the speed of everyday communication, as more general models will also suffer from intractability. This result
highlights an explanatory gap in communication science, and
we illustrated a methodology to deal with this gap.

Kwisthout, J. (2010). Most probable explanations in
Bayesian networks: complexity and tractability (Tech.
Rep.). Faculty of Science, Radboud University Nijmegen.
Levinson, S. (2006). On the human ’interaction engine’.
Roots of Human Society.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the best explanation (2nd ed.).
Rootledge.
Müller, M., van Rooij, I., & Wareham, T. (2009). Similarity
as tractable transformation. In N. A. Taatgen & H. van
Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 50–55). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Newman-Norlund, S. E., Noordzij, M. L., Newman-Norlund,
R. D., Volman, I. A., de Ruiter, J. P., Hagoort, P., et al.
(2009, Apr). Recipient design in tacit communication.
Cognition, 111(1), 46–54.
Nordh, G., & Zanuttini, B. (2005). Propositional abduction
is almost always hard. In Proceedings of the 19th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI2005) (pp. 534–539). Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1966). The collected papers of Charles S.
Peirce (Vol. 8; P. W. C. Hartshorne & A. W. Burks, Eds.).
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Scott-Phillips, T. C., & Kirby, S. (2010). Language evolution
in the laboratory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(9), 411–
417.
Shafto, P., & Goodman, N. (2008, Jan). Teaching games: Statistical sampling assumptions for learning in pedagogical
situations. Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Blackwell Publishing.
Thagard, P., & Verbeurgt, K. (1998, Mar). Coherence as
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 22(1), 1–24.
van Rooij, I. (2008). The tractable cognition thesis. Cognitive
Science, 32, 939–984.
van Rooij, I., Evans, P., Müller, M., Gedge, J., & Wareham, T.
(2008, Jan). Identifying sources of intractability in cognitive models: An illustration using analogical structure mapping. Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
van Rooij, I., Stege, U., & Kadlec, H. (2005). Sources of
complexity in subset choice. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 49(2), 160–187.
van Rooij, I., & Wareham, T. (2008, Nov). Parameterized
complexity in cognitive modeling: Foundations, applications and opportunities. The Computer Journal, 51(3),
385–404.
Verbrugge, R. (2009). Logic and social cognition: The facts
matter, and so do computational models. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 38(6), 649–680.
Wareham, H. T., Evans, P., & van Rooij, I. (2010). What
does (and doesn’t) make analogical problem solving easy?
Journal of Problem Solving, 3(2), 30–71.

Acknowledgments
JK was supported by the OCTOPUS project under the responsibility of the Embedded Systems Institute. TW was supported by NSERC Personal Discovery Grant 228104. IT was
supported by grant #453-08-002 from NWO.

References
Abdelbar, A., & Hedetniemi, S. (1998, Jun). Approximating
MAPs for belief networks is NP-hard and other theorems.
Artificial Intelligence, 102(1), 21–38.
Baker, C., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009, Dec). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3), 329–
349.
Blokpoel, M., Kwisthout, J., van der Weide, T. P., &
van Rooij, I. (2010). How action understanding can be
rational, Bayesian and tractable. In S. O. . R. Catrambone (Ed.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (p. 1643-1648). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bylander, T., Allemang, D., & Tanner, M. (1991, Jan). The
computational complexity of abduction. Artificial Intelligence, 49(1–3), 25–60.
Charniak, E., & Goldman, R. (1991, Jan). Probabilistic
abduction for plan recognition (Tech. Rep.). Department
of Computer Science Brown University and Department of
Computer Science Tulane University.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
de Ruiter, J., Noordzij, M., Newman-Norlund, S., NewmanNorlund, R., Hagoort, P., Levinson, S., et al. (2010). Exploring the cognitive infrastructure of communication. Interaction Studies, 11, 51–77.
Downey, R. G., & Fellows, M. R. (1999). Parameterized
Complexity. Springer. Hardcover.
Fortnow, L. (2009). The status of the P versus NP problem.
Communications of the ACM, 52(9), 78–86.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 29, 737–767.
Garey, M. R., & Johnson, D. S. (1979). Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory of NP-completeness. W.
H. Freeman.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Harvard University Press.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., & Horton, W. S. (1998). The egocentric basis of language use: Insights from a processing
approach. Current Directions in Psych. Science, 7, 46–50.

470

