UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Context Use and Three Way Bindings in Episodic Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/33j08844

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Yim, Hyunkwook
Dennis, Simon
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Context Use and
Three Way Bindings in Episodic Memory
Hyungwook Yim (yim.31@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
209C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Simon J. Dennis (dennis.210@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
200E Lazenby Hall, 1827 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Abstract
To address the mechanism underlying the development of
episodic memory, the current study used a modified list learning
paradigm for children (i.e. ABCD, ABAC, ABABr) and compared
the performance of 4 year-olds, 7 year-olds, and adults. The results
show that only the ABABr condition, which involves a 3-way
binding structure, differed across age. Additionally, a proposed
computational model (multinomial process tree model)
decomposed the binding strengths involved in the given tasks and
made it possible to compare the changes in these binding strengths.
The model shows that though all groups have similar item binding
strength, the overall context (list) binding and 3-way binding
strengths develops throughout development. Aside to the general
context binding strength, however, 7 year olds showed a lower
context binding strength than 4 year olds. The results are discussed
by the interaction between context strength and attentional
mechanism.
Keywords: episodic memory, memory development,
computational modeling, binding, three-way binding,
context

Introduction
Episodic memory refers to the stored information about
events and their spatial-temporal relations (Tulving, 1972).
This specific kind of memory about what happened when
and where is crucial to human being since it is ubiquitous in
our everyday life. Suppose that you visited your friend’s
house and parked your car somewhere. To remember the
parking spot, you should at least store one of the two
bindings: either between the car and the parking spot or
between the context (visiting a friend’s house) and the
parking spot. A more complicated scenario is when you
park your car two days in a row at two different spots. To
accurately remember where you parked today, you would
have to distinguish this memory from other memories such
as yesterday’s parking event. At the very minimum, the

number of bindings necessary to remember doubles
compared to the previous example. An even more
complicated situation arises if you own two cars that could
be parked in two different locations. Now you need to
remember which car was driven today and where it was
parked. This time, to distinguish between today’s memory
and yesterday’s memory, one needs to form and store a
three-way binding (i.e., [Time]-[Parking spot]-[Car]).
Beyond the complexity and variety of episodic memory,
however, it is also well known that the ability to properly
form episodic memory is not perfect at birth. Laboratory
researches show that children experience more difficulty
with episodic memory tasks compared to semantic tasks,
(Drummey & Newcombe, 2002; Ghetti & Lee, 2010; Kail,
1990). Studies on children’s memory in forensic context
(Pipe & Salmon, 2009) and children’s autobiographical
memory (Bauer, 2007) show that episodic memory is
vulnerable during childhood.
One of the possible explanations for the development of
episodic memory could be the ability to properly use
binding structures (c.f. Doumas, Hummel, & Sandhofer,
2008; Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998). As described
above, different episodic events require different binding
structures and as the events get more complex a more
complex binding structure is required. The current study
attempts to explain the development of episodic memory by
using a list learning paradigm modified for children along
with a computational model (multinomial process tree
model, MPT) that could decompose the underlying binding
structures of episodic memory.
In the list learning paradigm, one studies two lists of word
pairs, where each list is followed by a retention interval. At
test, after the studying the lists, questions about the first and
second list are asked. One of the advantages of the list
learning paradigm is that they could be easily manipulated

3040

into various conditions which represent various episodic
events. For example, the episodic events that were
mentioned in the car parking examples could all be
transformed into a list learning paradigm. The first example
where one had to remember a single parking event could be
transformed into a condition called ABCD. The first two
letters ‘AB’ refer to the item pairs in the first list and ‘CD’
refers to the item pairs in the second list. As the letters in
‘AB’ and ‘CD’ do not overlap, the items in the first and
second list of the ABCD condition do not overlap (see
Figure 1). Therefore when asked to recall the event given a
cue like “Where did you park your car when you visited
your friend?” one only needs a binding between the car and
the parking space or the context (visiting the friend) and the
parking space. This kind of binding is called a two-way
binding since the binding involves two items.
The episode of distinguishing two parking events (i.e.,
parking the car in different locations on different days)
could be transformed into an ABAC condition (Barnes &
Underwood, 1959; Postman, 1962). In the ABAC condition,
as denoted by the letters, only the first items are overlapped
in the two lists (see Figure 1). Therefore, to recall the event
correctly when asked “Where did you park your car today?”
one not only needs the binding between the car and the
parking space but also the binding between the parking
space and today. Thus, to succeed in the ABAC condition
one needs at least 2 two-way bindings.
The last example of two cars and two parking locations
can be transformed in a list learning paradigm called the
ABABr condition (Porter & Duncan, 1953; Postman, 1964).
In the ABABr condition items in the first and second list are
the identical but their pairings differ. To perfectly recall the
events in this condition it is known that at least a three-way
binding between the car, the location and the context is
required (Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989).
The three conditions sufficiently represent various
episodic events while providing the minimum requirements
to properly recall a certain event. Also the complexity of the
minimally required binding increases from the ABCD
condition to the ABABr condition. Additionally, using a
multinomial process tree (MPT) model based on the
responses in each condition, it is possible to decompose the
strength of different bindings (Batchelder & Riefer, 1999;
Riefer & Batchelder, 1988). Moreover, the model could
show how theses binding strength change during
development.
Therefore, the current paper will first address the
modified list learning paradigm and the experiment results
from different ages. Second, a MPT model will be proposed
that could decompose the binding strength in different ages
and discuss the developmental factors of episodic memory.

Figure 1: An illustration of the presented stimuli and each
experiment conditions.

Experiment
Method
Participants Three age groups participated in the
experiment. There were forty five 4 year old children (23
girls, M = 4.70 years, SD = 0.24 years, 16 for the ABCD
condition, 14 for the ABAC condition and 15 for the
ABABr condition), forty six 7 year old children (22 girls, M
= 7.30 years, SD = 0.27 years, 15 for the ABCD condition,
17 for the ABAC condition and 14 for the ABABr
condition), and fifty nine adults (23 females, M = 20.07
years, SD = 2.88 years) participated in the experiment.
There were 20 for the ABCD condition, 18 for the ABAC
condition and 21 for the ABABr condition). There were an
additional nine 4 year olds who were excluded from the
analysis where six lost interest in the experiment and three
did not learn the study items after 10 presentations. Children
participants were recruited from upper middle class suburbs
of Columbus, Ohio and the adults were undergraduate
students at The Ohio State University participating for
course credit.
Stimuli There were three conditions in the experiment that
resembled the traditional list learning paradigm. For the
study stimuli, each condition had two lists and each list had
six pairs of visual object which were shown one at a time.
Along with each item pair a child friendly cartoon character
for each list was constantly presented next to the pairs
serving as a list context (see Figure 2). The difference
between each condition was the structure of the list. In the
ABCD condition there were different items in each list
making 24 unique items in total. In the ABAC condition the
two lists had the same cues (1st item) where the targets (2nd
item) differed. In the ABABr condition the items for each
list were the same but the pairing was different between the
two lists. The test stimuli were identical to the study stimuli
except that the target was not shown (see Figure 3, Test).
Half of the test stimuli were from 1st list and the other half
was from the 2nd list. All stimuli were pseudo randomized
and were presented using Microsoft Power Point.

3041

instructions were as follows: “Do you remember what
Sponge Bob had under his airplane? (1) Yes! You are right.
Very good! (2) Oh! It was a strawberry. So, Sponge Bob
(pointing) hid the strawberry (pointing) under the airplane
(pointing).” After studying the first list, a 3-4 minute
retention interval followed where children played simple
video games. The studying procedure for the second list was
same as the first list. The test had six cued recall test, three
from each of the lists without feedback. The participants had
to accurately recall what was under the cue. The responses
were recorded on a response sheet.

Figure 2: An illustration of the presented stimuli for each
study trial. - Examples show two lists each with its own
character on the left side with two items presented on the
right.
Procedure The experiment consists of two study phases
where participants studied six pairs of items respectively. A
3 to 4 minute retention interval followed each study phase,
which involved participants to play a simple and engaging
video game. Sequentially there were 6 cued recall tests. The
procedures were same for all groups except that the two
children group participated in their schools while adults
participated in the laboratory.
A practice phase preceded the experiment to explain the
procedure to the participants. The procedure was identical to
the experiment except that the items were reduced to one
pair a list and did not have a retention interval. After the
practice phase, each participant was randomly assigned to
one of the experiment conditions.
After participants understood the procedure through the
practice phase, they were told that they are going to visit a
cartoon character’s house. They were first introduced to the
character and then to the objects in the character’s house.
(see Figure 3, first slide of each list) They were also told
that the character likes to hide things under these objects
and that they are going to find out what the hidden objects
are. Then the object pairs were presented by first showing
an item (cue at test) with the character, which was constant
throughout the each list. Thereafter, the cue item moved to
unveil the target item (see Figure 3). The instructions were
as follows: “Let’s see what is under Sponge Bob’s airplane.
(The airplane moves upward and unveils the strawberry)
What is it? Yes it is a strawberry. So Sponge Bob (pointing
at Sponge Bob) has a strawberry (pointing at the strawberry)
under his airplane (pointing at the airplane). Now let’s see
what Sponge Bob has under his turtle. ….” When all three
objects appeared on the screen, the experimenter rephrased
each items and the character while pointing at them one at a
time. This procedure helped the children to look and attend
to each of the objects and the characters.
After presenting all six pairs in a list, a cued recall test was
done for all pairs in a random order to ensure that the
participants learned all pairs. The participants saw a
character and a cue item and the correct answer was shown
as a feedback after their response. The procedure repeated
asking the whole list pairs until the participants perfectly
answered all six pairs. The number of repetitions was
analyzed as the amount of learning to criterion. Related

Figure 3: An illustration of the study lists and test.

Results
Accuracy at test was analyzed using a 3 X 3 (Age X
Condition) between-subjects ANOVA. Results showed a
main effect for Age, F (2, 141) = 4.65, p < 0.05, and a main
effect for Condition, F (2, 141) = 19.13, p < .001, and a
marginal interaction, F (4, 141) = 2.07, p = .089 (see Figure
4). Conducting a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test for Age, the
adult group differed from the 4 year-old group, p < .05, and
marginally from the 7 year-old group, p = .085. However,
the two children groups did not differ. For Condition, the
ABCD condition differed from the ABABr condition, p
< .001, and the ABAC condition, p < .001, but there was no
significant difference between the ABABr condition and the
ABAC condition.
A one-way ANOVA for each condition only showed
significant difference for the ABABr condition, F (2, 47) =
2.07, p < .005. From a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test, adults
significantly differed from 4 year olds, p < .001, marginally
differed from 7 year olds, p = .056, whereas the 4 and 7
year olds did not have significant difference.
The amount of learning to criterion was also analyzed. For
each participant the amount of repetition needed to learn the
2nd list was subtracted from that of the 1st list. The
subtracted value implies the amount of interference from the

3042

6

Correct Recall

5
4
3
2
1
0
4y

7y Adult
ABCD

4y

7y Adult
ABAC

4y

7y Adult
ABABr

Figure 4: Mean correct response for the Experiment. Error
bars refer to +/- one standard error.

Difference in learning to criterion
(2nd list ‐ 1st list)

1st list when learning the 2nd list (see Firgure 5). Using a 3 X
3 (Age X Condition) between-subjects ANOVA showed a
main effect for Age, F (2, 136) = 4.23, p < .05, a marginal
main effect for Condition, F (2, 136) = 2.91, p = .058, but
no Age X Condition interaction. A one-way ANOVA for
each of the conditions only showed significant difference
for the ABABr condition, F (2, 45) = 4.20, p < .05.
Moreover, a Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test only showed a
significant difference between adults and 4 year olds, p
< .05.
From the accuracy data, only the ABABr condition, which
requires a 3-way binding, showed a developmental change.
On the other hand, performance on the ABCD or the ABAC
conditions did not show an age difference. The results
suggest that the only developmental change is the ability to
form a 3-way binding. However, the results from the
learning to criterion data does not fully support that the only
developmental change is in the 3-way-binding abilities.
Although the amount of interference in the ABABr
condition reflects the developmental change in the test
accuracy, it does not account the test accuracy data in the
ABCD or ABAC condition. If the performance at test in the
ABCD or ABAC condition is resulting from the same
mechanism among difference age groups, the amount of
interference should be the same or at least should show a
developmental trend as in the ABABr condition. In the
ABCD condition, 7 year olds have a positive interference
whereas other age groups are having a negative interference.
Also in the ABAC condition, 7 year olds are having more
interference than adults, whereas 4 year olds are having
lesser interference than adults. Therefore, merely comparing
the correct recalls would not truly reveal the underlying
mechanism of episodic memory development.

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
‐0.5
‐1.0
4y

7y Adult
ABCD

4y

7y Adult
ABAC

4y

7y Adult
ABABr

Figure 5: Amount of interference by calculating the
difference of learning to criterion between the two lists (2nd
list minus 1st list). Values indicate the average divided by
the standard deviation.

Computational Model
It could be inferred from the results of the experiments
that the development of accurately using the three-way
binding increases during development. However, the results
merely show the difference of the overall accuracy
performance and could not show what kind of binding is
related and how it is changing during development. The
proposed multinomial process tree (MPT) model not only
uses the correct responses but also incorporates the
classified errors to estimate the binding strengths. The
estimated binding strength makes it possible to compare the
binding strength within an age group as well as among age
groups.

Model description
A multinomial process tree model (MPT) is a simple
probability model that is used to discompose the underlying
cognitive process (Batchelder & Riefer, 1999). The model
categories all responses based on the assumed underlying
mechanism involved. Thereafter, the parameters of the
underlying mechanisms are estimated by the frequency of
each response category.
The current MPT model assumes 4 probability parameters
for the underlying process – experiment (E), list (L), item (I),
and 3-way binding (B). For example, in the ABAC
condition when a cued recall test with “list1” and “A” is
given the correct response would be “B” (see Figure 6). To
make a correct response like this, one should remember that
the correct response was in the experiment context (E), and
also that it was presented in list1 (L), and that it was
presented with item “A” (I). If one did not respond anything
or something outside of the experiment, it would mean that
they do not have the appropriate information about the
experiment (1-E). If one responded as “N”, it could be
inferred that they remember the experiment context (E), the
cued item “A” (I), but confused about which list it was in
(1-L) since “N” is also paired with “A” except that it was
presented in list2. All respond categories could be inferred
in this manner and the parameters could be estimated.

3043

intrusion where the participants confuse which list the item
came from. The pattern is not predictable from the accuracy
results. However, taking account the high interference in the
7 year old data, it is possible that 7 year olds are worse than
4 year olds in distinguishing lists.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
4y

7y Adult

E
(experiment)

4y

7y Adult

I (item)

4y

7y Adult

L (list)

4y

7y Adult

B
(3waybinding)

Figure 7: The estimated parameters of the MPT model.
Error bars refer to 95% confidence interval.

General Discussions

Figure 6: An illustration of the proposed MPT model. (a)
Examples of different conditions. (b) Related processes for
each respond category in each condition. The blue letters
denote the possible responds when the cue “list1” and “A”
is given at test. The g parameter is a guessing parameter
fixed to 0.2.

Estimated model parameter
The estimated binding parameters are shown in Figure 7.
The E (experiment) parameter and the B (3-way binding)
parameter showed an increasing pattern with development.
The trend is consistent with the accuracy results where the
overall misses are reduced and accuracy in the ABABr
condition increased. The I (item) parameter did not show a
significant difference among age groups which is also
consistent with the accuracy results in the ABCD condition
that involves an item binding ability. However, the L (list)
parameter showed a ‘U shape’ pattern where the 7 year olds
had the lowest value. A low L parameter is mainly from list

The current research used a modified list learning paradigm
for children and a multinomial process tree model (MPT)
that could decompose the binding structures that are
involved in episodic memory. Experimental results show
that the use of complex binding structures such as using a 3way binding increases throughout development. The MPT
model also shows similar results where the B (3-way
binding) parameter increased with age. Moreover, it was
both shown from the experimental results and the MPT
model that item binding did not differ among the age group.
Both results support the current literature where the item
binding is a simple two way binding and could be compared
to the relatively early development of semantic memory.
The development of the 3-way binding could be related to
the fact that more complex binding structure develop
throughout development (Doumas et al., 2008; Halford et al.,
1998).
However, the L (list) parameter, which is affected by
confusing which item came from which list, of the 7 year
olds shows interesting patterns. Unlike other parameters, the
L parameter does not show a developmental trend nor is
constant due to the 7 year old data. Additionally the
interference data in 7 year olds is higher in the ABCD and
ABAC condition. Two mechanisms could be involved in
this U-shape pattern of the L parameter. One would be the
amount (or strength) of list context that one could use.
Taking account the formation of context that was proposed
by Howard and Kahana (2002), context is formed by a
drifting context. Therefore, whenever an item and its study
context are encountered, the previous item and context
becomes a part of context while attenuating its strength, and
by this process the context is evolving where recent context
(including items) have a stronger strength and older ones
have a weaker strength. If we apply this to the current data
in the ABAC condition, when one learns the 2nd list the

3044

currently formed context, which includes cues in the 1st list,
would have many overlapping elements with the 2nd list,
especially the cues of the 2nd list. Moreover, because of the
overlap, confusability would increase and the items in the 1st
list could override the items in the 2nd list (Sederberg,
Gershman, Polyn, & Norman, 2011). If the formed (or
evolved) context is developmentally more salient and less
attenuated for 7 year olds than 4 year olds, 7 year olds
would have a stronger context that could be used, and would
have more items overriding from the 1st list.
However, the increase in the amount of context strength
does not fully explain the adult data. If context strength is
increasing and therefore making the list information
confusing, adults should have the lowest L parameter, which
is not true in the data. The second mechanism could explain
the anomaly of the adult data which is the attentional
mechanism. It is well known that due to the immature
prefrontal cortex, young children often have difficulty
performing tasks that depend on these brain areas (Zelazo,
Carlson, & Kesek, 2008). Therefore, though the amount of
context strength does increase throughout development,
adults would have a stronger attentional mechanism that
could inhibit irrelevant information. Studies with prefrontal
lobe damaged patients would support this idea where a
similar list learning paradigm (e.g. ABAC, ABABr) was
conducted (Shimamura, Jurica, Mangels, Gershberg, &
Knight, 1995). The results show that patients had more
interference learning the 2nd list than the control group when
there were more overlapping items between the study lists.
It was argued that the interference results from the inability
to inhibit irrelevant information when forming memory.
In sum, it was found that the ability to use a 3-way
binding increases across age while suggesting that the
simple item binding abilities would have been developed
before the age of 4. The developmental mechanism for
context (list) use was discussed by two mechanisms –
context strength from a perspective that context evolves and
attentional mechanisms. Future research could be suggested
to compare these two mechanisms directly by manipulate
the saliency of the context, which would change the amount
of context strength.

References
Barnes, J. M., & Underwood, B. J. (1959). "Fate" of firstlist associations in transfer theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58(2), 97-105.
Batchelder, W. H., & Riefer, D. M. (1999). Theoretical and
empirical review of multinomial process tree
modeling. Psychological Bulletin & Review, 6(1),
57-86.
Bauer, P. (2007). Remembering the times of our lives:
Memory in infancy and beyond. Mahwah, NJ:
Laurence Erlbaum Associates.
Doumas, L. A. A., Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer, C. M.
(2008). A Theory of the Discovery and Predication
of Relational Concepts. Psychological Review,
115(1), 1-43.

Drummey, A. B., & Newcombe, N. S. (2002).
Developmental changes in source memory.
Developmental Science, 5(4), 502-513.
Ghetti, S., & Lee, J. (2010). Children's episodic memory.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational
complexity:
Implications
for
comparative,
developmental,
and
cognitive
psychology.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 803-865.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed
representation of temporal context. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 46, 269-299.
Humphreys, M., Bain, J., & Pike, R. (1989). Different Ways
to Cue a Coherent Memory System: A Theory for
Episodic, Semantic, and Procedural Tasks.
Psychological Review, 96(2), 208-233.
Kail, R. (1990). The development of memory in children
(3rd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman.
Pipe, M.-E., & Salmon, K. (2009). Memory development
and the forensic context. In M. L. Courage & N.
Cowan (Eds.), The Development of Memory in
Infancy and Childhood (2nd ed.). Hove and New
York: Psychology Press.
Porter, L. W., & Duncan, C. P. (1953). Negative Transfer in
Verbal Learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46(1), 61-64.
Postman, L. (1962). Transfer of training as a function of
experimental paradigm and degree of first-list
learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 1, 109-118.
Postman, L. (1964). Studies of Learning to Learn II.
Changes in Transfer as a Function of Practice.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 3,
437-447.
Riefer, D. M., & Batchelder, W. H. (1988). Multinomial
modling and the measurement of cognitive
processes. Psychological Review, 95, 318-339.
Sederberg, P. B., Gershman, S. J., Polyn, S. M., & Norman,
K. A. (2011). Human memory reconsolidation can
be explained using the Temporal Context Model.
Unpublished Manuscript submitted for publication.
Shimamura, A. P., Jurica, P. J., Mangels, J. A., Gershberg, F.
B., & Knight, R. T. (1995). Susceptibility to
Memory Interference Effects following Frontal
Lobe Damage: Findings from Tests of PairedAssociate Learning. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 7(2), 144-152.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E.
Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of
memory. New York: Academic Press.
Zelazo, P. D., Carlson, S. M., & Kesek, A. (2008). The
Development of Executive Function in Childhood.
In C. A. Nelson & M. Luciana (Eds.), Handbook of
Developmental
Cognitive
Neuroscience.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

3045

