UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Potential of Quantum Probability for Modeling Cognitive Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7b58g738

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Pothos, Emmanuel
Busemeyer, Jerome
Shiffrin, Richard
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Potential of Quantum Probability for Modeling Cognitive Processes
Emmanuel M. Pothos (e.m.pothos@swansea.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Swansea University, SA2 8PP, UK

Jerome R. Busemeyer (jbusemey@indiana.edu), Richard M. Shiffrin (shiffrin@indiana.edu), Jennifer S.
Trueblood (jstruebl@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington 47468, USA.

Zheng Wang (wang.1243@osu.edu)
Ohio State University, School of Communication, Columbus 43210, USA.
Reinhard K. Blutner (reinhard@blutner.de)
Institute of Logic, Language, and Computation, University of Amsterdam, 1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Harald Atmanspacher (atmanspacher@collegium.ethz.ch)
Department of Theory and Data Analysis, IGPP, D-79098 Freiburg, Germany.
Keywords: Quantum probability, formal approaches, decision
making, conceptual combination

General Background and Speakers
Quantum probability (QP) theory is a theory for how to
assign probabilities to observables. In the context of
physics, it has been successfully employed by researchers
for over 100 years and has been the basis for some of the
most impressive discoveries of the human mind (e.g., the
transistor, and so the microchip, and the laser). But the
applicability of QP theory is not limited to physical
phenomena and, indeed, there has been growing interest in
exploring the potential of QP theory in areas as diverse as
economics (Baaquie, 2004), information theory (e.g.,
Grover, 1997), and psychology.
We are interested in the latter objective. Probabilistic
approaches to cognition have been recently enjoying
considerable success (e.g., Griffiths et al., 2010). This is
perhaps unsurprising. Several (if not most) aspects of
cognitive processing involve inference about quantities
which cannot be determined with certainty. Thus,
probability theory seems an ideal tool for formalizing
uncertainty in cognitive processes and describing the
mechanisms which allow humans to be successful in an
uncertain world. The question then becomes to identify the
probabilistic framework which is most suitable for modeling
particular aspects of cognition.
Cognitive scientists have widely employed classical
probability theory and there is no doubt that such
approaches can be incredibly successful for particular
problems (e.g., Oaksford & Chater, 2007). But is Bayesian
probability always the most suitable probabilistic
framework for describing cognitive processes?
Human inference often appears to violate fundamental
laws of classical probability. For example, in the famous
Linda problem of Tversky and Kahneman (1983)
participants consider as more likely a conjunctive statement
than a corresponding single premise one (i.e., Probability

(A&B) > Probability (A); this is the conjunction fallacy). In
one-shot prisoner’s dilemma games, naïve participants
choose to defect knowing their opponent defects, they
choose to also defect knowing their opponent cooperates,
but they reverse their judgment and choose to cooperate
when their opponent’s action is unknown (Shafir &
Tversky, 1992). This result is also hard to reconcile with
classical probability theory, it violates the sure thing
principle and the law of total probability. Findings such as
the conjunction fallacy and the violation of the sure thing
principle provide the motivation for exploring probabilistic
frameworks alternative to classic probability theory.
QP theory is mostly consistent with classical probability
theory, but for a crucial difference. In classical probability
theory Probability (A&B) = Probability (B&A), but QP
theory does not always obey commutativity in conjunction.
In QP theory probability assessment can be order (or
context) dependent. Relatedly, QP theory is not constrained
by the law of total probability (though it is subject to other
constraints). The law of total probability in classical theory
can be expressed as Probability (A) = Probability (A&X) +
Probability (A & not X), but this decomposition in QP
theory may involve interference terms. As we have shown
(e.g., Busemeyer et al., in press; Busemeyer, Wang, &
Townsend, 2006; Pothos & Busemeyer, 2009), these
properties of QP theory can lead to successful and simple
QP models for empirical findings, such as the conjunction
fallacy and the violation of the sure thing principle.
Finally, QP theory remains suitable for describing
cognition without involving any claim that the brain is a
quantum computer. Rather, we adopt what is a standard
approach in cognitive science and ask: 'does quantum
probability theory produce results which predict human
behavior well?’
The application of QP theory in cognition holds a lot of
promise. The main objective of this symposium is to present
the key ideas to the cognitive science community and
summarize progress with QP theory cognitive models. What

1336

is the potential of such models? How well do they cover the
relevant empirical findings? What are the key differences
between QP theory models and matched classical
probability ones? Three talks will address these issues
(Pothos et al., Blutner, and Atmanspacher). Equally, the
symposium will be an opportunity to consider concerns with
the applicability of QP theory. The fourth talk will cast a
critical eye and address the issue of the complexity of QP
models and their comparability with standard approaches.

Zeno” effect, generalizing the quantum Zeno effect to
mental systems. Quantitative relations between the involved
time scales are theoretically derived and found to be
consistent with empirical observation. Moreover, the
Necker-Zeno model predicts phenomena of temporal
nonlocality, referring to mental states that are not sharply
localized in time but extend over a time interval of non-zero
duration.

Model Selection applied to QP models

Overview of Talks
QP theory in decision making
Pothos, Busemeyer, Trueblood, & Wang. Pothos is a
cognitive scientist with a background in physics. Trueblood,
Wang, and Pothos have all been working with Busemeyer
on QP models. Busemeyer is the mathematical psychologist
who first presented to the cognitive science community
detailed, formal models for psychological processes based
on QP theory. The talk will review the successful
application of QP theory in three important empirical
situations: the conjunction fallacy in Linda-type problems,
order effects in human inference, and violations of the sure
thing principle in Prisoner’s Dilemma.

QP theory models of semantic composition
Blutner. This speaker is a theoretical physicist by training,
interested in not only cognitive modeling, but also artificial
intelligence and philosophy. He will consider a
sophisticated geometrical approach
for semantic
composition. For example, what determines the meaning of
“red nose” or “red flag”? His model will provide a solution
for Quine’s problem of determining which part of an apple
or grapefruit has to be red in order to call it a “red apple” or
“reddish grapefruit”. The proposed quantum model is based
on tensor products and entangled states expressing the
results of conceptual combinations. The proposal conforms
to Millikan’s and Recanati’s view that comprehending
language is normally as direct as the perception of visual
scenery. In both cases, beliefs are formed in a direct way,
apparently without reference to serial processes of
inferential interpretation.

A generalized quantum framework for bistable
perception
Atmanspacher. This speaker, trained in theoretical physics,
is the Head of the Theory and Data Analysis department at
the Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology at Freiburg.
He has pioneered the development of a formal framework,
based on those elements of quantum theory which are
considered pertinent for cognitive modeling, such as
complementarity, whose historical origin can, in fact, be
traced back to psychology. He will present an application
for the perception of ambiguous stimuli, such as the Necker
cube. The perception process is modeled as the evolution of
an unstable two-state system, giving rise to a “Necker-

Shiffrin & Busemeyer. Shiffrin is a cognitive psychologist
with many seminal contributions to cognitive theory. With
Busemeyer, he will discuss the suitability of QP theory for
cognitive modeling and consider some practical issues
regarding the way QP models can be compared to traditional
probability models. Do QP models fit better simply because
they are more complex? Do traditional methods for model
comparison such as Bayesian Model Selection, Minimum
Description Length, and Cross Validation pose special
problems when employed for quantum probability models?
These and other model selection issues will be addressed.
Simulation results will be presented for some simple cases
to illustrate the situation and point to potential solutions.

References
Baaquie, B. E. (2004) Quantum finance: Path integrals and
Hamiltonians for options and interest rates. Cambridge
University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E. M., Franco, R., & Trueblood,
J. (in press). A quantum theoretical explanation for
probability judgment errors. Psychological Review.
Baaquie, B. E. (2004) Quantum finance: Path integrals and
Hamiltonians for options and interest rates. Cambridge
University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z., & Townsend, J. T. (2006).
Quantum dynamics of human decision-making. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 50, 220-241.
Griffiths, T. L., Chater, N., Kemp, C., Perfors, A., &
Tenenbaum, J. B. (2010). Probabilistic models of
cognition: exploring representations and inductive biases.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 357-364.
Grover, L. K. (1997). Quantum mechanics helps in searching
for a needle in a haystack. Physical Review Letters, 79,
325-328.
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality: The
probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2009). A quantum
probability explanation for violations of 'rational' decision
theory. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 276, 21712178.
Shafir, E. & Tversky, A. (1992). Thinking through
uncertainty: nonconsequential reasoning and choice.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 449-474.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunctive fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.

1337

