UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The topic comprehension process in simile sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1pz6483z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Taira, Tomohiro
Kusumi, Takashi

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Topic Comprehension Process in Simile Sentences
Tomohiro Taira (cogpsy.t.taira@gmail.com)

Takashi Kusumi (kusumi@educ.kyoto-u.ac.jp)

Graduate school of Education, Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan

topic in metaphoric-sentence comprehension has seldom
been examined experimentally. We used a simple
meaningfulness decision task with three conditions relating
to word order to investigate the topic of simile as relevant to
the metaphoric comprehension.

Abstract
Our study investigates the process of topic comprehension in
comparative sentences and the relationship between this
process and the word order of topic and vehicle. Our
experiment used a meaningfulness decision task with three
conditions: no-vehicle sentence (e.g. a word hurts someone),
vehicle-after-topic sentence (e.g. a word, like a weapon, hurts
someone), and vehicle-before-topic sentence (e.g. like a
weapon, a word hurts someone.) The results of the
meaningfulness decision task show that the vehicle-after-topic
sentence and the vehicle-before-topic sentence were judged as
meaningful more quickly than the no-vehicle sentence.
Especially in comparative sentences with low conventional
vehicle, the vehicle-before-topic sentences were judged more
quickly than the vehicle-after-topic sentences.

Metaphor and Simile

Keywords: figurative language, simile, metaphor,
comparative sentence, meaningfulness decision task

Introduction
Figurative language is an interesting problem in the fields of
linguistics, psychology, and the other cognitive sciences.
Many researchers have particularly noticed metaphoric
nominal sentences in this regard (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner,
2005; Chiappe, Kennedy, & Smykowski, 2003;
Gernsbacher, Keysar, Robertson & Werner, 2001; Jones &
Estes, 2006; Utsumi, 2007). In those recent studies, the
category of “metaphoric nominal sentence” includes two
types of sentences: metaphors and similes. The metaphor is
a declarative sentence that is composed of a topic and a
vehicle only, such as a word is a weapon, while the simile is
a comparative sentence that is composed of a topic, a
vehicle, and a comparative word, e.g., a word is like a
weapon.
Some recent studies have used the two types of sentences
as a method to investigate the process of similarity
cognition, or evaluation of the similarity between topic and
vehicle (e.g. Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Jones & Estes, 2006;
Utsumi, 2007). However, other studies have examined the
process of comprehending metaphoric sentences in
themselves, without looking at similes (e.g. Blasko &
Connine, 1993; Gernsbacher et al., 2001; Jones & Estes,
2005). In studies of metaphor, the main emphasis often falls
on the process of vehicle categorization (Gernsbacher et al.,
2001; Glucksberg, 2003; Glucksberg, McGlone, &
Manfredi, 1997). Experimental research on the topic
comprehension-process, on the other hand, seems to be
lacking.
In this paper, we examined the simile and its effect on
topic comprehension. In comparison with metaphor, simile
has rarely been examined in the research field of
metaphoric-sentence comprehension. Moreover, the role of

Metaphor and simile are similar and seem, in fact, to be
two forms of the same expression, whereas they have
different pragmatic aspects (Roberts & Kreuz, 1994). One
different point is that the metaphor is an expression that
considers the topic as sharing an ad hoc category with as the
vehicle, while the simile is an expression that emphasizes
similarity between the topic and the vehicle without
assigning them to the same category. So metaphor expresses
categorical and identical relationships, while the simile
expresses comparative but differentiated relationships
between topic and vehicle. Because of this difference, two
sentences were used as a method to investigate strength of
similarity in a topic-vehicle pair, as mentioned above.
This difference explains whether the topic-vehicle pair is
preferentially expressed as a metaphor or a simile. For
example, Bowdle & Gentner (2005) argued that cognitive
similarity between the topic and vehicle is enhanced by the
conventionality of the vehicle, explaining the preference for
metaphor or simile: a topic-vehicle pair with a conventional
vehicle is preferred for the metaphor form, while an
unconventional vehicle is preferred for the simile form.
Also, Jones & Estes (2006) experimentally showed the
effect of aptness on the preference for the metaphor form.
They revealed that a highly apt pair of topic-vehicle pair is
preferred for the metaphor form, while a less apt topicvehicle pair is preferred for the simile form. They argued
that the similarity between topic and vehicle is determined
by how aptly the vehicle expresses the important features of
the topic.
These studies on metaphor-simile preference, however,
discuss only the process of similarity cognition between
topic and vehicle, not the comprehension process of
metaphoric sentences. They reveal the relationships between
similarity cognition and preference for metaphor or simile,
but did not reveal what meaning the topic or vehicle are
understood as having in a declarative or a comparative
sentence.

Comprehension of Topic and Vehicle
Some previous studies have examined the problem we
mentioned above. For example, Gernsbacher et al. (2001)
and Glucksberg, Newsome, & Goldvarg (2001)

2156

experimentally examined the understanding of the meaning
of the vehicle in metaphor comprehension. Their experiment
used a priming paradigm and sentence reading task to
investigate how metaphor-relevant (superordinate relevant)
and metaphor-irrelevant (basic relevant) meanings are
processed in a vehicle during metaphor comprehension. For
example, Gernsbacher et al. (2001) showed that the vehicle
activates the metaphor-relevant meaning (e.g. Sharks are
tenacious) but suppresses the metaphor-irrelevant meaning
(e.g. Sharks are good swimmers) in metaphor
comprehension (e.g. that defense lawyer is a shark).
In other previous studies, the role of the topic in a
metaphor comprehension was examined. Taira & Kusumi
(2009a, 2010) investigated how strongly not only the
vehicle but also the topic in a metaphor activates metaphorrelevant and metaphor-irrelevant meanings by using a
priming paradigm and a meaningfulness decision task. Their
research also examined the effect of vehicle conventionality
and aptness of metaphor on meaning-activation of topic and
vehicle. They showed that the vehicle activates the
metaphor-relevant meaning in highly conventional and
highly apt metaphors and suppresses the metaphorirrelevant meaning in all types of metaphor, but that the
topic activates not only the metaphor-relevant meaning but
also the metaphor-irrelevant meaning in all types of
metaphors. The result that the topic of all types of metaphor
activates the metaphor-relevant meaning is seemingly
strange because of the fact that the topic of lowconventionality and low-aptness metaphors (e.g. marriage is
a refrigerator) can be understood quickly as a metaphorrelevant meaning (e.g. in a marriage, we can find various
things). One possible answer to this question is the
prediction that the topic in metaphor comprehension can
play a role in making acceptable all the meanings for the
correct and quick comprehension of the metaphor (cf.
McGlone, & Manfredi, 2001). However, Taira and
Kusumi’s experimental paradigm contains the problem of
word order only in their topic experiment.
The vehicle-activation experiments used a simple priming
task and a reading task or a meaningfulness decision task
(Gernsbacher et al., 2001; Glucksberg et al., 2001; Taira &
Kusumi, 2009a). The experimental paradigm employed in
these studies presented the priming stimulus of a metaphor
(e.g., a word is a weapon); then, the pair of vehicle and
metaphor-relevant meaning (e.g., a weapon hurts someone)
was read. The distance between the vehicle in a priming
stimulus and the vehicle in a reading task or meaningfulness
decision task is very short. As a result of this distance, the
meaning of the vehicle can be investigated correctly because
the distance disallows unnecessary (and complicating)
processes.
On the other hand, the topic-activation experiment used
the same tasks as the vehicle-activation experiment (Taira &
Kusumi, 2009a; 2010). In Taira and Kusumi’s experiment,
the distance between the topic in a priming stimulus (e.g., a
word is a weapon) and the topic in a decision task (e.g., a
word hurts someone) is long in comparison with the vehicle

experiment. Furthermore, by using the metaphor-priming
and the topic in a decision task, the topic is presented two
times for the participants. Those long distance and double
presentation of topic can help the participants comprehend
the topic as carrying not only a metaphor-relevant meaning
but also metaphor-irrelevant meaning.
A problem remains because a metaphor is expressed in a
predetermined word order. This problem, however, can be
solved by the use of Japanese comparative expression and a
meaning-decision task. In natural Japanese, a comparative
expression can be formed by two types of simple sentence.
For example, a sentence like “a word is like a weapon
(kotoba wa buki no youda) because it hurts someone
(nazenara sore wa hito o kizutsukeru karada)” can be
rewritten as “a word, like a weapon, hurts someone (kotoba
wa buki no youni hito o kizutsukeru)” and “like a weapon, a
word hurts someone (buki no youni kotoba wa hito o
kizutsukeru).” If we use the subject and the predicate in the
two sentences for the decision-task, the problems in a
priming task can be settled. Furthermore, the word order
enables us to change the progress of topic process,
especially in the experiment which investigates the online
process of sentences: the topic in the comparative sentence
which put the vehicle before the topic is understood later
than the topic in the sentence which put the vehicle after the
topic. This difference and the comparison between the aftertopic sentence and the before-topic sentence will reveal the
role of topic in metaphor comprehension. Our previous
studies indicated that the role of topic is to accept all the
meanings for the metaphor comprehension (Taira & Kusumi,
2009a). If the previous studies’ indication is correct, the
after-topic sentence will be decided as meaningful more
quickly than the before-topic sentence because the topic of
the after-topic sentence can activate its meanings longer
than the before-topic sentence.
In addition, the research on simile comprehension is less
extensive than the research on metaphor comprehension.
The research on the comprehension process in comparative
sentences is important not only for understanding topic
processes in similes but also for metaphor comprehension
research. As we mentioned already, the metaphor and simile
are similar but different from each other, so it is little known
whether the comprehension process of metaphors and
similes is the same or different. Based on the above
problems, our study uses two types of comparative sentence
to investigate and discuss the topic-comprehension in
similes.

Pilot Study
To investigate two types of comparative sentence (e.g., a
vehicle presented after a topic: a word, like a weapon, hurts
someone, and a vehicle presented before a topic: like a
weapon, word hurts someone), it should be confirmed that
the topics of two types of sentences, composed with
different word orders, are understood in the same level of
comprehension. The aim of this pilot study was to
investigate the comprehension equivalence between the

2157

topic in sentences with after-topic vehicles and topic in the
sentences with before-topic vehicles. Our predication was
that the word order will not affect the extent of saliency
which the topic is understood as the metaphor-relevant
meaning.

Method
Participants 120 undergraduates participated in the pilot
study. All were native Japanese speakers.
Materials Seventy-two Japanese comparative sentences
(e.g., “a word is like a weapon”) were used in the pilot study.
To each comparative sentence, an interpretative feature (e.g.
“a word hurts someone”) was applied. The comparative
sentence and interpretative feature were selected from
previous studies (Blasko & Connine, 1993; Gernsbacher et
al., 2001; Jones & Estes, 2006; Utsumi, 2007; Taira,
Nakamoto, & Kusumi, 2007).
Regarding simile, our past studies have investigated the
conventionality of the vehicle and aptness of the simile
(Taira & Kusumi, 2009b). In these past studies, 99 Japanese
undergraduates participated. The participants were required
to rate the conventionality (strength of the association
between a simile vehicle and its interpretative feature) and
the aptness (extent to which the vehicle’s figurative
meaning express the topic aptly and correctly) of a simile in
terms of the sense of its interpretative feature. We used a 5point conventionality scale (1 = “not at all conventional” to
5 = “highly conventional”) and aptness scale (1 = “not at all
apt” to 5 = “highly apt”) in the past studies. The
summarized results of our past studies are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Summarized results of conventionality and
aptness ratings in Taira & Kusumi (2009b)

vehicle in natural Japanese order, after the topic; and the
third was in reverse order from the second, with the vehicle
written before the topic. In the no-vehicle condition, only
the topic-interpretative feature pair was presented (as a
simple sentence). In the after-topic condition, the vehicle
was positioned after the topic; in the before-topic condition,
the vehicle was positioned before the topic. The participants
were presented with 24 material sentences in each condition.
Table 2: Example of sentence in each condition
Condition
Example of Sentence
no-vehicle
A word hurts someone.
after-topic
A word, like a weapon, hurts someone.
before-topic Like a weapon, a word hurts someone.
Notes: the sentence in all the conditions could be written
and read as natural and simple Japanese sentence.

Results and Discussion
Mean importance rating data were analyzed (see Table 3).
The data were analyzed via one-way ANOVA (sentence
conditions: no-vehicle, after-topic, before-topic) with
participants (Fp) and items (Fi). The main effect of the
sentence conditions was significant (Fp(2, 238) = 3.50, Fi(2,
142) = 4.75, ps < .05). Ryan’s multiple-comparison
procedure revealed that the interpretative feature in novehicle sentences were rated more important than in aftertopic and before-topic sentences (tp(238) = 2.55, 1.89, ps
< .05, 10; ti(142) = 2.97, 2.19, ps < .005, .05). Otherwise,
the difference between after-topic and before-topic
sentences was not significant (tp(238) = 0.67, ti(142) = 0.78,
ps > .10).
Table 3: Mean importance ratings (with participants)

Data
Mean (SD)
Max
Min

Conventionality Aptness
3.38 (0.74)
3.14 (0.82)
4.60
4.58
1.89
1.52
Notes: 5-point scale, N = 72

Mean
(SD)

Procedure The pilot study was a simple rating task. The
participants were presented with the material sentences (e.g.,
“a word hurts someone”), and required to rate how
important a feature the predicate of the sentence (e.g., “hurt
someone”) was for the subject of the sentence (e.g. “a
word”). We used a 5-point scale for importance rating (1 =
“not at all important” to 5 = “very important”).
We used a booklet in the pilot study. The participants
were presented with 96 sentences which included 24
practice sentences and 72 trial sentences. The practice
sentences were printed on the first page of the booklet, and
the trial sentences were printed in the next pages. The order
of printed trial sentences was counterbalanced between
participants.
All the material sentences were presented in one of three
different conditions (see Table2): the first one presented the
topic and features with no vehicle; the second one put the

no-vehicle
3.63
(0.47)

after-topic
before-topic
3.33
3.25
(0.50)
(0.53)
Notes: 5-point scale, N = 120

From the results, the sentences with no vehicle tended to
be rated the most important. Sentences with any vehicle in
any word order, on the other hand, were rated less important.
In the pilot study, the participants were required to rate the
importance of subject-predicate pairs with no context. The
previous studies showed that a metaphorical expression is
difficult to understand without sufficient contexts (Keysar,
1989; Ortony, Shallert, Reynolds & Antos, 1978). The
sentences in the after-topic and before-topic conditions were
more difficult to understand because of the lack of
contextual support, than the sentences in the no-vehicle
condition.
The important point from the results is that there was no
difference between importance ratings in the after-topic and
before-topic conditions. This suggests that a topic and an
after-topic vehicle are almost equal to a topic and beforetopic vehicle. In that light, vehicle word order has little

2158

effect on the saliency strength of topic in a comparative
sentence.

Experiment
Meaningfulness decision task (MDT: Taira & Kusumi,
2009a; 2010): a task in which participants are required to
decide whether the subject-predicate pair is meaningful or
not. The MDT is adequate for investigating the
comprehensive strength of relationships between the subject
and the predicate in a sentence. Our experiment used the
MDT to investigate the topic in sentences with after-topic
vehicles and in sentences with before-topic vehicles.

Method
Participants and Materials Eighty-six undergraduates and
graduate students participated in the experiment. All were
native Japanese speakers and different individuals from the
participants in the pilot study. The materials in the
experiment were the same as in the pilot study.
Procedure All the experimental trials were conducted in
Japanese. Firstly, the participants were instructed that the
experiment was composed of two different phases: a MDT
and a sentence-recognition task.
1500ms

1500ms

1500ms

after topic,
comparative

word

like a
weapon

hurts
someone

after topic,
control

word

***

hurts
someone

ISI: 200ms
like a
weapon

word

hurts
someone

before topic,
control

***

word

hurts
someone

Results and Discussion
Two participants identified less than 60% of the trial pairs
as non-meaningful, so their data were excluded from
analysis. In the end, 84 participants’ data were analyzed.
Meaningful Decision Proportion Data were analyzed by a
2 (vehicle type: control/comparative) x 2 (vehicle position:
after topic/before topic) repeated-measures ANOVAs with
participants (Fp) and items (Fi). Mean meaningful-decision
percentages are shown in Table 4.

ISI: 200ms

before topic,
comparative

The participants were required to judge whether the pair
of topic and interpretative feature was meaningful or not as
quickly as possible before the interpretative feature was
distinguished. A reaction of “meaningful” was indicated by
pressing the “ 1” button of a ten-key pad, and a notmeaningful reaction was to press the “3” button. If the
participants could not react in 1500 ms, the red text “Time
Over!” was presented in the center of the screen as a timeover message. In a meaningful decision, the participants
were instructed to ignore the comparative vehicle, but were
required to memorize all the sentences presented in the
MDT, and to recognize the sentences in the sentencerecognition task, which was ostensibly to be conducted after
the MDT trials were finished. However, the recognition task
was not actually conducted. The next trial was started 2000
ms after the end of the trial.
The MDT trials included 36 dummy trials and 72 target
trials. The dummy trials were identified as non-meaningful.
On the other hand, all the target trials were identified as
meaningful, and be defined by the 2 (vehicle type:
control/comparative) x 2 (vehicle position: after topic/before
topic) design, as mentioned above.

Table 4: Mean meaningful decision proportion of the
MDT (SD)
Vehicle position
after topic
before topic

Figure 1: Design of the MDT
In the MDT trial, the fixation mark (+) was presented at
the center of a PC screen for 1500 ms. The participants were
instructed to watch the fixation mark carefully. After that,
the fixation mark was removed, and a material sentence was
presented at the center of the screen. At this time, the
sentence was separated into three parts, and the parts were
presented in sequence. The three parts were the topic (e.g., a
word), a comparative vehicle (e.g., like a weapon), and
interpretative feature (e.g., hurts someone). The
interpretative feature was always presented last, although
the comparative vehicle was presented either after or before
the topic. The three parts were presented for 1500 ms each,
and the ISI for 200 ms. In the comparative vehicles, the
vehicle of the material sentences was presented as a
comparative stimulus, whereas the character list (* * *) was
presented as a matched control stimulus (see Figure 1).

Control
80% (12)
81% (13)

Comparative
88% (10)
88% (10)

The main effect of the vehicle type was significant (Fp(1,
83) = 43.31, Fi(1,71) = 24.37, ps < .001). However, the
interaction between vehicle type and vehicle position was
not significant (Fp(1, 83) = 0.27, Fi(1,71) = 0.50, ps > .10).
The result showed that the comparative vehicle helps the
participants judge the pair of topic and interpretative feature
as meaningful regardless of vehicle position.
Decision Time Before analysis, we excluded meaningfuldecision data exceeding two standard deviations from the
mean (4% of the data were excluded). The data were
analyzed via a 2 (vehicle type) x 2 (vehicle position)
repeated-measures ANOVAs with participants (Fp) and
items (Fi). Mean decision times are shown in Figure 2.
The main effects of vehicle position (Fp(1, 83) = 4.60,
Fi(1,71) = 9.79, p < .05, p < .005) and vehicle type (Fp(1,
83) = 36.74, Fi(1,71) = 42.05, ps < .001) were significant.
The interaction between vehicle type and vehicle position

2159

was also significant (Fp(1, 83) = 15.09, Fi(1,71) = 7.48, p
< .001, p < .01). The test of the simple main effect revealed
that the comparative vehicle helps the participants judge the
pair of topic and interpretative feature as meaningful more
quickly than the control vehicle both in the after-topic (Fp(1,
166) = 7.60, Fi(1,142) = 9.48, p < .01, p < .005) and beforetopic (Fp(1, 166) = 51.76, Fi(1,142) = 44.63, ps < .001)
conditions. On the other hand, in the control condition, the
difference between after-topic and before-topic was
significant (Fp(1, 166) = 17.37, Fi(1,142) = 16.90, ps < .001),
although the difference in the condition of comparative
vehicle presented was not significant (Fp(1, 166) = 0.87,
Fi(1,142) = 0.00, ps > .10). This suggests that the
presentation timing of the topic is related to the difficulty of
topic comprehension. If the topic is presented early in the
period during which comprehension is in progress, the topic
activates its possible meaning more than if presented
relatively late in this period. This is suggested by the
control-vehicle data on the difference between after-topic
and before-topic. But this difference disappears in the
comparative-vehicle condition. This suggests that the
comparative vehicle activates the interpretative feature in
the topic, especially in the before-topic condition. The
results that the before-topic sentence activates the metaphorrelevant meaning more than the after-topic sentence are
contrary to our predication. This might be caused by the
topic of the before-topic sentence in which the process of
vehicle precedes the topic, thus the sentence activated the
metaphor-relevant meaning only of the vehicle, not the topic,
which might accept all the vehicle meaning.
Control
Decision Time (ms)

800
826.99
795.80

772.11

765.15

700
After Topic

Table 5: Mean decision time (SD) divided by the median
of vehicle conventionality (ms).
Conventionality
Low Conv.
after topic
before topic
High Conv.
after topic
before topic

Control

Comparative

798.85 (99.13)
840.22 (87.91)

798.66 (94.41)
772.66 (96.77)

800.55 (100.84)
830.31 (103.52)

739.09 (103.69)
764.12 (106.78)
N = 36

On the other hand, the effect of aptness seems to be less
than that of conventionality. Table 6 shows mean decision
time divided by median aptness (high aptness (e.g., “a word
is like a weapon”) vs. low aptness (e.g., “a marriage is like a
refrigerator”)). Three way ANOVA showed that only the
main effects of aptness (Fi(1,70) = 12.48, p < .001), vehicle
type (Fi(1,70) = 42.64, p < .001), and vehicle position
(Fi(1,70) = 9.80, p < .005) were significant. There was no
interaction between vehicle type, vehicle position, and
aptness (Fi(1,70) = 0.06, p > .10). This shows that the
participants in the comparative condition could identify the
pair of topic and interpretative feature as meaningful
regardless of the aptness of the comparative sentence.

Comparative

850

750

(Fi(1,70) = 6.04, p < .05). The test of the simple main effect
revealed that the effect of vehicle type was only not
significant in the condition of the low-conventionality
vehicle presented after the topic (Fi(1,140) = 0.00, p > .10),
and that the comparative vehicles in the other conditions
(low-conventionality
vehicle
before
topic,
highconventionality vehicle after topic, and high-conventionality
vehicle before topic) were significant (Fi(1,140) = 24.04,
19.89, 23.08, ps < .001). Furthermore, in the comparative
low-conventionality condition, the decision time for
vehicles presented after the topic is faster than that for
vehicles presented before the topic (Fi(1,140) = 4.41, p
< .05). These results show that the presentation of the
vehicle helps the participants judge the pair of topic and
interpretative feature as meaningful, but that the topic with
low-conventionality vehicle is difficult to judge in the after
topic-vehicle condition.

Before Topic

Vehicle Position

Table 6: Mean decision time (SD) divided by the median
of aptness (ms).

Figure 2: Mean decision time in the MDT
Note: Error bars represent the SE of the mean.
Is the tendency of the effect of the comparative vehicle
the same regardless of the simile type? The answer is
probably “no.” Table 5 shows the mean decision time
divided by the median of vehicle conventionality (high
conventionality (e.g., “a thunder strike is like a knife”) vs.
low conventionality (e.g., “a fashion model is like a rail”)).
Three way ANOVA showed that the interaction between
vehicle type, vehicle position, and conventionality (low
conventionality/high conventionality) was significant

2160

Aptness
Low Apt
after topic
before topic
High Apt
after topic
before topic

Control

Comparative

830.08 (105.61)
861.60 (96.06)

811.43 (86.41)
803.70 (102.26)

769.31 (83.33)
808.93 (88.54)

726.31 (101.48)
733.07 (88.22)
N = 36

We speculate that this difference between vehicle
conventionality and aptness is probably characteristic of
simile. The simile, unlike the metaphor, emphasizes the
similarity between the topic and vehicle. So, in the simile, it
is not necessary for the topic and the vehicle to be the same.
That is why the meaning of the topic can be different from
the meaning of the vehicle. Furthermore, the topic does not
interfere with activation of all the meaning in metaphoric
sentences (McGlone, & Manfredi, 2001), so the important
process is to interpret the meaning of the vehicle. Thus, the
meaning of vehicle is more strongly affected by vehicle
conventionality
than
vehicle
aptness,
because
conventionality is the strength of meaning of the vehicle
only, but aptness is the strength of the relationships between
the topic and vehicle. The importance of vehicle in simile is
indirectly suggested by the vehicle-position results.

General Discussion
The experiment presented in this paper showed
experimental results of comparative-sentence processing.
From our study, it is shown that the topic of comparative
sentence is quickly comprehended as a simile-relevant
meaning, and that the topic of low-conventionality
comparative sentence is easily understood in a condition
where the vehicle is presented before the topic. The aptness
is not related to the process of simile.
The definition of aptness in our study, however, is a little
different from the definition in the previous studies. The
definition in the previous studies is the extent to which the
vehicle’s figurative meaning expresses an important feature
of the topic (Jones & Estes, 2006). This definition does not
decide what the figurative meaning refers to. So the
important feature is possibly different for each person who
evaluates the aptness of the vehicle to the topic. On the
other hand, the definition of aptness in our study determines
the figurative meaning. In the case of “a word is like a
weapon,” the aptness of the feature (a weapon hurts
someone) is predetermined. In this definition of aptness,
however, vehicle conventionality and aptness cannot be
independent of each other (r = 0.53, p < .001; from Taira &
Kusumi, 2009b). This suggests that not only vehicle
conventionality but also aptness can have an effect on the
processing of comparative sentence.
In future research, we will examine the relationships
between various factors (not only conventionality and
aptness but also familiarity, similarity, difficulty to
understand and so on) which is may affect on the process of
simile comprehension, using, for example, multiple
regression analysis. In addition, we will discuss the
difference between the process of simile and metaphor in
detail, based on experimental data.

References
Blasko, D., & Connie, C.M. (1993). Effects of familiarity
and aptness on metaphor processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19, 295-308.

Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The Career of Metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112, 193-216.
Chiappe, D., Kennedy, J., & Smykowski, T. (2003).
Reversibility, aptness, and the conventionality of
metaphors and similes. Metaphor and Symbol, 18, 85–105.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Keyser, B., Robertson, R. R. W., &
Werner, N. K. (2001). The role of suppression and
enhancement in understanding metaphors. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 433-450.
Glucksberg, S. (2003). The psycholinguistics of metaphor.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 92-96.
Glucksberg, S., Mcglone, M.S., & Manfredi, D. (1997)
Property attribution in metaphor comprehension. Journal
of Memory and Language, 36, 50-67.
Glucksberg, S., Newsome, M. R., & Goldvarg, Y. (2001).
Inhibition of literal: Filtering metaphor-irrelevant
information during metaphor comprehension. Metaphor
& Symbol, 16, 277-293.
Jones, L., & Estes, Z. (2005). Metaphor comprehension as
attributive categorization. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53, 110-124.
Jones, L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and alarm
clocks: Aptness and conventionality in metaphor
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
18-32.
Keysar, B. (1989). On the functional equivalence of literal
and metaphorical interpretation in discourse. Journal of
Memory and Language, 28, 375-385.
McGlone, M. S., & Manfredi, D. A. (2001). Topic-vehicle
interaction in metaphor comprehension. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 1209-1219.
Ortony, A., Schallert, D., Reynolds, R. & Antos, S. (1978).
Interpreting metaphors and idioms: Some effects on
context on comprehension. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 17, 465-477.
Roberts, R. M., & Kreuz, R. J. (1994). Why do people use
figurative language? Psychological Science, 5, 159–163.
Taira, T. & Kusumi, T. (2009a). The meaning of topic and
vehicle in metaphor comprehension: Evidence from
meaningfulness decision task. Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Science
Society, 92-95.
Taira, T. & Kusumi, T. (2009b). The cognition of the topic
and vehicle and aptness of metaphor. Proceedings of the
9th Annual Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Linguistics
Association, 465-471.
Taira, T. & Kusumi, T. (2010). Semantic change of topic
and vehicle in metaphor comprehension: Process of
irrelevant meaning. Proceedings of the 10th Annual
Meeting of the Japanese Cognitive Linguistics
Association, 513-523.
Taira, T., Nakamoto, K., & Kusumi, T. (2007). Metaphor
familiarity and interpretation diversity. Cognitive Studies,
14, 322-338.
Utsumi, A. (2007). Interpretive diversity explains metaphorsimile distinction. Metaphor and Symbol, 22, 291-312.

2161

