UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The QWERTY Effect: How stereo-typing shapes the mental lexicon.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5w44w64f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Jasmin, Kyle
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The QWERTY Effect:
How stereo-typing shapes the mental lexicon.
Kyle Jasmin1,2,3
(kyle.jasmin@mpi.nl)
1

Daniel Casasanto1,4,5
(casasanto@alum.mit.edu)

Neurobiology of Language Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
2
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, UK
3
Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, USA
4
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Nijmegen, NL
5
Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA

Abstract
The QWERTY keyboard mediates communication for
millions of language users. Here we investigated whether
differences in the way words are typed correspond to
differences in their meanings. Some words are spelled with
more letters on the right side of the keyboard and others with
more letters on the left. We tested whether asymmetries in
the way people interact with keys on the right and left of the
keyboard influence their evaluations of the emotional valence
of the words. In Experiment 1, we found a relationship
between emotional valence and QWERTY key position,
across three languages (English, Spanish, and Dutch). Words
with more right-hand letters were rated as more positive in
meaning on average than words with more left-hand letters.
In Experiment 2 we replicated this pattern in nonce words.
Although these data are correlational, the fact that a similar
pattern was found across languages suggests that the
QWERTY keyboard is shaping the meanings of words, as
people filter language through their fingers. Widespread
typing introduces a new mechanism by which semantic
changes in language can arise.
Keywords: body-specificity hypothesis;
meaning; orthography; typing; valence.

motor

action;

Introduction
For many people, language may be typed and read almost as
much as it is spoken and heard. Today the phrase “talk to
you later” (abbreviated “ttyl”) often means that
conversational partners will continue “talking” with their
fingers. When they do, they are likely to use the QWERTY
keyboard. The QWERTY layout was invented in 1878, as a
remedy for mechanical problems with the original
Remington typewriters, the keys of which were arranged
alphabetically. During fast typing, neighboring keys would
jam when used in succession. QWERTY was designed to
separate frequently-used letter pairs to opposite sides of the
keyboard, avoiding mechanical clashes.
The final
arrangement was constrained by the inner workings of the
Remington machine, and by the need to place the letters in
“t-y-p-e-w-r-i-t-e-r” conveniently on the top row of keys, to
help salesmen tap out what was, at the time, a brand name
(David, 1985).

The QWERTY keyboard, which originated as a tool for
journalists, is now everywhere in our culture. Increasingly,
coffee shop chatter is being replaced by the sound of
clicking keystrokes. Conversations and even courtships can
take place entirely through text. Smart phones and laptops
let people type messages from virtually anywhere.
Routinely, language is produced without speech. When
linguists and psychologists talk about the articulators used
in language production, they are ordinarily referring to parts
of the mouth. But increasingly, the articulators that mediate
our day-to-day language production are the fingers.
The way words are articulated with the mouth is related to
their meaning. Although many sound-meaning mappings
are arbitrary (de Saussure, 1966), there are aspects of
meaning that appear non-arbitrarily linked to the
configuration of the vocal-tract articulators used to produce
them (Ohala, 1984). Here we propose a link between the
meanings of words and the action of the manual articulators
used for typing them. Because patterns of articulation are
not independent of meaning, typing introduces a new
mechanism by which semantic changes in language can
arise.
We propose that typing words on the keyboard may
influence their emotional valence (i.e., the positivity or
negativity of their meanings). Typing is a special kind of
motor action. Performing motor actions fluently generally
leads to positive feelings and evaluations (Oppenheimer,
2008; Ping, Dhillon, & Beilock, 2009). Therefore, motor
fluency could mediate relationships between the location of
letters on the QWERTY keyboard and the valence of the
words they compose, either directly or indirectly.
A direct link between motor fluency and valence could
result from the distribution of letters on the right and left
sides of the keyboard. In standard QWERTY typing, the
left hand is responsible for typing more letters than the right
hand (15 letters vs. 11). For skilled and unskilled typists
alike, fingers on the left hand are responsible for more keys
than fingers on the right. This should make planning and
executing keystrokes more difficult with the left hand than
with the right, because the amount of cognitive control
required to strike one key among its neighbors should
increase with the number of keys, due to increased response

1823

competition (Ridderinkhof, van den Wildenberg, Segalowitz
& Carter, 2004). This proposal is supported by reaction
time data showing that, when participants are presented with
letters in isolation and asked to press the corresponding
keys, they are faster to type letters from the right side of the
keyboard than the left (Logan, 2003).
If right-hand letters are easier to type, this should lead to
more positive feelings when people type words composed of
more right-hand letters, and more negative feeling when
they type words with more left-hand letters. Over time,
associations between typing fluency and emotion could
cause “right-hand words” to acquire more positive meanings
and “left-hand words” more negative meanings. Skilled
typists implicitly prefer easy-to-type letter strings, even
when they were not typing, supporting the possibility that
typing fluency could influence the emotional valence of the
things people type (Beilock & Holt, 2007; Van den Bergh,
et al. 1990). To summarize this first proposal, on the basis
of keyboard kinematics, words with more right-hand letters
should be easier to type, and should therefore acquire more
positive meanings on average than words with more lefthand letters.
Alternatively, motor fluency might interact with
QWERTY to influence the valence of words more
indirectly. The hands are not created equal. Most people
have a dominant hand, and therefore interact with the
environment more fluently on one side of space than the
other. As a consequence, people implicitly associate
positive things with their dominant side and negative things
with their nondominant side. When asked to decide which
of two products to buy, which of two job applicants to hire,
or which of two alien creatures looks more trustworthy,
right- and left-handers respond differently. Right-handers
tend to prefer the product, person, or creature presented on
their right side, but left-handers tend to prefer the one on
their left (Casasanto, 2009). Children as young as 5 years
old already make evaluations according to their handedness,
judging animals shown on their dominant side to be nicer
and smarter than animals on their nondominant side
(Casasanto & Henetz, 2011). Beyond the laboratory,
people’s association of “good” with their dominant side can
be observed in their spontaneous gestures during positive
and negative speech (Casasanto & Jasmin, 2010).
Overall, these results cannot be predicted or explained by
metaphors or idioms in language, which consistently
associate “good” with “right” and “bad” with “left” (e.g.,
my right-hand man; two left feet). Rather, these results
reveal implicit mental metaphors linking left-right space and
emotional valence, which are body-specific (Casasanto,
2009): Right- and left-handers, who have different patterns
of motor fluency, implicitly associate “good” and “bad”
with opposite sides of space.
These mental metaphors influence people’s judgments
even when they are not using their hands, indicating that
immediate motor experience is not necessary to activate
body-specific associations between space and valence:
Mentally representing locations on one’s “good” or “bad”

side of space is sufficient (Casasanto & Brookshire, 2011;
Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011). People who know how to
type automatically activate the positions of keys when they
read words (Rieger, 2004). Consequently, words spelled
with more letters on one side of the keyboard than the other
could activate mental metaphors linking space with valence
whether or not people are typing, and whether or not typing
is actually more fluent with one hand than with the other.
Although Keyboard Kinematics and Mental Metaphors
both predict relationships between QWERTY key position
and word valence, they predict different effects of
handedness.
According to the Keyboard Kinematics
proposal, right- and left-handers should both show a Good
Is Right pattern, rating words with more right-hand letters to
be more positive in meaning, since there should be less
response competition for typing letters on the right side than
on the left, regardless of the typer’s handedness.
Alternatively, the Mental Metaphors proposal predicts that
right-handers should rate words with more right-hand letters
to be more positive, since these words should activate their
implicit Good Is Right association more strongly; by
contrast, left-handers should rate words with more left-hand
letters to be more positive, since these words should activate
their implicit Good Is Left association.
Here we explored the relationship between QWERTY key
position and word meaning, in two experiments. In
Experiment 1 we tested for associations between left-right
key position and emotional valence in words from three
QWERTY-using languages (English, Spanish and Dutch).
In Experiment 2 we tested whether effects of QWERTY key
position are restricted to existing words, or whether key
position also affects the valence of nonce words that have
never been seen or typed. In both experiments we compared
word ratings between left- and right-handers, to evaluate
Keyboard Kinematics and Mental Metaphors as potential
causes of the hypothesized relationship between QWERTY
and word meaning.

Experiment 1: Does QWERTY predict valence
ratings for words across languages?
Experiment 1 tested whether associations between side of
keyboard and emotional valence are detectable in
participants’ judgments about words in three languages.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=132; 14 lefthanders, 118 right-handers by self-report) participated
online, for payment.
Materials and Procedure We analyzed words from 3
corpora. The Affective Norms for English Words corpus
(ANEW; Bradley and Lang, 1999) consists of 1034 words.
Participants used a pencil to rate valence on a 9-point scale
composed of five Self-Assessment Manikins (SAMs),
which ranged from a smiling figure at the positive end of
the scale to a frowning figure at the negative end.

1824

Participants were told to mark one of the manikins, or a
space between two adjacent manikins.
The second corpus was a Spanish version of ANEW
(SPANEW; Redondo, et al. 2007), in which translations of
the ANEW words were rated by native Spanish speakers
using a procedure.
The third corpus was a Dutch version of ANEW
(DANEW), which we created. The 1034 ANEW words
were translated into Dutch by a native speaker. Three of the
English words translated to the same Dutch word.
Removing these duplicates left 1031 words in the sample.
Each participant saw 85 of the translated ANEW words
intermixed with 74 words from an unrelated experiment,
which served as fillers. Participants saw words one at a
time, and rated them for emotional valence on 9-point SAM
scales. Whereas ANEW and SPANEW participants used
pencil and paper, DANEW participants responded by
clicking one of 9 radio buttons located beside the 5
manikins, or in between two manikins. In ANEW and
SPANEW the manikins were arranged from left to right. In
DANEW, the manikins were arranged vertically on the
screen, to avoid any unintended interactions between a leftright rating scale and the left-right positions of the letters
that composed stimulus words.

Results and Discussion
For each word in the corpus, we computed the difference of
the number of left-hand letters (q,w,e,r,t,a,s,d,f,g,z,x,c,y,b)
and right-hand letters (y,u,i,o,p,h,j,k,l,n,m), a measure we
call the Right Hand Advantage [RHA=(# right-hand letters)(# left-hand letters)]. Overall, there was a significant
positive relationship between RHA and Valence in ANEW,
SPANEW, and DANEW combined, according to a linear
regression with items (ANEW words and their translation
equivalents) as a repeated random factor (Wald χ2=5.34,
df=1, p=.02; Figure 1). Words with more right-hand letters
were rated to be more positive on average than words with
more left-hand letters. We will call this relationship the
QWERTY effect.1
To determine whether the QWERTY effect differed
across languages, Language was added to the regression
model as a fixed factor. The mean valence ratings differed
between languages, producing a main effect of Language
(Mean Valence Ratings: Dutch=5.07 (SD=2.27);
English=5.15 (SD=1.99); Spanish=4.74 (SD=2.14); Wald
χ2=101.09, df=2, p=.0001).
Importantly, however,
Language did not interact with RHA to predict Valence
(Wald χ2=0.23, df=2, p=.89), and the effect of RHA on
Valence remained significant when the effect of Language
and the interaction of Language with RHA were controlled
(Wald χ2=5.19, df=1, p=.02).
Since there was no significant difference in the strength of
the QWERTY effect across languages, an analysis of each

separate language is neither required nor licensed. With that
caveat, we note that the predicted relationship between RHA
and Valence was significant in English (Wald χ2=4.61,
df=1, p=.03) and in Dutch (Wald χ2=5.81, df=1, p=.02), and
a trend in the same positive direction was found in Spanish
(Wald χ2=1.04, df=1, p=.31). It would be inappropriate to
interpret these patterns as differing between languages,
given the lack of any statistical difference (Wald χ2<1),
which cannot be attributed to a lack of power (minimum
N=1031 items).
A further analysis was conducted to control for possible
effects of Word Length and for the frequency with which
individual letters are used in each language (Letter
Frequency).2 RHA remained a significant predictor of
Valence when Word Length, Letter Frequency, Language,
and their interactions were controlled (Wald χ2=6.95, df=1,
p=.008).
A final set of analyses tested for effects of handedness in
the DANEW raters (no information is available about the
handedness of the raters for ANEW and SPANEW).
According to a mixed regression model with subjects and
items as repeated random factors, RHA predicted Valence in
right- and left-handers, combined (F(1,1022)=4.92, p=.03).
When Handedness was added to the model, it did not
interact with RHA to predict Valence (F(1,6077)=0.16,
p=.69).
The association between RHA and Valence
remained significant when the effect of Handedness and the
interaction of Handedness and RHA were controlled
(F(1,1224)=4.00, p=.05).
Although the QWERTY effect did not differ significantly
between right- and left-handers, we conducted an
exploratory analysis to determine whether handedness
influenced the direction of the correlation between RHA and
Valence, since this information is critical to deciding
between different possible causes of the QWERTY effect.
Right-handers showed a positive association of RHA with
Valence (F(1,1020)=4.84, p=.03). Left-handers showed a
trend in the same positive direction, which did not approach
significance, likely due to the small number of left-handers
(F(1,416)=0.27, p=.61).
Overall, words with more right-hand letters were rated to
be more positive than words with more left-hand letters.
Since this pattern did not differ between right- and lefthanders (not even qualitatively, in terms of direction), the
results of Experiment 1 support Keyboard Kinematics as the
cause of the QWERTY effect.

1

The phrase “QWERTY effect” is sometimes used informally in
Economics, to describe a product that is highly successful despite
being inferior to its competitors. The semantic QWERTY effect
we report here is unrelated.

2

Information about frequency of letter use across languages was
obtained
from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Letter_frequency,
accessed April 10, 2011.

1825

(Consonant Frames; CFs). These CFs were crossed with 4
vowels (/i/, /u/, /eɪ/, /oʊ/) to generate 3,312 nonce words.
The vowels /i/ and /u/ were spelled with double-e (pleek),
and double-o (plook). The vowels /eɪ/ and /oʊ/ were spelled
with an a and final e (plake) and with o and final e (ploke).
CFs containing words that were spelled or pronounced like
existing English words were excluded. Spellings were
adjusted so that all nonce words had legal English spellings.
This left 404 CFs which, crossed with 4 vowels, yielded
1616 words. Four CFs were randomly excluded to leave
1600 nonce words, which were presented in a Latin square
design. Participants were instructed to read words in “an
alien language” and indicate how positive the meaning
seemed on a 9-point scale by clicking on a radio button with
the mouse. Each participant rated 20 words.

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. The difference between
the number of right-hand letters and left-hand letters (RHA)
predicted valence ratings for English, Dutch and Spanish
words.

Experiment 2: Does QWERTY predict valence
judgments for nonce words?
Experiment 2 tested whether the QWERTY effect would be
found for nonce words, with no pre-experimental meaning.
This experiment addressed three questions raised by
Experiment 1. First, would an effect of handedness emerge
in a larger sample of participants, including more lefthanders? Second, does the QWERTY effect arise at the
level of the word, or at a sub-lexical level (i.e., letters or
clusters of letters)? Third, could the QWERTY effect be an
artifact of lexical frequency? In principle, if words with
higher RHAs also had higher frequencies, this could result
in a spurious correlation between RHA and Valence.
Information about lexical frequency was not available for all
of the words form Experiment 1, complicating an analysis to
rule out possible frequency effects.
In the present
experiment, however, all items were novel, and therefore
had frequencies of zero.

Methods
Participants English speakers (N=800; 36 left-handers, 751
right-handers, 13 ambidextrous by self-report) were
recruited via the Amazon Mechanical Turk website and
participated online, for payment.
Materials and Procedure A corpus of pronounceable,
single-syllable English nonce words was generated by
crossing a set of 46 consonant (or cluster) onsets and 18
consonant codas, for a total of 828 onset-coda combinations

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2. The difference between
the number of right-hand letters and left-hand letters (RHA)
predicted valence ratings for English nonce words.

Results and Discussion
RHA was calculated as in Experiment 1. There was a
significant positive relationship between RHA and Valence,
according to a mixed linear regression with subjects and
items as repeated random factors (F(1,1584)=10.85 p=.001;
Figure 2), replicating the main result of Experiment 1.
When Handedness (for left- and right-handers) was added to
the model, it did not interact with RHA to predict Valence
(F(1,15053)=.03, p=.86). In further exploratory analyses,
right-handers showed a positive association of RHA with
Valence (F(1,1574)=11.76, p=.001). Left-handers showed a
trend in the same positive direction, which did not approach
significance (F(1,600)=0.68, p=.41). As in Experiment 1,
there was no effect of handedness on the association

1826

between RHA and Valence, which trended in the same
direction for right- and left-handers.
Nonce words with more right hand letters were judged to
have more positive meanings in an alien language,
suggesting that Good Is Right associations are stored or
activated at the level of letters or combinations of letters.
Importantly, the QWERTY effect in Experiment 2 cannot be
explained by an unexpected relationship between lexical
frequency and key position, since all items were novel, and
had frequencies of zero.3

General Discussion
In two experiments, we demonstrate a previously
undocumented relationship between the meanings of words
and the way they are typed: the QWERTY effect. On
average, words spelled with more right-hand letters (on the
right of the keyboard) were rated to be more positive in
emotional valence than words spelled with more left-hand
letters (on the left of the keyboard). This was true even
though raters were not typing when they responded: In some
cases they were using pencil and paper. A similar
relationship between key position and word meaning was
found across three languages (English, Spanish, and Dutch),
and was also extended to nonce words with no preexperimental meaning.
We proposed two possible causes of the QWERTY effect,
which made contrasting predictions. According to the
Keyboard Kinematics account, people should tend to rate
words with more right-hand letters than left-hand letters as
more positive, regardless of their handedness. According to
the Mental Metaphors account, right-handers should tend to
rate words with more right-hand letters as more positive, but
left-handers should favor words with more left-hand letters.
Results of both experiments showed similar patterns in
right- and left-handers, supporting the Keyboard Kinematics
account. Right-hand letters are less numerous, therefore
words with more right-hand letters may acquire more
positive meanings because they are easier to type, due to an
asymmetry built into the QWERTY keyboard.
Although there was no significant difference between
right- and left-handers, we note that the association between
RHA and Valence was numerically weaker in left-handers
in both experiments, as would be expected if there were
additive effects of Keyboard Kinematics and Mental
Metaphors, strengthening the Good Is Right effect in righthanders, but weakening it in left-handers.

Alternative accounts of the QWERTY effect?
The fact that we found no differences in the strength of the
QWERTY effect across English, Spanish, and Dutch argues
3

It is possible that when judging the valence of nonce words,
participants activated real English words that were phonologically
or orthographically similar. However, this is merely as source of
noise, and is unlikely to account for the observed RHA effect,
since letters that are phonological or orthographic neighbors are
unlikely to be typographic neighbors on the QWERTY keyboard.

against two alternatives explanations for this effect. First, if
the effect had been found in only one language, it would be
amenable to explanations based on accidents of sound
symbolism (Ohala, 1984). In any single language, it could
happen by chance that words with higher RHAs are more
positive due to sound-valence associations. But despite
some commonalities, the English, Dutch, and Spanish
languages have different phonological systems, and
different letter-to-sound mappings.
To maintain this
skeptical alternative, it would be necessary to posit that
RHA correlated with different letter-sound-valence
mappings in each of these three languages (with strengths
that did not differ across languages).
Second, if we had found the QWERTY effect in English
alone, it would seem plausible that space-valence mappings
had shaped the QWERTY layout, but not the other way
around. QWERTY was designed by an English speaker.
Since there is about a 90% chance he was a right-hander,
implicit space-valence associations could have biased him to
place letters that carried positive associations on the right
and letters with negative associations on the left of the
keyboard. Presumably, however, such implicit associations
would be based on the peculiar roles these letters play in
English words or sounds. The finding of similar QWERTY
effects across languages suggests that, even if English-based
letter-space-valence associations influenced QWERTY’s
design, QWERTY has now “infected” typers of other
languages with similar associations. Since the present data
are correlational, establishing the causal relationships
underlying the QWERTY effect will require further
research.

Conclusions
Although the relationship between words’ forms and
meanings is largely arbitrary, aspects of how words are
produced can shape their meanings. In the past, language
was only spoken, and was therefore only subject to
constraints on hearing and speaking. Now language is
frequently produced by the fingers, and for millions of
people, it is filtered through QWERTY. As people develop
new technologies for producing language, these
technologies shape the language they were designed to
produce.
The meanings of words in English, Dutch, and Spanish
are related to the way people type them on the QWERTY
keyboard. Words with more right-hand letters are rated as
more positive in emotional valence than words with more
left-hand letters. The fact that nonce words also show the
QWERTY effect suggests that new coinages in language
will show effects of how they are typed immediately.
People responsible for naming new products, companies,
and brands might do well to consider the potential
advantages of consulting their keyboards and choosing the
“right” name.

1827

Acknowledgments
Research supported in part by the Junta de Andalucía (P09SEJ-4772) and by a James S. McDonnell Foundation
Scholar Award to DC.

References
Beilock, S. L. & Holt, L. E. (2007). Embodied preference
judgments: Can likeability be driven by the motor
system? Psychological Science, 18, 51-57
Bradley, M.M., & Lang, P.J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings. Technical report C-1, Gainesville, FL.
The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University
of Florida.
Casasanto, D. (2009). Embodiment of abstract concepts:
good and bad in right- and left-handers. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 138(3), 351-367.
Casasanto, D. & Brookshire, G. (2011). Brief Motor
Experience Reverses Visual Hemifield Effects.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Casasanto, D. & Chrysikou, E.G. (2011). When Left is
'Right': Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts.
Psychological Science, 22(4), 419-422.
Casasanto, D. & Henetz, T. (2011). Handedness shapes
children's abstract concepts. Cognitive Science. In Press.
Casasanto, D. & Jasmin, K. (2010). Good and Bad in the
Hands of Politicians: Spontaneous gestures during
positive and negative speech. PLoS ONE, 5(7), e11805.
David, P. (1985). Clio and the Economics of QWERTY.
The American Economic Review, 75(2), 332-337.
De Saussure, F. (1966). Course in General Linguistics.
Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye (Eds.), Translated by
Wade Baskin. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Grudin, J. T. (1983). Error patterns in novice and skilled
transcription typing. In W. E. Cooper (Ed.), Cognitive
aspects of skilled typewriting. New York: SpringerVerlag. 121–143.
Logan, G. D. (2003). Simon-type effects: Chronometric
evidence for keypress schemata in typewriting. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29, 741-757.
Ohala, J. (1984). An ethological perspective on common
cross-language utilization of F0 of voice. Phonetica, 41,
1-16.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). The secret life of fluency.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 12(6), 237-241
Ping, R., Dhillon, S., & Beilock, S. L. (2009). Reach for
what you like: The body’s role in shaping preferences.
Emotion Review, 1, 140-150
Redondo, J., Fraga, I., Padrón, I., & Comesaña, M. (2007).
The Spanish adaptation of ANEW (Affective Norms for
English Words). Behavioral Research Methods 39(3),
600-605.
Riderinkhof, K. R., van den Wildenberg, W., Segalowitz, S.,
Carter, C. (2004). Neurocognitive mechanisms of
cognitive control: The role of prefrontal cortex in action
selection, response inhibition, performance monitoring,

and reward-based learning. Brain and Cognition. 56(2).
129-140.
Rieger, M. (2004). Automatic keypress activation in skilled
typing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance, 30, 555-565.
Van den Bergh, O., Vrana, S., & Eelen, P. (1990). Letters
from the heart: Affective categorization of letter
combinations in typists and nontypists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 1153–1161.

1828

