UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Repetition-Break Plot Structure: A Tool for Persuasion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xm920w9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Loewenstein, Jeffrey
Raghunathan, Rajagopal
Heath, Chip

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Repetition-Break Plot Structure: A Tool for Persuasion
Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@gmail.com)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 350 Wohlers Hall, 1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820, USA

Rajagopal Raghunathan (raj.raghunathan@mccombs.utexas.edu)
McCombs School of Business, 1 University Station B6700
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Chip Heath (chip.heath@stanford.edu)
Stanford Graduate School of Business, 518 Memorial Drive
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
The Repetition-Break plot structure, which capitalizes on how
people learn through drawing comparisons, generates
persuasive narratives. In two experiments, we show that
television advertisements using the Repetition-Break plot
structure are persuasive, leading to higher brand attitudes and
purchase intentions than ads with alternative structures. This
effect is partly attributable to comparison-induced surprise.
Thus, we have evidence that a theoretically explainable and
generic plot structure not only makes for interesting stories, it
also makes those stories effective for persuasion.
Keywords: Repetition-Break plot structure; advertisements;
persuasion; comparison, narratives.

Introduction
Cognitive science research on how people learn is useful for
understanding why advertisements work. Consistent with a
variety of research on the importance of stories and
examples as a basis for learning (e.g., Gentner, 1989; Rubin,
1995; Schank, 1992), advertisers increasingly seek to
persuade consumers by developing involving stories that
spur thinking and transport consumers (Adaval & Wyer,
1998; Wang & Calder, 2009; Wentzel, Tomczak &
Herrmann, 2010). We show that an old narrative structure
found in folktales all around the world (Barbeau, 1960;
Chophel, 1984; Zipes, 2002), called the Repetition-Break
plot structure (Loewenstein & Heath, 2009), is surprisingly
potent in modern advertisements. The plot structure
capitalizes on regularities in sequencing examples that foster
category and schema learning. It consists of a series of
highly similar events (A, A’, A”…) that encourages
comparison and forming an expectation of what is to come,
followed by a final deviating event (B) that produces
surprise and interest (cf., Rozin, Rozin, Appel & Wachtel,
2006). By showing that the Repetition-Break plot structure
can be used to persuade, we provide evidence that people
can generate broadly valued, exceptionally creative, and
effective communications by using recipes built on
cognitive science principles (for related approaches studying
alternative structures, see Goldenberg, Mazursky &

Solomon, 1999; McQuarrie & Mick, 1996; and Pieters,
Wedel & Batra, 2010).
For example, one of the top advertising awards, the CLIO,
gave its “best in show” Grand Clio award for the best
television advertisement in 2010 to an advertisement that
used the Repetition-Break plot structure. The ad showed a
series of striking transformations when objects entered some
purportedly magic Tasmanian water: an old bicycle enters
the water and turns into a motorcycle, a simple ukulele
enters the water and turns into a stunning guitar, a simple
kayak turns into a flashy speedboat, and, in the final key
transformation, ordinary beer turns into Boag’s Draught, the
Australian beer that is the subject of the advertisement. The
repeated series of transformations set a pattern that was then
extended, surprisingly, to Boag’s Draught beer.
In prior research, we found that the Repetition-Break plot
structure generated compelling jokes and folktales
(Loewenstein & Heath, 2009). We found that jokes and
folktales with the Repetition-Break plot structure were more
likely than others to be socially selected and liked. We
argued that these jokes and folktales, like the Boag’s
Draught advertisement, used the Repetition-Break plot
structure to generate surprise and interest. In the current
studies, we extend this work to show that the RepetitionBreak plot structure not only generates surprising and
interesting stories, it can leverage that interest to shape
people’s attitudes about the subjects of those stories.
Cognitive science should examine not only cognitive
processing, but also the consequences of that processing.

Comparison-Generated Surprise
Prior arguments about why surprising and involving stories
are effective emphasize that such stories deviate from
viewers’ expectations (Peracchio & Tybout, 1986), leading
viewers to resolve the incongruity (Speck, 1990). Deviating
from prior expectations to generate surprise is also critical to
the effectiveness of counterintuitive cultural narratives (e.g.,
Boyer & Ramble, 2001; Norenzayan, Atran, Faulkner, &
Schaller, 2006). The key difference as to why stories relying
on the Repetition-Break plot structure are effective is that
they do not rely on people already knowing the background

1105

expectation. Repetition-Break stories use comparison to
teach the expectations from which they later deviate.
Creating surprise by teaching expectations that are then
disrupted is powerful. It allows stories to be engaging in
novel ways and to a broad array of audiences. For example,
McQuarrie and Mick (1999) found that some advertisement
structures failed to be effective for foreign consumers, and
argued that the structures failed because these consumers
did not have the requisite background expectations that
native consumers did. By first teaching the background
expectations on which they will rely, Repetition-Break ads
avoid this problem. Further, teaching expectations allows
stories using the Repetition-Break plot structure to generate
surprises based on novel expectations, such as by
constructing a narrative logic relying on the fictional “magic
Tasmanian water.”
The Repetition-Break plot structure uses an initial
repetition to establish a pattern that a final event extends or
breaks in a surprising way (Loewenstein & Heath, 2009).
By showing people several highly similar events, the
Repetition-Break plot structure leads people to draw
comparisons, because surface similarity and close temporal
succession foster engaging in comparison (e.g., Loewenstein
& Gentner, 2001). Drawing comparisons encourages people
to focus on commonalities and form generalizations
(Gentner & Markman, 1997). Thus, the initial Repetition
phase of the Repetition-Break plot structure encourages
people to form an expectation about how subsequent events
should unfold. The expectation could be familiar or novel to
viewers. Critically though, all viewers should have the
information from comparing the initial repeated events to
form the expectation, and viewers drawing comparisons to
form the expectation is the first reason that Repetition-Break
ads should be engaging.
The expectation people derive from comparing initial
events provides a basis for a final event to deviate and
generate surprise. The final event can extend the
generalization to a new and unknown domain and product,
as in the Boag’s Draught advertisement, which is a
progressive alignment effect (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996).
Or, the final event can depart from the generalization, as in
the classic folktales the Three Billy Goats’ Gruff and the
Three Little Pigs, which is an alignable difference effect
(Markman & Gentner, 1993). In either case, deviating from
the similar initial events should lead viewers to try to
resolve the incongruity and make sense of the final event
and the larger meaning of the narrative. By encouraging
people to undertake these cognitive efforts, the narratives
spur involvement. This is critical, because it allows
advertisers’ stories to persuade consumers and increase their
attitudes towards the ad and brand. Further, surprise
heightens affective responses (Mellers, 2000), which should
strengthen the persuasion effects. Thus, when the
Repetition-Break plot structure is used for advertising, it
should have the capacity to influence not just consumers’
cognition, but also to involve consumers, to generate strong

emotions, and to persuade consumers to like what they are
seeing.

Overview of the Studies
We had two goals with these studies. The first was to test
whether the Repetition-Break plot structure yields
persuasive advertisements. As has long been noted
(Greenwald, 1968), learning need not imply persuasion.
Accordingly, we test whether ads using the RepetitionBreak plot structure generate more favorable attitudes
towards the brands in the ads than ads using other
structures. The second goal was to generate evidence as to
when and for what the plot structure should be useful. This
led us to test outcomes distinct from persuasion, to separate
the predicted broad engagement account from a more
specific humor account, and to test the plot structure’s
effectiveness under different processing conditions.

Experiment 1
This study tests whether Repetition-Break ads have a
specific advantage in being involving and persuasive. We
showed participants ads, and then tested for persuasion
(people’s engagement with the ad, liking for the brand, and
purchase intentions). We predicted a Repetition-Break
advantage. We also tested for mere attention to the ad (can
people recall and recognize what brand was advertised),
where we do not predict a Repetition-Break advantage. The
attention measures allow us to test whether RepetitionBreak ads are particularly effective or whether participants
are merely disregarding non-Repetition-Break ads. This is
plausible, as we examined the effectiveness of target ads
embedded in a sequence of mundane ads, such as one might
see in a commercial break between television shows.
The target ads varied across participants. For some
participants, the target ad was a Repetition-Break ad. Some
participants instead saw what we call Contrast controls: the
Repetition-Break target ad edited so that it has just one
initial event, rather than several. The final event is
unchanged. Contrast controls are useful because they are a
test of whether comparing initial events is important, as our
processing account implies, even though the repeated events
provide no substantive new information. (We note that in
additional studies and analyses, we have found no effects of
duration differences). A further set of participants viewed
what we call Alternative controls: an ad from the same
campaign as the target Repetition-Break ad, but that did not
have a Repetition-Break structure. These controls are a
check on the influence of aspects of the ads unrelated to plot
structure, such as campaign-wide choices about the people,
style, music, tagline, and so forth. In addition, we tested
three different sets of Repetition-Break, Contrast and
Alternative controls for the sake of empirical generalization.
Thus, when we look for a Repetition-Break advantage, we
are testing whether participants viewing a Repetition-Break
ad generate different outcomes than participants viewing a
Contrast or Alternative control ad.

1106

In addition, we made efforts to measure not only the
engagement and persuasion that we argue is critical for
Repetition-Break ads but also humor, which is just one of
multiple possible ends to which Repetition-Break ads can be
aimed. Repetition-Break ads are not simply a subset of
funny ads. Accordingly, we gathered participants’
assessments of how humorous the ads were and tested
humor and engagement as drivers of any effect of the
Repetition-Break plot structure on people’s attitudes
towards the brands in the ads and their intentions to
purchase goods from the brands in the ads.

Methods
Participants In all, 220 undergraduates participated for
course extra credit (mean age: 20.7 years; 61% female; 44%
white; 68% native English speakers). Exploratory data
analysis provided no support for these demographic
variables moderating the relationships between the ad
structures and the dependent measures, so we do not
consider them further.
Materials, design and procedure We used a 3 (Structure:
Repetition-Break, Contrast, Alternative) X 3 (Brand:
Adidas, Fiat, Cotton) factorial design. Participants saw one
of the nine possible target ads resulting from this design
embedded in the middle of six filler advertisements. After
viewing all seven ads, participants engaged in an unrelated
task for an average of eight minutes and then answered a
series of questions about the ads.
Participants answered attention questions first. They
recalled all the brands for which they saw advertisements,
and we tallied whether they correctly wrote the target brand
as a measure of brand recall. We then gave participants a list
of brands, and asked them to identify their degree of
confidence that they did or did not see an ad for each brand
as a measure of brand recognition. Half the brands they had
seen before, half they had not, and we included as foils
brands from the same product category as the target brands.
Participants next answered persuasion questions. We
showed participants three frames from the target ad and then
asked them to answer a standard brand attitude scale (Abrand;
e.g., how appealing is the advertised brand; α = .94) and an
engagement scale (e.g., how surprising was the ad, how
appealing was the story in the ad; α = .87). We assessed
participants’ purchase intentions by asking the degree to
which they agreed with two statements (α = .94): The next
time I need [product type], I intend to consider [brand]; and
The next time I consider buying [product type], I intend to
purchase a [brand] product. We also asked them to rate how
funny the ad was (1=Not at all Funny to 7=Very Funny), as
well as whether they had seen the ad before.

Results
Repetition-Break ads yielded higher evaluations than the
Contrast and Alternative controls on the persuasion
measures but not on the attention measures (Figure 1). To
reach this assessment, we conducted a series of 3 (Structure:

Repetition-Break, Contrast, Alternative) X 3 (Brand:
Adidas, Cotton, Fiat) ANOVAs to examine each measure—
brand attitudes, engagement, purchase intentions, brand
recognition, and brand recall. These showed consistent main
effects of Structure as well as predictable orthogonal main
effects of Brand (e.g., participants found Adidas a more
appealing brand than Cotton). To save space, we emphasize
planned contrasts between Repetition-Break and Contrast
ads and between Repetition-Break and Alternative ads.
Repetition-Break ads (M = 5.50, SE = 0.17) yielded more
favorable brand attitudes than Contrast ads (M = 5.00, SE =
0.19), F(1, 219) = 2.09, p < .05, and Alternative ads (M =
4.86, SE = 0.18), F(1, 219) = 2.86, p < .01. RepetitionBreak ads (M = 4.32, SE = 0.21) yielded higher levels of
engagement than Contrast ads (M = 3.62, SE = 0.22), F(1,
219) = 2.91, p < .01, and Alternative ads (M = 3.51, SE =
0.18), F(1, 219) = 3.66, p < .001. Repetition-Break ads (M =
3.42, SE = 0.22) yielded stronger purchase intentions than
Contrast ads (M = 2.82, SE = 0.22), F(1, 219) = 2.27, p <
.05, and a trend towards stronger purchase intentions than
Alternative ads (M = 3.00, SE = 0.21), F(1, 219) = 1.69, p =
.09. Thus, Repetition-Break ads generate higher levels of
persuasion than Contrast and Alternative ads.

Figure 1: Persuasion and Attention measures (transformed
to z-scores for comparability) for Alternative, Contrast and
Repetition-Break advertisements from Experiment 1.
We found a markedly different pattern for the attention
measures. Repetition-Break ads (M = 8.70, SE = 0.37) were
more confidently recognized than Contrast ads (M = 7.05,
SE = 0.22), F(1, 219) = 3.33, p < .01, but less confidently
recognized than Alternative ads (M = 9.91, SE = 0.29), F(1,
219) = -2.64, p < .01. Repetition-Break ads (M = .38, SE =
.06) tended to be more likely to be recalled that Contrast ads
(M = .23, SE = .05), F(1, 219) = 1.96, p = .05, but if
anything were less likely to be recalled than Alternative ads
(M = .45, SE = .06), F(1, 219) = -1.07, p = .29. Thus, as
predicted, Repetition-Break ads show no overall advantage
on attention measures.
Repetition-Break ads do not appear to rely solely on
humor. Repetition-Break ads (M = 3.48, SE = 0.14) were
rated as funnier than Alternative ads (M = 2.48, SE = 0.14),
F(1, 219) = 5.76, p < .001, and showed a non-significant
tendency to be funnier than Contrast ads (M = 3.03, SE =
0.17), F(1, 219) = 1.35, p = .18. However, using Preacher,
Rucker and Hayes’ (2007) approach for simultaneously

1107

assessing multiple mediators, we found a positive
coefficient for the indirect effect of Repetition-Break
through engagement on brand attitudes, .30 (SE - .11, 95%
CI: .11 to .53), and a negative coefficient for the indirect
effect of Repetition-Break through humor on brand
attitudes, -.12 (SE - .06, 95% CI: -.26 to -.03). Similarly, we
found a positive coefficient for the indirect effect of
Repetition-Break through engagement on purchase
intentions, .20 (SE = .08, 95% CI: .06 to .44), and a negative
coefficient for the indirect effect of Repetition-Break
through humor on purchase intentions, -.23 (SE = .09, 95%
CI: -.47 to -.07). Thus, Repetition-Break ads do need not be
funny to be effective.

Discussion
Repetition-Break ads were persuasive. Participants found
them particularly engaging, and thereby reported higher
brand attitudes and purchase intentions relative to Contrast
versions that eliminate the opportunity to draw comparisons
and Alternative ads from the same campaign that did not use
Repetition-Break plot structures. People paid attention to all
the ads; we found mixed performance for Repetition-Break
ads on the attention measures of brand recognition and
recall. Thus, Repetition-Break ads are useful for high
involvement, persuasion concerns such as attempts at
increasing brand attitudes and purchase intentions. We also
found that humor was distinct from engagement, and that
Repetition-Break ads did not need to be funny to be
effective. The broader implication is that people
encountering stories should be more likely to experience
those stories using the Repetition-Break plot structure as
particularly powerful and influential.

Experiment 2
Our account of the Repetition-Break plot structure is that the
repeated events generate a potentially novel expectation that
can be used to set up a break that generates surprise and
interest. This means Repetition-Break ads require
moderately sophisticated cognitive processing over the
course of the ad, rather than being immediately perceptible,
like catchy music, attractive actors or exotic scenery. For the
plot structure to be effective, people have to have the
cognitive capacity to become engaged and translate that
engagement (or lack of engagement) into brand attitudes.
Making a related argument, McQuarrie and Mick (2003)
noted that consumers must have the ability, opportunity and
motivation to process an ad that uses rhetorical figures. Also
related, Ahn and colleagues (2009) found that cognitive load
diminished people’s processing and memory of repeated
patterns of events in a slide show. To be clear, we are
differentiating between boredom and disinterest as reasons
not to process ads—Experiment 1 showed that RepetitionBreak ads can stand out from a sequence of mundane ads—
and limited ability to process information due to high
cognitive load. In this study, we examine whether the
Repetition-Break plot structure advantage is reduced or
eliminated if people are placed under cognitive load.

The primary motivation to examine the effects of
cognitive load is that there is an alternative account for the
Repetition-Break plot structure advantage that should be
impervious to cognitive load. Rozin and colleagues (2006)
highlighted the effectiveness of what they called the AAB
pattern. They found the AAB pattern was prevalent in music
and jokes, and that the AAB pattern was more frequent and
more effective than the AB pattern (and more frequent but
equally effective as the AAAB pattern). These findings are
consistent with our claims about the importance of initial
repetition. Where the accounts diverge is in explaining what
the repetition and break are doing to generate surprise.
Rozin and colleagues highlighted the role of automatic,
potentially innate expectations for patterns to repeat, and
hence explain the presence of multiple initial events as
establishing repetition, which should then automatically
trigger surprise if the repetition is broken. This account is
geared towards explaining why people might enjoy hearing
the same piece of music repeatedly, even after the breaks
can be expected. Also, in music the repetitions are often
identical, as the same melody or phrase literally repeats.
Repeated, identical perceptual patterns may provide
immediately compelling expectations. However, we suggest
that the narrative plot structures found in advertisements (as
well as jokes, folktales and other narratives) are more
conceptual than perceptual. The repetitions are of similar,
but not identical, events, and so are likely to require
deliberate cognitive processing to derive generalizations.
The break is also more conceptual than perceptual, and
likely requires some deliberation to decode. Thus, our
account predicts that cognitive load will dampen
engagement, whereas the automatic expectations account
from Rozin and colleagues (2006) should predict null
effects of cognitive load.

Methods
Participants A total of 252 junior and senior
undergraduates participated for course extra credit (mean
age 21.0 years; 54% female; 51% white: 87% native English
speakers). Exploratory data analysis revealed no notable
relationships between these demographic variables and the
attitude about the brand attitude dependent measure.
Materials, design and procedure Participants saw three
target advertisements, interspersed with three filler
advertisements. We used a 3 (Structure: Repetition-Break,
Contrast, Alternative) X 2 (Cognitive load: Load, No load)
X 3 (Brand: Adidas, Cotton, Fiat) mixed measures design.
For each participant, the three target ads were all of the
same type, so a given participant saw three Repetition-Break
ads, or three Contrast ads, or three Alternative ads. In the
Load condition, participants were shown an 8-digit number
and asked to memorize it (as in, e.g., Shiv & Huber, 2000).
Then they were shown an ad. Next they recalled the
number, and if they were incorrect, were told so. Then they
rated their attitude towards the brand in the advertisement
and whether they had seen the ad before. In the No load

1108

condition, participants were simply shown the ads and
immediately asked for their ratings.

Results
We first examined participants’ efforts at remembering the
8-digit numbers, which served as our cognitive load
manipulation. Participants mostly (71%) recalled the
numbers accurately. Even when they were inaccurate, they
recalled an average of five of the eight digits correctly,
implying that they were attempting to retain the number.
Consequently, we have evidence that participants in the
cognitive load condition were not ignoring the load task.
A 3 (Structure: Repetition-Break, Contrast, Alternative) X
2 (Cognitive load: Load, No load) X 3 (Brand: Adidas,
Cotton, Fiat) mixed measures ANOVA found an effect of
Structure, F(2, 726) = 8.66, p < .001, no main effect of
Cognitive load, F(1, 726) = 0.47, p = .49, an effect of Brand,
F(2, 726) = 31.12, p < .001, and an interaction between
Structure and Load, F(2, 726) = 5.27, p < .01 (Figure 2). We
followed up by running separate analyses for participants in
the Load and No Load conditions. For participants under
cognitive load, there was no effect of Structure, F(2,315) <
1, as participants’ attitudes towards the brands were
comparable after seeing Repetition-Break ads (M = 5.52, SE
= .12), Contrast ads (M = 5.54, SE = .11) and Alternative
ads (M = 5.40, SE = .11). These numbers hardly change if
we include their recall accuracy from the cognitive load
manipulation as a covariate.

We found reliably different brand attitudes for the
different brands. Adidas (M = 5.77, SE = .07) was more
highly rated than Cotton (M = 5.57, SE = .07), F(1, 726) =
2.02, p < .05, and Cotton in turn was more highly rated than
Fiat (M = 4.94, SE = .08), F(1, 726) = 7.61, p < .001. There
was no interaction between Cognitive load and Brand; the
overall means for each brand hardly changed if people were
under load or not (Adidas: 5.81 / 5.72; Cotton: 5.61 / 5.52;
Fiat: 4.93 / 4.95). These results are important because they
show that load was not eliminating everything that
contributes to participants’ brand attitude ratings, but
selectively eliminating plot structure effects.

Discussion
The Repetition-Break plot structure is persuasive, provided
people can engage with the stories. If people have the
cognitive capacity to follow the plot in an advertisement, it
has the potential to contribute to, or take away from, their
impressions of the brand. However, if people are strongly
straining with another task, then other concerns, presumably
those contributing to the immediate surface appeal of the ad,
likely predominate.
The results also have implications for separating the
account we offered for why the Repetition-Break plot
structure is effective and the account Rozin and colleagues
(2006) offered for why the AAB pattern is effective. It is
possible that perceptual patterns can rely on simple
comparisons and be engaging even in the presence of
cognitive load. It follows from our results though that more
conceptual repetitions rely on more effortful cognitive
processing to generate effects.

General Discussion

Figure 2: Attitude about the Brand ratings for Alternative,
Contrast and Repetition-Break advertisements by
participants under cognitive load and not under cognitive
load.
As in Experiment 1, for participants not under cognitive
load, there was an effect of Structure, F(2,324) = 11.04, p <
.001. Participants’ brand attitudes were higher after seeing
the Repetition-Break ads (M = 5.73, SE = .11) than after
seeing either the Contrast ads (M = 5.38, SE = .11),
F(1,324) = 4.26, p < .05, or the Alternative ads (M = 5.06,
SE = .11), F(1,324) = 21.95, p < .001. Because we found an
interaction with cognitive load and because the plot
structure advantage held without but not with cognitive
load, it appears that cognitive load suppressed the effect of
plot structure on participants’ brand attitudes.

Cognitive science research on learning by comparison is
instructive for understanding why, how and when stories
will be engaging and persuasive. Advertisements using the
Repetition-Break plot structure to create narratives were
engaging and led to more favorable attitudes towards the
brands in the ads and higher purchase intentions for the ads
in the brands. Removing the initial repetition from
Repetition-Break ads led people to derive lower brand
attitudes and weaker purchase intentions, consistent with
our claim of the importance of comparing initial events.
Repetition-Break ads also generated higher brand attitudes
and purchase intentions than ads with different plot
structures from the same campaign, providing further
support that there is value to the plot structure over and
above other choices about the ads. Thus, we have evidence
of the value of the Repetition-Break plot structure for
generating persuasive stories.
We found that people’s level of engagement with the
narrative in the ads mediated the persuasion effect.
Repetition-Break ads are more engaging than otherwise
similar ads, despite being no better attended. A strong
secondary task, however, selectively eliminated the plot
structure advantage, implying that the plot structure requires
at least a moderate degree of deliberate processing. Finally,
we found the Repetition-Break plot structure was effective

1109

when people viewed ads and immediately evaluated them as
well as when people viewed ads within a block and only
later evaluated them. Thus, the Repetition-Break plot
structure requires effort, but is apparently worth it.
More broadly, cognitive science provides a basis for
explaining how to structure information to increase the
likelihood that people will acquire it. The Repetition-Break
plot structure capitalizes on these cognitive tendencies. Not
only does it make the stories it conveys more likely to
spread (Loewenstein & Heath, 2009), it also seems to make
those stories more likely to be influential.

Acknowledgments
We thank Andy Gershoff, Page Moreau and Jonathan
Silverstein for thoughtful feedback, Joy Si and Lisa Twu for
their tireless assistance, and the McCombs School of
Business at The University of Texas at Austin for support.

References
Adaval, R., & Wyer, R. S., Jr. (1998). The role of narratives
in consumer information processing. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 7, 207–245.
Ahn, H.-K., Liu, M. W., & Soman, D. (2009). Memory
markers: How consumers recall the duration of
experiences. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19, 508516.
Barbeau, M. (1960). Huron-Wyandot traditional narratives.
National Museum of Canada, Bulletin No. 165,
Anthropological Series No. 47. Ottawa, Canada: Queen’s
Printer and Controller of Stationary.
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts: Cross-cultural evidence for recall of
counter-intuitive representations. Cognitive Science, 25
(4), 535–564.
Chophel, N. (1984). Folktales of Tibet. New Dehli, India:
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 199-241). London: Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1),
45-56.
Goldenberg, J., Mazursky, D., & Solomon, S. (1999). The
fundamental templates of quality ads. Marketing Science,
18 (3), 333–351.
Greenwald, A. G. (1968). Cognitive learning, cognitive
response to persuasion, and attitude change. In A. G.
Greenwald, T. C. Brock, & T. M. Ostrom (Eds.),
Psychological foundations of attitudes (pp. 147-170).
New York: Academic Press.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797–2822.
Loewenstein, J., & Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial mapping in
preschoolers: close comparisons facilitate far mappings.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 2 (2), 189–219.

Loewenstein, J., & Heath, C. (2009). The Repetition-Break
plot structure: A cognitive influence on selection in the
marketplace of ideas. Cognitive Science, 33, 1-19.
Markman, A.B. & Gentner, D. (1993). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32(4), 517-535.
McQuarrie, E. F., & Mick, D. G. (1996). Figures of rhetoric
in advertising language. Journal of Consumer Research,
22, 424-438.
McQuarrie, E. F., & Mick, D. G. (1999). Visual rhetoric in
advertising: Text-interpretive, experimental, and readerresponse analyses. Journal of Consumer Research, 26,
37-54.
McQuarrie, E. F., & Mick, D. G. (2003). The contribution
of semiotic and rhetorical perspectives to the explanation
of visual persuasion in advertising. In L. M. Scott & R.
Batra (Eds.), Persuasive imagery: A consumer response
perspective (pp. 191-221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mellers, B. A. (2000). Choice and the relative pleasure of
consequences. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 910–924.
Norenzayan, A., Atran, S., Faulkner, J., & Schaller, M.
(2006). Memory and mystery: The cultural selection of
minimally counterintuitive narratives. Cognitive Science,
30, 531–553.
Peracchio, L. A., & Tybout, A. M. (1996). The moderating
role of prior knowledge in schema-based product
evaluation. Journal of Consumer Research, 23, 1996.
Pieters, R., Wedel, M., & Batra, R. (2010). The stopping
power of advertising: Measures and effects of visual
complexity. Journal of Marketing, 74, 48-60.
Preacher, K. J, Rucker, D. D., & Hayes, A. F. (2007).
Addressing moderated mediation hypotheses: Theory,
methods, and prescriptions. Multivariate Behavioral
Research, 42(1), 185-227.
Rozin, P., Rozin, A., Appel, B., & Wachtel, C. (2006).
Documenting and explaining the common AAB pattern in
music and humor: Establishing and breaking expectations.
Emotion, 6(3), 349-355.
Rubin, D. (1995). Memory in oral traditions: The cognitive
psychology of epic, ballads, and counting-out rhymes.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Schank, R. C. (1982). Dynamic memory. Cambridge
University Press.
Shiv, B., & Huber, J. (2000). The impact of anticipating
satisfaction on consumer choice. Journal of Consumer
Research, 27, 202-216.
Speck, P. S. (1990). The humorous message taxonomy: A
framework for the study of humorous ads. Current Issues
and Research in Advertising, 13, 1-44.
Wang, J., & Calder, B. J. (2009). Media engagement and
advertising: Transportation, matching, transference and
intrusion. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19, 546-555.
Wentzel, D., Tomczak, T., & Herrmann, A. (2010). The
moderating effect of manipulative intent and cognitive
resources on the evaluation of narrative ads. Psychology
& Marketing, 27(5), 510-530.
Zipes, J. (Tr.) (1987). The Complete Fairy Tales of the
Brothers Grimm. New York: Bantam Books.

1110

