UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical evidence for the Whorfian hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9jx5103t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Dolscgeid, Sarah
Shayan, Shakila
Majid, Asifa
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Thickness of Musical Pitch:
Psychophysical evidence for the Whorfian hypothesis
Sarah Dolscheid1,2
Shakila Shayan1
Asifa Majid1,3
Daniel Casasanto1,3,4
(sarah.dolscheid@mpi.nl) (shakila.shayan@mpi.nl) (asifa.majid@mpi.nl) (casasand@newschool.edu)
1

Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, NL
3
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
4
Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA
2

pitches (Lidji, Kolinsky, Lochy, & Morais, 2007; Rusconi,
Kwan, Giordano, Umiltà, & Butterworth, 2006). Beyond
binary high-low correspondences, psychophysical pitch
reproduction tasks show that pitch maps onto vertical space
in a continuous analog fashion (Casasanto, 2010).
Pitch and vertical space have been found to interact even
in prelinguistic infants. In a preferential looking task, 3- to
4-month-olds preferred congruent trials (in which
visuospatial height and pitch height corresponded) over
incongruent trials (Walker et al., 2010; see also Wagner, et
al., 1981). There is, thus, converging evidence that people
mentally represent pitch in terms of vertical space, just like
they talk about it.
Crucially, however, not everybody talks about pitch the
same way. In spite of the apparent predominance of the
„high-low‟ metaphor, some languages do not metaphorize
pitch spatially. The Kpelle people of Liberia for instance,
talk about high and low pitches as light and heavy. The Suyá
people of the Amazon basin call high pitches young and low
pitches old, and the Bashi people of central Africa call high
pitches weak and low pitches strong (Eitan & Timmers,
2010).
Even languages that use spatial metaphors for pitch may
not use the same vertical metaphors that are familiar to
English speakers. For the Manza of Central Africa, high
pitches are small and low pitches large (Stone, 1981). In
other languages like Farsi, Turkish and Zapotec (spoken in
the Sierra Sur of Mexico) high pitches are thin and low
pitches thick (Shayan, Ozturk & Sicoli, 2011).
This linguistic diversity in pitch vocabulary raises a
question: Do people who use different metaphors in
language mentally represent pitch differently? If so, how
deep are the effects of language on musical pitch? Could
language shape the nonlinguistic representations that people
use for perceiving or producing musical pitches, even when
they are not using language?
The question of linguistic relativity, often associated with
the writings of Benjamin Whorf (1956), has been
extensively debated in domains like “time” (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2001; Casasanto 2008), “space” (e.g., Majid,
Bowerman, Kita, Haun, & Levinson, 2004), “motion” (e.g.,
Gennari, Sloman, Malt & Fitch, 2002; Papafragou, Hubert,
& Trueswell, 2008), and “color” (e.g., Regier & Kay, 2009),
but little is known about effects of language on pitch
representation.

Abstract
Do the languages that people speak affect the way they
think about musical pitch? Here we compared pitch
representations in native speakers of Dutch and Farsi. Dutch
speakers describe pitches as „high‟ (hoog) and „low‟ (laag),
but Farsi speakers describe high-frequency pitches as „thin‟
(naazok) and low-frequency pitches as „thick‟ (koloft).
Differences in language were reflected in differences in
performance on two psychophysical pitch reproduction
tasks. This was true even though the tasks used entirely
nonlinguistic stimuli and responses. To test whether
experience using language changes pitch representations, we
trained native Dutch speakers to use Farsi-like metaphors,
describing pitch relationships in terms of thickness. After
training, Dutch speakers‟ performance on a nonlinguistic
psychophysical task resembled native Farsi speakers‟.
People who use different space-pitch metaphors in language
also think about pitch differently. Beyond correlation,
language plays a causal role in shaping mental
representations of musical pitch.
Keywords: Metaphor; Musical pitch; Psychophysics; Space;
Whorfian hypothesis.

Introduction
Speakers often use spatial metaphors to talk about musical
pitch. In English, pitches can be high or low, melodic
contours can rise or fall and people can sing at the top or the
bottom of their range. Are these spatial metaphors merely
linguistic conventions, or do they reflect something
fundamental about the way people mentally represent
musical pitch?
There are several reasons to believe that pitch and space
are importantly related in the brain and mind. Amusic
patients, who have difficulty discriminating pitch changes,
also have deficits in spatial tasks like mental rotation
compared to control groups of musicians and non-musicians
(Douglas & Bilkey, 2007). Behavioral experiments also
demonstrate a systematic relationship between pitch and
space in normal participants. In stimulus-response
compatibility tasks, participants are faster to press higher
response keys to identify high-frequency pitches than to
press lower response keys, and vice versa for low-frequency

537

A first hint that people who use different pitch metaphors
conceptualize pitch differently comes from co-speech
gestures. Consistent with the Manzas‟ linguistic coding of
pitches as small and large, speakers have been observed
continuously lowering their hand in space while referring to
the smaller (i.e., higher) pitches, contrary to the English
high-low mapping (Ashley, 2004). This suggests that people
may conceptualize pitch consistent with their pitch
vocabulary. However, on a skeptical interpretation of these
data, gestures that match the co-occurring speech may only
reveal conventions for communicating about musical
pitches, not modes of conceptualizing them. Alternatively,
they may reveal a „shallow‟ influence of language on
thought, indicating that people do indeed conceptualize
pitch in language-specific ways, but only while they are
packaging their thoughts into words (i.e., while they are
„thinking for speaking‟, see Slobin, 1996).
Further evidence for cross-linguistic differences in pitch
representation comes from a developmental study in Farsi-,
Turkish-, and German-speaking children (Shayan, et al., in
preparation). Children were asked to match tones of
different pitches with toy snakes of different thicknesses.
Turkish- and Farsi-speaking children reliably matched the
low-pitched sounds to the thicker snake and the highpitched sounds to the thinner snake, consistent with thickthin metaphors in their languages. German children, who are
exposed to high-low metaphors in their language, did not
show the same thick-thin response pattern.
A persistent challenge in testing relationships between
language and nonlinguistic mental representations is
devising truly nonlinguistic tasks. Here we tested pitch
representations in speakers of one language that uses
„height‟ metaphors (Dutch) and another that uses „thickness‟
metaphors (Farsi), using a pair of psychophysical tasks with
non-linguistic stimuli and responses (adapted from
Casasanto 2010). In one task (Height Interference),
participants saw lines of varying heights while listening to
tones of different pitches. After each tone, participants
reproduced the pitch by singing it back. In the other task
(Thickness Interference) participants saw lines varying in
thickness while hearing tones of different pitches, and sang
back the pitches that they had heard.
In both tasks, the spatial information was irrelevant, and
spatial variation was orthogonal to variation in pitch. As
such, the spatial dimension of the stimuli served as a
distractor: a piece of information that could potentially
interfere with performance on the pitch reproduction task.
We reasoned that if Dutch and Farsi speakers‟ concepts of
pitch were similar irrespective of the languages they speak,
then performance on these tasks should not differ between
language groups. On the other hand, if Dutch and Farsi
speakers mentally represent pitch the way they talk about it,
using different kinds of spatial representations, they should
show contrasting patterns of cross-dimensional interference:
Dutch speakers‟ pitch estimates should be more strongly
affected by irrelevant height information, and Farsi
speakers‟ by irrelevant thickness information.

Experiment 1:
Do people think about pitch like they talk about it?
Experiment 1 tested whether the relationships between
space and pitch found in Dutch and Farsi speakers‟
linguistic metaphors are also present in their nonlinguistic
pitch representations.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=40) and native
Farsi speakers (N=40) participated in this study for
payment. Half of the participants from each language group
performed the Height Interference task (N=20 Dutch, 20
Farsi) and half performed the Thickness Interference task
(N=20 Dutch, 20 Farsi). One additional Farsi-speaking
participant was tested, but was excluded for performing the
task incorrectly. Dutch participants were recruited from the
Max Planck Institute participant pool. Farsi speakers were
recruited from Nijmegen and Delft.
Materials For the Height Interference experiment,
horizontal lines intersected a vertical reference line at one of
nine different locations (ranging from 80 to 720 pixels from
bottom to top of the computer screen, in 80 pixel
increments). For the Thickness Interference experiment, a
vertical line appeared in the middle of the screen in one of
nine thicknesses (ranging from 8 to 72 pixels in 8 pixel
increments). Variation in thickness was thus proportional to
variation in height. In each experiment, the nine different
lines were fully crossed with nine different pitches ranging
from C4 to G#4 in semitone increments, to produce 81
distinct trials. All stimuli were presented on a pc laptop
(screen resolution = 1024x768 pixels) using Presentation
software (www.neurobs.com). Lines were presented in
white on a grey background (350 pixels wide) which was
surrounded by black frames. Auditory stimuli were created
using Audacity software (http://audacity.sourceforge.net/)
and presented through sealed headphones.
Singing responses were recorded by an EDIROL R-09
recording device, and analyzed using Praat software
(http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/) by a coder blind to the
corresponding spatial stimuli. The approximate temporal
midpoint of each response was determined by visual
inspection of the waveform. The average fundamental
frequency (F0) of each sung response was extracted from an
interval spanning 300 ms before and after the estimated
temporal midpoint, to ensure that measured F0 was
representative of the whole response.
Instructions were translated by native speakers of Dutch
and Farsi, and contained no space-pitch metaphors.
Although the language of instructions differed across
language groups, the tasks themselves comprised only
nonlinguistic stimuli (lines and tones) and responses (sung
tones).
Procedure Participants were asked to watch the lines and
listen to the pitches carefully, and to sing back the pitches as
accurately as possible. They were tested individually, and

538

received written instructions prior to the start of the
experiment in their native language.
After three practice trials, participants were presented
each of the 81 line-pitch pairings one at a time, in random
order. Line-pitch stimuli were presented for 2 seconds each.
Immediately after each stimulus, a picture of a microphone
appeared in the center of the screen indicating that the
participants had 2 seconds to sing back the pitch they had
heard. Each response period was followed by an inter-trial
interval of 500 milliseconds. After 40 trials, participants
were given a break, the duration of which was self-paced.
Testing lasted about 15 minutes, and was followed by a
debriefing.

To test for the predicted interaction of Language (Dutch,
Farsi) and Task (Height Interference, Thickness
Interference), the normalized slopes from the thickness task
were multiplied by -1. This multiplication was necessary
because, interestingly, the relationship between spatial
magnitude and frequency reverses between height and
thickness metaphors. Greater spatial height corresponds to
higher frequency, but greater spatial thickness corresponds
to lower frequency. Multiplying the slopes by -1 for one of
the tasks aligns the space and pitch continuums (i.e., the
slope then indicates the same relationship between spatial
magnitude and frequency for both tasks). The normalized
slopes of the effects of space on pitch reproduction were
submitted to a 2 x 2 ANOVA. Language interacted with
Task to predict the effect of space on pitch estimates
(F(1,79)=10.73, p=.002), consistent with the use of „height‟
metaphors in Dutch and „thickness‟ metaphors in Farsi
(figure 2.) There were no main effects.
In planned pairwise comparisons, the effect of height
interference was greater in Dutch speakers than in Farsi
speakers (t(38)=2.65, p=.01) and conversely, the effect of
thickness interference was greater in Farsi speakers than in
Dutch speakers (t(38)=2.00, p=.05). In Dutch speakers the
effect of height interference was greater than the effect of
thickness interference (t(38)=2.26, p=.03, and in Farsi
speakers the effect of thickness interference was greater
than the effect of height interference (t(38)=2.38, p=.02, all
tests two-tailed).
In both Dutch and Farsi culture, higher pitches are written
higher on the musical staff. In principle, differences in
experience using this nonlinguistic cultural convention
could be responsible for the observed effects, as opposed to
differences in experience using language. A further analysis
ruled out this possibility. During debriefing, participants
rated how well they read music on a scale of 1-7. When this
rating was added as a covariate to the 2 x 2 ANOVA, the
interaction between Language and Task remained highly
significant, even when differences in music reading ability
were controlled (F(1,79)=10.83, p=.002).

Results

Normalized slopes of the effect of space on pitch

Pitch estimation, cross-domain effects
The effects of irrelevant spatial information on pitch
reproduction were first tested for each group and each task,
individually. The values of the height and thickness stimuli
were normalized. For each participant we computed the
normalized slope of the effect of the height or thickness of
the stimuli on participants‟ reproduced pitches (figure 1
presents data averaged over participants). In Dutch speakers,
the spatial height of the stimuli influenced pitch estimates as
predicted by „height‟ metaphors in Dutch (t(19)=2.70,
p=.01), but the thickness of stimuli had no significant effect
on pitch reproduction (t(19)=0.57, ns). Farsi speakers
showed the opposite pattern: thickness influenced pitch
estimates as predicted by „thickness‟ metaphors in Farsi
(t(19)=2.09, p=.05), but height had no significant effect on
pitch reproduction (t(19)=1.16, ns).

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. Effects of height
interference (top) and thickness interference (bottom) on
pitch estimates in speakers of Dutch (left) and Farsi (right).
Error bars indicate s.e.m.

Figure 2: Cross-dimensional interference
Experiment 1. Error bars indicate s.e.m.

539

effects

in

Pitch estimation, within-domain effects
Further analyses were conducted to ensure that differences
in cross-dimensional interference were not due to
differences in the accuracy with which participants
reproduced pitches. For each participant we computed the
slope of the effect of the actual pitches on participants‟
reproduced pitches (Dutch Height: Average slope=1.02,
t(19)=12.50, p=.0001; Dutch Thickness: Average
slope=0.87, t(19)=12.68, p=.0001; Farsi Height: Average
slope=0.61, t(19)=6.67, p=.0001; Farsi Thickness: Average
slope=0.58, t(19)=6.21, p=.0001). According to a 2 x 2
ANOVA, Language did not interact with Task to predict the
effect of actual pitch on estimated pitch (F(1,79)=0.45, ns).
Overall, Dutch speakers‟ pitch estimates were more accurate
than Farsi speakers‟ (F(1,79)=16.99, p=.0001), but this main
effect of Language on within-domain performance cannot
explain the critical Language x Task interaction we found in
the cross-domain analysis.
Finally, we conducted a 3-way ANOVA on the
normalized slopes, combining the cross-domain and withindomain analyses. There was a 3-way interaction of
Language (Dutch, Farsi), Task (Height Interference,
Thickness Interference) and Domain (Within-domain
effects, Cross-domain effects; F(1,159)=6.12, p=.02),
indicating that the predicted cross-dimensional interference
effects were not due to unpredicted differences in withindomain performance.
In summary, performance on these nonlinguistic tasks
suggests that people who use different metaphors in their
native languages form correspondingly different mental
representations of musical pitch.

Methods
Participants Native Dutch speakers (N=60) participated for
payment. Half were assigned to the Thickness Training task,
and the other half to the Height Training task.
Materials Participants completed 196 fill-in-the-blank
sentences using the words dunner (thinner) and dikker
(thicker) in the Thickness Training condition and the words
hoger (higher) or lager (lower) in the Height Training
condition. In both tasks, half of the sentences compared the
length or thickness of physical objects (e.g., A tower is
higher / lower than a blade of grass; A pillar is thicker /
thinner than a finger); the other half compared the pitches of
different sounds (e.g., A flute sounds higher / lower than a
bass; A flute sounds thicker / thinner than a bass). Stimuli
were presented on a pc laptop using Presentation software.
Procedure Participants saw 3 correctly-completed example
sentences before the experiment started. They were then
presented one sentence at a time and instructed to fill in the
blank by typing the correct response. They were not told
whether „thicker‟ or „thinner‟ meant „higher‟ or „lower‟;
rather, they were left to infer the correct mapping based on
the example sentences, and on the written feedback they
received after each trial (either ‛goed‟ (correct) for correct
responses or ‛fout‟ (incorrect) for incorrect responses).
Training took about 20 minutes. After the training phase, all
participants performed the Thickness Interference task used
in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Training Phase Participants filled in the blanks with high
accuracy for both the Height Training (Mean
%correct=0.99, SD=0.01) and the Thickness Training task
(Mean %correct=0.99, SD=0.01). Accuracy did not differ
between tasks (difference of means=0.002, t(58)=.34, ns).

Experiment 2:
Does language shape pitch representations?
Did language give rise to the cross-linguistic differences in
performance reported for the Height and Thickness
interference experiments? Although the data from
Experiment 1 closely follow predictions based on language,
they are nevertheless correlational. A 2-part training study
was conducted to investigate a causal role for language.
Dutch speakers were trained to complete sentences about
pitch relationships using Farsi-like thickness metaphors
(Thickness Training), or using the familiar high-low
metaphors (Height Training) as a control. To determine
whether this linguistic training had an effect on
nonlinguistic pitch representations, we then tested all
participants on the Thickness Interference task described in
Experiment 1. If experience using the pitch metaphors in
their native language causes Farsi speakers to think about
pitch using mental representations of spatial thickness, then
repeatedly using thickness metaphors during training should
transiently strengthen Dutch speakers‟ nonlinguistic
thickness-pitch mappings, and should increase the effect of
irrelevant thickness information on pitch estimation.

Test Phase In the Thickness Interference task, the effect of
thickness on pitch estimation was highly significant
following Thickness Training (Slope=1.46, p=.003), but not
following Height Training (Slope=0.08, ns; difference of
slopes=1.38, t(58)=1.84, p=.07, two-tailed). The effect of
thickness on pitch estimation in thickness-trained
participants was statistically indistinguishable from the
effect in native Farsi speakers (difference of slopes=1.39,
t(48)=1.12, ns), and was significantly greater than the effect
in untrained Dutch speakers (difference of slopes=2.06,
t(48)=2.02, p=.05).
Experience using language can change non-linguistic
mental representations of musical pitch.

General Discussion
Dutch and Farsi speakers, who use different metaphors for
pitch in language, also form correspondingly different
nonlinguistic pitch representations. We show this via a
double-dissociation between Dutch- and Farsi-speakers‟
performance on a pair of nonlinguistic psychophysical tasks.

540

Dutch speakers, who talk about pitches as „high‟ and „low‟,
incorporated irrelevant height information into their pitch
estimates (but ignored irrelevant thickness information).
Farsi speakers, who talk about pitches as „thin‟ and „thick‟,
incorporated irrelevant thickness information into their pitch
estimates (but ignored irrelevant height information). When
Dutch speakers were trained to use Farsi-like metaphors,
they showed the same pattern of cross-dimensional
thickness interference as native Farsi speakers. Beyond
demonstrating a language-thought correlation, results show
that metaphors in language can play a causal role in shaping
nonlinguistic mental representations of musical pitch.

in long-term memory, which are partly conditioned by
language. Suppose each time people produce or understand
a spatial metaphor for pitch they activate the corresponding
mental metaphor: an associative mapping between
nonlinguistic mental representations in the source domain
(space) and target domain (pitch). Over time, speakers of a
„height‟ language like Dutch would strengthen the heightpitch mapping at the expense of any competitors, such as
the thickness-pitch mapping -- and vice versa for speakers
of a „thickness‟ language like Farsi. This associative
learning model is supported by the training effect we report
in Experiment 2.

Beyond Thinking for Speaking

Malleability of mental metaphors

On one influential view of the relationship between
language and thought, patterns in language can influence
nonlinguistic mental representations, but only (or primarily)
while people are packaging their thoughts into words
(Slobin, 1987, 1996), or while they are performing tasks for
which verbal codes can be helpful (e.g., Gennari, Sloman,
Malt & Fitch, 2002; Papafragou, Hubert, & Trueswell,
2008). But these „shallow‟ effects of language on high-level
language-mediated thinking are only one sort of linguistic
relativity effect. The present results support the proposal
that language can also have „deep‟ effects on people‟s lowlevel perceptuo-motor abilities (Casasanto, 2008), such as
their ability to perceive and reproduce musical pitches.
Although participants were not producing or
comprehending language during these pitch reproduction
tasks, it remains possible that they were using language
covertly to label the stimuli. However, this is unlikely to
account for the observed pattern of cross-dimensional
interference, for a combination of reasons. First, the
increments of space and pitch were too fine-grained to be
labeled using ordinary (non-technical) words: e.g., relative
to the other pitches, C4 and C#4 would both be labeled
„low‟. Yet, participants could perceive and reproduce values
along the analog space and frequency continuums that could
not be discriminated using their lexical categories. (Relative
coding like higher than the last would be of little use since
stimulus order was random.)
Most importantly, covertly labeling the pitches using
spatial words could not possibly result in the observed
pattern of spatial interference because variation in pitch was
orthogonal to variation in space. Only verbally labeling the
spatial height or thickness of the stimuli could, in principle,
contribute to the spatial interference effects. Yet, labeling
the spatial dimension of stimuli would be unmotivated given
that this information was always task-irrelevant, and it
would be unhelpful given that (a) labeling the irrelevant
dimension would interfere with labeling the relevant one,
and (b) the irrelevant spatial information was often in
conflict with the relevant pitch information (e.g., a „high‟
line would often appear during a „low‟ pitch).
Rather than an online effect of using verbal labels, we
propose that the observed cross-dimensional interference
resulted from analog relationships between space and pitch

The finding that Dutch speakers‟ mental representations of
pitch could be retrained to resemble Farsi speakers‟ in only
20 minutes may seem surprising, but such rapid retraining
effects are not unprecedented (see Boroditsky, 2001;
Casasanto & Bottini, 2010; Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011;
Fischer, Mills, & Shaki, 2010). In particular, the present
results echo a relationship between space-time metaphors in
language and in thought. Many languages like English tend
to use distance metaphors to talk about duration (e.g., a long
time). In other languages like Greek, duration tends to be
metaphorized as an amount of a substance in 3-dimensional
space (e.g., poli ora, tr. „much time‟). In a pair of
nonlinguistic psychophysical tasks analogous to those
presented here, English and Greek speakers were asked to
reproduce the duration of stimuli while ignoring their spatial
extent (in one task) or their volume (in the other). Irrelevant
distance information influenced English speakers‟ time
estimates more strongly than irrelevant volume information,
but the opposite pattern was found in Greek speakers:
Mental metaphors for time mirrored linguistic metaphors.
After about 20 minutes of exposure to Greek-like spacetime metaphors in language, however, the effect of volume
on time reproduction was just as strong in „volume-trained‟
English speakers as in native Greek speakers (Casasanto,
2008).
The effect of short-term training with new linguistic
metaphors is presumably temporary, but the same
associative learning mechanisms that change people‟s
performance in the laboratory may also influence mental
metaphors in the course of ordinary language use. Using
one‟s native language may serve as a natural „training task‟,
encouraging the habitual use of some nonlinguistic
metaphorical mappings more than others (for a discussion of
how brief training can transiently overwhelm long-term
training see Casasanto & Bottini, 2010.)

Origins of space-pitch mappings
Does language establish mental metaphors between space
and pitch in the first place, or does it modify preexisting
mappings? Given that space-pitch mappings have been
demonstrated in prelinguistic infants (e.g., Walker et al.,
2010), the latter seems more likely. In principle, both
height-pitch and thickness-pitch mappings could be present

541

in children‟s minds; the relative strength of these mappings
could be adjusted subsequently, according to the relative
frequencies of these metaphors in the languages they
acquire.
This proposal raises the question: Where do these mental
metaphors come from, if not from language? Both of the
space-pitch metaphors we explore here could plausibly be
based on correspondences in the physical world. The
relationship between thickness and pitch is evident in
musical instruments (e.g., thicker strings produce lower
tones). As people produce higher pitches the larynx rises; as
they produce lower pitches it descends.
Yet, these „just so stories‟ about the physical origins of
mental metaphors should be interpreted with caution (or
tested directly, e.g., Casasanto & Chrysikou, 2011). It is
easy to find other physical regularities that predict different
relationships between pitch and space (e.g., taller people,
tend to have lower voices). Furthermore, it remains an open
question to what extent space-pitch mappings in our minds
emerge in developmental time, as individuals track
experiential regularities (e.g., Casasanto, 2009; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1999) or in evolutionary time, as the neural
substrates of spatial cognition were exapted for non-spatial
functions.

Cognitive Linguistics (pp. 127-145). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for Thinking. In V. Evans &. P.
Chilton (Eds.), Language, Cognition and Space: The State of the
Art and New Directions (pp. 453-478). London: Equinox
Publishing.
Casasanto, D., Bottini, R. (2010). Can Mirror-Reading Reverse the
Flow of Time? In N.S. Hölscher, T.F. Shipley, M. Olivetti
Belardinelli, J.A. Bateman (Eds.), Spatial Cognition VII (pp.
335-345). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Casasanto, D., & Chrysikou, E. G. (2011). When Left it „Right‟:
Motor fluency shapes abstract concepts. Psychological Science,
22(4), 419-22
Douglas, K. M., & Bilkey, D. K. (2007). Amusia is associated with
deficits in spatial processing. Nat. Neurosci., 10(7), 915-21.
Eitan, Z., & Timmers, R. (2010). Beethoven‟s last piano sonata
and those who follow crocodiles: cross-domain mappings of
auditory pitch in a musical context. Cognition, 114(3), 405-22.
Fischer, M. H., Mills, R. A, & Shaki, S. (2010). How to cook a
SNARC: number placement in text rapidly changes spatialnumerical associations. Brain and Cognition, 72(3), 333-6.
Gennari, S. P., Sloman, S., Malt, B. C., & Fitch, W. T. (2002).
Motion events in language and cognition. Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Lakoff J., Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh. Basic
Books.
Lidji, P., Kolinsky, R., Lochy, A., & Morais, J. (2007). Spatial
associations for musical stimuli: a piano in the head? JEP: HPP,
33(5), 1189-207.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., & Levinson,
S. C. (2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case for
space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(3), 108-14.
Papafragou, A., Hulbert, J., & Trueswell, J. (2008). Does language
guide event perception? Evidence from eye movements.
Cognition, 108(1), 155-84.
Regier, T., & Kay, P. (2009). Language, thought, and color: Whorf
was half right. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(10), 439-46.
Rusconi, E., Kwan, B., Giordano, B. L., Umiltà, C., &
Butterworth, B. (2006). Spatial representation of pitch height: the
SMARC effect. Cognition, 99(2), 113-29.
Shayan, S., Ozturk O., & Sicoli, M. (2011). Thickness of pitch,
cross-modal metaphors in Farsi, Turkish and Zapotec, The
Senses and Society. In press.
Slobin, D. I. (1996). From “thought and language” to “thinking for
speaking.” In J. J. Gumperz & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking
linguistic relativity (pp. 70–96). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Stone, R. M. (1981). Toward a Kpelle conceptualization of music
performance. Journal of African Folklore, 94, 188-206.
Wagner, S., Winner, E., Cicchetti, D., & Gardner, H. (1981).
"Metaphorical" Mapping in Human Infants. Child Development,
52(2), 728.
Walker, P., et al. (2010). Preverbal infants‟ sensitivity to
synaesthetic cross-modality correspondences. Psychological
Science, 21(1), 21-5.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). In J. B. Carrol (Ed.), Language, thought, and
reality: Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Keeping one‟s distance:
The influence of spatial distance cues on affect and evaluation.
Psychological Science, 19, 302–308.

Metaphoric representation of concrete experiences
The great majority of psychological experiments on
metaphor have tested for mappings from concrete domains
like space to abstract domains that can never be perceived
through the senses, such as time (e.g., Boroditsky, 2001),
intimacy (Williams & Bargh, 2008), and similarity
(Casasanto, 2009). Unlike these target domains, however,
musical pitch can be perceived directly: Why should pitch
be represented metaphorically, in language or thought?
Although pitch is „concrete‟ in the sense that it is
perceptible, arguably it can only be perceived via one
sensory channel: audition. Compared with the metaphoric
source domain of space, which can be perceived
multimodally (e.g., spatial distance can be judged based on
sight, sound, touch, or even smell), pitch is relatively
abstract. Here we show that mental metaphors can structure
even target domains that are, themselves, grounded in
perception, and that experience with language can shape
these metaphorical mappings.

References
Ashley, R. (2004). Musical pitch space across modalities: Spatial
and other mappings through language and culture. In P. W. S.
Lipscomb, R. Ashley, R. Gjerdingen (Ed.), Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Music Perception and
Cognition. Adelaide: Causal Productions.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? Mandarin
and English speakers‟ conceptions of time. Cognitive
Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who is afraid of the big bad Whorf? Crosslinguistic differences in temporal language and thought.
Language Learning, 58(1), 63-79.
Casasanto, D. (2009). When is a Linguistic Metaphor a Conceptual
Metaphor? In V. Evans & S. Pourcel (Eds.), New Directions in

542

