UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Ellsberg ‘Problem’ and Implicit Assumptions under Ambiguity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zr2296h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Guney, Sule
Newell, Ben R.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Ellsberg ‘Problem’ and Implicit Assumptions under Ambiguity
Sule Guney (s.guney@student.unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Empirical research has revealed that people try to avoid
ambiguity in the Ellsberg problem and make choices
inconsistent with the predictions of Expected Utility Theory.
We hypothesized that people might be forming implicit
assumptions to deal with the ambiguity resulting from the
incomplete information in the problem, and that some
assumptions might lead them to deviate from normative
predictions. We embedded the Ellsberg problem in various
scenarios that made one source of ambiguity (i.e., the implied
distribution of the unknown number of the colored balls)
explicit. Results of an experiment showed that more people
chose consistently (and hence rationally) when the scenario
encouraged them to think that the probability distribution of
the number of balls was normal. The results give insight into
the implicit assumptions that might lead to choices congruent
with normative models.
Keywords: Ellsberg paradox, decision making under
ambiguity, implicit assumptions, probability distributions.

Introduction
Since its inception the study of judgment and decision
making has been concerned with the discrepancy between
what we do and what we ought to do (Newell, Lagnado &
Shanks, 2007). A long line of studies show that people make
judgments and decisions that deviate from the principles of
normative models, such as probability theory (for
probability judgment) and Expected Utility Theory (EUT)
(for decision making). Some tasks have become classics in
the literature because they show such robust and systematic
violations
of
normative
principles.
The typical task used to demonstrate deviations from
normative models is as follows: Provide people with a
judgment or a decision problem which generally contains
quantitative or statistical information, ask them to judge the
likelihood of an event or make a choice between
alternatives, and compare the obtained responses with what
normative models dictate. If the response does not conform
to the principles of a given normative model, then that
response typically is labeled “fallacious”, “erroneous”, or
“paradoxical”. A general assumption behind this labeling is
that it is possible to adhere to the principles of normative
models given only the information provided in the problem
description. Though it often is possible for people to engage
in normative computations, the impoverished and/or abstract
nature of many classic problems might lead people to make
additional assumptions in order to develop a coherent
picture of a particular problem (Nickerson, 1996). These
additional assumptions could give rise to responses that are

incongruent with the principles of normative theories. Thus
it is not a failure of normative computations per se, but a
mismatch between the external description and the decision
maker‟s internal representation of the problem (Stanovich &
West, 2000; see also Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007).
Nickerson (1996) emphasized how, in many of the classic
probability judgment tasks (e.g., Bertrand‟s Box, Monty
Hall), different implicit assumptions can lead to starkly
different conclusions. A compelling example is that of an
encounter with a man on the street who introduces you to
his young son. You know the man to be a father of two;
what is the probability that his other child is also a boy?
Answers of 1/3 and 1/2 can both be justified depending on
the implicit assumptions one draws (e.g., is the man equally
likely to take walks with children of either gender or does he
favor walks with a son?) (see also Bar-Hillel & Falk, 1982).
The essence of these discussions is that judgments defined
as erroneous or paradoxical could be explained in terms of a
mismatch between the information provided to the
participant and the implicit assumptions that they form
when they are presented with the problem. In this article we
shift focus from probability judgments to a classic decision
making problem – the Ellsberg Paradox. This is an infamous
decision problem because peoples‟ choices in the problem
systematically violate normative principles. In addition, the
problem is impoverished in a similar way to those discussed
in the judgment literature. Thus our basic hypothesis is that
the „paradoxical‟ behavior observed in the Ellsberg problem
might result from the tacit assumptions people form when
faced with incomplete information.

The Ellsberg Problem
In most of the decisions we make, we are faced with
different sorts of outcomes with varying degrees of
certainty. While we might be able to attach specific
probabilities to different outcomes in some cases (i.e., when
the outcome depends on a fair coin flip), we may encounter
some events where assessing a probability value is not
entirely possible (i.e., when predicting the outcome of the
next U.S. presidential election). Ellsberg coined the term
“ambiguity” for the latter case and claimed that most people
prefer to bet on gambles with known probabilities rather
than unknown (Ellsberg, 1961). His classic example is as
follows:
Suppose that there is an urn known to contain 30 red balls
and 60 black or yellow balls but the exact proportion of

2323

black and yellow balls is not known. One ball will be drawn
at random from the urn. You are offered to bet on two
gambles with two alternatives.
Gamble 1
A: If the ball drawn is red, you will win $100.
B: If the ball drawn is black, you will win $100.
Gamble 2
C: If the ball drawn is either red or yellow, you will win
$100.
D: If the ball drawn is either black or yellow, you will win
$100.
Ellsberg suggested that A&D will be the most frequent
choice pattern and B&C the least (Ellsberg, 1961). In other
words, people will bet on alternatives with known
probabilities (A&D) rather than ambiguous alternatives
(B&C). However, the A&D pattern is an obvious violation
of the sure-thing principle of EUT because it shows that
people prefer to bet on a red ball rather than on a black ball
in Gamble 1 whereas they also prefer to bet on a non-red
ball rather than a non-black ball in Gamble 2. Another way
to express this contradiction is that choosing A&D implies
that the decision makers behave as if the number of red balls
is higher than the number of black balls in Gamble 1, but the
number of red balls is less than the number of black balls in
Gamble 2.
The vast majority of empirical evidence has demonstrated
that people indeed have a strong preference for A over B
and for D over C (see Becker & Brownson, 1964; Slovic &
Tversky, 1974; MacCrimmon & Larsson, 1979; for the twocolor version see Raiffa, 1961; Yates & Zukowski, 1976;
Kahn & Sarin, 1988; Curley & Yates, 1989; Eisenberger &
Weber, 1995). In addition to the investigation of this
original version, this tendency against ambiguity in decision
making has been tested under different conditions (for an
extensive review, see Camerer & Weber, 1992). For
instance, it has been shown that unambiguous gambles are
strictly preferred to ambiguous gambles, even when the
expected value of the latter is higher (Keren & Gerritsen,
1999), and that people are willing to pay more for
unambiguous gambles (Becker & Brownson, 1964).

Ambiguity Aversion
Ellsberg proposed that it is not irrational to display the A&D
choice pattern, but rather that EUT fails to incorporate
ambiguity as distinct from risk into choice behavior
(Ellsberg, 1961). For decades, this hypothetical gambling
situation has been thought to be a paradox because it
contradicts one axiom of EUT while the “ambiguity
aversion” it manifests is intuitively plausible. On the
theoretical level, several attempts have been made to solve
this paradox by modifying some aspects of EUT (e.g.,
Choquet integral in Choquet theory, see Schmeidler, 1989).
On the empirical side, what accounts for ambiguity aversion
has remained an enduring question in the literature (see
Chow & Sarin, 2001; Fox & Tversky, 1995; Fox & Weber,
2002; Frisch & Baron, 1988; Goodie, 2003; Grieco &

Hogarth, 2004; Heath & Tversky, 1991; Hogarth &
Kunreuther, 1989; Yates & Zukowski, 1976).
Ambiguity has been defined as: “the uncertainty about
probabilities, created by missing information that is relevant
and could be known” (Fellner, 1961; Frisch & Baron, 1988).
The ambiguity seen in the Ellsberg problem has two
components: The first is the proportion of the black and
yellow balls, and the second is the procedure used in the
arrangement of black and yellow balls in a way that makes
us unable to know the probability distribution (and hence
the proportion). For example, if the procedure used to
determine the number of black and yellow balls was coin
flipping (e.g. Heads all yellow; Tails all black), the urn then
must contain either 60 black balls or 60 yellow balls. In
contrast, if the number of black balls was determined via a
random selection method (e.g., pulling numbered tokens out
of a bag), then the number could be anything from 0 to 60.
This second component has not been emphasized by
previous studies, however we think its role might be as
important as the first one in creating paradoxical choices.
This is because if the procedure used in the arrangement of
the black and yellow balls is known, then although the exact
proportions of each cannot be inferred, it is possible to
deduce the probability distribution of the number of balls,
and thereby, perhaps, reduce that component of ambiguity.
In the standard version of the Ellsberg problem because
participants do not know the procedure used to determine
the number of black and yellow balls, they are unable to
make an inference about the probability distribution (e.g.,
Bertrand paradox, see Bertrand, 1889; Nickerson, 2004, p.
186-204). According to the principle of insufficient reason,
when one does not know a probability distribution one has
to assume a uniform distribution (which implies that the
probability of winning is equally likely for each alternative
in Gambles 1 and 2). Such an assumption leads to
indifference (Baron, 2007).
However, people are not indifferent between the
alternatives in each gamble. As noted above, Ellsberg
(1961) argued that „ambiguity aversion‟ directs preferences
towards A&D. We suggest that this aversion, at least in part,
comes from the implicit assumptions that people form in the
presence of ambiguity, and/or the absence of the
information that is required to make a pair of choices that is
consistent with the principles of EUT. In particular people
might form an implicit assumption about the arrangement of
the black and yellow balls in the urn (i.e., how they were
selected and placed in the urn).
To investigate this idea, we kept constant one component
of ambiguity – the proportion of black and yellow balls and manipulated the second component – the procedure
used in their arrangement in the urn. We provided people
with „missing information‟ by embedding the classic
Ellsberg problem within 3 different scenarios where the
procedure used in arrangement of the black and yellow balls
was explicitly stated and each yielded different (implied)
probability distributions.

2324

Selection of the scenarios and implied probability
distributions
We focused on three possible probability distributions for
the black (and yellow) balls, and hence, on three different
scenarios where these probability distributions can be
deduced.
In the first experimental group, the “50-50” group, the
scenario was as follows: The experimenter tossed a fair
coin. If the coin toss came up heads, then all 60 balls are
black. If the coin toss came up tails, then all 60 balls are
yellow. This scenario implies that the number of black balls
could be either 0 or 60 with probability of .50.
In the second experimental group, the “equal probability”
group, the scenario read: The experimenter randomly picked
a number out of a bag which contained numbers from 1 to
60. Then she put that number of black balls into the urn. For
instance, if the number selected was 20, she put 20 black
balls into the urn; and then made the total number of balls
up to 90 by adding a further 40 yellow balls. Thus implying
that the number of black balls could be anything from 1 to
60 with an equal probability
In the third experimental group, the “normal distribution”
group the scenario was: The experimenter put 60 black and
60 yellow balls into a huge box and shuffled them for a
short while. After that she randomly picked 60 balls out of
the box and put those 60 balls into the urn described above.
This scenario suggests that the number of black balls could
be anything from 0 to 60 but middle values (close to 30) are
more probable than extreme values (close to 0 and 60).
Figure 1 shows the probability distributions implied in
each scenario. (These figures were not provided to
participants and neither were the “50-50”, “Equal
Probability” etc. labels used in the problem descriptions.)
One practical reason for using these particular probability
distributions was that they were convenient to be
transformed into coherent scenarios. Second, and more
importantly, they were the first possible distributions that
quickly came to our minds. We thought this may also be
true for other people. For instance, it could be quicker and
easier to imagine that the number of black balls is anything
between 1 and 60 with an equal probability, or likely to be
something around 30, rather than unlikely to be something
around 30 (i.e., a parabolic normal curve).
Although we could not find examples in the existing
literature of this kind of manipulation with the Ellsberg
problem, we made tentative predictions regarding the effect
that providing people with scenarios yielding different
(implied) probability distributions would have on choices.
We predicted that the “equal probability” scenario would
lead to a choice pattern similar to the one observed in the
original version of the Ellsberg problem because both imply
that the number of black balls could be anything from 0 to
60 with an equal probability - even though this is not
explicit in the original version. More importantly, we
expected the choice pattern obtained in the “normal
distribution” scenario to be different (and perhaps result in
more EUT-consistent choices) from those observed in the

other scenarios since it is more informative in the sense that
it implies a relatively small range for the possible number of
black balls (i.e. the number of black (yellow) balls is more
likely to be close to 30).
One could argue that the “50-50” scenario is as
informative as the “normal distribution” scenario since it
implies that number of black (yellow) balls is either 0 or 60,
so that it could have a similar „consistency-increasing‟
effect on the choice pattern as well.
The experiment examined these tentative predictions.

Method
Participants
One-hundred and forty first year psychology students (M
age = 19.5, 89 female) at UNSW participated in the
experiment as a part of their course requirement. They were
randomly assigned to the four groups (n = 35).

Design and Procedure
All participants received a paper-and-pen version of the
Ellsberg problem. All groups were given the three-color
version (as described in the introduction) where they were
first told: “Imagine an urn known to contain 30 red balls and
60 black or yellow balls (thus 90 coloured balls in total)”.
With the exception of the control group (the “Original
Ellsberg” group), this statement was followed by a scenario
in which the procedure used in the arrangement of the black
and yellow balls was explicitly explained (see above for
descriptions).
Each scenario was followed by the statement that the
exact proportion of black and yellow balls was still
unknown, and that one ball would be randomly drawn from
the urn. Participants were then asked to select one of the two
alternatives that they would prefer to bet on in each gamble.

Results
Table 1 displays the number of each choice pairings in the
two gambles for each group. Note that according to EUT,
consistent choice pairings are “A&C” and “B&D” whereas
inconsistent pairings are “A&D” and “B&C”. As can be
seen in the table participants in the “Original Ellsberg”
group demonstrated the standard pattern with A&D as the
dominant choice pairing. This pairing was also the dominant
one for participants in the “50-50” group and the “equal
probability” group. Indeed there was no significant
difference in the number of consistent choice pairings
between either of these two groups and the “Original
Ellsberg” group, χ²(1, N=70)= 0, p > .05.

2325

“Original Ellsberg”
Table 1: The number of participants according to their
choice pairings and to consistent/inconsistent choices across
four groups. (n= 35 in each group).

Choice
pairings
“50-50”

Groups
“50-50” “Equal” “Normal”

A&C*
7
7
A&D
21
18
B&C
1
4
B&D*
6
6
∑Consist.
13
13
∑Inconsist.
22
22
* Choice pairings consistent with EUT

1
0.5
0
0

“Original
Ellsberg”

60

“Equal probability”

“Normal distribution”

Figure 1: Implied probability distributions for the black
balls in each scenario. The x-axis corresponds to the number
of black balls and the y-axis to the probability values.
In stark contrast, the “normal distribution” group showed a
significantly higher number of consistent choice pairings
than the “Original Ellsberg” group, χ²(1, N=70)= 5.72, p <
.02.

Discussion
The “normal distribution” group demonstrated more
consistent choice preferences compared to both the
“Original Ellsberg” group and the other two experimental
groups. The increase in consistency appears to result
primarily from an increase in the selection of A&C and a
corresponding decrease in the selection of A&D. One way
to explain this increase could be a reduction in ambiguity
aversion which led people to choose C (ambiguous
alternative) in Gamble 2. So why does the “normal
distribution” scenario lead to a reduction in ambiguity
aversion and to the more „rational‟ choice pattern?

8
17
5
5
13
22

14
11
1
9
23
12

In the “normal distribution” scenario, participants were
told that the 60 black and yellow balls were placed in the
urn after the experimenter put 60 black and 60 yellow balls
in a box, shuffled them for a while, and randomly picked 60
balls out of the box. Although it is not explicitly stated, this
procedure implies that the probability distribution of the
number of black (yellow) balls is normal. Therefore, the
probability of the number of black (yellow) balls being
around 29, 30, 31 is higher than it being 1, 2, 3 or 58, 59,
60.
This information is crucial because it (might) suggest to
the participant that the distribution of balls in the urn is
highly likely to be something like 30 red, 30 black and 30
yellow balls. Armed with this additional information people
need no longer be ambiguity averse or indifferent and can
make choices consistent with EUT.
Why is the increased consistency manifested primarily in
more A&C and not more B&D choices? We conjecture that
A remains more attractive than B because it represents a
choice of 30 red (for sure) over “30-ish” black. Likewise C
is more attractive than D because C comprises 30 red (for
sure) or “30-ish” yellow, whereas D has two uncertain
options (“30-ish” black or “30-ish” yellow).
Thus the key mechanism appears to be a reduction in at
least one component of ambiguity (the method of
arrangement) that is provided by the more informative
“normal distribution scenario”. The normal distribution is
more informative, for instance, than the “equal probability”
scenario (cf. Larson, 1980) because in the latter scenario,
since the number of black balls can be anything from 1 to
60, it is almost impossible to make even a rough estimation
about the number of balls. Thus the scenario is still
„impoverished‟ and leads to a similar pattern of choices as
observed in the original version. Indeed, equal probability
distributions are considered to be one of the least
informative distributions in probability theory (Jaynes,
1968).
To test this notion of „informativeness‟ a follow-up
experiment could elicit estimates of the number of black
(yellow) balls from participants after they make a decision

2326

in each gamble. If the implied distributions are being
assumed then those participants given the “normal
distribution” should give estimates with a narrow range for
the number of black (yellow) balls (i.e., around 30).
This questioning might also shed light on why the 50-50
scenario, which is arguably as informative as the „normal
distribution‟, still resulted in a similar pattern of choice
preferences (A&D) as the original version. One possibility
is that the all-or-none nature of the 50-50 distribution makes
option C (relatively) less attractive because the decision
maker might reason that there is either 60 black (yellow)
balls or 0. If there are no yellow balls then C (red or yellow
wins) looks like a poor choice because there are only 30 red
balls. In contrast D (black or yellow wins) looks better
because there has to be 60 balls of one of those colors.
A further interesting feature of these data is that the
participants given the “normal distribution” scenario still
chose option A with almost the same frequency as those in
the Original Ellsberg group (compare the totals for the top
two rows in Table 1). This might suggest that participants in
the “normal distribution” group were still ambiguity averse
when presented with Gamble 1 since choosing A is the
indication of ambiguity aversion.
It is possible that participants chose the alternative A in
Gamble 1 because they were still ambiguity averse, but
when they came to make a decision in Gamble 2, they
realized that choosing D would lead to an inconsistent
preference after choosing A. Thus they chose the alternative
C, not because they were less ambiguity averse, but because
D seemed inconsistent after choosing A.
Our ability to test this idea is limited because all
participants completed the experiment with paper and pen
and were free to answer the gambles in any order. A follow
up in which presentation order was reversed, and order of
completion was controlled, might provide insight into this
alternative explanation.
If people are less ambiguity averse in Gamble 2 of the
“normal distribution” group, then there should not be any
change in terms of the number of A&C pairings chosen
even when the participants are presented with Gamble 2
first. In other words, they should have no problem with
choosing alternative C first although it is ambiguous. On the
other hand, if the participants are still ambiguity averse but
are trying to be consistent across gambles, then when given
the reversed order they should choose alternative D first
(because it is unambiguous), and then alternative B (because
choosing B is consistent with choosing D).
These results provide an important first step in our
understanding of the types of implicit assumption that might
underlie choice patterns in decisions under ambiguity. We
think these results are a useful bridge between the literature
on probability judgment (e.g., Nickerson, 1996) and risky
(ambiguous) choice and reinforce that in both domains
„erroneous‟ behaviour can be attributed to the impoverished
nature of the tasks under investigation (see also Krynski &
Tenenbaum, 2007 for a causal-model based approach to
disambiguation of probability problems).

These results suggest that (some) people are able to
adhere to the principles of normative theories not as a result
of providing them with the complete specification of a
problem, but with a particular type of information (a
scenario which encourages them to think that the black and
yellow balls are normally distributed). This implies that a
good match between our implicit assumptions and the
description of a decision problem makes it possible to
narrow the apparent gap between what we normally do and
what we ought to do.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a UNSW Overseas
Postgraduate Research Scholarship awarded to the first
author and an Australian Research Council Discovery
Project Grant (DP 0877510) awarded to the second author.
We thank Hasan G. Bahcekapili for his helpful insights.

References
Bar-Hillel, M. A., & Falk, R. (1982). Some teasers
concerning conditional probabilities. Cognition, 11, 109122.
Baron, J. (2007). Thinking and deciding. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Becker, S. W., & Brownson, F. O. (1964). What price
ambiguity? Or the role of ambiguity in decision-making.
Journal of Political Economy, 72, 62-73.
Bertrand, J. (1889). Calcul des probabilites [Calculus of
probabilities]. Paris: Gautier-Villars et Fils.
Camerer, C., & Weber, M. (1992). Recent developments in
modeling preferences: Uncertainty and ambiguity.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 325-370.
Chow, C. C., & Sarin, R. K. (2001). Comparative ignorance
and the Ellsberg paradox. Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 22, 129-139.
Curley, S. P., & Yates, F. J. (1989). An empirical evaluation
of descriptive models of ambiguity reactions in choice
situations. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 36, 272-287.
Eisenberger, R., & Weber, M. (1995). Willingness-to-pay
and willingness-to-accept for risky and ambiguous
lotteries. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 10, 223-233.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity and the Savage
axioms. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75, 643-669.
Fellner, W. (1961). Distortions of subjective probabilities as
a reaction to uncertainty. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 75, 670-694.
Fox, C. R., & Tversky, A. (1995). Ambiguity aversion and
comparative ignorance. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110, 585-603.
Fox, C. R., & Weber, M. (2002). Ambiguity aversion,
comparative ignorance, and decision context.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
88,476-498.
Frisch, D., & Baron, J. (1988). Ambiguity and rationality.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 1, 146-157.

2327

Goodie, A. S. (2003). The effects of control on betting:
Paradoxical betting on items of high confidence with low
value. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29, 598-610.
Grieco, D., & Hogarth, R. M. (2004). Excess entry,
ambiguity seeking, and competence: An experimental
investigation. UPF Economics and Business Working
Paper.
Heath, C., & Tversky, A. (1991). Preference and belief:
Ambiguity and competence in choice under uncertainty.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 4, 5-28.
Hogarth, R. M., & Kunreuther, H. (1989). Risk, ambiguity
and insurance. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2, 5-35.
Jaynes, E. T. (1968). Prior probabilities. IEEE Transactions
on Systems Science and Cybernetics, 4, 227-241.
Kahn, B. E., & Sarin, R. K. (1988). Modelling ambiguity in
decisions under uncertainty. Journal of Consumer
Research, 15, 265-272.
Keren, G. B., & Gerritsen, L. E. M. (1999). On the
robustness and possible accounts for ambiguity aversion.
Acta Psychologica, 103, 149-172.
Krynski, T. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). The role of
causality in judgment under uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 430-450.
Larson, J. R. Jr. (1980). Exploring the external validity of a
subjectively weighted utility model of decision making.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 26,
293-304.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Larsson, S. (1979). Utility theory:
Axioms versus paradoxes. In M. Allais & O. Hagen
(Eds), 1979. Expected utility hypotheses and the Allais
paradox. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel.
Newell, B. R., Lagnado, D. A., & Shanks, D. R. (2007).
Straight choices: The psychology of decision making.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Nickerson, R. S. (1996). Ambiguities and unstated
assumptions in probabilistic reasoning. Psychological
Bulletin, 120, 410-433.
Nickerson, R. S. (2004). Cognition and chance: The
psychology of probabilistic reasoning. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Raiffa, H. (1961). Risk, ambiguity and the Savage axioms:
Comment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75, 690-694.
Schmeidler, D. (1989). Subjective probability and expected
utility without additivity. Econometrica, 57, 571-587.
Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1974). Who accepts Savage‟s
axiom? Behavioral Science, 19, 368-373.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-665.
Yates, J. F., & Zukowski, L. G. (1976). Characterization of
ambiguity in decision making. Behavioral Science, 21,
19-21.

2328

