UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of User Reviews on Older and Younger Adults’ Attitude towards Online
Medication Information

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8q09q7vh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Liao, Q. Vera
Fu, Wai-Tat

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of User Reviews on Older and Younger Adults’ Attitude towards Online
Medication Information
Q. Vera Liao (liao28@illinois.edu) & Wai-Tat Fu (wfu@illinois.edu)
Human Factors Division, Department of Computer Science, and Beckman Institute
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 201 N. Goodwin Ave., Urbana, IL 61801 USA
is an important question considering the large population of
older adults among e-health information consumers, and
their potential limitations (declined cognitive ability,
generally inexperienced with Internet, etc).
A large proportion of research studying Web credibility
was based on the dual processing model of persuasive
communications such as the Elaboration Likelihood Model
(ELM) (Sillence et al., 2006). Based on ELM, attitudinal
changes with online information can be explained as users
encounter two distinctive types of cues on the Website:
content cues in terms of message content on the page,
which requires systematic, deliberative processing, and
contextual cues related to surface features of the websites
(interface design, usability, source information, etc), which
can be processed in a heuristic way by relying on practical
rules or experience (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). Based on this
theoretical model, a number of studies have provided
evidence for the impact of both content cues and contextual
cues on users’ credibility judgments of online information.
Nowadays, users who visit public health websites are
exposed to more diverse credibility cues than ever before.
In addition to the content message and various Website
features provided by sophisticated interface design, user
review system is allowed by Web 2.0 technologies.
Although user reviews are supposed to act as a guidance for
users to locate and evaluate information more efficiently,
they may add another layer of complexity to users’
credibility assessment process. This is because the largely
anonymous and unfiltered user generated contents
themselves demand credibility assessment, which may in
turn interact with the original credibility assessment of the
contents on the Web sites.
We conducted a laboratory study to explore how user
reviews influenced older and younger adults’ attitude
towards online medication information. Specifically, we
were interested in whether older and younger adults reacted
differently to user reviews that conveyed credibility cues
consistent or inconsistent with the credibility cues in the
content of the Website. According to previous studies
(Liao, 2010), older adults in general had lower abilities to
differentiate between strong and weak content cues when
making credibility judgments. In this study, we focused on
how younger and older adults’ credibility judgments would
change after reading user reviews that were consistent or
inconsistent with the credibility cues in the content, to
understand the interactions among age, credibility cues, and
user reviews, which might interact to determine users’
attitude towards online medication information.

Abstract
A laboratory study was conducted to explore whether the
presence of online user reviews, specifically its interaction
with the credibility of information on the Website, has
differential impact on younger and older adults’ attitude
towards medication information on the Internet. Results
showed that while there was age difference in how message
contents on the Web page influenced credibility judgments,
the presence of user reviews moderated the age difference.
Specifically, we found that: 1) when credibility cues in user
reviews were consistent with the credibility cues in Web page
contents, older adults’ attitude towards the medication was
reinforced more than younger adults, and 2) when the
credibility cues in user reviews were inconsistent with the
credibility cues in Web page contents, older adults were less
sensitive to the influence of user reviews. Especially when
highly positive user reviews were given to a seemingly noncredible medication, older adults were less likely to be
swayed by user reviews. Possible causes of this age
difference in the effects of user reviews were discussed.
Keywords: Cognitive aging, credibility judgment, attitude
change, online user reviews

INTRODUCTION
While the study of persuasion and attitude change remains
an indispensable part of contemporary social psychology,
the pervasive use of computer and Internet has drawn
increasing attention to the subarea of computer mediated
persuasion. In addition to domains that have a tradition to
embrace pervasive techniques, such as advertising and
commerce, a newly emerging research topic in this area is
to study users’ credibility judgments with online
information. The easily accessible and massive amount of
information on the Web, as well as the large variation in its
quality, makes credibility assessment a key stage of
message persuasion process that will determine users’
acceptance or rejection of message statements. It also
provides ample opportunities for researchers to study the
underlying factors influencing message persuasion in
realistic contexts.
Given the risk of trusting wrong information when
making medical decisions, credibility judgment is
especially important for users who seek medical
information online. It would determine users’ attitude
towards the medication and eventually impact the
dissemination of online health information and its use for
promoting public health. In this paper, we focus on
differences between younger and older adults’ attitude
towards online medication information by studying their
credibility judgments of online information. We believe this

844

also tried to make all articles with approximately equal
length and amount of information. We then asked a group
of 7 participants to validate our manipulations and selected
8 sets of documents based on the results to be the content
materials. The disease and medicines names were modified
such that they could not be directly identified.
Contextual Cue Manipulation
We randomly selected web page templates from highly
recognized healthcare websites based on their public
reputation, Website traffic and endorsement by Health on
the Net Network (HON). We kept half of them to be
“strong” contextual cue web pages, and for the other half
we removed features that are known to affect website
credibility to make contextual cues “weak”. 3-5 changes
were randomly picked from two categories: design look and
source features (Table 1). Fogg (2001) identified that
design look, including layout, typography, images, etc, to
be the greatest concern when people make web credibility
evaluation. Source features were defined to be features that
indicate the source authority and reliability and are
fundamental elements for a health website. Features
including reference, author information, site ownership,
third party endorsement, commercial motive, etc, were
found to contribute to the perception of credibility in
multiple studies (Hong, 2006).
User Reviews
We selected material of user reviews from the same website
and modified them to accord to the particular medicine. The
website also provides user rating based on one star
(disagree) to five star (agree) scale for each entry of user
review. The ratings were generally consistent with how
negative or positive the user reviews were arguing (see
Table 1). These user reviews were primarily about users’
experience with the medicine and were less than 100 words
each. 4-6 entries of user reviews were given to each
medicine. We manipulate the consistency of user review
with content cue strength by selecting positive (three to five
stars) or negative (one to three stars) reviews.
Cognitive Ability and Internet Experience Index
Previous studies on older adults’ distinctive behavior in
online environment suggested the age differences could be
attributed to some unique characteristics of older
generation, especially their declined cognitive ability and
inadequate experience with information technology.
Therefore, measures of cognitive ability and Internet
experience were taken to capture the difference between
two age groups. For cognitive abilities, we focus on fluid

METHOD
Participants
Twenty-two older adults (age between 58 and 80,
Mean=68.45, SD=6.36, 59.1% are female) and twenty-two
younger adults (age between 19 and 26, Mean=21.50,
SD=1.95, 63.6% are female) participated in our study. All
participants were recruited from the Urbana-Champaign
area in the US. Most participants (93.2%) have completed
some years of college. There was no significant age
difference in their education level or self-reported
frequency of health information seeking activities on the
Internet.
We also measured participants’ task-related domain
knowledge by a fluency task, in which participants were
asked to generate as many relevant keywords as possible
for each of the eight diseases we used in experiment. The
average number of keywords for each disease was used as
an index of individual’s task related domain knowledge.
Result showed there was no significant age difference in
domain knowledge between the younger and older
participants (p=0.64).

Experiment Design and Material
A 2×2×2×2 mixed factor design was used in this study.
There were two within-subjects variables: content cue
strength (strong/weak) and contextual cue strength
(strong/weak), and two between-subject variables: age
(young/old), and user reviews (with/without user reviews).
All participants were asked to finish 8 tasks. Under each
task were four web pages corresponding to the four
combinations of strong/weak content cue and contextual
cue. User reviews were randomly assigned to be consistent
or inconsistent with the content cues, and evenly distributed
across all content cue and contextual cue combinations.
Content Cue Manipulation
We followed the empirical method used by Petty and
Cacioppo (1986) to manipulate content cues, i.e. the content
argument strength. We selected material from a well-known
healthcare website (www.revolutionhealth.com). It lists
articles of alternative medicine by different diseases, and
provides ratings from users and clinic reviews. Based on
those review ratings we selected articles with “strong” and
“weak” content cues, and further modified their use of
evidence, argument rigor, information quality and bias to
manipulate their credibility (Hamilton, 1998) (Table 1). We

Content
cue
Contextual
cue
User
review

Strong
Weak
chosen from “high ranked” medicine; with research
chosen from “low ranked” medicine; lack of
evidence, explanation of mechanism, comprehensive evidence, biased information, ill logic, commercial
information, positive and strong argument
or unprofessional writing tone
nice layout/color/structure, with reference/contact
bad design, lack of reference/source, typo,
information/third party endorsement
advertising, commercial features
Five-star review: “Really effective product!
One-star review: “This was a complete waste of time
Combined with the right diet it is capable of
and money for me. I tried different brands one after
producing rigid control of blood sugars.”
the other and never even lost half a kg!”
Table 1. Examples of content cue, contextual cue and user review

845

mental abilities (working memory and processing speed),
which are most vulnerable to aging. Working memory was
measured by letter Number Sequencing Task, while
processing speed was measured by Letter and Pattern
Comparison Task (Salthouse, 1991; Chin & Fu, 2010). To
measure their Internet experience, we selected 12 questions
from Knowledge-related Internet Information Seeking
Semi-structured Interview (KRIISS) (Sharit et al., 2008).
The interview asks questions regarding how the Internet
works, how to use Web browser tools and how to perform
information search task.

Figure 1 shows the three-way interaction between content
cue, age, and presence of user reviews. The presence of
user reviews tended to moderate younger adults’ reaction to
strong and weak content cues more than older adults when
making credibility judgments. Two three-way ANOVA
with presence of user review, content cue strength and
contextual cue strength, performed within each age group
further confirmed this effect: while there was a significant
interaction between content cue and presence of user
reviews among younger adults (F(1, 20)=5.903, p=0.02),
this two-way interaction was not observed among older
adults ( F(1,20)=0.022, p=0.88). It indicated that while the
presence of mixed user review significantly affected
younger adults’ credibility ratings after reading them, it did
not show such effect on older adults’ credibility ratings.
We then investigated only the two groups with user
reviews by introducing another independent variable: the
consistency with content cue strength (consistent/
inconsistent), as a within-subject variable. Four-way
ANOVA with age, consistency, content cue strength and
contextual cue strength showed that the main effects of
content cues (F(1,40)=6.63,p=0.01) and contextual cues
(F(1,40)=7.38, p=0.01) were significant. Two way
interaction between content cue strength and consistency of
user reviews was significant (F(1,40)= 65.82, p< .01). No
other effects were observed. These results indicated that
while older adults were less able to differentiate between
strong and weak content cues according to our former study
(Liao & Fu, 2011), this age difference disappeared when
user reviews were presented, primarily because mixed user
reviews tended to moderate younger adults’ credibility
judgment with content cues, but less for older adults’. In
addition, the interaction between consistency and content
cue suggested that user reviews that were consistent and
inconsistent with content cue strength had differential
impact on users’ credibility judgment.
In summary, we found that the presence of mixed user
reviews moderated younger adults’ differential attitude
towards credible medication information and non-credible
one more significantly than older adults’. Thus the age
difference in discerning medication information with strong
and weak content cue disappeared when the Websites
included the feature of user reviews. Given the interaction
effect of consistency and content cue on credibility
judgment, we performed separate analyses on the impact of
consistent and inconsistent user reviews on credibility
judgment to investigate their effects.
Effects of Consistent User Reviews
We analyzed the 16 Web pages with user reviews that were
consistent with the content cue strength. Four-way ANOVA
with age, presence of consistent user review, content cue
strength and contextual cue strength showed that the main
effects of content cue (F(1,40)=102.00,p<0.01) and
contextual cue (F(1,40)=14.27, p<0.01) were significant.
The two-way interaction between content cue and age
(F(1,40)=4.87, p=<0.01), and interaction between content
cue and presence of consistent user reviews (F(1,40)=7.34,
p =0.01) were also significant.

Procedure
Before the experiment, all participants were given the set of
standardized pretests to measure their cognitive ability and
Internet experience. Then participants were randomly
assigned to conditions with or without user reviews. All
participants started by reading the scenario of the task,
which stated that they were asked to help a friend to
evaluate some alternative medicines randomly selected
from the Internet. The concern of fake medicine was
mentioned to implicitly emphasize the need for credibility
judgment. Then they were presented with the task interface,
a web based aggregator with subscribed web pages
organized by 8 diseases. They can click and browse those
web pages to read about different alternative medicines.
Each of the articles has four parts: introduction, side effects,
interaction and dosage information, as the typical medicine
introduction articles on real health websites. For condition
with user reviews, participants could click on a “Read
Users’ Review” link to read user reviews, which were
presented on the same web page. After that, participant
clicked on “Rate” button on the aggregator interface to
submit their ratings for the medicine.

Results
Effects of User Review on Credibility Judgment
We performed a four-way ANOVA with age and presence
of user reviews, which has an equal chance of being
consistent or inconsistent with the content arguments, as
between subjects variables, and content cue and contextual
cue strength as within subjects variables. Results showed
that the main effects of content cue (F(1,40)=56.66, p
<0.01) and contextual cue (F(1,40)=23.05, p<0.01) were
significant. Interestingly, there was a significant three-way
interaction between content cue, age and presence of user
reviews (F(1,40)=4.45, p=0.04).

Figure 1. Credibility ratings for messages with mixed
reviews or without review

846

The results implied that the presence of consistent user
reviews had positive effects on users’ ability to differentiate
between strong and weak content cues since they received
consistent cues to reinforce their initial attitude formed by
reading the article. We then performed three-way ANOVA
within each age group with the presence of consistent user
review, content cue strength, and contextual cue strength.
While there was a significant two-way interaction between
content cue and consistent user reviews among older adults
(F(1,20)=6.80, p=0.02), this two-way interaction was not
observed among younger adults (F(1, 20)=1.66, p=0.21).
Figure 2 illustrated this difference: while consistent user
reviews did not significantly change younger adults’
credibility ratings, older adults’ credibility ratings became
more polarized towards messages with strong content cues
and those with weak ones.

Figure 2. Credibility rating for messages with consistent
reviews or without review
In summary, we found that consistent user reviews i.e.,
favorable user reviews given to credible medication
information, and unfavorable user reviews given to noncredible one, enhanced older adults’ differential reaction to
credible medication information and non-credible one more
significantly than younger adults.
Effects of Inconsistent User Reviews
We then analyzed the 16 Web pages with user reviews
that are inconsistent with the content cue strength. Fourway ANOVA with age, presence of inconsistent user
review, content cue strength and contextual cue strength,
showed that the main effect of contextual cue (F(1,40)=
6.62, p=0.01) were significant. The interaction between
content cue and presence of inconsistent user reviews was
significant (F(1,40)=24.72, p< .01). The interaction
between content cue and age was not significant (F(1,40)=
0.03, p=0.87) when inconsistent user reviews were
presented. Interestingly, there was a marginally significant
three-way interaction between content cue, age and
presence of inconsistent user reviews (F (1,40)= 2.43,
p=0.09).

Figure 3. Credibility rating for messages with inconsistent
reviews or without review
The results showed that inconsistent user reviews in
general had a negative influence on users’ ability to
differentiate between strong and weak content cues in the

847

Web page content. From Figure 3 we could see that the
marginally significant three-way interaction between age,
content cue, and presence of inconsistent user reviews was
probably caused by the finding that younger adults’
judgments were more susceptible to the influence of
inconsistent user reviews compared to older adults.
The presence of inconsistent user reviews appeared to be
a particularly interesting issue since intuitively negative
reviews on well argued articles and positive reviews on
poor argued articles may induce attitude change in different
ways. While negative reviews on a well written (strong
content cue) article could potentially help prevent users
from mistrusting questionable sources, positive reviews on
a poorly written (weak content cue) article, on the contrary,
could imply deceptive manipulations or spamming related
activities.
To test the difference, in each age group, we tested the
main effects of negatively inconsistent user reviews on the
eight Web pages with highly credible content, and the main
effects of positively inconsistent user reviews on the eight
Web pages with non-credible content. Results showed that,
for older adults, the effects of negatively inconsistent user
reviews on strong content cues was marginally significant
(F(1,20)=3.17, p=0.09), but the effects of positively
inconsistent user reviews on weak content cues was nonsignificant(F(1,20)=0.32, p=0.58). For younger adults the
effects of positive user reviews on weak content cue (F(1,
20)= 10.96, p<.01) were significant, and negative user
reviews on strong content cue (F(1,20)=3.45, p=0.08) was
marginally significant. These results revealed that while
both older and younger adults’ attitude towards a credible
article could be moderated by negative user reviews, older
adults were less likely to change their attitude in cases
where there were ill-made arguments with highly
appraising user reviews. Instead, they were more likely to
retain their initial negative attitude compared to younger
adults.
To further understand this age difference that we found in
the effects of inconsistent user reviews on users’ attitude
change, we looked into two age related variables: cognitive
ability and internet experience. By including the cognitive
ability index as covariate, the marginally significant threeway interaction between content cue, age and presence of
inconsistent user reviews (F (1, 39) =2.43, p=0.09)
remained. It implied that the generally lower cognitive
ability did not seem to cause the age difference on reaction
to inconsistent user reviews.
ANCOVA with Internet experience as the covariate
showed that the three-way interaction between content cue,
age and inconsistent user review became non-significant
(F(1,39)=2.02, p=0.16). It suggested that older adults’
generally lower Internet experience might have at least
partially contributed to the age difference in the effects of
inconsistent user reviews. To further test this, we divided
all participants into a high internet experience group and a
low internet experience group by performing a median split
based on the Internet experience index in each of the four
experiment groups. The same four-way ANOVA was

performed for the low Internet experience and high Internet
experience groups. Results showed that the interaction
between content cue, age, and inconsistent user review was
still marginally significant among participants with high
Internet experience (F(1,20)=3.28, p=0.08), but not
significant among participants with low Internet
experience(F(1,20)=0.068, p=0.80). The results therefore
further confirmed that low Internet experience contributed
to the lower sensitivity to the impact of inconsistent user
reviews.
To further detect whether older and younger adults who
have low internet experience reacts to inconsistent user
reviews in the same pattern, in each age group, for low and
high Internet experience sub-group, we tested the main
effect of negatively inconsistent user review on credible
content, and the main effect of positively inconsistent user
review on non-credible content. We found that older adults
with low Internet experience were not affected by either
positive reviews on page with weak content cues(F(1,
10)=0.04, p=0.85) or negative reviews on page with strong
content cues(F(1, 10)=1.18, p=0.30). Older adults with
high Internet experience, as well, were not affected by
either positive reviews on page with weak content cues
(F(1, 10)=1.35, p=0.27) or negative reviews on page with
strong content cues (F(1, 10)=0.68, p=0.43). Younger
adults who had low Internet experience were only subject to
the influence of positive user reviews on weak content cues
(F(1, 10)=8.37, p=0.02) but not negative review on strong
content cues(F(1,10)=0.18, p=0.68). Younger adults with
high Internet experience, however, were significantly
influenced by both negative user review on strong content
cues (F(1, 10)=8.78, p=0.01) and positive user review on
weak content cues(F(1, 10)=5.05, p=0.05).
The pattern of results implied that, in general, users with
lower Internet experience were less inclined to integrate
cues and information from user reviews that contradicted
the Web page contents; therefore their attitude towards
online medication information was less affected by this
kind of user reviews on the Website. However, the lower
Internet experience of older adults only partially explained
the age difference in the effects of inconsistent user
reviews. This was because younger adults and older adults
who had inadequate experience with Internet did not behave
exactly the same way.
In summary, we found that inconsistent user reviews, i.e.,
favorable user reviews for non-credible medication
information, and unfavorable user reviews for credible
medication information, had lower impact on older adults’
attitude towards the medication than younger adults’. Older
adults were especially tended to discount positive user
review on non-credible medication. Also it was found that
Internet experience may play a role in this age difference in
the influence of inconsistent user reviews.

found significant effects of content cues, contextual cues,
and presence of user reviews on users’ credibility judgment
ratings. Also, we found that user reviews could influence
older and younger adults’ credibility judgment in different
ways. When credibility cues in user reviews were consistent
with the credibility cues in website contents, it could more
significantly enhance or reinforce older adults’ attitude
formed by reading the original content, and thus help to
overcome the age difference in making correct credibility
judgment. While previous research studying age differences
using the dual processing model provided robust evidence
for age-related decline in deliberative content processing,
our results suggested that providing supplemental
information by user reviews may narrow the gap between
younger and older adults for evaluating the quality of
message content. Also it seemed to be consistent with
findings of previous studies that repeatedly stressing a
claim or position may increase familiarity and influence
older adults’ judgment making (e.g., Skurnik &Yoon,
2005).
One interesting finding in this study was older adults’
lower sensitivity to inconsistent user reviews, especially
when positive user reviews appeared on a less credible
website. This phenomenon could be interpreted from two
aspects: First, older adults’ lower susceptibility to attitude
change may be a possible explanation. While controversy
still exists, the majority of research on aging and attitude
change reports that resistance to external influence
increases with age. Especially in persuasion situations,
lower attitude change is often found among older adults,
possibly because they are more likely to develop skills of
defending oneself against systematic pressure to change.
Also, research on age differences indicates that
motivational and emotional variables may influence older
adults’ deliberative processing level and affect the outcome
of influence (Lynn & Phillips, 1977). We infer that these
age-related differences may cause older adults to be less
sensitive to the influence of user reviews, especially in the
situation of negative initial attitude. It was possible that
older adults initial negative attitude towards low-credibility
content made them to selectively stop further deliberative
processing when reading and comprehending user reviews.
The second possible reason for the lower sensitivity to
inconsistent user reviews could be attributed to the
generally lower internet experience of older adults. The
non-significant age difference among younger and older
users who had low Internet experience provided some
support to this possibility. Indeed, previous studies showed
that people’s general trust with Internet is positively related
to users’ Internet experience (Wathen & Burkell, 2002).
Frequent users of Internet tend to have more certainty and
more confidence in online information. We could further
extend this view to social networking applications. For
example, there is research showing that younger adults
often use Internet for entertainment and social networking,
while older adults tend to use Internet as a tool for research,
shopping and banking (Sydney, 2009). This may imply that,
compared to general Internet experience, older adults may

Discussion
In general, we found that user reviews had strong impact on
users’ attitude towards online medication information. We

848

have an even lower experience with user reviews and other
social networking features (both in terms of actively
contributing and passively reading). This may lead to a
higher tendency for older adults to distrust and discount
cues associated with user reviews.

apparently credible websites: survey of five common
health topics. British Medical Journal 324, 581-582.
Hilligoss, B. and S.Y. Rieh. (2008). Developing a unifying
framework of credibility assessment: Construct,
heuristics, and interaction in context. Information
Processing & Management 44, 4 , 1467-1484.
Hong, T. (2006). The influence of structural and message
features on Web site credibility. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology 57, 1,
114-127.
Liao, Q.V. (2010). Effects of cognitive aging on credibility
assessment of online health information. Ext. Abstract
CHI2010(pp.4321-4326). ACM Press
Liao, Q.V., Fu, W. (2011). Effects of aging and individual
differences on credibility judgments of online health
information. In proc. The 33rd Annual Meeting of
Cognitive Science Society
Lynn W. Phillips, B.S. (1977). Age Differences in
Information Processing: A Perspective on the Aged
Consumer. Journal of Marketing Research 14, 444-457.
Peters, E., et al. (2007). Adult Age Differences in Dual
Information Processes: Implications for the Role of
Affective and Deliberative Processes in Older Adults'
Decision Making. Perspectives on Psychological Science
2, 1, 1-23.
Petty, R.E., Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). The Elaboration
Likelyihood Model. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 19, 123-205 .
Salthouse, T.A. (1991). Mediation of Adult Age
Differences in Cognition by Reductions in Working
Memory and Speed of Processing. Psychological Sicence
2, 179-183.
Sharit, J., et al. (2008). Investigating the Roles of
Knowledge and Cognitive Abilities in Older Adult
Information Seeking on the Web. ACM Trans. Comput.Hum. Interact 15. 1, 1-25.
Sillence, E., et al. (2006). A framework for understanding
trust factors in web-based health advice. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 64, 8, 697-713.
Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., Park, D. C., & Schwarz, N. (2005).
How
warnings
about
false
claims
become
recommendations. Journal of Consumer Research, 31,
713–724.
Sydney Jones. (2009). Generations Online in 2009, Pew
Internet & American Life Project.
Wathen, C.N. and J. Burkell. (2002). Believe it or not:
Factors influencing credibility on the Web. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology 53, 2, 134-144.

References
Cheung, M., et al. (2009). Credibility of Electronic Wordof-Mouth: Informational and Normative Determinants of
On-line Consumer Recommendations. Int. J. Electron.
Commerce 13, 4, 9-38.
Chin, J. and W.-T. Fu. (2010). Interactive effects of age and
interface differences on search strategies and
performance. In Proc. CHI2010 (pp. 403-412), ACM
Press.
Czaja, S.J., et al. (2007). Older Adults and Internet Health
Information Seeking. In Proc. HFES2009 (pp.126-130).
Dutton, W.H. and A. Shepherd. (2006). Trust in the Internet
as
an
experience
technology.
Information,
Communication & Society 9, 4, 433 - 451.
Eysenbach, G. (2008). Medicine 2.0: Social Networking,
Collaboration,
Participation,
Apomediation,
and
Openness. In Proc. Medicine 2.0.
Eysenbach, G. (2007). Credibility of Health Information
and Digital Media: New Perspectives and Implications
for Youth. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning, 123154.
Fairweather, P.G. (2008). How older and younger adults
differ in their approach to problem solving on a complex
website. In Proc. SIGACCESS2008(pp. 67-72), ACM
Press.
Fogg, B.J. (2003). Prominence-Interpretation Theory:
Explaining How People Assess Credibility Online. In
Proc. CHI 2003. ACM Press .
Fogg, B.J., et al(2001). What makes Web sites credible?: a
report on a large quantitative study. In Proc. CHI2001
(pp. 61-68). ACM Press.
Gefen, D. and D.W. Straub. (2004). Consumer trust in B2C
e-Commerce and the importance of social presence.
Experiments in e-Products and e-Services 32, 6, 407-424.
Hamilton, M.A. (1998). Message Variables That Mediate
and Moderate the Effect of Equivocal Language on
Source Credibility. Journal of Language and Social
Psychology 17,1, 109-143.
Heinke Kunst, D.G., Pallavi M Latthe, Manish Latthe,
Khalid S Khan. (2002). Accuracy of information on

849

