UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Labels on Children's Category Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rx5k2gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Best, Catherine A.
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Labels on Children’s Category Learning
Catherine A. Best (best.140@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology and the Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
208G Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology and the Center for Cognitive Science, The Ohio State University
208D Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
The effect of language on perception of the visual world is an
ongoing debate among researchers. According to one account,
labels facilitate categorization by highlighting commonalities
among labeled objects. Yet according to another account,
early in development labels attenuate categorization by
interfering with visual processing. In the current study, 4year-old children were trained on two contrasting categories
that were either labeled or presented in silence. Children were
trained to discriminate the categories by associating them
with a target object (Experiment 1) or with a target label
(Experiment 2). Results demonstrated that children were more
likely to learn the visual categories when images were
presented in silence than when labeled. Furthermore, there
was no evidence that children in the label condition reliably
learned the categories, casting doubt on the idea that labels
facilitate category learning in children.
Keywords: Category Learning; Language; Children

Introduction
Previous research suggests that labels play a useful role in
perceptual and conceptual discrimination of visual
information early in development. For example, researchers
have shown that infants ranging from 3 to 12 months are
often better at learning visual categories when objects are
associated with labels than when the same visual stimuli are
associated with nonlinguistic sounds (Balaban & Waxman,
1997; Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007; Robinson & Sloutsky,
2007; Ferry, Hespos, & Waxman, 2010). And by 18 months,
familiar labels have been shown to facilitate learning of
more abstract categories like spatial relations (e.g.,
Casasola, Bhagwat, & Burke, 2009). In addition, there is
neurophysiological evidence suggesting that labels may
directly influence how the brain processes visual
information. Using EEG recordings, researchers have
yielded evidence that 12-month-old infants displayed
greater cortical responses (e.g., gamma-band activity) when
presented with labeled versus unlabeled objects (Gliga,
Vloein, & Csibra, 2010). Finally, labels also influence the
category structure that infants learn. For example, while
looking at an identical set of visual images, 10-month-old
infants hearing only one label associated with all exemplars

learned one category; whereas, infants hearing two labels
learned two categories (Plunkett, Hu, & Cohen, 2008).
Conversely, alternate research with 8- and 12-montholds suggests that labels can attenuate infants’ learning of
visual categories when performance was compared to
learning of objects presented in silence (Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2007). For pre-linguistic infants, labels (and
sounds) have been shown to interfere with the
categorization of visual input.
What underlying mechanisms can account for the
differential effects of labels on early categorization, and do
these contradictory effects of labels exist later in
development for category learning in childhood? One
mechanism that has been proposed to account for effects of
labels on category learning is that words facilitate
categorization by highlighting the commonalities among
labeled entities (Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007; Waxman,
2003). As a result, labeling helps children attend to
category-relevant information (Waxman, 2004). An
alternative idea is that infants and children have difficulty
processing multimodal information, with labels and sounds
often attenuating visual processing (Robinson & Sloutsky,
2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). Therefore by this
account, labels should have no facilitative effect above a
silent condition and may even overshadow visual processing
(Sloutsky & Robinson, 2008). Still, perhaps with
development, labels have more influence on category
learning as children become more efficient than infants at
processing cross-modal information (Robinson & Sloutsky,
2004) and as they become more familiar with the notion that
items belong in categories and labels denote these categories
(Gelman & Coley, 1991; Gelman & Markman, 1986). In
fact, research on the effect of labels on preschool children’s
category learning demonstrates that labels invite children to
compare commonalities among category members while
assessing both commonalities and differences between item
pairs (Namy & Gentner, 2002).
To investigate the effect of labels on children’s
category learning, the current study presented 4-year-olds
with two contrasting categories. In Experiment 1, half of the
children were trained on category members with labels and
half were trained on category members presented in silence.

3332

Critically, half of the features of each category member
were shared among the category members (i.e., categoryrelevant information); whereas, half of the features were not
predictive of category membership (i.e., category-irrelevant
information). Additionally, unlike previous research designs
that teach infants and children word-category relations and
test them afterward, the current study used multiple blocks
of training and testing trials to examine the rate of category
learning in children.

Current Predictions
If exposure to linguistic input facilitates early category
learning, then effects should be particularly evident when
children learn novel categories with a distinct set of features
common among category members. Specifically, if effects
of linguistic labels on categorization stem from labels
directing children’s attention to category-relevant
information (i.e., through inviting comparison of perceptual
commonalities), then participants who hear labels should
learn the categories faster than participants who do not hear
labels. However, if labels continue to disrupt visual
processing throughout childhood, then participants who hear
labels should be slower to learn the categories than
participants who do not hear labels.

total duration of 5000ms, with the audio beginning with the
onset of the image and lasted 2400ms in duration, and the
remaining 2600ms consisting of silence. In the silent
condition flowers were not labeled (i.e., the speech was
removed entirely), and visual presentations lasted for a total
duration of 5000ms.
Design The experiment had a between-subjects design,
with participants randomly assigned to one of two
experimental conditions (i.e., label or silent). The visual
input was the same for all conditions and was presented in a
random sequence. Only the auditory input differed between
conditions.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Twenty preschool children (13 boys, 7 girls;
M = 56 months, SD = 3.5 months) were tested, with 10
children per condition. Four-year-old children were
recruited from middle-class, suburban preschools and
childcare centers in the Columbus, Ohio area.
Stimuli Visual stimuli included two contrasting categories
of cartoon flowers with 24 items per category. Each
category member consisted of a four-petal line drawn flower
with colorful shapes inside each petal (see Figure 1). Two
petals contained consistent colored shapes across category
members (i.e., category-relevant features), while two petals
contained colored shapes that were equally likely in either
category (i.e., category-irrelevant features). Flowers were
constructed to be a familiar concept to children; however,
the featural information (i.e., petals) was artificially
manipulated to provide every child with novel exemplars to
learn. Although the cartoon flowers did not resemble real
flowers, it was explained to children in the context of a story
that these flowers grow on a far away planet. Each flower
stimulus was approximately 7.5cm in width and 13.5cm in
height.
Auditory stimuli included novel object labels (e.g.,
zibblers or blickets) recorded by a female speaker within the
context of a carrier phrase (e.g., “Both of these flowers are
called zibblers”). Speech was recorded at 44.10 kHz, 16 Bit,
in stereo and paired with corresponding bitmap images. In
the label condition, the audio-visual presentation lasted for a

Figure 1. Example stimulus pairs from two contrasting
categories. Note. Category-relevant features are circled with
dashed lines on the left exemplar for the reader.
Procedure
A female experimenter tested children with a
laptop computer in a quiet room at their preschool or
childcare center. The experiment was presented as a game in
which children fed flowers to different alien creatures with
the aim that they would learn two visual categories by
associating each kind of flower with a different creature.
Participants were first trained on which flower categories
the creatures liked to eat. The cover story preceding training
trials was as follows:

3333

The creatures that live on Planet XX eat flowers.
In this game, I need your help feeding the
creatures some flowers. It is very important that
we make sure to feed the creatures the right kind
of flower. If they eat the wrong kind of flower,

they will get a tummy ache. Pay attention to what
the flowers look like. The two kinds of flowers
might look the same, but if you look closely, you
will see that they are different. Are you ready to
see what flowers the creatures like to eat?

Results and Discussion

Training trials each had a two-sequence presentation. First
the creature was shown and children were prompted with a
pre-trial phrase, “Let’s see what flower the yellow (or
purple) creature likes to eat.” Then a pair of flowers eaten
by that creature was shown during the actual training trial.
Only children in the label condition heard different labels
for the two categories during training trials (see Figure 2).
Children in the silent condition heard silence when the
flower pairs were shown. The goal for all children was to
learn to distinguish the two flower categories by mapping
the two different creatures to each category.

Primary analyses focused on children’s learning rates
between conditions as indicated by accuracy at test. To
determine if labels facilitated children’s category learning
over time, we compared mean accuracy for the first half of
the experiment to the second half of the experiment.
Therefore children’s accuracy in blocks 1 and 2 (i.e, test
trials 1 to 12) were compared to children’s accuracy in
blocks 3 and 4 (i.e., test trials 13 to 24) between the label
condition and the silent condition (see Figure 3). Children in
the silent condition significantly improved their response
accuracy from the first half (M = .48, SE = .21) to second
half (M = .63, SE = .26) of the experiment, t(9) = 1.83, p <
.05, one tail, indicating they could learn the categories with
exposure to more exemplars. In contrast, a similar increase
in learning between experimental halves was not
demonstrated by children in the label condition.
Furthermore, children’s accuracy in the label condition
never differed from chance performance throughout the
experiment; however, children’s accuracy in the silent
condition was marginally above chance by the second half
of the experiment, t(9) = 1.65, p = .06 (one-tail).

*

Figure 2. Example training sequence illustrating two of
the four training trials per block.
At test, children were asked to feed the flowers to one of
two creatures so as not to give the creature a tummy ache.
The goal was for children to feed the correct kind of flower
to the creatures (i.e., the yellow creature eats flower
category 1 and the purple creature eats flower category 2).
Test stimuli were novel exemplars from the studied
categories and were the same size as training stimuli. Each
test trial remained visible until children made a verbal
response. All participants completed four blocks, each with
four training trials and six test trials, for a total of 40 trials.
In each block, children were given feedback on the first two
test trials, but not on the remaining four test trials. Examples
of auditory feedback included “Yummy! Thank you” or
“Bleck! I feel sick.” All stimuli were randomly selected
from two contrasting categories. The experimenter recorded
children’s responses on the computer using Presentation
software version 14.4.

Figure 3. Mean accuracy between conditions by first half
(blocks 1-2) and second half (blocks 3-4) of experiment.
Note. The * indicates a reliable difference between
experimental halves, p < .05.

Summary
Experiment 1 found no effect of labels
facilitating category learning compared to silence. Children
presented with labeled category members did not learn
faster than children presented with unlabeled category
members. Furthermore, children in the label condition
demonstrated no learning; whereas, children in the silent
condition demonstrated learning over time. These results
support the idea that labels do not facilitate category
learning and may hinder performance. Still, it is possible
that labels did facilitate learning of the categories; however,
children associated the visual categories with the labels and
not the creatures. To examine this possibility, we conducted

3334

Experiment 2 in which the game was changed to assess
children’s ability to map two novel labels to two visual
categories without associating categories to creatures.

evidence that children learned the visual categories since
accuracy in the control condition never differed from chance
performance. Children in the control condition of
Experiment 2 were not faster to learn the categories than
children in the silent condition of Experiment 1, with their
performance at chance in both experimental halves (see
Figure 4). In addition, children in the control condition of
Experiment 2, like children in the label condition of
Experiment 1, never differed from chance performance.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Fifteen preschool children (9 boys, 6 girls;
M = 53 months, SD = 3.8 months) were tested in the control
condition. Four-year-old children were recruited from
middle-class, suburban preschools and childcare centers in
the Columbus, Ohio area, but did not participate in
Experiment 1.
Stimuli
The cartoon flower category stimuli were
identical to Experiment 1; however, to reduce task demands,
children no longer needed to match the alien creatures with
the flowers as part of the game. The current task required
children to produce the correct category label at test.
Auditory stimuli were identical to that of Experiment 1.

Summary
Experiment 2 found comparable results as
Experiment 1 with regard to the lack of a facilitative effect
of category labels on children’s learning. Children in the
control condition never learned the category labels, and
performed no better than the children in the label condition
of Experiment 1. In fact performance by children provided
with category labels never exceeded performance by
children presented with category members in silence for the
second half of the experiment. Taken together, these results
suggest that labels do not facilitate category learning, and
may actually hinder performance.

Procedure A female experimenter tested children with a
laptop computer in a quiet room at their preschool or
childcare center. The experiment was presented as a game in
which children had to learn the names of two different
flower categories. Participants were first trained by hearing
the flower names paired with flower images. The cover
story preceding training trials was as follows:
The creatures that live on Planet XX eat flowers.
The flowers they eat have funny names. I’m
going to show you two different kinds of flowers
that they like to eat so you can learn the names
of the flowers. Pay attention to what the flowers
look like. The two kinds of flowers might look the
same, but if you look closely, you will see that
they are different. Now it is time to learn the
names of the two different kinds of tasty flowers.
Are you ready to see some flowers?
Then children were tested by asking them to recall only the
flower name when presented with a visual stimulus (i.e., as
opposed to recalling the corresponding alien creature as in
Experiment 1). All participants completed four blocks, each
with four training trials and six test trials, for a total of 40
trials. In each block, children were given feedback on the
first two test trials, but not on the remaining four test trials.
Examples of auditory feedback included “Good job! That
was a blicket” or “Oops! That wasn’t a zibbler.” Each test
trial remained visible until children made a verbal response.
The experimenter recorded children’s responses on the
computer using Presentation software version 14.4.

Results and Discussion
Primary analyses focused on children’s learning rate as
indicated by accuracy at test. Although the current task
demands were lessened from Experiment 1, there was no

*

Figure 4. Mean accuracy between experiments by first half
(blocks 1-2) and second half (blocks 3-4). Note. Means for
silent and label condition as reported from Experiment 1 and
the * indicates a reliable difference between experimental
halves, p < .05.

General Discussion
The current findings provide important evidence regarding
effects of labels on early category learning. Despite that
children are more experienced word-learners than infants,
labeling category members during training did not help 4year-old children to learn the categories faster than children
in the silent condition. Experiment 1 demonstrated that
children can discriminate categories by learning to associate
visual categories with a visual target object, but only when
category members were presented in silence. In fact,
providing novel auditory labels for category members
appeared to prevent learning of the visual categories

3335

altogether. Experiment 2 demonstrated that when task
demands were lessened, children still could not learn two
categories by associating visual categories with a novel
label (rather than a target object as in Experiment 1).
Because the current study was particularly difficult, it is
possible that children could not learn two related categories
simultaneously. However, given this possibility, then the
children in the silent condition should have been equally as
poor at learning as the children in either the label or control
conditions. It is also possible that the poor performance was
due to children having to monitor multiple dimensions since
the flower categories involved the conjunction of two
features to identify each category, namely shape and color.
However, even if children attended to one of the two
correlated features, they still would have been able to
discriminate the categories. Additionally, previous research
examining category learning of structurally dense categories
(i.e., where multiple features and values predict category
membership), shows that redundancy and correlated
information actually aids learning (Kloos & Slousky, 2008).
Although the current findings do not support previous
evidence of facilitative effects of labels on categorization
(Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007),
these findings do support previous evidence of attenuated
visual processing due to auditory input (e.g., Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2007). Studies have shown that labels interfere
with visual processing in pre-linguistic infants (Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2007; Sloutsky & Robinson, 2008); however, the
current study found similar interference results with 4-yearold children. Previous research by Sloutsky and Napolitano
(2003) has demonstrated that 4-year-old children’s attention
to auditory information dominates over their attention to
visual information when both types of input are presented
simultaneously. Auditory dominance, a weakened encoding
of visual input in the presence of audio input, may account
for the results in the label condition as well as in the control
condition if in fact children encoded the auditory stimuli,
but not the visual stimuli. Perhaps children who heard labels
never processed the visual information or they processed the
visual information to some extent, but not sufficiently
enough to accurately learn the categories at the expense of
their preference to first process the auditory labels. Future
research is currently underway to tease apart differences in
the level of processing audio and visual input based on
attentional measures during learning by recording eye
movements during category learning to examine attention
patterns during learning.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grants from the NSF (BCS0720135), the NIH (R01HD056105), and the US
Department of Education (R305H050125; R305B070407)
to V. M. Sloutsky and from the NIH (RO3HD055527) to C.
W. Robinson.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3 – 26.
Casasola, M., Bhagwat, J., & Burke, A. S. (2009). Learning to
form a spatial category of tight-fit relations: How experience
with a label can give a boost. Developmental Psychology, 45,
711-723.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2010). Language
facilitates category formation in 3-month-old infants. Child
Development, 81 (2), 472-479.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but not
tones) facilitate object categorization: evidence from 6- and
12-month-olds. Cognition, 105, 218–228.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In J. P.
Byrnes & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Perspectives on language
and thought: Interrelations in development (pp. 146-196).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gliga, T., Volein, A., & Csibra, G. (2010). Verbal labels
modulate perceptual object processing in 1-year-old children.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 2781-2789.
Kloos, H. & Sloustky, V. M. (2008). What’s behind different
kinds of kinds: Effects of statistical density on learning and
representation of categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 137, 52-72.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out of
two sow’s ears: Young children’s use of comparison in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 5-15.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J. F., & Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can override perceptual categories in early infancy. Cognition, 106,
665 - 681.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007). Linguistic labels
and categorization in infancy: Do labels facilitate or hinder?
Infancy, 11, 233 - 253.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. C. (2003). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in young
children. Child Development, 74, 822–833.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Robinson, C. W. (2008). The role of words
and sounds in visual processing: From overshadowing to
attentional tuning. Cognitive Science, 32, 342–365.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In D.
H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early category and
concept development: Making sense of the blooming, buzzing
confusion (pp. 213–241). London: Oxford University Press.
Waxman, S. R. (2004). Everything had a name, and each
name gave birth to a new thought: Links between early
word-learning and conceptual organization. In D. G. Hall
& S. R. Waxman (Eds.), From many strands: Weaving a
lexicon (pp. 295-335). Cambridge: MIT Press.

3336

