UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Co-occurrence Probability on Knowledge Generalization in Preschool-Age
Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4h9956mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Matlen, Bryan
Fisher, Anna
Godwin, Karrie

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Co-occurrence Probability on Knowledge Generalization in
Preschool-Age Children
Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

Gentner, 1998; Sloutsky, Kloos, & Fisher, 2007; Rakison,
Lupyan, & Oakes, 2008; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996).
A local instantiation of this issue concerns the
mechanisms underlying children’s generalization of new
knowledge. Many studies investigating this phenomenon
have concluded that, similar to adults, young children’s
generalization is based on conceptual knowledge (Booth,
Waxman, & Huang, 2005; Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gelman,
& Medin, 1993; Jaswal, 2004; Jaswal & Markman, 2007;
Welder & Graham, 2001). For example, in their seminal
study Gelman and Markman (1986) provided children the
opportunity to generalize a property from a target object
(e.g. a “rabbit”) to either a test item that shared appearance
but not category similarity with the target (e.g. a similar
looking “squirrel”), or a test item that shared category but
not appearance similarity with the target (e.g. a dissimilar
looking “rabbit”). In this study, category similarity was
conveyed by each objects’ label: labels could be either
identical (e.g. rabbit–rabbit) (Experiment 1) or synonymous
(e.g. bunny–rabbit) (Experiment 2). Gelman and Markman
found that children extended properties to categorically
similar items at above chance levels for both identical and
synonymous labels (at 67% and 63%, respectively).
These findings are consistent with a knowledge-based
account of children’s generalization. However, it has been
suggested that children’s induction with identical labels may
be label-based rather than category-based (Sloutsky & Lo,
1999; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). In particular, if labels are
perceived by children as object features then identical labels
should increase the overall perceived similarity of compared
entities. A mathematical model which construes labels as
object features was able to account for Gelman &
Markman’s findings (1986; Experiment 1) as well as several
novel findings (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004).
At the same time, the finding that not only identical but
also synonymous labels promote generalization in
preschool-age children has presented a challenge to the
similarity-based account children’s generalization: as
synonymous labels are not identical or even phonologically
similar, they should not increase the overall perceived

Prior research had documented that semantically-similar
labels that co-occur in child-directed speech promote
generalization in young children. The present study examined
whether co-occurrence probability – in the absence of
semantic similarity – can influence children’s inferences.
Four- and five-year-old children were exposed to an auditory
speech stream consisting of trisyllabic nonsense words (e.g.
“golabu”) that were concatenated into a continuous speech
stream. After listening to the stream, children were given a
label extension task where the first two syllables of a
nonsense word were assigned to a novel target object (e.g.
“gola”); children were asked to choose which of the three test
items should be referred to by the remaining syllable of this
nonsense word (e.g., “bu”; Experimental condition) or by a
syllable from a different nonsense word (e.g., “ti”; Control
condition). Children’s generalization performance in this task
was similar to results of previous research that used natural
rather than artificial language stimuli. These results are
consistent with the notion that that low-level, automatic
processes can influence performance on high-level reasoning
tasks.
Keywords: Labels. Statistical Learning. Generalization.
Cognitive Development. Categories.

Introduction
A longstanding issue in cognitive development research
centers on how children acquire knowledge. At the core of
this issue is whether children’s learning is “theory-based” –
guided by top-down, domain-specific mechanisms – or
whether more automatic, domain-general mechanisms are
sufficient to account for the vast amount of information that
children acquire in the early years of life. These contrasting
views are fueled in part by findings that, on the one hand,
young children are capable of exhibiting adult-like
performance in a variety of higher-order reasoning tasks
(Gelman & Coley, 1990; Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Goswami
& Brown, 1990; Keil, Smith, Simons, & Levin, 1998)
while, on the other hand, children’s performance on such
tasks is often driven by low-level perceptual, memory, and
attentional factors (Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005; Rattermann &

674

similarity across presented items. Arguably, the only reason
children should generalize from a “bunny” to a “rabbit” is
because these labels refer to items of the same kind.
However, it has been recently suggested that some
synonymous labels used in prior research not only referred
to objects of the same kind but also were likely to co-occur
in child-directed speech (Fisher, 2010). Specifically,
according to the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000)
the following synonym-pairs used in Gelman and
Markman’s (1986) study co-occurred in natural speech of
children or their caregivers: bunny- rabbit, puppy- dog, and
kitty-cat; other synonym-pairs were unlikely to co-occur
(e.g., rock-stone, cobra-snake, dessert-sand). Co-occurrence
has been shown to give rise to strong lexical associations
(Brown & Berko, 1960; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992);
therefore, it is possible that children’s generalization with
co-occurring synonyms was the result of lexical priming
rather than category-based reasoning. Under this
interpretation, when children extend a property of a “bunny”
to a “rabbit”, it is not because they reason that bunnies and
rabbits are the same kind of animal, but instead because the
label “bunny” primes the label “rabbit” during the course of
the task. Thus, it is conceivable that overall above-chance
generalization with synonymous labels in prior research
stemmed from averaging across two different types of items
(i.e., co-occurring synonyms and non-co-occurring
synonyms).
To explore this possibility, Fisher, Matlen, & Godwin (in
press) presented a group of four-year-old children and adults
with a property induction task with both co-occurring
semantically-similar labels (e.g., bunny-rabbit) and non-cooccurring semantically-similar labels (e.g. alligatorcrocodile) (the type of labels was manipulated withinparticipants). Importantly, following the property induction
task children’s knowledge of all labels used in the study was
tested in a task similar to the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997); findings from this task
suggested that 4-year-old children were nearly at ceiling in
identifying pictures using co-occurring and non-cooccurring labels (99% of correct responses in both
conditions).
Fisher et al (in press) findings indicated that adults
overwhelmingly gave category-based responses, regardless
of the co-occurrence probability of labels. In contrast, 4year-old children were more likely to provide categorybased responses in the co-occurring condition than in the
non-co-occurring condition (74% and 51%, respectively).
Moreover, the rate of category-based generalizations in 4year-old children did not exceed chance level (50%) in the
non-co-occurring condition. At the same time, when
children’s responses were aggregated across the cooccurrence conditions, the overall rate of category-based
responding was above chance (63% - identical to that
reported by Gelman & Markman, 1986). A follow-up study
indicated that the majority of children do not reliably give
category-based
responses
with
non-co-occurring

semantically-similar labels before six years of age (Fisher et
al, in press; Experiment 2).
In a related study, Fisher (2010) found a similar pattern of
performance in a label generalization task. In particular, in
that study children and adults were presented with several
novel objects and told the name for one of these objects.
Participants were then asked which of the other objects
would be more likely to be referred to by a semanticallysimilar label. For example, participants could be told that
the target objects “is called a bunny in a far away place” and
then asked which of the three test objects might be “called a
rabbit in the far away place”. Regardless of the cooccurrence probability of labels, adults overwhelmingly
chose high-similarity test items, reasoning that semanticallysimilar labels should refer to perceptually similar objects.
However, 4-year-old children exhibited this pattern of
responding only with co-occurring labels, whereas their
choices of high similarity items did not exceed chance with
non-co-occurring labels.
Overall, extant research provides evidence in support of
the possibility that synonym-based reasoning has a more
protracted developmental trajectory than previously
believed. Furthermore, it appears that children’s successful
generalization with some synonymous labels is due to cooccurrence probability rather than semantic similarity.
However, all previous studies examining this issue used
natural language stimuli; therefore, it is possible that
children’s performance was influenced by factors other than
co-occurrence probability, such as familiarity and frequency
of occurrence. Fisher et al (in press) evaluated these
possibilities and found no support them. At the same time,
given the nature of the stimuli it is difficult to completely
rule out confounding factors. It is also possible that cooccurrence information is necessary but not sufficient to
influence children’s generalization: in other words, cooccurrence may facilitate children’s ability to perform
synonym-based generalization, yet co-occurrence in the
absence of semantic similarity may not promote
generalization. The present study was designed to test
whether co-occurrence could influence generalization in the
absence of semantic similarity information, while also
eliminating potentially confounding factors associated with
using natural language stimuli in prior research.
Towards these goals, we utilized an experimental
approach often employed in the statistical learning literature
(Aslin, Saffran & Newport, 1998; Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996; Saffran, Newport, Aslin, Tunick, &
Barrueco, 1998). In these studies, participants are typically
exposed to an auditory speech stream consisting of a string
of repeating syllables that comprise words of an artificial
language. Within this stream, some of the syllables have
low transitional probabilities, whereas other syllables had
high transitional probabilities. Transitional probability is
one way of capturing the co-occurrence relation of units in a
language (Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998). In most
statistical learning studies transitional probability between
syllables X and Y is calculated as:

675

statistical structure of the artificial language. These
predictions were tested in the experiment reported below.

Probability of Y|X = (frequency of XY) / (frequency of X).
The speech stream is often designed such that the only cues
to the word boundaries are the transitional probabilities of
each syllable, and participants’ task is to discriminate
between “words” and “part-words” of this artificial
language following exposure to it.
Using this paradigm, prior research has indicated that
adults, young children, and preverbal infants are capable of
segmenting words using the statistical structure of artificial
languages (Aslin, et al., 1998; Saffran, et al., 1996; Saffran
et al., 1998). Moreover, it has been shown that infants are
capable of using the statistical information to learn novel
object-label pairings (Graf-Estes, Evans, Alibali, & Saffran,
2007) and that adults find it more difficult to learn objectlabel pairings when words are inconsistent with the
statistical structure of an artificial lexicon (Mirman,
Magnuson, Graf Estes, & Dixon, 2008).
In the present study we adapted the statistical learning
paradigm as follows. We exposed preschool-age children to
a speech stream that consisted of four artificial trisyllabic
words used in the Saffran et al (1996) study (e.g. golabu,
padoti, etc). Each syllable had a 100% transitional
probability within words and a 33% transitional probability
between words. After listening to the stream, children were
presented with a label generalization task analogous to that
in Fisher (2010). Specifically, children were presented with
a set of novel objects consisting of a Target and three Test
items varying in the degree of similarity to the Target. The
Target object was labeled using a part-word from the
artificial language (e.g. “gola”), and children were asked to
generalize a Test label that was either consistent with the
co-occurrence information of the artificial language (e.g.
“bu”) (Experimental condition) or inconsistent with it (e.g.
“ti”) (Control condition).
Prior research indicated that four-year-olds in this label
extension task generalized synonymous labels to high
similarity test items when labels co-occurred in childdirected speech but generalized labels at chance level to test
items when labels did not co-occur (Fisher, 2010). In the
present study – where there was no semantic information
present – we predicted that, if children’s performance in
prior research was influenced by co-occurrence probability
rather than semantic similarity of labels, then children
would extend Test labels to highly similar items only when
the labels were consistent with the statistical structure of the
artificial language (i.e. analogous to children’s performance
with co-occurring synonyms in Fisher, 2010). In contrast,
we expected that children might not show this pattern of
responding (i.e., choosing highly similar test items) when
Test labels were inconsistent with the statistical structure of
the artificial language.
However, if children’s
generalization in prior research was not driven by the cooccurrence of synonyms in natural language, in the present
study children should exhibit similar pattern of responses
whether Test labels are consistent or inconsistent with the

Method
Participants
Participants were 41 four- and five-year-old children (M =
5.08 years, SD = .67 years, 16 girls, 23 boys) recruited from
a university lab school. Two children were excluded
because they were learning English as a second language.
All other children were native English speakers.

Materials
Language materials consisted of four, trisyllabic nonsense
words used in prior research (e.g., Saffran, Aslin, &
Newport, 1996): “golabu”, “padoti”, “bidaku”, and “tupiro”.
A female native English speaker was recorded pronouncing
each word individually and each recording was then edited
to be approximately 800ms in duration. The recordings were
used to create a speech stream in which each word occurred
a total of 105 times. Because the present study did not test
whether children are capable of segmenting words using
transitional probabilities alone (there is ample prior research
showing that they are capable of it), we included a short
200ms pause in between each word in order to facilitate
segmentation. All syllables had a 33% between-word
transitional probability and a 100% within-word transitional
probability. In total, the speech stream lasted seven minutes
in duration.
Visual stimuli consisted of four sets of four novel objects
(see Figure 1 for an example). These stimuli were a subset
of picture sets used in Fisher (2010). Each set was
comprised of a target object and three test objects, where
one of the test objects was highly visually similar to the
Target item (High similarity item), one test object was
moderately similar to the Target item (Moderate similarity
item), and one test object was dissimilar from the Target
item (Low similarity item). The level of similarity of each
test items to the target was confirmed in a separate
calibration study reported in Fisher (2010). The location of
each test item relative to the target (i.e., directly below,
below and to the right, or below and to the left) was
randomized for each participant. Visual stimuli were
presented on a laptop computer and their presentation was
controlled by SuperLab-3 software.

Procedure
Children were tested individually in a quiet room at their
school by hypothesis-blind experimenters. The experiment
consisted of two parts: the listening phase and the
generalization phase. The experimenter first told the
children that they would be coloring pictures and that
afterwards, they would get to play a game.

676

Table 1: List of Target and Test labels.

Figure 1. A sample set of visual stimuli used in the
present Experiment. Test 1 is a High Similarity item, Test 2
is a Moderate Similarity item, and Test 3 is a Low
Similarity item.

Trial

Target
Label

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Gola
Pado
Bida
Tupi
Pado
Gola
Tupi
Bida

Test Label:
Experimental
Condition
Bu
Ti
Ku
Ro
Ti
Bu
Ro
Ku

Test Label:
Control
Condition
Ti
Bu
Ro
Ku
Bu
Ti
Ku
Ro

Results
Proportion of choices of each Test item was calculated for
each participant and averaged across participants. The rate
of choosing High Similarity, Moderate Similarity, and Low
Similarity test items in the Experimental condition was
56%, 23%, and 20%, respectively. In the Control condition,
the rate of choices of High Similarity, Moderate Similarity,
and Low Similarity test items was 36%, 33%, 32%,,
respectively. Children’s performance on High Similarity
items in the present study is displayed in Figure 2. Children
in the Experimental condition chose the High Similarity
items at above chance level (chance in this experiment was
33%) one-sample t(19) = 2.78, p < .05, whereas children in
the Control condition chose the High Similarity items at a
level no greater than chance, one-sample t(18) = .29, p =
.76. An independent samples t-test showed that children in
the Experimental condition were marginally more likely to
choose High Similarity items when compared to children in
the Control condition, t(37) = 1.85, p = .07.
To investigate performance at an individual level, we
classified participants into similarity-based and nonsimilarity-based responders. A similarity-based responder
was defined as a participant who chose High Similarity test
items on at least 6 out of 8 trials (75%; binomial p < .02). In
the Experimental condition, 8 of 20 participants qualified as
similarity-based responders, while only 3 of 19 participants
qualified as similarity-based responders in the Control
condition. The association between responder type and
experimental condition was marginally significant, χ2(1, 39)
= 2.82, p = .09.
It is worth noting that the results obtained in this study
with artificial language stimuli are similar to those reported
by Fisher (2010) with natural language stimuli. For instance,
in Fisher’s study the rate of choosing High Similarity test
items among 4-year-old children was 65% for co-occurring
synonyms and only 39% for non-co-occurring synonyms.

Once children were coloring, the experimenter played the
speech stream from a laptop computer. The listening phase
lasted for approximately 7 minutes1.
After the listening phase, the experimenter told children
that they were going to play a game where they would have
to guess the names of objects on a different planet (i.e. the
generalization phase). The experimenter showed the first
picture set, which was comprised of a target item and three
test items. The experimenter then labeled the target picture
with a bisyllablic part-word from the artificial language. In
the Experimental condition, the experimenter asked the
child which of the test items should be referred to by a
monosyllabic label that completed the part-word according
to the artificial language. For example, the experimenter
would say, “On a different planet, this one is called a gola”
while pointing to the target picture. The experimenter would
then say, “if this one’s a gola, which one’s a bu?”. Children
responded by pointing to one of the three test items. In the
Control condition, the procedure was identical except that
the test label was a syllable that was inconsistent with the
statistical structure of the artificial language (e.g. if the
target label was “gola”, the test label was “ti”).
Children completed eight trials, two for each of the four
artificial words. A full list of linguistic stimuli is provided in
Table 1. Trials were presented in one of two orders (either
trials 1 – 8 in Table 1, or the reverse).

1

Due to technical difficulties, some of the pauses between
words were longer at some points in the speech stream, which
thereby extended the listening phase by about a minute. This
technical problem affected 10 out of 39 participants. However,
children who experienced this difficulty did not perform differently
from the rest of the children, independent samples t(37) = .12, ns,
and were therefore included in all analyses reported.

677

While the present study does not rule out the possibility that
children use semantic knowledge to perform generalization
tasks, it suggests that it is possible for children to perform
such tasks relying on associative knowledge alone. This
finding is consistent with the notion that domain-general
mechanisms help children acquire knowledge (Christie &
Gentner, 2010; Saffran, Pollak, Seibel, & Shkolnik, 2007)
and that low-level associative learning can give rise to
intelligent behavior in development (Sloutsky & Fisher,
2008; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996).

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha, Janelle Higa, Stephanie Brown,
Alyssa Montenaro, and Yael Engel for their help in data
collection. We also thank the children, parents, teachers, and
administrators for their participation. This research was
supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education through Grant R305B040063 to
Carnegie Mellon University.

Figure 2. Proportion of High Similarity choices by condition.
The dashed line indicates chance performance.

References

Discussion

Aslin, R. N., Saffran, J. R., & Newport, E. L. (1998).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month-old infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321 – 324.
Booth, A. E., Waxman, S. R., & Huang, Y. T. (2005).
Conceptual information permeates word learning in
infancy. Developmental Psychology, 41, 491 – 505.
Brown, R. & Berko, J. (1960). Word association and the
acquisition of grammar. Child Development, 31, 1-14.
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11, 356 – 373.
Fisher, A. V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and
stones are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2005). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development, 76, 583-597.
Fisher, A. V., Matlen, B. J., & Godwin, K. E. (in press).
Semantic similarity of labels and inductive
generalization: Taking a second look. Cognition
Gelman, S.A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A. & Coley, J. D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in
2-year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26,
796-804.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A. & Medin, L. (1993). What’s so essential
about essentialism? A different perspective on the
interaction of perception, language, and conceptual
knowledge. Cognitive Development, 8, 157 – 167.
Gopnik, A. & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting Blickets: How
young children use information about novel causal

The aim of the present experiment was to explore whether it
is possible for label co-occurrence information to influence
performance on a generalization task in the absence of
semantic similarity. The results of this experiment provide
preliminary support for this possibility. Specifically,
children extended novel part-words to highly similar items
at levels greater than chance when the part-words were
consistent with the statistical structure of the artificial
language, but not when the part-words were inconsistent
with the statistical structure of the artificial language. These
findings suggest that – at least in principal – the results of
earlier research concerning children’s generalization could
indeed have been driven largely by co-occurrence
information.
It is important to acknowledge that the present work is
limited in that it is primarily preliminary in nature.
Specifically, we did not contrast children’s performance on
a label generalization task after listening to the speech
stream with a condition in which no speech stream is
presented, and this contrast remains to be the focus of our
future work. Nevertheless, to our knowledge, the present
findings are novel in that they provide support for the idea
that co-occurrence information alone may be sufficient to
influence children’s performance on generalization tasks.
In addition to informing the study of children’s
generalization, we believe that this line of research can also
help to inform our understanding of some fundamental
issues in cognitive development. In particular, there is
presently an active debate focusing on whether children’s
performance in high-level cognitive tasks can be explained
by association-based, domain-general processes or whether
top-down domain-specific mechanisms need to be
postulated (e.g., Gelman, 2003; Keil, 2005; Sloutsky, 2010;
Smith, Colunga, Yoshida, 2010; Waxman & Gelman, 2009).

678

powers in categorization and induction. Child
Development, 71, 1205 – 1222.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A. L. (1990). Melting chocolate
and melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35, 69 – 95.
Graf Estes, K., Evans, J. L., Alibali, M. W., & Saffran, J. R.
(2007). Can infants map meaning to newly segmented
words? Statistical segmentation and word learning.
Psychological Science, 18, 254 – 260.
Graham, S. A., Kilbreath, C. S., & Welder, A. N. (2004).
Thirteen-month-olds rely on shared labels and shape
similarity for inductive inferences. Child Development,
75, 409–427.
Jaswal, V. K. (2004). Don’t believe everything you hear:
Preschoolers’ sensitivity to speaker intent in category
induction. Child Development, 3, 279-300.
Jaswal, V. K. & Markman, E. M. (2007). Looks aren’t
everything: 24-month-olds’ willingness to accept
unexpected labels. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 8, 93 – 111.
Keil, F. C. (2005). Knowledge, categorization, and the bliss
of ignorance. In Gershkoff-Stowe, L. & Rakison, D. H.
(Eds) Building object categories in developmental time.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103 – 135.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Spreading activation
versus compound cue accounts of priming: Mediated
priming revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 1155 – 1172.
Mirman, D., Magnuson, J. S., Graf Estes, K., & Dixon, J. A.
(2008). The link between statistical segmentation and
word learning in adults. Cognition, 108, 271 – 280.
Rakison, D., Lupyan, G., & Oakes (2008). Developing
object concepts in infancy: An associative learning
perspective. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 73, 1 – 130.
Rattermann, M. J. & Gentner, D. (1998). More evidence for
a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children’s performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13, 453 – 478.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274, 1926 – 1928.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., Tunick, R. A., &
Barrueco, S. (1998). Incidental language learning:
Listening (and learning) out of the corner of your ear.
Psychological Science, 8, 101 – 105.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105, 669 – 680.

Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2008). Attentional
learning and flexible induction: How mundane
mechanisms give rise to smart behaviors. Child
Development, 79, 639 – 651.
Sloutsky, V.M., Kloos, H., & Fisher, A.V. (2007). When
looks are everything: Appearance similarity versus kind
information in early induction. Psychological Science,
18, 179–185.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Lo, Y.-F. (1999). How much does a
shared name make things similar? Part 1: Linguistic
labels and the development of similarity judgment.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 1478-1492.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010). From perceptual categories to
concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244
– 1286.
Smith, L. B., Colunga, E., & Yoshida, H. (2010).
Knowledge as process: Contextually-cued attention and
early word learning. Cognitive Science, 34, 1287 –
1314.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143 – 171
Waxman, S. & Gelman, S. A. (2009). Early word-learning
entails reference, not merely associations. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 13, 258 – 263.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

679

