UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Distribution of Repair in Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7zd514km

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Colman, Marcus
Healey, Patrick

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Distribution of Repair in Dialogue
Marcus Colman and Patrick G.T. Healey
{marcus,ph}@eecs.qmul.ac.uk
Queen Mary, University of London,
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group,
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science,
London E1 4NS UK
Abstract
Repairs –the various ways in which people edit and
reformulate conversational turns– are a characteristic feature
of natural dialogue. However, relatively little is known about
their overall frequency or distribution in conversation. We
present a systematic, quantitative study of patterns of repair in
two corpora: ‘ordinary’ dialogues from the British National
Corpus (BNC) and task-oriented dialogues from the HCRC
Map Task. We use this analysis to evaluate three hypotheses
about patterns of repair 1) social ‘preferences’ 2) processing
demands and 3) dialogue co-ordination. The results show that
repair is more frequent in task-oriented dialogue, that use of
repair is broadly unaffected by familiarity or mode of
interaction but substantially affected by task roles. We argue
that the complimentary patterns of repair used by
conversational partners support the view of repairs as an
integrated, cross-turn and cross-person, system for sustaining
the mutual-intelligibility of dialogue.
Keywords: Communication; Dialogue; Repair; Conversation
Analysis.

Introduction
Models of human communication in the cognitive sciences
often idealise to a situation in which people are assumed to
‘speak the same language’ i.e. are assumed to be
linguistically transparent to one another. However, in
practice, “no two speakers of the same language ever speak
exactly the same dialect of that language” (Fodor and
Lepore, 1992, p.10). Dialogue always proceeds against a
background of idiolect differences. Place of residence,
cultural group, hobbies, occupation, education and age
group all feed into differences in the way we use language
(e.g., Clark; 1996). Detecting and dealing with differences
in interpretation is thus a recurrent and routine problem in
conversation.
Conversation analysts have described a structured set of
repair mechanisms that people can use to signal problems,
or possible problems, with interpretation (e.g. Schegloff,
Jefferson and Sacks, 1977; Schegloff, 1987, 1992). The
conversation analytic (CA) repair structures are built around
three main points a) initiation: who signals a problem whether it is the speaker of a problem turn (‘self ’) or a
recipient of it (‘other’) b) repair: who actually makes a
change to the problem turn (self or other) c) position: where
in the conversational sequence these events occur; in the
same turn as the problem, in the turn after the problem turn
or in some subsequent turn.
The different possible trajectories from each potential
‘problem’ turn, through the initiation of a repair to its

completion are part of an integrated repair ‘space’ that spans
multiple turns and multiple participants (Schegloff 1992).
This paper addresses two basic questions about the
structure of this repair space:
1. What is the typical distribution of repair in this
space?
2. What factors explain this distribution?
The first question is about quantifying the distribution of
different repair types. It has not, to our knowledge
previously been addressed (although some studies have
looked at the distribution of within-turn repairs e.g.
Bortfeld, et al. 2001; Lickley and Bard, 1998). This gap is
partly because CA focuses on the particular sequential
consequences of repair in specific cases, not statistical
distributions.1
The second question is about the kinds of explanation
offered for the distribution of repairs. We identify three
broad, non-exclusive, hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1. Social Preference: In CA, the structure of
the repair space is primarily explained in terms of
‘preference’; what a competent speaker might consider to be
conversationally or socially appropriate. This leads to an
ordering of different repair trajectories such that selfinitiation is preferred over other-initiation and self-repair
over other-repair (see examples below). This preference
hierarchy operates independently of the type of
conversational task or type of problem encountered
(Schegloff, Jefferson and Sacks, 1977).
Hypothesis 2. Processing Demands: Repair phenomena
may also be a side-effect of the difficulty of producing or
comprehending language because of processing load. For
example, Clark and Wasow (1998) show that self-repairs are
more likely where people are producing more complex
constituents. Most of the experimental evidence for this
applies to first position self-repairs such as repeats and
restarts (e.g. Branigan et al, 1999; Lickley and Bard, 1998)
but could be generalized to at least some aspects of other
forms. For example, the delay and markers that often
precede a third position repair might simply reflect
1
In fact, Schegloff (1993) specifically argues that CA
phenomena are not suitable for quantitative analysis. For example,
counting the frequency of occurrences of “what?”, obscures
differences in the complex variety of things that “what?” can be
used to do in conversation (see Drew, 1997). This is true but it
does not preclude the possibility that useful generalizations can be
made by looking at the overall distribution of ‘whats’. We also
note that repair is unusual in that it can occur freely in any context,
unlike e.g. laughter or sobbing (c.f. Schgeloff, 1993).

1563

increased processing time. On this account repairs are
essentially accidental ‘disfluencies’ or ‘noise’ although they
may, nonetheless carry useful information for a hearer (c.f.
Brennan and Schober, 2001).
Hypothesis 3. Dialogue Co-ordination: The distribution
of repairs in dialogue might also be explained by the
operation of structured co-ordination mechanisms. In this
case, the structure of repair is not dependent on the social
considerations or the ostensible problem per se, but on the
joint activities people engage in to maintain the mutualintelligibility of conversation in response to a problem.
Bortfeld et al. (2001) present evidence for the role of
position 1 self-repairs (repeats, restarts and fillers) in coordination. Here we consider the larger repair space. Healey
(2008) has argued that the structure and operation of this
space underpins all effective dialogue and directly
constrains the form of shared symbol systems in general
(see also Healey et al. 2007).
This paper evaluates these hypotheses through a
quantitative, corpus analysis of the distribution of repair
trajectories in two different dialogue corpora: the British
National Corpus (BNC) and the HCRC Map Task
Dialogues. These corpora make it possible to answer the
following questions: How frequent is repair in ordinary
conversation? What is the overall distribution of repair
types? Do ordinary conversation and task-oriented dialogue
differ in the frequency or distribution of repairs? Are
patterns of repair affected by visual contact, by levels of
familiarity or task roles?

Methods
To obtain reliable measures of the frequency of different
repair types the repair protocol described in Healey et al.
(2005) was used. This is designed to provide an index of the
frequency of several basic CA categories of repair on the
basis of surface characteristics alone. It consists of a binary
branching decision tree of yes/no questions that are applied
to each contribution to an interaction. These questions
apply only to the surface form of the utterance. For
example, the following questions are used to identify the
position of a repair:
• Position 1: "Does the initiator edit, amend or
reprise part of their contribution before another
participant responds to it?"
• Position 2: "Is this contribution introduced to
propose repetition or revision of another
participant's contribution?"
• Position 3: "Is this contribution introduced to edit,
amend or reprise a previous contribution by the
initiator?"
We note that the repair protocol departs from the CA
analysis in several respects. Categories such as embedded
repair are not coded because they are not explicitly signaled
as repairs and other categories such as position 4 repair are
ignored because they are too rare to provide a useful
comparative measure.

For ease of exposition and to facilitate comparison with
previous work (e.g. Bortfeld et al. 2001) we provide glosses,
detailed in
Table 1 for some of the CA terminology used in the
protocol. These glosses are only intended as shorthand for
the categories defined by the protocol and not intended as
technical terms.
Gloss
Repeat
Restart
Transition
Clarification
Request (CR)
Correction
Follow-up
Reformulate

Table 1: Terminology
Repair Protocol Category
Position 1 Self-Initiated Self-repair
‘Articulation’
Position 1 Self-Initiated Self-repair
‘Formulation’
Position 1 Self-Initiated Self-Repair
in Transition Space
Position 2 Next Turn Repair Initiator
(NTRI)
Position 2 Other-Initiated, OtherRepair
Position 3 Other-Initiated, SelfRepair
Position 3 Self-Initiated Self-Repair.

The following examples, taken from the HCRC map task
dialogues (Anderson et al, 1991; see below for description)
illustrate some of the phenomena of interest:
(1)Q3EC1. Repeat / P1 SI SR Articulation
Follower:
which is due we-- … due west?
(2)Q1EC6. Restart / P1 SI SR Formulation
Giver:
so you’re underneath them … between
them
(3)Q1EC4. Transition / P1 SI SR Transition Space
Giver:
and, start going down Southeast … … …
you go past a pine forest on your right
Position two corresponds to the first response, by another
person, to a potentially problematic contribution (typically,
but not always, in the next turn). The two most common
types of event in these situations are Position 2 Next Turn
Repair Initiators, glossed here as ‘Clarification Requests’
(CR), and Position 2 Other-Initiated, Other-Repairs which
we gloss here as ‘Corrections’.
(4)Q1EC6. Clarification Request / P2 NTRI
Giver:
past a forge on your right?
Follower:
past a what?
(5)Q1EC8. Correction / Position 2 OIOR.
Giver:
right to the very end of … paper
Follower:
the very end of the map?
(6)Q3EC1. CR and Follow-up / P2NTRI – P3OISR
Follower:
so you want me to go … east … then
south?
Giver:
no, south then east, we may have a
different map

1564

Intuitively a Clarification Request (CR / P2NTRI) is likely
to prompt a Follow-up (P3OISR)2. The final major repair
type we consider is reformulation or position three selfinitiated self-repair (P3SISR). This commonly occurs where
someone recognizes something problematic about someone
else’s interpretation of one of their own preceding
contributions. They then attempt to rephrase or repeat their
original contribution to address this.
(7)Q1EC8. Reformulate / P3SISR
Giver:
right … now, have you got the hot wells?
Follower:
they’re over a bit
Giver:
or hot springs?

of task-role. Lastly, an analysis of the effects of repair on
outcome.

Repair in Ordinary and Task-Oriented Dialogue:
Figure 1 illustrates the baseline distribution of repair types
found in ordinary dialogue (BNC). In the 1934 turns
(14,034 words) in this sample 390 repairs were coded. This
gives an approximate frequency of repair in ordinary
dialogue of 1 event every 36 words or every 5 turns.
The pattern in Figure 1 is consistent with the general CA
claim (Hypothesis 1) that earlier repair initiation and repair
are preferred, that self-initiation is preferred over otherinitiation and that self-repair is preferred over other-repair.
Although conversation lengths vary more in the BNC than
the HCRC Map Task corpus average turn length is broadly
comparable (BNC: 7.2 words, Map Task, 8.2 words).

The British National Corpus.
To provide a baseline analysis of the relative frequency of
different repair types in ordinary conversation a subset of
dialogues from demographic portion of the British National
Corpus (BNC) were used (Burnard, 2000). This consists of
tape recordings of unscripted informal conversations in
contexts ranging from business meetings to domestic
interactions. The recordings are made by volunteers from a
demographically balanced sample of ages, regions and
social classes.
Thirty dialogues were randomly selected for analysis
from the BNC. These consisted of 1934 utterances, 14,034
words produced by 41 people.

The HCRC Map Task Corpus
The HCRC map task corpus (Anderson et al, 1991) consists
of dialogues between pairs, seated on opposite sides of a
table who each have a copy of a schematic map (their view
of each other’s maps is obscured). On one person’s map, the
‘Giver’s, there is a route marked which they attempt to
describe to their partner the ‘Follower’ in enough detail to
allow them to draw it onto their own map. Some landmarks
on the maps are shared and some are not.
In half of these dialogues eye contact is possible between
the participants; in the other half a screen is placed between
them. In addition familiarity is manipulated so that half the
pairs are familiar and half unfamiliar. An advantage of this
task is that it provides a sensitive measure of task outcome –
the difference or deviation score between the original given
route and the one drawn by the Follower. All 128 dialogue
transcripts from the published HCRC map task corpus were
coded for repair. This corpus consists of 19,133 turns and
156,315 words.

Figure 1: Repair Distribution in Ordinary Conversations
(BNC). Light Bars = ‘Self’, Grey Bars = ‘Other’

Results

Figure 2: Repair Distribution in Task-Oriented Dialogues
(Map Task). Light Bars = ‘Self’, Grey Bars = ‘Other’

The results are reported in four stages; first the generic
comparison of patterns of repair in ordinary and taskoriented dialogues. Secondly, comparison of the effects of
modality (+/- Eye Contact) and familiarity on repair in the
task-oriented dialogues. Thirdly a comparison of the effects

2

Note that this diverges from Schegloff’s terminology who does
not count the response to NTRI as a position 3 repair.

Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of repair types found
in the Map Task. Comparison with Figure 1 suggests several
contrasts. First, repairs in the Map task are approximately
twice as frequent as in the BNC. A total of 7,977 repair
events were coded giving an average frequency of more
than 1 event every 2.5 turns or one every 20 words. This
suggests that the arguably greater processing demands of the

1565

task-oriented dialogues are reflected in more repair
(Hypothesis 2). Although there is a higher overall level of
repair, relative use of different positions in the ‘repair space’
(positions 1, 2 and 3) is not reliably different in the ordinary
conversations and the task-oriented dialogues Chi2(2)= 1.01,
p = 0.323.
Three focused Chi2 analyses tested for differences in the
use of specific repair types. The relative balance of repeats
and restarts (P1SISR) is reliably different: Chi2(1)= 14.2,
p<0.01. Restarts are used more often in the task-oriented
dialogues. People also make proportionally greater use of
direct correction (i.e. P2OIOR) than requests for
clarification (P2NTRI) in the task oriented dialogues:
Chi2(1)= 11.5, p<0.01. However, the relative proportion of
CR’s to Follow-ups is not reliably different Chi2(1)= 3.14,
p=0.07.
To summarise, people do substantially more repair in the
task-oriented dialogues and make more use of restarts and
direct corrections. However, they are equally likely to
respond to a clarification request in either case.

The parallel analysis of Face-to-Face vs. No Eye Contact
shows only one reliable difference, in this case in the use of
transition space repairs. Participants in the Face-to-Face
condition make more use of transition space repairs than
those in the no eye-contact condition. Intuitively this makes
sense since when people can see each other they may be
able to detect some problems with interpretation by looking
at their partners when they have finished their turn.
However, the absolute frequencies are small (face-to-face
n=31, no eye contact n=12) and therefore this result must be
treated with caution.
Table 2: Repairs by Familiar and Unfamiliar Pairs
(Mann Whitney U)
Repair Type
P
Repeat (P1SISR: Articulation)
0.50
Restart (P1SISR: Formulation)
0.82
Transition (SISR: Transition Space) 0.94
CR (P2 NTRI)
0.04 *
Correction (P2 OIOR)
0.82
Follow-up (P3 OISR)
0.19
Reformulate (P3 SISR)
0.68

Effects of Modality and Familiarity:
The distribution of repairs in the familiar and unfamiliar
pairs and in the Face-to-Face vs. No Eye Contact dialogues
is illustrated in Figure 3.

Table 3: Repairs by Face-to-Face and No Eye Contact Pairs
(Mann Whitney U)
Repair Type
P
Repeat (P1SISR: Articulation)
0.50
Restart (P1SISR: Formulation)
0.76
Transition (SISR: Transition Space) 0.00 *
CR (P2 NTRI)
0.54
Correction (P2 OIOR)
0.19
Follow-up (P3 OISR)
0.15
Reformulate (P3 SISR)
0.21
In summary neither familiarity nor modality have strong
overall effects on the use of repair by participants. Familiar
pairs show a tendency to use more clarification requests,
possibly indicating a greater willingness to signal problems
i.e. initiate repairs. Face-to-face pairs make more use of
transition space repairs suggesting some advantage to being
able to visually monitor how a contribution is received.

Effects of Task Role:

Figure 3: Repair Distribution by Modality and Familiarity.
As Figure 3 suggests, the level and distribution of repair
types is relatively unaffected by familiarity and by mode of
interaction. Mann-Whitney U Tests on each of the repair
categories in Figure 3 comparing Familiar vs. Unfamiliar
pairs shows only one reliable difference (see Table 2).
Familiar pairs are more likely to use clarification requests
(NTRI’s) than unfamiliar pairs, consistent with Hypothesis
1.

3

A criterion level of p < 0.05 is adopted for all statistical tests.
Exact probabilities are reported for completeness.

As noted, the Map Task has two task roles. The Giver has a
route that needs to be described so the Follower can draw it.
Roles thus index a basic informational asymmetry that is
useful for testing Hypothesis 2. As Figure 4 and Figure 5
show, this difference in role is reflected in different
distributions of repair types used.
Wilcoxon tests show that only frequency of repeats is not
reliably different across roles (p=0.13). For Clarification
Requests (p<0.01) and Corrections (p<0.01) the Follower's
mean frequency is significantly higher. For all the other
categories: Restarts (p<0.01), Transition (p=0.02), Followups (p<0.01) and Reformulations (p<0.01) the Giver’s mean
frequency is higher.

1566

As Figure 4 and Figure 5 indicate there is a significant
complementarity in the use of repairs in the two roles. This
is confirmed by the inter-correlations between Giver and
Follower repair types for word count ratios given in Table 4
(only significant associations are reported).

G Follow-up – F Correction

.214

.015

Task Performance:
Step-wise linear regression provides an assessment of the
extent to which the different repair types independently
impact on task performance. Route deviation score is the
dependent variable and familiarity (Y/N), modality (+/- Eye
Contact), and frequency of Giver and Follower repair types
results in a model with three predictors: 1. Familiarity
(Standardised Beta=.688, t=6.95, p<0.01) with more
familiar pairs tending to produce more accurate routes
(64cm2 deviation vs. 79cm2). 2. Medium (Standardised
Beta= -.464, t=-5.03, p<0.01) with audio only pairs tending
to produce more accurate routes than face-to-face pairs (69
cm2 vs. 74cm2) and 3. Giver’s restart repairs (Formulation /
P1SISR: Standardised Beta=-.344, t=3.26, p=0.01) with
more restarts producing more accurate routes.

Discussion
Figure 4: Distribution of Repairs Used by Route Followers

Figure 5: Distribution of Repairs Used by Route Givers
Table 4: Inter-correlations in Use of Repair Types.
Repair types

rho

p

G Restart – F Restart

.293

.001

G Transition – F Transition

.310

.000

G Correction – F Repeat

.189

.033

G Correction – F CR

-.261

.003

G Correction – F Follow-up

.308

.000

G CR – F Repeat

.174

.049

G CR – F CR

-.266

.002

G CR – F Follow-up

.790

.000

G Follow-up – F CR

.655

.000

The results provide some support for the Social Preference
explanation of repair distribution (Hypothesis 1). The most
frequent repair types in both corpora are position 1 selfinitiated repairs (repeats and restarts). There is also a clear
statistical preference for other-initiation (CR /NTRI) over
other-repair (Correction/OIOR) in position two. The
quantitative analysis also reveals that this difference is
moderated by familiarity. Where the Map Task participants
know each other they use reliably more explicit prompting
and clarification (NTRI).
One clear source of support for the processing demands
explanation (Hypothesis 2) is the finding that the frequency
of repairs in the task-oriented dialogues is approximately
double that in the ordinary conversations in the BNC. It
seems likely that the need to communicate relatively finegrained information about routes and landmarks places
significant demands on participants. This produces the
predicted increase in number of repairs. This finding is
difficult to explain in terms of social preferences although it
might be argued that the experimental situation of the map
task itself changes what people feel is or is not appropriate.
The more specific finding that transition space repairs are
used more in the eye contact condition suggests that people
take advantage of the available non-verbal signals to judge
whether they are making themselves clear or not, and adjust
their contribution accordingly. Again, this seems more
consistent with the management of processing demands
(Hypothesis 2) than the operation of social preferences.
The main support for the explanation of repair structure in
terms of dialogue coordination mechanisms (Hypothesis 3)
comes from the more detailed evidence of interdependencies in choice of repair type across the two
different roles. It is worth noting that all participants acted
both as Givers and Follower in the HCRC Map task so
individual differences are directly controlled for.
It is clear that these two different task roles are associated
with divergent patterns of repair. The Giver primarily works

1567

to produce intelligible descriptions (Position 1 repairs) and
the Follower focuses on clarifying them (Position 2 repairs).
Social preferences ought to be the same for both roles.
Instead the results suggest that the informational asymmetry
is directly reflected in the patterns of repair. This supports
Hypothesis 2 (processing demands)
However, the complimentary nature of repair patterns in
Figure 4 and Figure 5 provides strongest support for
Hypothesis 3; dialogue co-ordination. There is a close interdependency between the different trajectories in the repair
space that conversational partners use as shown in the
correlations in Table 4. For example, the more one
participant requests clarification (NTRI) the less the other
does. Also, the more the Giver offers possible corrections
(P20I0R) the less often the Follower needs to clarify. This
suggests that participants are making systematic and
coordinated trade-offs in their use repair, thereby reducing
the joint effort needed to communicate effectively (Clark,
1996).

Conclusion
The results of this study show that repairs are a pervasive
feature of dialogue. They also provide useful quantitative
evidence about the basic structure and function of the repair
space. Repairs are not just noise in the signal or
‘disfluencies’. They pattern in systematic ways and these
patterns are not easily explained by appeal to social
preferences or processing demands alone. As previous work
has shown, the surface form of self-repairs can provide
useful information for co-ordination in dialogue. The results
reported here show the larger scale cross-person and crossturn patterns that structure the ‘repair-space’. This space, we
have argued, is used as a coordinated, integrated system by
all the parties to an interaction and, we claim, is critical to
maintaining the mutual-intelligibility of dialogue.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the EPSRC DiET Project
(EP/D057426/1). Thanks especially go to Amy Isard, Jean
Carletta, Arash Eshghi and Greg Mills for their
correspondence and help.

References
Anderson, A.; Bader, M.; Bard, E.; Boyle, E.; Doherty, G.
M.; Garrod, S.; Isard, S.; Kowtko, J.; McAllister, J.;
Miller, J.; Sotillo, C.; Thompson, H. S. & Weinert, R.
(1991) The HCRC Map Task Corpus. In: Language and
Speech 34351-366.
Bortfeld, H. Leon, S.D., Bloom, E., Schober, M.F.,
Brennan, S. (2001) Disfluency Rates in Conversation:
Effects of Age, Relationship, Topic, Role, and Gender.
Language and Speech, 434 (23), 12293–124579.
Branigan, H., Lickley, R. and McKelvie, D. (1999). Nonlinguistic influences on rates of disfluency in spontaneous
speech. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference of Phonetic Sciences, 1999.

Brennan, S and Schober M. F. (2001) How Listeners
Compensate for Disfluencies. Journal of Memory and
Language, 44, pp. 274-296.
Burnard (2000). Reference Guide for the British National
Corpus (World Edition). Oxford University Computing
Services.
Carletta, J. C., Isard, A., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., DohertySneddon, G., & Anderson, A. (1996). HCRC Dialogue
Structure Coding Manual (HCRC/TR-82), Human
Communication Research Centre, University of
Edinburgh.
Clark, H.H. and Wasow, T. (1998) Repeating Words in
Spontaneous Speech. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 201–242.
Clark, H.H. (1996) Using Language. Cambridge University
Press.
Drew, P. (1997). “'Open' class repair initiators in response to
sequential sources of trouble in conversation.” Journal of
Pragmatics 28: 69-101.
Fodor, J. and Lepore, E. (1992) “E. Lepore, Holism: A
Shopper’s Guide. Blackwell.
Healey P.G.T. (2008) “Interactive Misalignment: The Role
of Repair in the Development of Group Sub-languages” in
Cooper R. and and Kempson R. (eds) Language in Flux.
Palgrave-McMillan. p 13-39
Healey, P.G.T., Swoboda, N., Umata I. and King, J. (2007)
“Graphical Language Games: Interactional constraints on
representational form” Cognitive Science, 31, 285-309.
Healey, P. G. T., Colman, M. and Thirlwell, M. (2005).
Analysing Multi-Modal Communication: Repair-Based
Measures of Human Communicative Co-ordination. in
Natural, Intelligent and Effective Interaction in
Multimodal Dialogue Systems, Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic, 2005.
Kowtko, J. C., Isard, S. D. and Doherty, G. M. (1991).
Conversational games within dialogue. In Proceedings of
the espirit workshop on discourse coherence.
Lickley, R and Bard, E. (1998). When can listeners detect
disfluency in spontaneous speech? Language and Speech
41.
Schegloff, E. A. (1987).
Some Sources of
Misunderstanding in Talk-in-Interaction, Linguistics, 25
(1987), 201-218.
Schegloff, E. (1992). Repair after the next turn: the last
structurally provided defense of intersubjectivity in
conversation. American Journal of Sociology, 97(5),
1295-1345.
Schegloff, E. A. (1993). Reflections on Quantification in the
Study of Conversation. Research on Language and Social
Interaction, 26:1, 1993, 99-128.
Schegloff, E. A. (1997). "Third Turn Repair," in G. R. Guy,
C. Feagin, D. Schiffrin and J. Baugh (eds.), Towards a
Social Science of Language: Papers in honor of William
Labov. Volume 2: Social Interaction and Discourse
Structures. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Schegloff, E., Jefferson, G. and Sacks, H. (1977). The
preference for self-correction in the organization of repair
in conversation. Language, 53, 361-382.

1568

