UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The inception of simulation: a hypothesis for the role of dreams in young children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3rp3d8mj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Thill, Serge
Svensson, Henrik

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The inception of simulation:
a hypothesis for the role of dreams in young children
Serge Thill (serge.thill@his.se)
Henrik Svensson (henrik.svensson@his.se)
Cognition & Interaction Lab, University of Skövde
PO BOX 408, 541 28 Skövde, Sweden
e.g. Shanahan 2006; Ziemke et al. 2005) of the functionality
of simulations and their neural substrate.
However, current accounts of simulation do no address the
question of the phylogenetic origin and how simulations develop in the child. Hesslow (2002) emphasized that simulation theory explains cognitive functions in terms of phylogenetically older brain functions, i.e., functions that evolved to
allow mammals to eat, move and reproduce. Thus, it might
be possible to claim that part of the explanation can be offloaded to the explanation of the evolution and development of
perception and action processes themselves. However, while
some of the basic neural substrate for developing simulations,
such as the ability of the cerebellum to learn sensorimotor
contingencies (cf. Svensson et al., 2009), might have an evolutionary origin, it is quite clear that simulations have to be
learnt during the life-time of an individual. Not only does
the world change at various time scales, our body grows and
changes in unexpected ways, which means that inner models (or, in simulation theory terms, simulations) must be quite
plastic (e.g. Wolpert et al., 2001). There is thus a necessity
for an explanation of what guides the initial formation of the
predictive associations between motor and sensory areas of
the brain, resulting in simulations that are independent of the
current environment. Although some accounts of simulation
have touched upon on it (e.g. Gallese, 2003; Grush, 1995), a
coherent account of the origin of simulation is largely missing. In the present paper, we argue that such an account can
be given by considering the function of dreams in infants and
young children.
It should perhaps be pointed out that the origin of simulations is not the same question as that of the origin of representations, which has been extensively discussed in cognitive
science (e.g. Bickhard & Terveen, 1995). The account of how
simulations develop in humans that we seek to establish does
not for example entail explaining intentionality and representational content which an account of the emergence of representation would include. However, this does not preclude
that it can contribute to the understanding of how intentional
states develop (cf. Brinck & Gärdenfors, 1999).

Abstract
In the present paper, we present an argument and an initial
model connecting research into the functional role of dreams
with simulation theories. Traditionally, although theories that
describe the refinement of simulations exist, the origin of these
simulations is not considered in detail. Similarly, research into
the functional role of dreams tends to focus on adults, with less
regard to the dreams of young children.
Here, we suggest that a functional role of dreams in infants
through to early childhood may be the inception of these simulations. We show that the proposed model can present a unified
explanation for functions of both the phenomenological experience of dreaming as well as other aspects of brain activity
during sleeping, e.g. the processing of memories. Additionally, it explicitly provides an account for the development of
simulations in early childhood, hypothesising that an initial
function of dreams is the inception and development of simulations.
Keywords: Simulation Hypothesis; Dream functions; Cognitive Development

Introduction
Where do simulations come from?
With its roots dating at least as far back as the British empiricists, the simulation hypothesis (Hesslow, 2002) (note that
this is somewhat different from simulation theories (ST) in
research on other minds, cf. Carruthers & Smith, 1996) explains features of cognition associated with having an inner
world in terms of reactivations of bodily states (Svensson,
2007). That is, the adult brain has the capacity to - through
anticipatory and associative mechanisms - recreate the same
neural context as during previous interactions with the environment in sensory-, motor-, and somatosensory areas of
the brain. In simpler terms, cognition is explained as coupled chains of simulated actions, (i.e. redeployment of motor
brain areas; see Anderson, 2007a,b), and simulated perceptions (i.e. redeployment of sensory and somatosensory brain
areas). Thus, an essential aspect of the simulation hypothesis
is the ability to predictively associate a particular action with
its consequences in different circumstances and the recreation
of previous multimodal states.
Evidence has been provided for simulated actions and perceptions in several different areas, e.g. motor imagery (e.g.
Jeannerod, 1994), visual imagery (Kosslyn & Thompson,
2000), bodily imagery (e.g. Gibbs & Berg, 2002), action understanding (Rizzolatti, 2005), and language (e.g. Glenberg
& Kaschak, 2002). For a recent review see Barsalou (2008).
Furthermore, there are a number of theoretical (e.g. Barsalou, 1999, 2008; Grush, 2004; Hesslow, 2002) and computational models (for a review see Marques & Holland, 2009,

What is the function of dreams in early life?
There is no certainly lack of theories regarding the functionality of dreams. A popular current example is the theory that
dreams are used to simulate threats (Revonsuo, 2000). This
Threat Simulation Theory (TST) is interesting especially as
it is one of the few that attempts to identify an explicit function of the phenomenology of dreaming including the narra-

231

tive nature of dreams. This is in contrast to several theories
that identify functions of, for instance REM sleep without addressing the phenomenal levels of dreams or even the narrative organisation. A popular idea in this line of reasoning is
that dreams are involved in memory processing (e.g. Hobson 1994 or Crick & Mitchison 1983, 1995). A related theory proposes that dreams are a series of events (influenced
by the dreamer’s past) within a model of the world in which
the dreamer actively participates (Foulkes, 1985). However,
as Revonsuo (2000) points out, there still is no function to
the narrative beyond “producing novel and unique mnemonic
configurations”. A different approach theorises that dreams
may allow us to deal with emotional concerns (e.g. Hartmann,
1998).
For a more complete discussion of these theories briefly
mentioned above, see for instance Revonsuo (2000). In the
context of the present paper, however, the critical insight is
that most, if not all, of these theories aim to identify a functional role that is relevant for adult life. Pre-adulthood dreams
are typically only cited to support the theories; Revonsuo
(2000) for instance cites evidence that children’s dreams feature more dangerous animals than adults in favour of his
threat simulation theory while Valli et al. (2005) lists dreams
of traumatised children as additional support for the same theory.
Domhoff (2001) summarises several relevant studies
(Foulkes, 1982, 1999; Foulkes et al., 1990) to illustrate a few
key features of children’s dream. Most importantly, dreams
of children appear to be different from those of adults in that
they exhibit a different frequency and cognitive structure until the child reaches an age of around 9-11 years old. Further,
Domhoff (2001) notes that dream reports from children below the age of around 11-13 years differ from adult dream
reports in length and content. Specifically, dreams of young
children under the age of 5 appear to be “bland”, featuring
mainly static imagery. Between 5 and 8 years old, dreams
do contain interactive characters but the narrative does not
appear well developed. Overall, Domhoff (2001) concludes
that “visual imagination may develop gradually and may be a
necessary cognitive prerequisite for dreaming”.
It is therefore clear that one cannot compare dreams of
adults with dreams of children since the latter tend to be
much less sophisticated. This makes it unlikely that theories such as Revonsuo’s TST (Revonsuo, 2000) apply to children’s dreams. On the other hand, even though the phenomenological aspects of dreams my appear impoverished in
children when compared to adult’s dreams, there is no reason
to believe that they may not serve a function.
In the remainder of this paper, we outline the hypothesis
that dreams in young children may in fact play a crucial role
in the inception and refinement of simulations. This is motivated in part by the ontogenetic hypothesis (Blumberg, 2010;
Roffwarg et al., 1966) of the function of children’s dreams,
namely that the large amount of REM sleep at the beginning
of life can be explained by a need for endogenous stimulation

of the nervous system, especially higher cortical areas, which
“may be useful in assisting neuronal differentiation, maturation, and myelinization” (Roffwarg et al., 1966, p. 616)
of these areas. Thus, the ontogentic hypothesis focuses on
the neurophysiological aspects of brainstem induced cortical
and muscle spindle activity, rather than a possible function of
the conscious experiential aspect. Of interest to our hypothesis, the motor activity initiated by the brain stem, visible as
twitches during REM sleep (Blumberg, 2010), is able to assist in the formation of sensory anticipations (cf. Blumberg,
2010). Thus, the spontaneous production of motor activity
during REM sleep, might be play a role in triggering the formation of simulations, in particular, simulated sensations and
perceptions. It might possibly also explain why simulated actions play a crucial role in simulations (cf. e.g. Cotterill, 1996,
2001; Hesslow, 2002).
Specifically, we therefore argue in this paper that dreams
and simulations form a bootstrapping process in which
dreams help creating and refining simulations which are then
used within dreams to generate narrative content. We show
that this hypothesis is both consistent with available evidence and compatible with theories related to the functions
of dreams in adults as well as the position taken by Domhoff
(2001).

The role of dreams in the inception of
simulations
There are interesting parallels between the insights from research into dreams and the simulation hypothesis. For instance, actions in dreams are thought to be neurophysiologically similar to real actions except for not being executed
(Revonsuo, 2000). In the language of the simulation hypothesis, actions in dreams are therefore simulated actions. Furthermore, Hobson (1999, as described by Revonsuo 2000, p.
889), argued that “the experience of movement in dreams
is created with the help of the efferent copying mechanism,
which sends copies of all cortical motor commands to the
sensory system. The brain thus receives internally generated
information about issued motor commands and computes the
expected consequences of those commands. The sensory system is not informed that these commands were not in actual
fact carried out by the muscles, and therefore the illusion of
movement comes about”. Again, these insights are highly relevant to the simulation hypothesis as the use of efferent copies
or more encompassing input from motor areas to sensory areas has also been proposed as a possible neural substrate for
establishing simulations generally (Cotterill, 2001; Hesslow,
2002).
One can thus argue that the simulation hypothesis is relevant for theories about the functions of dreams in general since it provides the necessary mechanisms for creating dream narratives based on internal models of the world.
Note that this is actually independent of the specific theory
one subscribes to, whether it is TST (Revonsuo, 2000) or for
instance Foulkes’ view (Foulkes, 1985) since most implicitly

232

assume the presence of such a mechanism. However, as argued earlier, it is not likely that simulations are formed (at
least beyond a rudimentary proto-simulation) as a result of
an evolutionary process. This implies that simulations must
be formed (or significantly refined) during the lifetime of the
human. Further, according to simulation theory, these simulations are important to cognition and should therefore form
at the earliest opportunity.
Additionally, the phenomenological content of dreams can
in general have further useful consequences for simulation
processes employed when awake (e.g. solve problems).
Firstly, dreams are somewhat more unconstrained than other
thought processes, e.g. dream imagery is often more bizarre
than wake thoughts, self-reflection is absent in dreams, and
dreams lack orientational stability (Hobson et al., 2000).
Thus, dreaming allows the emergence of paths of simulated
actions and perceptions that would not, by some mechanism,
have been thought of while awake. Secondly, dreams might
be useful for creating longer and more stable simulations as
they contain several organising aspects. Dreams integrate
several different dream elements into a coherent story, intensified emotions are experienced which also seem to guide
the narratives during dreams, and instinctual programs such
as fight-flight mechanisms are also used to guide the dreams
(Hobson et al., 2000). There is thus a reason to believe that
simulations can benefit from the phenomenological experience of dreams and thus, that dreams may help in form these
simulations. We suggest that this process begins in early
childhood.

Figure 1: Schematic of the hypothesised relation between
dreams and simulations. Dashed lines indicate functions
that diminish in importance as the child ages whereas thick
lines indicate functions that increase. In very young infants,
re-enacting of experienced sensorimotor perceptions within
dreams shape internal simulations of the world the infant is
living in. Based on these simulations, the infant or young
child will generate predictions which are then validated while
awake, leading to a fine-tuning of the simulation. As the
child grows older, the “Formation” mechanism ceases to play
an important role (although it may be used if radically new
perceptions are encountered) and dreams simply use existing
simulations (with their content formed through other cognitive mechanisms). Simultaneously, the accuracy of the simulations increases as the child grows older, leading both to
a decrease of required fine-tuning and an increased usage
of predictions in other cognitive functions, such as postulated for instance by the Threat Simulation Theory (Revonsuo, 2000). See text for a more thorough description.

Even though children’s dreams are described as “impoverished” (Domhoff, 2001) compared to those of adults, infants spend around 14 hours per day sleeping, compared to
8-9 hours for 16-year olds (Iglowstein et al., 2003). Further,
about half of that is spent in REM sleep, dropping to 30% to
40% (but approaching adult levels in quality) in infants aged
between 1 month to 1 year (Finn Davis et al., 2004). Although
it is hard to know whether or not any phenomenological experience is associated with these sleeping patterns in infants, we
do know, as discussed previously that this is the case in young
children (Domhoff, 2001). Here we suggest, as outlined before, that the relationship between dreams and simulations actually go both ways: while in older children and adults, simulations are primarily used to form the narratives of dreams,
this dependency is reversed in young children where dreams
are used to form and refine the simulations. Figure 1 illustrates our model of this process. The critical notion here is
the existence of two separate loops: one which uses dreams
to refine simulations and a second loop which uses dreams
(and therefore simulations) to support other cognitive abilities. The hypothesis is that the first loop is dominant initially
and gradually declines in importance as the second loop begins to dominate, marking a transition from functional roles
of dreams in children to roles relevant to adults.

ing to a formation of simulations. This is the inception phase.
Since this takes place in young infants, it is hard to know
what the phenomenological experience of this phase is; it
is therefore somewhat of an assumption that it exists (rather
than the inception of simulations being a subconscious process). However, it seems likely that it is initially composed
of a more or less direct repetition of the impressions of recent sensorimotor experiences. Once a simulation has been
formed, dreams begin to use it at which stage the phenomenological experience begins to increase in complexity, including
the generation of event sequences that were not directly experienced but are rather predictions of what is possible. These
predictions can then be tested by the child while it is awake,
leading to a validation mechanism which in turn is used to
finetune the existing simulations. Within our model, this loop

In infants and young children, sensorimotor experiences
are thus hypothesised to be re-enacted within dreams, lead-

233

is the dominant one during infancy and early childhood. It
is clear that simulations that depend on sensorimotor experiences can only be accurate to the extent of the infants abilities, which are themselves continuously developing throughout childhood. The first decade of life is therefore likely to be
spent considerably refining the simulations. It is worth pointing out that other models based on simulated actions and perceptions propose similar mechanisms. For instance, Grush
(2004), in his emulation theory of representation, proposed a
model based on Kalman filters (in control theory) in which
the predictions produced by simulations (or emulations in his
terms), are also used to update the emulations themselves by
comparing them with the corresponding actual input.

accuracy and complexity of simulations have advanced sufficiently. This is at least indirectly supported by the fact that
studies that do show evidence for the threat simulation theories relies on data from children aged on average about 12
years, at which age dreams are already adult-like in their complexity and narrative (Domhoff, 2001).
Third, it predicts that internal simulations are defined heavily by the experiences in early childhood. Although this may
be hard to verify, the abundance of bodily metaphors in language (Lakoff & Johonson, 1999) might be a possible consequence thereof.

At the same time, however, as simulations begin to be accurate, the predictions they generate during dreams can be
used in other aspects of higher-level cognition. We do not
attempt to characterise these other aspects in detail but this
would for instance include a function of dreams as postulated
by Revonsuo’s TST (Revonsuo, 2000). In other words, as
the need for fine-tuning is reduced, the function of dreams as
support to higher-level cognitive mechanisms increases. This
creates a second loop where higher-level cognition defines the
narratives of dreams, which increases in complexity as simulations increase in completeness. Within our model, this loop
is dominant from late childhood onwards.

In the present paper, we presented a model that addresses
issues in two separate fields. Within the context of simulation theories, it provides a coherent account of simulations
might originate and form during early childhood, an aspect
that has not been given much attention previously, although
it has been touched upon by some (e.g. Gallese, 2003; Grush,
1995). Within the context of research into the functional role
of dreams, we argued that the traditional focus is on adult
dreams and that theories pertaining to the role of dreams in
children are still missing. Our model thus provides a hypothesis as to what such a function might be by tying into the
development of simulations.
It is worth pointing out that, since the model addresses the
role of dreams at an age not normally covered by other theories of the function of dreams, the present hypothesis is not
actually at odds with those except with the idea that dreams
(as opposed to the activity the brain goes through during a
dream) serve no function (e.g. Flanagan, 1995); indeed, since
our model hypothesises that simulations are fine-tuned based
on predictions generated in dreams, the phenomenological
experience plays an important role. Threat Simulation Theory (Revonsuo, 2000) for instance, as already argued, specifically requires a form of internal simulation in order to be
effective. Additionally, since simulations and the resulting internal models of the world can be seen as a form of memory
(of the functioning of the world), the same mechanisms that
were used in early life to create these simulations can be used
later on to consolidate or process memories during dreams,
as hypothesised for instance by Hobson (1994) or Crick &
Mitchison (1983, 1995), even if this function of dreaming is
not related to the phenomenological experience. Our model
thus also offers a way of unifying separate theories by providing mechanisms that allow a natural distinction between (1)
functions at a phenomenological level, in which the narrative
of the dream has an explicit role in supporting cognition and
(2) functions that may be subconscious and relying on mechanisms that were involved in the construction of simulations.
Our hypothesis and the resulting model are developmental in the sense that the function of the model evolves over
time by shifting the focus from one loop to the other, which
results in a shift from using dreams primarily as a way of refining simulation to using dreams (and the underlying simu-

Discussion

The model leads to a number of predictions. First of all,
it predicts that the complexity of the dreams and the narration increases over time as the internal simulations become
more and more complete. Additionally, dreams will reflect
developmental stages of the brain and body. Since the complexity and content of simulations is defined by by what an
individual can currently experience, they are intrinsically tied
to the overall physiological development of the body. Thus,
as brain and body develop and higher-level cognitive functions emerge, more complex simulations are also made possible. These novel aspects of the simulations will need to be
fine-tuned as postulated by our model, predicting that during
development, the dream contents will reflect newly gained
cognitive or bodily abilities. This is at least partly consistent
with the development of cognitive abilities in children and to
what extent those abilities involve more complex simulations.
For example, at the age of 6-12 months infants are able to e.g.
separate goal from means (Frith & Frith, 2003) and recognize
goal-directed actions (Csibra, 2003), in which brief simulations of actions may play a role (Gallese, 2003). It is not until
around the age of 5 or 6, however, that more complex simulations have developed. For example, at the age of 5 the child
starts to be able to more fully grasp how others behave and
think (Frith & Frith, 2003), which would involve longer and
more extensive simulated chains of perceptions and actions.
Overall, this is in agreement with the description of children’s
dreams listed by for instance Domhoff (2001).
Second, it predicts that any functionality of dreams related
to supporting higher-level cognition, e.g. to simulate and prepare for threats Revonsuo (2000) does not appear until the

234

lations) primarily as a way to generate predictions that can be
used in other aspects of cognition (in the same sense that, for
instance, TST (Revonsuo, 2000) sees dreams as functional).
This approach resulted in the explanation of both phenomenological and other functions of dreams discussed in the previous paragraph, which highlights that taking developmental
aspects into consideration is important in general. By restricting themselves to the cognitively developed individual, the
phenomenologically focussed TST (Revonsuo, 2000) for instance can not (and does not need to) account for theories pertaining to e.g. memory processing within dreams (e.g. Crick
& Mitchison, 1983, 1995) or vice versa. In other words, the
developmental perspective has allowed a unified view of what
has previously been considered to be separate processes. The
importance of such a perspective in dream research has been
realised for instance by Domhoff (2001) when he calls for
a new neurocognitive theory of dreams by explicitly noting,
amongst others, that dreams evolve throughout childhood and
the present model is therefore in the same spirit.
Some aspects of the present model on simulation formation can also be related to research into the development of
episodic memory (e.g. Atance & O’Neill, 2005; Perner et
al., 2007). An important aspect and necessary prerequisite
of episodic memory is the ability to recreate previous experiences (cf. Perner et al., 2007); in our terms, simulations.
However, since episodic memory does not develop fully until around the age of four (Atance & O’Neill, 2005), we
would hypothesize that the development of episodic memory is partly determined by the phenomenal quality, stability
and validity (i.e. correspondence to actual previous experiences) of the simulations. For example, Perner et al. (2007)
pointed out that among other things introspection is necessary for episodic memory and this process would certainly be
helped by having more stable simulations, which may not be
available early in life.
Finally, the present paper illustrates that insights from simulation theories and research into dreams can be mutually
beneficial: for research exploring the functions of dreams,
simulation theory offers a comprehensive mechanism that
may well underlie the generation of the phenomenological
experience of dreams. On the other hand, to those interested in the simulation hypothesis, the insights from research
into dreams can provide additional validation and examples
of mechanisms. The similarity - discussed earlier - between dream mechanisms as described by for instance Hobson (1999) and mechanisms of simulation theories (Cotterill,
2001; Hesslow, 2002) or the explicit reference to simulations
(but without considering simulation theories) by Revonsuo
(2000) are a prime examples of this potential mutual benefit
and therefore potential for a close interdisciplinary cooperation.

tulated by simulation theory (Hesslow, 2002). We have outlined an evolving model that describes the changing relations between dreams and simulations and we have illustrated
that the hypothesis is compatible with current knowledge of
dreams. The hypothesis lead to a number of predictions,
which need to be explored more fully in further work.

References
Anderson, M. L. (2007a). Massive redeployment, exaptation, and the functional integration of cognitive operations.
Synthese, 159(3), 329-345.
Anderson, M. L. (2007b). The massive redeployment hypothesis and the functional topography of the brain. Philosophical Psychology, 20(2), 143-174.
Atance, C. M., & O’Neill, D. K. (2005). The emergence of
episodic future thinking in humans. Learning and Motivation, 36(2), 126-144.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59(1), 617-645.
Bickhard, M., & Terveen, L. (1995). Foundational issues in
artificial intelligence and cognitive science: Impasse and
solution. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Blumberg, M. S. (2010). Beyond dreams: do sleep-related
movements contribute to brain development? Frontiers in
Neurology, 2, doi: 10.3389/fneur.2010.00140.
Brinck, I., & Gärdenfors, P. (1999). Representation and selfawareness in intentional agents. Synthese, 118(1), 89-104.
Carruthers, P., & Smith, P. K. (Eds.). (1996). Theories of theories of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cotterill, R. M. J. (1996). Prediction and internal feedback in
conscious perception. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
3(2), 245-266.
Cotterill, R. M. J. (2001). Cooperation of the basal ganglia,
cerebellum, sensory cerebrum and hippocampus: possible
implications for cognition, consciousness, intelligence and
creativity. Progress in Neurobiology, 64(1), 1-33.
Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream
sleep. Nature, 304, 111-114.
Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1995). Rem sleep and neural nets.
Behavioural Brain Research, 69, 147155.
Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological and referential understanding of action in infancy. 358(1431), 447. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 358(1431),
447-458.
Domhoff, G. W. (2001). A new neurocognitive theory on
dreams. Dreaming, 11(1), 13-33.
Finn Davis, K., Parker, K. P., & Montgomery, G. L. (2004).
Sleep in infants and young children: Part one: normal
sleep. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 18(2), 65-71.
Flanagan, O. (1995). Deconstructing dreams: the spandrels
of sleep. The Journal of Philosophy, 92, 5-27.

Conclusions
We have presented the hypothesis that an initial function of
dreams is the inception and fine-tuning of simulations as pos-

235

Foulkes, D. (1982). Children’s dreams. New York: Wiley.
Foulkes, D. (1985). Dreaming: A cognitive-psychological
analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: L Erlbaum Associates.
Foulkes, D. (1999). Children’s dreaming and the development of consciousness. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Foulkes, D., Hollifield, M., Sullivan, B., Bradley, L., & Terry,
R. (1990). REM dreaming and cognitive skills at ages 5-8:
A cross-sectional study. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 13, 447-465.
Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (2003). Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London B, 358(1431), 459473.
Gallese, V. (2003). The manifold nature of interpersonal relations: the quest for a common mechanism. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 358, 517528.
Gibbs, R. W., & Berg, E. A. (2002). Mental imagery and
embodied activity. Journal of Mental Imagery, 26, 1-30.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. sychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 558565.
Grush, R. (1995). Emulation and cognition. Phd Thesis:
University of California, San Diego.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation:
Motor control, imagery and perception. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27(3), 377-396.
Hartmann, E. (1998). Dreams and nightmares: The new
theory on the origin and meaning of dreams. New York:
Plenum Press.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation of behaviour and perception. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6(6),
242-247.
Hobson, J. A. (1994). The chemistry of conscious states:
Toward a unified model of the brain and mind. Boston:
Little, Brown and Co.
Hobson, J. A. (1999). Consciousness. Scientific American
Library.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Schott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. (2000).
Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience
of conscious states. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23,
793-1121.
Iglowstein, I., Jenni, O. G., Molinari, L., & Largo, R. H.
(2003). Sleep duration from infancy to adolescence: Reference values and generational trends. Pediatrics, 111(2),
302-307.
Jeannerod, M. (1994). The representing brain: Neural correlates of motor intention and imagery. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 17, 187-245.
Kosslyn, S. M., & Thompson, W. L. (2000). Shared mechanisms in visual imagery and visual perception: Insights
from cognitive neuroscience (M. S. Gazzaniga, Ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lakoff, G., & Johonson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
New York: Basic Books.
Marques, H. G., & Holland, O. (2009). Architectures for
functional imagination. Neurocomputing, 72, 743-759.
Perner, J., Kloo, D., & Gornik, E. (2007). Episodic memory development: theory of mind is part of re-experiencing
experienced events. Infant and Child Development, 16(5),
471-490.
Revonsuo, A. (2000). The reinterpretation of dreams: An
evolutionary hypothesis of the function of dreaming. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 877-901.
Rizzolatti, G. (2005). The mirror neuron system and its function in humans. Anatomy and Embryology, 210(5), 419421.
Roffwarg, H., Muzio, J., & Dement, W. (1966). Ontogenetic development of the human sleep-dream cycle. Science, 152(3772), 604-619.
Shanahan, M. (2006). A cognitive architecture that combines
internal simulation with a global workspace. Consciousness and Cognition, 15(2), 433-449.
Svensson, H. (2007). Embodied simulation as off-line representation. Licenciate Thesis: University of Skövde.
Svensson, H., Morse, A. F., & Ziemke, T. (2009). Neural
pathways of embodied simulation. In Anticipatory behavior in adaptive learning systems (ABiALS).
Valli, K., Revonsuo, A., Pälkäs, O., Ismail, K. H., Ali, K. J.,
& Punamäki, R. (2005). The threat simulation theory of the
evolutionary function of dreaming: Evidence from dreams
of traumatized children. Consciousness and Cognition, 14,
188-218.
Wolpert, D. M., Ghahramani, Z., & Flanagan, J. R. (2001).
Perspectives and problems in motor learning. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 5(11), 487-494.
Ziemke, T., Jirenhed, D. A., & Hesslow, G. (2005). Internal
simulation of perception: a minimal neuro-robotic model.
Neurocomputing, 68, 85-104.

236

