UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Spatial Cognition During Childhood: Extending Understanding of
Perception, Memory, Language, Maps, and Gestures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54d221p5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Schutte, Anne
Fleharty, Heidi
Hund, Alycia
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Spatial Cognition During Childhood: Extending
Understanding of Perception, Memory, Language, Maps, and Gestures
Anne R. Schutte (aschutte2@unlnotes.unl.edu) and Heidi Fleharty (heidifleharty@hotmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska Lincoln, 238 Burnett Hall
Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 USA

Alycia M. Hund (amhund@ilstu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Illinois State University, Campus Box 4620
Normal, IL 61790-4620 USA

David H. Uttal (duttal@northwestern.edu) and Megan Sauter (megan.sauter@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Swift Hall 102, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Nina Simms (ninasimms@northwestern.edu), Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu), and
David H. Uttal (duttal@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Swift Hall 102, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA
Keywords: spatial cognition; cognitive development.

children’s perceptual abilities. Specifically, over
development children’s ability to perceive the location of
axes of symmetry improves quantitatively. Ortmann and
Schutte (2010) examined whether there were changes in
children’s ability to perceive the location of symmetry axes
by having 3- to 6-year-olds and adults determine on which
half of a large monitor a smiley face was located. Three- to
6-year-olds were above chance at classifying all but the
location closest to midline, and over development there was
improvement in the ability to localize the axis. Despite this
apparent ability to perceive the symmetry axes, 3-year-olds
do not reliably subdivide space in SWM tasks (Huttenlocher
et al., 1994; Schutte et al., 2009). Perhaps their perception of
midline is too “fuzzy” for them to use it as a reference axis
in memory. We conducted a pilot study with 3-year-olds to
examine whether perception of the midline symmetry axis
was related to memory biases. The DFT predicts that biases
toward midline will be reduced for children who are better
able to localize midline, and this relationship will depend on
the location of the target in memory. That is, for 3-yearolds, errors to targets that are close to midline will not be
correlated with the perception of midline, because these
targets are strongly biased toward midline. Memory errors
to targets farther from midline, however, should be
correlated with their perception of midline. The prediction
was supported. Children who were better able to determine
on which side of midline a target was located were more
likely to be biased away from midline in the spatial memory
task for all targets except the two closest to midline. These
results support the DFT and demonstrate interactions
between perception and cognition over development.

Symposium Overview
Understanding the development of spatial cognition during
childhood is important. Paying close attention to
development provides a lens through with to explore
mechanisms that underlie stability and change in perception,
memory, language, and symbolic understanding over time.
This symposium, moderated by Alycia Hund, includes four
talks highlighting tight links between spatial perception of
midline and memory for nearby targets during early
childhood explicated through dynamic systems theory,
specifying the development of spatial language (especially
middle and between) during early childhood by focusing on
the role of scaffolding interactions, exploring links between
spatial language, maps, and midpoint search strategies
during early childhood, and explicating spatial thinking
during childhood by integrating maps, words, and gestures.
The symposium concludes with a discussion of common
themes, including how children perceive, remember, talk
about, and gesture about middle and other spatial relations.

Spatial Perception and Working Memory
Perception and cognition are inextricably intertwined.
This interaction is evident in the development of spatial
memory. Early in development there is a transition in
memory biases. Young children’s spatial working memory
(SWM) responses are biased toward the center of a
homogenous space, whereas older children and adults
subdivide the space along the midline symmetry axis, and
their memory responses are biased away from the center of
the space. According to Dynamic Field Theory (DFT), a
dynamic systems model of spatial cognition, developmental
changes in geometric biases in SWM are caused by changes
in neural interaction in SWM and the development of

Spatial Language
Three-year-olds produce the spatial terms in, on, and
under, whereas 4-year-old children produce more complex
terms such as back and front. Very little is known about

292

children’s production of the complex terms between and
middle. These terms require comparison with two reference
objects, which involves considerable conceptual and
syntactic complexity. What mechanisms might facilitate
young children’s mastery of such complexity? One potential
mechanism is scaffolding—the process by which experts
provide support to help children accomplish more than they
could do on their own (Vygotsky, 1978). The goal of this
study was to specify the impact of four prompt types
(scaffolding) in facilitating 4- and 5-year-old children’s use
of between and middle in a direction-giving task in relation
to overhearing conversations. These prompt types were
identified via an observational study involving parents and
children. On each trial, 4- and 5-year-old children hid a
mouse in a small object between two identical furniture
items and then told a doll where the mouse was hiding.
Children were randomly assigned to one of six conditions:
between directive prompting (Is the mouse in the basket
between the couches or in the basket by the couch?), middle
directive prompting (Is the mouse in the basket in the
middle of the couches or in the basket by the couch?), nondirective prompting (Can you tell the doll anything more?),
control (no prompting), overhearing between (overhearing
conversations describing the dollhouse set up using
between),
and
overhearing
middle
(overhearing
conversations using middle). Children who received
directive prompting involving between or middle were
highly likely to incorporate these terms into their directions.
In contrast, children who received non-directive or no
prompting and children who overheard conversations
containing between or middle evinced very limited use of
these terms. Together, these findings indicate that children’s
incorporation of between or middle was not due primarily to
priming effects but was facilitated by the directive nature of
scaffolding provided.

simultaneously, map fairly veridically to spatial relations,
and represent both qualitative and quantitative information.
Accordingly, maps could be a particularly effective way to
communicate the unique and challenging aspects of
midpoint. Thus, the current study explored the relative
effectiveness of labels and maps, separately and in
combination, as tools to communicate spatial relational
information to preschoolers. Two- and three-year-olds
played a challenging hiding-and-finding game: a hidden
object was always located at the midpoint between two
landmarks, but the positions of the landmarks changed on
each trial. Consistent with prior findings, hearing a label
during the task improved children’s accuracy. Surprisingly,
however, children’s performance did not benefit from
seeing a map. These results invite further exploration into
the conditions under which maps are helpful to young
children, and reinforce the role of language as a powerful
tool for conveying spatial relational information.

Spatial Symbols: Maps, Words, and Gestures
Learning to use spatial symbols plays an important role in
the development of spatial cognition. For example, learning
to understand the meaning of left and right may influence
children’s mental representation of spatial information
(Shusterman & Spelke, 2005). Likewise, coming to see and
to think about the world from the perspective of maps can
contribute to the development of spatial cognition (Davies
& Uttal, 2007). Symbols differ in terms of what kinds of
spatial information they communicate efficiently or
effectively. For example, in language, spatial relations must
be communicated serially. In contrast, maps can depict
multiple relations among locations. Gesture can be
construed as intermediate; we often can imply multiple
locations with our hands, such as by laying out a spatial
framework and pointing out locations relative to that
framework. We investigated both the development of
children’s ability to communicate spatial relations and the
influences of this communication on spatial thinking.
Children (ages 6 and 8) learned the layout of six different
toy animals within a room by walking through the space
along a single, specified route and anticipating what could
be found in each of the six hiding locations. Children were
then asked to communicate the locations to their parents in
one of three forms: language alone, language augmented by
gesture, or map drawing. Children returned to the original
room after they had communicated the locations and were
asked to make judgments about spatial relations that they
had not experienced. In the language condition, 6-year-olds
and 8-year-olds tended to name only the animals that they
had experienced. Asking children to add gesture improved
communication, but not reasoning. Asking children to draw
a map improved both communication and reasoning. These
results suggest that the act of communicating spatial
information influences children’s thinking about spatial
information.

Words, Maps, and Spatial Relations
Spatial relations like in, across, or within are fundamental
to spatial thinking, but some spatial relations are more
challenging than others. The present work investigates
children’s understanding of the complex relation midpoint
(or middle). Midpoint is complex in that it encodes location
relative to more than one entity, and it integrates both
qualitative and quantitative spatial information. Here, we
explore two kinds of symbols that might help children
understand this relation: labels and maps. Previous studies
have shown that relational language can help children
reason about spatial relations (Loewenstein & Gentner,
2005), and in fact, children’s knowledge of the terms middle
and between predicts their performance on a challenging
midpoint search task (Simms & Gentner, 2008). Maps also
promote relational representations of space (Uttal, Fisher, &
Taylor, 2006), but differ from labels in important ways
(Davies & Uttal, 2007). Labels convey spatial information
sequentially, map arbitrarily to spatial concepts, and usually
represent only qualitative information. In contrast, maps
convey information about multiple spatial relations

293

