UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of time pressure and the spatial integration of the stimulus dimensions on overall
similarity categorization.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3424r63w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Milton, Fraser
Viika, Lotta
Henderson, Holly
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of time pressure and the spatial integration of the stimulus dimensions on
overall similarity categorization.
Fraser Milton (f.n.milton@ex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom

Lotta Viika (lv222@ex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom

Holly Henderson (hssh201@ex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom
Andy J. Wills (a.j.wills@ex.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom
several influential theories of natural categories. The
“classical” view postulates that natural categories are made
up of necessary and jointly sufficient features (e.g., Bruner,
Goodnow, & Austin, 1956). If an item has the necessary
feature (or features) it can be considered a member of that
category regardless of the rest of its properties. In recent
times, there has, however, been a growing emphasis on the
idea that natural categories are organized around an overall
similarity (family resemblance) structure (Rosch & Mervis,
1975). Under this theory, an item does not have to possess
any single feature, but as long as it has enough features that
are characteristic of that category it can be considered a
member of that group. In an overall similarity structure,
within-group similarity is maximized and between-group
similarity is minimized. One advantage of a family
resemblance strategy is that it enables one to make
inferences about other properties of an item (e.g., Lassaline
& Murphy, 1996). For instance, by classifying an item as a
bird, it enables one to infer that it can fly, has feathers, lays
eggs, and sings.
Given that the family resemblance theory appears a more
compelling account than the classical view, it is surprising
that initial studies showed that when people are asked to
classify a group of stimuli without any feedback from the
experimenter (often known as free classification) they tend
to sort by a single dimension (e.g., Ahn & Medin, 1992;
Ashby, Queller & Berretty, 1999; Imai & Garner, 1965;
Medin, Wattenmaker, & Hampson, 1987). More recent
work, however, has shown that overall similarity sorting can
be increased by a number of factors including background
knowledge (Spalding & Murphy, 1996), stimulus structure
(Pothos & Close, 2008), perceptual discriminability (Milton
& Wills, 2008), pairwise rather than multiple stimulus
comparisons (Regehr & Brooks, 1995), the prior application
of an overall similarity sort to different stimuli (Milton &

Abstract
A free classification study is presented in which the effect of
time pressure and the spatial integration of the stimulus
dimensions on overall similarity sorting is investigated. A 2 x
2 between-subjects factorial design was employed with the
factors being the level of time pressure (high/low) and the
spatial integration of the stimulus dimensions (high/low). The
results showed, consistent with Milton and Wills (2004), that
spatially separable stimuli resulted in a greater level of overall
similarity sorting than more spatially integrated dimensions.
Furthermore, participants under low time pressure produced a
greater level of overall similarity sorting than those under
high time pressure, consistent with Milton, Longmore and
Wills (2008).
Critically, there was also a significant
interaction between time pressure and the level of spatial
integration, with the integration effect being greater under low
time pressure than under high time pressure. These findings
provide support for the idea that overall similarity sorting can
be the result of an effortful, deliberative process.
Keywords:
free
classification,
overall
similarity,
unidimensional, time pressure, spatial separability.

Introduction
Categorization is the process by which items encountered
in the world are divided into groups of things. Our ability to
categorize is so fundamental to our mental life that it is
easily overlooked. As an illustration of its importance, in a
world of only proper nouns, you could have the concept of
“Rover” but not of “Dog”, of “Barrack Obama” but not of
“President”.
The process of categorization must necessarily be highly
constrained due to the virtually infinite number of objects
we encounter in our everyday environment. One reasonable
assumption is that the categories we prefer to create would
reflect the underlying structure of objects we encounter
outside the laboratory. Over the years there have been

795

Wills, 2009), and the spatial separation of the stimulus
dimensions (Milton & Wills, 2004).
The focus of the present work is the finding of Milton and
Wills (2004) that the level of spatial integration of the
stimulus dimensions has a strong influence on the
prevalence of overall similarity sorting. Specifically, they
investigated factorially the influence that the level of spatial
integration and the level of perceptual difficulty had on
overall similarity sorting (see Figure 1). They did not find
any effect of perceptual difficulty (although see Milton &
Wills, 2008), but found that stimuli that were more spatially
separable evoked a greater level of overall similarity sorting
than stimuli that were more spatially integrated (see also
Milton & Wills, 2009).

in which items are grouped in an automatic and nondeliberative way. The idea that overall similarity sorting is a
non-deliberative process has received considerable support
in the literature. For instance, Ward (1983) showed that
when a time constraint is applied participants grouped items
by overall similarity to a greater extent than when under
little time pressure (for related findings, see J.D. Smith &
Kemler Nelson, 1984; Ward, Foley, & Cole, 1986).
Similarly, J.D. Smith & Kemler Nelson (1984) showed that
overall similarity sorting was more prevalent under a
concurrent cognitive load than under no load and that when
participants were asked to respond impressionistically
overall similarity sorting was higher than under more
standard instructions. This evidence is also complemented
by the finding that overall similarity sorting is higher under
incidental than intentional learning (Kemler Nelson, 1984)
and that children respond by overall similarity to a greater
extent than adults (Kemler, 1983, but see Raijmakers,
Jansen, & van der Maas, 2004). A similar distinction has
also been made in theories of reasoning (e.g., Sloman, 1996)
and decision making (Dijksterhuis et al., 2006).
Nevertheless, it is unclear how a non-deliberative account
could account for the finding that spatially separable stimuli
evoked more overall similarity sorting than more spatially
integrated stimuli.
As an explanation for their findings, Milton and Wills
(2004) proposed that participants sorting by overall
similarity used an effortful dimensional summation strategy
in which participants consider each dimension in isolation
and place the stimulus into the category with which it has
most features in common. In other words, according to this
account, both overall similarity and unidimensional sorting
are based on a deliberative strategy with overall similarity
sorting being an effortful and more time consuming
approach that makes use of more of the available
information. It seems plausible that spatially separating out
the dimensions will make them easier to differentiate,
making a multidimensional rule strategy easier to apply. In
addition, simply separating out the dimensions may make
participants aware that they are ignoring relevant
information and, consequently, encourage them to make use
of more of the information.
Recent work has provided support for Milton and Wills’s
idea that, at least under certain conditions, overall similarity
sorting can be the result of an effortful, deliberative process.
Specifically, Milton, Longmore, and Wills (2008) showed,
using a match-to-standards procedure, that under a low time
constraint participants sort by overall similarity to a greater
extent than under a high time constraint and that the
imposition of a concurrent load reduced overall similarity
responding relative to a no load condition. Furthermore,
Wills, Longmore, and Milton (submitted) have shown, using
the same procedure, that instructions to categorize in a more
deliberative manner increased overall similarity sorting
relative to standard instructions, and that both participants
with a high working memory capacity and those classified
as reflective (rather than impulsive) produced more overall

Figure 1. The prototypes of the four stimulus sets used in
Experiment 4 of Milton and Wills (2004).
This result was perhaps surprising when one considers
previous work which showed that integral stimuli evoked a
greater level of overall similarity sorting than separable
stimuli (Handel & Imai, 1972; Kemler & Smith, 1979). The
explanation often given for this is that separable stimuli
allow selective attention and the dimensions can be analysed
independently whilst integral stimuli cannot be processed
independently of other dimensions and do not allow
selective attention (e.g., J.D. Smith & Kemler Nelson,
1984). This makes integral stimuli more conducive to
overall similarity responding. Whilst the spatially integrated
stimuli used by Milton and Wills (2004) were not integral
based on the definition of Garner (1974), integralityseparability has often been considered to be a continuum
rather than a dichotomy (Foard & Kemler Nelson, 1984;
L.B. Smith & Kemler, 1978). Under these assumptions, one
might reasonably have anticipated the spatially integrated
stimuli evoking more overall similarity sorting than the
spatially separable stimuli. Instead, the opposite occurred.
The explanation that Milton and Wills (2004) gave for
their spatial separability effect was that participants sorting
by overall similarity were using an effortful and deliberative
strategy. This is contrary to the traditional view that overall
similarity sorting is the result of a primitive, holistic process

796

similarity responding. Finally, Milton, Wills, and Hodgson
(2009), using fMRI, found greater frontal lobe involvement
(which is typically associated with cognitive effort) for
overall similarity relative to unidimensional responding.
Whilst Milton and Wills (2004) believed that their spatial
separability effect was due to a deliberative overall
similarity strategy being more likely for spatially separable
than for spatially integrated stimuli this explanation was
inevitably post-hoc and there is currently no other evidence
that directly supports this claim. The aim of the present
study was to seek evidence for this proposal. To do this, we
created two sets of stimuli that varied on the level of spatial
integration of the dimensions but were in all other respects
identical. On the basis of the results of Milton and Wills
(2004) we predicted that when participants were given
plenty of time to sort the stimuli a spatial separability effect
would emerge. That is, participants sorting the spatially
separate stimuli would group items by overall similarity
more than those sorting the spatially separable stimuli. If, as
Milton and Wills (2004) proposed, the spatial separability
effect was due to the application of an effortful, deliberative
overall similarity strategy, then one would predict that it
would be possible to attenuate or even eliminate the effect if
participants had limited time in which to categorize the
stimuli. This is because participants would then have
insufficient time in which to apply the deliberative strategy
that is assumed to underlie the separability effect. The
present experiment investigates this hypothesis.

Table 1: Abstract Stimulus structure

Note. Each row (within each category) describes a
different stimulus. D = dimension: 1 and o represent the
values of each dimension.
The stimuli, whose prototypes are shown in Figure 2,
were artificial flowers. The stimuli varied on the number of
stamen (few/many), the number of petals (7/8), the length of
the stem (short/long), and the shapes of the leaves
(pointed/rounded).

Method

Figure 2. The prototypes of the high spatial integration and
the low spatial integration stimulus sets.

Participants
48 undergraduate students from the University of Exeter,
aged 18-25, took part in the study. The task was run using
E-Prime on a Dell PC with a 22-inch color monitor and a
standard computer keyboard. Participants sat approximately
0.5 meters away from the screen.

Procedure
Participants were randomly allocated to one of the four
between-subject conditions. Before the free classification
phase, participants were introduced to the stimuli with a presort procedure employed previously by Milton and Wills
(2004). Two copies of each of the ten stimuli in the set were
spread out randomly in an array. Participants then had to
match these stimuli into identical pairs without feedback. If
participants made any mistakes, the pairs had to be matched
again. The purpose of this task was to ensure participants
could fully distinguish the four feature-pairs.
The free classification phase was a slight variation of the
match-to-standards task developed by Regehr and Brooks
(1995); the task is a computer-based version of the Milton
and Wills (2004) task, and it has previously been used in
Milton et al. (2008). Participants were informed that they
were to take part in a categorization task. They were told
that there were many ways in which the stimuli could be
split and that there was no one correct answer. They were
also told that the groups did not have to be of equal sizes
and that they should classify the stimuli in the way that
seemed most sensible or natural.
At the start of each trial, participants were presented with
the prototypes of category A and category B and were

Stimuli
The stimuli had the same abstract structure as
employed by Medin et al. (1987). This category
structure is shown in Table 1. The stimulus set
consisted of four binary-valued dimensions (D1-D4)
and the stimuli were organized around two prototypes
each representative of one of the categories. These
prototypes were constructed by taking all the positive
values on the dimensions for one of the stimuli
(1,1,1,1) and all the zero values on the dimensions
(0,0,0,0) for the other category. The rest of the stimuli
(called one-aways) had three features characteristic of
their category and one atypical feature more
characteristic of the other category. In total, there were
10 stimuli in the set. Sorting the stimuli by overall
similarity maximizes within-group similarities and
minimizes between-group similarities.

797

allowed to examine the prototypes for as long as they
wished. The category that each prototype represented was
fixed across participants. Participants initiated the start of
the trial by pressing the space bar. The screen then went
blank for 250ms, and this was followed by a central fixation
cross for 500ms. One of the stimuli in the set was then
presented in the middle of the screen for either 1000ms in
the high time pressure condition or 5000ms in the low time
pressure condition. Participants were not allowed to respond
during this time. The stimulus was then immediately
followed by a gray mask which remained on the screen until
the participant had made a response (the identical stimulus
presentation technique has previously been used by Milton
et al., 2008). Participants were required to press the “C”
key (which was labeled “A”) to indicate the flower belonged
to category A or the “M” key (which was labeled “B”) to
indicate the flower belonged to category B.
Participants were presented with a total of 60 stimuli, in 6
blocks of 10 trials. In each block, each stimulus in the set
was presented once in a random order. Participants were
given the chance to pause at the end of each block. During
this time, they were also asked to write down, as precisely
as possible, the way in which they had sorted the stimuli in
the previous block.

Any other sorts were placed into an other category, even if
the description given by the participant fitted one of the
sort types described above.

Results
For each participant, the sort type for each of the 6 blocks
was analyzed separately. These sorts were placed into one
of three categories: overall similarity, unidimensional, and
other.
The
mean
proportion
of
overall
similarity,
unidimensional, and other sort types for each condition are
displayed in Figure 3. For the mean proportion of overall
similarity sorts, a 2 (level of time pressure) x 2 (level of
dimensional integration) between-subjects ANOVA was
conducted. This revealed that there was a significant main
effect of time pressure, F (1, 44) = 46.65, p <.001 indicating
that overall similarity sorting was higher under low time
pressure than under high time pressure. There was also a
significant main effect of spatial integration, F (1,44) =
5.46, p =.024, indicating that overall similarity sorting was
higher for the spatially separable stimuli than for the
spatially integrated stimuli. Most important for the current
purposes was the significant interaction between time
pressure and spatial integration, F (1,44) = 4.65, p = .037.
Pairwise comparisons, assessing this interaction, revealed
that there was a significant effect of spatial integration under
low time pressure, t (22) = 2.42, p = .024, but not under high
time pressure, t(22) = .81, p = .81.

Analysis of Results
The categories that sorts were placed into were closely
modeled on those used in Regehr and Brooks (1995), and
identical to those used in Milton and Wills (2004). To be
classified as sorting by overall similarity or
unidimensionally, the participant’s verbal description also
had to match their behavioral response.
A unidimensional sort was defined as a sort based on a
single dimension of the stimulus. It did not matter which
dimension was used as the basis for sorting, providing all
the positive valued features for the chosen dimension were
in one category and all the zero valued features were in the
other category. Participants also had to describe their sort
as based on that particular dimension. Sorts were also
classified as unidimensional if participants’ described their
classification as based on a single dimension but there was
a solitary error in their classification. In other words, nine
of the items were classified on the basis of a single
dimension but the other item was placed in the wrong
category.
An overall similarity sort had the identical structure to
that shown in Table 1. In this type of sort, each of the
prototypes along with their derived one-aways were placed
in separate categories without error. Additionally,
participants had to describe their sort as being either based
on overall similarity or by indicating that they placed each
item into the category with which it had more features in
common. Sorts described in this way, but which contained
a solitary sorting error, were also classified as overall
similarity sorts.

0.9

Proportion of sorts

0.8
0.7
0.6

Overall Similarity
Unidimensional
Other

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Spatially
Integrated

Spatially
Separable

High time pressure

Spatially
Integrated

Spatially
Separable

Low time pressure

Figure 3. The mean proportion of overall similarity,
unidimensional and other sorts for each condition.
For the mean proportion of unidimensional sorts, a similar
2 x 2 between-subjects ANOVA was conducted. This
revealed that there was again a significant effect of time
pressure, F (1,44) = 13.63, p <.001, indicating that
unidimensional sorting was greater under high time pressure
than under low time pressure. There was also a significant
effect of spatial integration, F (1,44) = 7.05, p =.011
indicating that unidimensional sorting was higher for the
spatially integrated than the spatially separable stimuli.
There was, however, no significant interaction between time

798

pressure and spatial integration for undimensional sorts, F
(1,44) = .944, p = .337.
For the mean proportion of Other sorts, a 2 x 2 between
subjects ANOVA revealed no significant effect of time
pressure, F (1,44) = 2.87, p = .097, spatial integration, F
(1,44) = 1.79, p = .188, and no interaction between time
pressure and spatial integration, F (1,44) = .64, p = .427.

Our conclusion that the overall similarity sorting we
observed in this study was the result of a deliberative
strategy does not, of course, imply that overall similarity
classification cannot also be, under certain conditions, due
to a non-deliberative strategy. For instance, we have
previously provided evidence that non-deliberative overall
similarity sorting can be identified using the match-tostandards procedure under a very high time constraint
(Milton et al., 2008). One prediction that follows from this
is that if a more severe time constraint was applied to the
one that we used here then the pattern of results would
reverse. That is, at extreme time pressure, overall similarity
sorting would be higher for the spatially integrated stimuli
than for the spatially separable stimuli. If such a pattern of
results were to emerge, this non-monotonic effect of time
pressure on the spatial separability effect would provide
further evidence for the idea that overall similarity sorting
can be the result of both deliberative and deliberative sorting
depending on the task conditions.
It is also the case that whilst evidence for deliberative
overall similarity sorting in free classification comes from a
diverse number of manipulations such as time pressure
(Milton et al., 2008), concurrent load (Milton et al., 2008),
instructional manipulations (Wills et al., submitted),
individual differences measures such as working memory
and level of impulsivity (Wills et al., submitted), as well as
imaging work (Milton et al., 2009), this evidence has all
been found using the match-to-standards procedure (for a
discussion of the important impact procedural differences
may have on overall similarity sorting, see Milton et al.,
2008). There are a number of reasons that make the matchto-standards procedure an ideal technique for this question –
for instance, it provides clear and unambiguous
identification of both overall similarity and unidimensional
sorting and it is also amenable to both types of sorting
behavior. However, it is also the case that the evidence in
support of non-deliberative processing comes from a
broader range of procedures and our result may be specific
to the particular task employed (i.e., the match-to-standards
procedure). It is therefore important in future work to test
the generality of the idea that overall similarity sorting can
be the result of a deliberative strategy across a wider range
of procedures. This is something that we are currently
pursuing.
In conclusion, this study provides support for the
hypothesis of Milton and Wills (2004) that their effect of
spatial separability on the prevalence of overall similarity
sorting was due to the fact that a deliberative strategy was
more likely to be applied for the spatially separable than the
spatially integrated stimuli. Our finding that overall
similarity sorting was modulated by spatial separability
under low time pressure but not under high time pressure
provides evidence that this effect only occurs when
participants have sufficient time in which to apply such an
effortful, multidimensional strategy. As such, this study
provides further support for the contention that overall
similarity sorting can be the result of a deliberative process.

Discussion
The present study investigated the effect that time
pressure has on the prevalence of overall similarity sorting
in two stimulus sets that varied in the level of spatial
integration of the stimulus dimensions. Specifically, we
tested the hypothesis of Milton and Wills (2004) that their
finding differential levels of overall similarity sorting
depending on the level of spatial integration of the stimulus
dimensions was due to an effortful, deliberative, strategy
being more likely for spatially separable stimuli. Our results
provided support for this explanation. We showed that,
consistent with Milton et al. (2008), participants under low
time pressure sorted by overall similarity to a significantly
greater extent than those under high time pressure. We also
found, in line with the results of Milton and Wills (2004),
that spatially separable stimuli resulted in a greater level of
overall similarity sorting than spatially integrated stimuli.
Additionally, and most importantly for the current purposes,
there was a significant interaction between time pressure
and the level of spatial integration for overall similarity
sorting. Specifically, we found that the spatial separability
effect was greater under low time pressure than under high
time pressure. This was indicated by the fact that the
spatially separable stimuli were sorted by overall similarity
to a significantly greater extent under low time pressure than
the spatially integrated stimuli but that this effect did not
approach significance under high time pressure. Indeed, it is
striking that for both the spatially integrated and the
spatially separable stimulus sets overall similarity sorting
was negligible in the high time pressure condition.
Our findings, then, indicate that it is possible to eliminate
the spatial integration effect found by Milton and Wills
(2004) if one constrains the amount of time available to
classify the stimuli. This experiment can therefore be
considered as part of a growing body of literature which
suggests that overall similarity sorting can be the result of
an effortful, deliberative, strategy (Milton et al., 2008;
Milton et al., 2009; Wills et al., submitted).
According to this account it should be possible to
introduce alternative manipulations that would similarly
modulate the spatial separability effect. In particular, if one
were to apply a moderate concurrent load (perhaps such as
used by Milton et al., 2008) one would also predict,
according to a deliberative account, that the spatial
separability effect would be reduced relative to a no load
condition. Similarly, the separability effect should be larger
when one instructs participants to sort in a deliberative
mindset relative to in a non-deliberative mindset.

799

Future research should aim to provide a greater
understanding regarding the precise interplay between the
deliberative and non-deliberative systems of overall
similarity sorting.

Milton, F., & Wills, A.J. (2004). The influence of stimulus
properties on category construction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 407-415.
Milton, F. & Wills, A.J. (2008). The influence of perceptual
difficulty on family resemblance sorting. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2273-2278). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Milton, F., & Wills, A. J. (2009). Long-term persistence of
sort strategy in free classification. Acta Psychologia, 130,
161-167.
Milton, F., Longmore, C.A., & Wills,A.J. (2008). Processes
of overall similarity sorting in free classification. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 34, 676-692.
Milton, F., Wills, A.J., & Hodgson, T.L. (2009). The neural
basis of overall similarity and single-dimension sorting.
Neuroimage, 46, 319-326.
Pothos, E. M., & Close, J. (2008). One or two dimensions in
spontaneous classification: A simplicity approach.
Cognition, 107(2), 581-602.
Raijmakers, M. E. J., Jansen, B. R. J., & van der Maas, H.
L. J. (2004). Rules and development in triad classification
performance. Developmental Review, 24, 289 – 321.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L.R. (1995). Category organization
in free classification: The organizing effect of an array of
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21, 347-363.
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The Empirical Case for Two Systems
of Reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Smith, J. D., & Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1984). Overall
similarity in adults' classification: The child in all of us.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 137 –
159.
Smith, L.B., & Kemler, D.G. (1978). Levels of experienced
dimensionality in children and adults. Cognitive
Psychology, 10, 502-532.
Spalding, T.L & Murphy, G.L. (1996). Effects of
background knowledge on category construction. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 525 – 538.
Ward, T. B. (1983). Response tempo and separable-integral
responding: Evidence for an integral-to-separable
processing sequence in visual perception. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 9, 103 – 112.
Ward, T. B., Foley, C. M., & Cole, J. (1986). Classifying
multidimensional stimuli: Stimulus, task, and observer
factors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 12, 211 – 225.
Wills, A.J., Milton, F.,& Longmore, C.A. (submitted).
Deliberative processing and overall similarity in free
classification.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Great Western Research
Initiative.

References
Ahn, W.K., & Medin, D. L. (1992). A two-stage model of
category construction. Cognitive Science, 16, 81 – 121.
Ashby, F. G., Queller, S., & Berretty, P. M. (1999). On the
dominance of unidimensional rules in unsupervised
categorization. Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 1178 –
1199.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A. (1956). A
Study of Thinking. New York: Wiley.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On Making the Right Choice: The
Deliberation-Without-Attention Effect. Science, 311,
1005-1007.
Foard, C.F., & Kemler Nelson, D.G. (1984). Holistic and
analytic modes of processing: The multiple determinants
of perceptual analysis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113, 94-111.
Garner, W.R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.
Handel, S., & Imai, S. (1972). The free classification of
analyzable and unanalyzable stimuli. Perception &
Psychophysics, 12, 108-116.
Imai, S. & Garner, W.R. (1965). Discriminability and
preference for attributes in free and constrained
classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69,
596 – 608.
Kemler, D. G. (1983). Exploring and reexploring issues of
integrality, perceptual sensitivity, and dimensional
salience. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 36,
365 – 379.
Kemler Nelson, D. G. (1984). The effect of intention on
what concepts are acquired. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 23, 734 – 759.
Kemler, D.G., & Smith, L.B. (1979). Accessing similarity
and dimensional relations: Effects of integrality and
separability on the discovery of complex concepts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 133150.
Lassaline, M. E., & Murphy, G. L. (1996). Induction and
category coherence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3,
95 – 99.
Medin, D.L., Wattenmaker, W.D., & Hampson, S.E. (1987).
Family resemblance, conceptual cohesiveness, and
category construction. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 242279.

800

