UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Relation between Finger Gnosis and Mathematical Ability: Can we Attribute Function to
Cortical Structure with Cross-Domain Modeling?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zp670g4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Penner-Wilger, Marcie
Anderson, Michael L.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Relation between Finger Gnosis and Mathematical Ability: Can we Attribute
Function to Cortical Structure with Cross-Domain Modeling?
Marcie Penner-Wilger (Marcie.Penner-Wilger@fandm.edu)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604 USA

Michael L. Anderson (michael.anderson@fandm.edu)

Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College, Lancaster, PA 17604 USA
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA
anatomically distinct brain areas (Bergeron, 2008). As
such, workings are neither consciously available nor
describable with higher-level psychological vocabulary.
Therefore, in contrast to the current practice in cognitive
neuroscience, workings should be described using
domain-independent vocabulary. Here, we adopt a
vocabulary drawn from information processing theory,
although certainly other possibilities (e.g. dynamic
systems theory) may turn out to be more appropriate to
the task (Anderson, 2007a).
According to the Massive Redeployment Hypothesis
(MRH; Anderson, 2010, 2007a,b) multiple workings, in
concert, compose higher-level cognitive uses, and a
typical brain area will contribute to many cognitive uses,
across domains, but perform the same working across
uses (Anderson, 2010). MRH straddles the middle ground
between localization and holism in that, although parts of
the brain are specialized (i.e., they always perform the
same working), this specialization is at the lower-order
level of cognitive workings (e.g., computations or
transformations) rather than that of higher order cognitive
uses. Anderson (2007a, p. 339) uses the analogy of
“finding the right letter to go into a box on a
(multidimensional) crossword puzzle” to describe the task
of determining a shared cognitive working. Thus,
knowing the many cognitive uses that a brain area
supports will help to determine what that brain area does.
Both Anderson (2010, 2007a,b) and Bergeron (2008)
advocate for the determination of shared cognitive
workings within and across domains as a method to
advance our understanding of high-level cognition and to
achieve the interdisciplinary goals of cognitive science.
The methodology of looking across domain boundaries
to determine the working of a brain area is not common in
cognitive neuroscience; activations are generally
attributed to processes specific to the domain under
investigation (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000). Cabeza and
Nyberg conclude, in a review of 275 imaging studies, “it
would be useful to systematically compare functional
neuroimaging data in different cognitive domains and to
develop general theories that account for the involvement
of brain regions in a variety of cognitive tasks” (Cabeza &
Nyberg, 2000, p. 31). One such working was proposed by
Hubbard et al. (2005): a computational transformation for
spatial updating implemented within the parietal sulcus.
This cognitive working is also thought to play a role in
another cognitive use: shifting attention along the mental
number line. It is hypothesized that the SNARC effect—

Abstract
This paper details and applies a novel method for assigning
function to local cortical structure. Imaging results from
multiple cognitive domains were used to investigate what a
shared neural substrate could be contributing to two
apparently different domains: finger and number
representation. We identified a region within the left
precentral gyrus contributing to both tasks; identified, across
several cognitive domains, other cognitive uses to which the
ROI may have been put; and looked across these cognitive
uses to ascertain the functional contribution of the ROI. The
result of this process is a proposed local working—an array of
pointers—that can be tested empirically and will allow for
further elaboration of the redeployment view of the relation
between finger and number representations. This work is
significant for understanding the relationship between finger
gnosis and math, and for introducing cross-domain modeling
as a new empirical method.
Keywords: number representation; finger representation;
neural substrate; exaptation; function-structure mapping;
localization; cross-domain modeling.

The Redeployment View
Finger gnosis or “finger sense” (indexed by the ability to
distinguish which fingers have been lightly touched
without visual feedback) is related to math ability (Fayol,
Barrouillet, & Marinthe, 1998; Noël, 2005; PennerWilger et al., 2007). In Penner-Wilger and Anderson
(2008) we elaborated a novel hypothesis regarding the
observed predictive relation between finger gnosis and
mathematical ability. In brief, we suggested that these
two cognitive capacities have overlapping neural
substrates, as the result of the re-use (“redeployment”) of
part of the finger gnosis circuit for the purpose of
representing number. On this redeployment view, the
neural circuitry shared between finger gnosis and number
representation forms one part of the functional complex
necessary for number representation. Along with the
neural circuit shared with finger gnosis, additional neural
circuits (with additional abstract functional capacities) are
expected to combine in support of the capacity for
number representation.
The crucial question that a shared neural circuit raises
is: What is the shared circuit doing for the different
functional complexes of which it is a part? What is the
working of this circuit that allows it to support tasks in
such apparently different cognitive domains?
In the framework we adopt here, workings represent
low-level operations that are performed by small,

2445

the finding that smaller numbers are responded to faster
with the left hand and larger numbers with the right
hand—arises as a result of this shared working.
Tettamanti and Weniger (2006) examined activation of
Broca’s area in a variety of cross-domain tasks with the
purpose of determining the shared working. Though
generally held to be a language area, responsible for
phonological processing and language production,
Broca’s area is also activated in non-linguistic domains
such as object manipulation, action perception, and music
(Tettamanti & Weniger, 2006). The authors examined the
existing imaging data, across domains, and concluded that
the cognitive working of Broca’s area “may be to process
hierarchical structures in a wide range of functional
domains” (p. 491). Such investigations illustrate how
looking across domain boundaries for shared workings
can help generate more specific proposals for those
workings, as well as potentially contribute to a better
understanding of the nature of high-level cognitive
domains and their relations.
In Penner-Wilger and Anderson (2008), one possible
shared working between finger and number representation
was suggested—a register. A register is a representational
form comprised of an ordered series of elements that can
be independently activated. Different patterns of
activation across the register reflect different
representational content. The suggestion of a register,
however, was based solely on the two domains of interest:
finger and number. In the current paper, imaging results
from multiple domains are used to more systematically
investigate the shared working. The steps in this process
were to (1) identify the brain area of interest; (2) identify,
across domains, other cognitive uses that the area of
interest supports; and (3) look across tasks and domains to
ascertain the shared working of the area of interest. The
final result of this process was a proposed shared working
that can be tested empirically (e.g., via interference
studies), and should generate a better, more accurate, and
more fruitful description of our representation of number
and its relation to other domains.

condition involved solving two-digit by two-digit
multiplication problems with a product less than 1000.
Stimuli were presented visually and participants
responded verbally.
The most relevant subtraction for the present purposes
is the conjunction of compute and retrieve conditions
minus the read condition, as number representations are
accessed for both single and multi-digit arithmetic. The
conjunction analysis isolates the common neural
activation for the two arithmetic tasks over and above
activation associated with the control (i.e., read)
condition. The area of interest is significantly activated in
all three comparisons. Thus, the ROI for investigation of
the shared working between finger and number
representation is taken to be within the left precentral
gyrus centered on coordinates (-42, 0, 38) ± 6 mm.

Identifying, Across Domains, Other Cognitive
Uses that the Region of Interest Supports
Identification, across domains, of other cognitive uses that
the ROI supports was accomplished using (1) existing
neuroscience results of shared brain areas in number and
finger representation from Step 1, and (2) the ActionGrounded Cognition Lab’s (www.agcognition.org)
database of post-subtraction activations for 2164 studies
from 692 journal articles (Anderson, Brumbaugh, &
Suben, 2010). All studies in the database were conducted
with healthy adult participants. Areas of activation
recorded in the database reflect greater neural activation
in the noted region for a given condition compared to a
baseline or other comparison as noted (i.e. postsubtraction activations as reported in the original papers).
The output of the database search included the
following information for experiments reporting postsubtraction activation with a center inside the ROI within
the left precentral gyrus: publication citation, domain (i.e.,
action, cognition, emotion, interoception, perception, etc.)
and sub-domain (e.g., attention, language, memory, etc.)
based on the BrainMap database classification system
(Laird, Lancaster, & Fox, 2005), imaging method,
Talairach coordinates and Brodmann area of each
recorded activation, relative placement within the
Brodmann area, and the subtraction used to generate the
results (Anderson, Brumbaugh, & Suben, 2010). Finding
that our region of interest was activated in tasks across
domain boundaries would provide further support for
MRH. Investigation of the output of the database search at
the levels of domain, sub-domain, and the relevant tasks
and subtractions used was necessary to guide and
constrain identification of a proposed shared working.

Identifying the Brain Region of Interest
The brain region of interest is taken from the PET study
of Zago et al. (2001), who reported activation in the left
precentral gyrus at the coordinates for finger
representation during adults’ performance of both singledigit and multi-digit multiplication. This same area within
the left precentral gyrus was also activated during singledigit multiplication (Dehaene et al., 1996), single-digit
addition (de Jong et al, 1996; Pesenti et al., 2000), number
comparison (Dehaene et al., 1996; Pinel, Piazza, LeBihan
& Dehaene, 2004), and symbolic and non-symbolic exact
and approximate addition with dots (Venkatraman, Ansari
& Chee, 2005). Thus, the selected ROI is activated across
a range of numerical formats and tasks.
Zago et al. had four conditions: rest, read, retrieve, and
compute. The read condition involved reading pairs of
Arabic digits, which were composed of zeros and ones.
The retrieve condition involved solving single-digit
multiplication problems from 2 x 2 to 5 x 6. The compute

Results. The results of the database search provided 65

studies and 80 subtractions showing post-subtraction
activation within the region of interest in the left
precentral gyrus. Of the subtractions, 11 were in the
domain of action, 60 in cognition, 2 in emotion, and 7 in
perception. Within the domain of action, four were in the
sub-domain of execution, five in inhibition, and one in
each of imagination and preparation. Within the domain
of cognition, 20 were in the sub-domain of attention
(including four in visual attention), 16 in language (one in

2446

orthography, two in phonology, nine in semantics, and
four in speech), 2 in mathematics, and 20 in memory
(seven in explicit memory and ten in working memory)
and one in each of time and theory of mind. Within the
domain of perception, two were in audition, one in
somesthesis, and four in vision. Thus, consistent with
Anderson’s (2010) MRH, the region of interest was
involved in varied cognitive uses across domains.

compared to cue switching, where two cues indicated the
same action (Brass & von Cramon, 2004) or to direct
mapping between cue and task (Dassonville et al., 2001).
Increased activation was found for the incongruent
compared to neutral condition in Stroop paradigms (Liu et
al., 2006; Norris et al., 2002). Increased activation was
also found for antisaccades compared to controlled
saccades or fixation—in the antisaccade task participants
are required to direct their gaze to a mirror-symmetrical
location in the opposite visual field of the target, requiring
response inhibition (Chikazoe et al., 2007; Connolly et al.,
2000) as well as for anti-pointing (Connolly et al., 2000).
Thus, task switching/response inhibition is one cognitive
use associated with our shared working of interest. Task
switching requires, among other things, representation of
the response sets (tasks) and some means of mapping cues
to response sets.
In six papers (10 subtractions), order tasks showed
activation in the ROI. Executing saccades to a sequence
of memorized locations, compared to rest (Heide et al.,
2001; Petit et al., 1996), correct hits in deciding whether
the first and last letter of a word were in alphabetical
order compared to misses (Henson et al., 2005), in an
order-memory task following presentation of five letters
compared to an item-memory task (Marshuetz et al.,
2000), and in spatial and non-spatial n-back tests, where
participants are asked to recall items presented n-items
previously, compared to indicating which object changed
luminance or recalling items presented 0-back (Owen et
al., 1998; Ragland et al., 2002). Thus, storage and recall
of order information is one cognitive use associated with
our shared working of interest. Order tasks require,
among other things, some means of representing
information in an ordered form.
In summary, the cognitive uses for our ROI include:
finger representation, number representation, category
representation,
task
representation,
and
order
representation. Note we are not claiming that this ROI is
the only region that performs these various tasks, for
instance that it plays some unique, unduplicated role in
task switching. Rather, these are the various conditions
under which we have observed increased activation in our
ROI. Given the brain area of interest here, and the
cognitive uses the area supports, our goal is to look across
uses to see if it is possible to identify a shared working—
some cognitive resource it provides that would account
for its contribution to all these various tasks.

Looking Across Cognitive Uses to Ascertain the
Shared Working of the Region of Interest
Given the variety of domains, sub-domains, tasks, and
subtractions that showed activation in our ROI within the
left precentral gyrus, the challenge was to glean the
underlying shared working. The output of such an
endeavor should be a low-level cognitive working,
described in domain-neutral vocabulary, which the
different cognitive uses could plausibly benefit from
incorporating.
The region of interest was activated in expected tasks
including number comparison (Gobel et al., 2004; Liu et
al., 2006) and mental representation of fingers (KuhtzBushbeck et al., 2003; Jancke et al., 2000; Numminen et
al., 2004), confirming that this area is involved in both
cognitive uses. In examining the variety of cognitive uses
that share common activation in the ROI, three additional
themes emerged: generation (e.g., generate items in a
given category), inhibition (e.g., incongruent Stroop
condition, anti-saccade, response inhibition), and order
(e.g., n-back task, performing memorized sequences of
saccades, judging alphabetical or sequential order).
Further examination of tasks within each theme was
undertaken as a means to both guide and constrain the
proposed shared working.
In nine papers (10 subtractions), generation tasks
showed activation in the ROI. Increased activation was
found when participants covertly generated words within
a given category, compared to rest (Frankenstein, Richter,
Mcintyre, & Remy, 2001; Tremblay & Gracco, 2006) or
compared to listing numbers (Pihlajamaki et al., 2000).
Increased activation was found for generation of related
verbs when participants were shown nouns, relative to
fixation or rest (Drobyshevsky, Baumann & Schneider,
2006; Hamzei et al., 2001) and also found when
participants produced verbs, compared to nouns, in the
context of short phrases or sentences (Shapiro, Moo, &
Caramazza, 2006). Increased activation was found for the
generation of neutral words relative to emotional words
(Cato et al., 2004). Thus, word generation is one cognitive
use associated with our shared working of interest. Word
generation requires, among other things, representation of
the category of items to be generated, mapping between
category and items, and some means of keeping track of
items already generated.
In thirteen papers (16 subtractions), inhibition tasks
showed activation in the ROI. Increased activation was
found in task switching conditions compared to task
repetition (Cools, Clark, & Robbins, 2004; Dove et al.,
2000). Increased activation was also found in task
switching, where the meaning of the cue switched,

Proposal for a Shared Working
Given the shared uses from the database search, the
specifications for a shared working are: that it allows for
ordered storage of discrete representations and for
mapping between representational forms. Does our initial
proposal of a register (Penner-Wilger & Anderson, 2008)
meet these updated requirements? A register does provide
ordered storage (the reason for our initial proposal). A
register, however, does not provide a means for mapping.
One possibility is that our ROI performs storage and
another shared region performs mapping, in which case a
register would be a plausible shared working. Another

2447

possibility is that our selected ROI did not pick out a
small, anatomically-distinct brain area and, therefore, is
large enough to encompass two or more workings, one of
which could again plausibly be a register. The third
possibility is that our ROI did successfully pick out a
small, anatomically-distinct brain area that performs one
working, but that this working is more complex than our
original proposal and performs both the storage and the
mapping. This final possibility is addressed for the
duration of the paper.
One computational unit that could implement both the
ordered storage and mapping requirements is an array of
pointers. An array is an ordered group, meeting the
requirements for ordered storage. A pointer is a data
structure that designates a memory location and can
indicate different data types. The added functionality in
this proposed working comes not from the array, as our
proposed register could easily have instead been
described as an array, but from what the array contains.
An array of pointers allows for storage and access of
ordered elements, which are able to point to—or index—
representations or locations in memory, allowing for
mapping between different representational forms. Thus,
an array of pointers would allow for the ordered storage
of different types of information and would facilitate the
mapping between representations.
In finger representation, an array of pointers could hold
distinct ordered representations for each finger. In number
representation, an array of pointers could hold
representations of discrete numbers (not limited to values
≤10), ordered by magnitude, across different
representational forms: non-symbolic and number words,
numerals, etc. This structure could support number
comparison, but also numerical estimation—as estimation
involves translating between alternative representations.
Imaging evidence shows the ROI is activated for both
tasks. In generation tasks, an array of pointers could store
category items and map from categories to items. In task
switching, the array could point to the different task
demands and map cues to response sets. In order tasks, as
in number and finger representation, the array could store
ordered information (e.g., alphabet, sequence of
movements, etc.). Thus, each cognitive use could benefit
from a shared working in the form of an array of pointers.
In summary, the results of the cross-domain
investigation lead to further specification of the proposed
shared working, from a register (Penner-Wilger &
Anderson, 2008) to an array of pointers. The function of
pointers is similar to one of the physical functions of the
fingers. It would thus not be implausible to suppose that
this basic function of the fingers was supported by a brain
mechanism wherein representational content is
determined by the object being indexed, rather than the
state of the indicator per se. An array of pointers—one
part of the functional complex supporting finger gnosis—
would be a candidate for redeployment in any laterdeveloping complex with functional elements able to take
advantage of a component with this abstract functional
structure. We suggest that the number representation
complex did just that.

We should pause here to admit that if one were
modeling the finger gnosis complex in isolation it is
unlikely that an array of pointers implementation for one
of its components would leap out as the obvious choice.
One of the important general implications of MRH is that
one should not model functional complexes in isolation,
but should consider what other complexes may also be
using the same neural substrates. The effect of this
change in methodology is often to suggest novel
decompositions (and candidate implementations) of
cognitive functions. And yet this general suggestion of a
pointer structure is not unprecedented or neurally
implausible. In fact, such a structure is consistent with
the semantic pointer architecture, a recent elaboration of
the Neural Engineering Framework (Eliasmith &
Anderson, 2003). According to this theory, some neural
networks implement semantic pointers, composable
neural representations with partial semantic content that
play an important role in integrating information for
higher-order cognition.
How can the same working, in this case an array of
pointers, be used to support diverse types of
representations across uses? For our proposed working,
the representational power is associated both with the
properties of the array, including (1) which ordered
elements in the array are bound (i.e. pointing to or
indexing something) and which are not (i.e., are free), and
(2) the representational flexibility inherent in the structure
of the array, as well as with the properties of the pointers,
including (3) what the pointers are indexing (i.e., bound
to). The full content of the representation depends on all
three properties. Across different uses, tasks, and
contexts, the same working can be used to represent
vastly different content by altering any one of these
properties of the array or pointers. This distinction is more
broadly captured by the distinction between the
representation itself and the representation consumer
(Millikan, 1984). Depending on how the representation
consumer is tuned, it might be sensitive to: whether there
are bound elements, how many bound elements there are,
the particular ordering of the bound elements (and there is
great flexibility here, depending on how the order is
exploited for content), the individual index content of the
pointers, the overall unordered content, the overall
ordered content.

Figure 1: Illustration of array of pointers structure
The same working, an array of pointers, could support
different forms of numerical representation (e.g., Arabic
digits, number words, etc.). Doing so would require
binding of the indexed content of the pointers to different
locations. Other properties of the array, however, could
remain constant. This rebinding would incur costs
associated with switching the indexed location as well as
reading the new value. As shown in Figure 1, this same

2448

working could also support diverse representations such
as fingers, items in a category, response sets, or an
ordered list of spatial locations. Switching between item
classes would again require binding of the indexed
content of the pointers to different locations, but would
also likely involve differences in the other properties of
the array such as the number of elements in the array and
number of bound elements. Precise modeling of the
various steps involved in different sorts of
task/representation switching will allow for specific
reaction-time predictions in each case (e.g. which kinds of
switching will take more, and which less time; and also
how the time needed will change with variations in the
number of items being tracked). We are exploring such
properties, having built and currently testing a model of
number representation using the novel candidate
implementation described here in artificial spiking
neurons based on the Neural Engineering Framework
(Eliasmith & Anderson, 2003).

Cabeza, R. & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition II:
An empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1 – 47.
Cato, M. A., Crosson, B., Gökçay, D., Soltysik, D.,
Wierenga, C., Gopinath, K., Himes, N., Belanger, H.,
Bauer , R.M., Fischler, I.S., Gonzalez-Rothi, L., &
Briggs, R.W. (2004). Processing words with emotional
connotation: an fMRI study of time course and
laterality in rostral frontal and retrosplenial cortices.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 167-177.
Chikazoe, J., Konishi, S., Asari, T., Jimura, K., &
Miyashita, Y. (2007). Activation of right inferior
frontal gyrus during response inhibition across response
modalities. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 6980.
Connolly, J. D., Goodale, M. A., DeSouza, J. F., Menon,
R. S., & Vilis, T. (2000). A comparison of
frontoparietal fMRI activation during anti-saccades and
anti-pointing. Journal of Neurophysiology, 64, 16451655.
Cools, R., Clark, L., & Robbins, T. W. (2004).
Differential responses in human striatum and prefrontal
cortex to changes in object and rule relevance. Journal
of Neuroscience, 24, 1129-1135.
Dassonville, P., Lewis, S. M., Zhu, X. H., Ugurbil, K.,
Kim, S. G., & Ashe, J. (2001). The effect of stimulusresponse compatibility on cortical motor activation.
NeuroImage, 13, 1-14.
Dehaene, S., Tzourio, N., Frak, V., Raynaud, L., Cohen,
L., Mehler, J., & Mazoyer, B. (1996). Cerebral
activations during number multiplication and
comparison: A PET study. Neuropsychologia, 34,
1097-1106.
de Jong, B. M., van Zomeren, A. H., Willemsen, A. T.
M., & Paans, A. M. J. (1996). Brain activity related to
serial cognitive performance resembles circuitry of
higher order motor control. Experimental Brain
Research, 109, 136 – 140.
Dove, A., Pollmann, S., Schubert, T., Wiggins, C. J., &
von Cramon, D. (2000). Prefrontal cortex activation in
task switching: An event-related fMRI study. Cognitive
Brain Research, 9, 103-109.
Drobyshevsky, A., Baumann, S. B., & Schneider, W.
(2006). A rapid fMRI task battery for mapping of
visual, motor, cognitive, and emotional function.
NeuroImage, 31, 732-744.
Eliasmith, C., & Anderson, C. H. (2003). Neural
engineering: Computation, representation, and
dynamics in neurobiological systems. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fayol, M., Barrouillet, P., & Marinthe, C. (1998).
Predicting arithmetical achievement from neuropsychological performance: A longitudinal study.
Cognition, 68, B63-B70.
Frankenstein, U. N., Richter, W., McIntyre, M. C., &
Remy, F. (2001). Distraction modulates anterior
cingulate gyrus activations during the cold pressor test.
NeuroImage, 14, 827-836.
Göbel, S.M., Johansen-Berg, H., Behrens, T., &
Rushwort, M. F. S. (2004). Response-selection-related

Conclusion
In conclusion, the relation between finger gnosis and
math ability may be the result of redeployment of a neural
substrate that supports both finger gnosis and the
representation of number, along with a variety of other
uses. Our current findings, based on the outlined crossdomain structure-function mapping methodology, suggest
that the shared resource may be implementing an array of
pointers. This shared working suggests a novel
decomposition (and candidate implementation) of number
representation. We hope that the methodology of
investigating overlapping functional complexes rather
than modeling in isolation will be a fruitful addition to the
field of cognitive science, serving as a provisional model
for a new, more integrative approach to functional
localization.

References
Anderson, M.L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental
organizational principle of the brain. (Target article)
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(4): 245-66.
Anderson, M. L. (2007a). Massive redeployment,
exaptation, and the functional integration of cognitive
operations. Synthese, 159, 329-345.
Anderson, M. L. (2007b). Evolution of cognitive function
via redeployment of brain areas. The Neuroscientist, 13,
13-21.
Anderson, M.L., Brumbaugh, J. & Suben, A. (2010).
Investigating functional cooperation in the human brain
using simple graph-theoretic methods.
In W.
Chaovalitwongse, P. Pardalos and P. Xanthopoulos,
eds. (Eds.), Computational Neuroscience. Springer.
Bergeron, V. (2008). Cognitive architecture and the
brain: beyond domain-specific functional specification.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Brass, M. & von Cramon, D. Y. (2004). Decomposing
components of task preparation with functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16, 609-620.

2449

parietal activation during number comparison. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 1536-1551.
Hamzei, F., Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., Glauche, V.,
Weiller, C., & Buchel, C. (2003). The human action
recognition system and its relationship to Broca's area:
An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 19, 637-644.
Hanakawa, T., Honda, M., Sawamoto, N., Okada, T.,
Yonekura, Y., Fukuyama, H., & Shibasaki, H. (2002).
The role of rostral Brodmann area 6 in mentaloperation tasks: An integrative neuroimaging approach.
Cerebral Cortex, 12, 1157-70.
Heide, W., Binkofski, F., Seitz, R. J., Posse, S., Nitschke,
M. F., Freund, H. J., & Kompf, D. (2001). Activation of
frontoparietal cortices during memorized triple-step
sequences of saccadic eye movements: An fMRI study.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 1177-1189.
Henson, R.N.A., Hornberger, M., & Rugg, M.D. (2005).
Further dissociating the process involved in recognition
memory: An fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 17, 1058-1073.
Hubbard, E. M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in
parietal cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci, 6, 435 - 448.
Jancke, L., Loose, R., Lutz, K., Specht, K., & Shah, N. J.
(2000). Cortical activations during paced finger-tapping
applying visual and auditory pacing stimuli. Cognitive
Brain Research, 10, 51-66.
Kuhtz-Buschbeck, J. P., Mahnkopf, C., Holzknecht, C.,
Siebner, H. R., Ulmer, S., & Jansen, O. (2003).
Effector-independent representations of simple and
complex imagined finger movements: A combined
fMRI and TMS study.
European Journal of
Neuroscience, 18, 3375-3387.
Laird, A.R., Lancaster, J.L., & Fox, P.T. (2005).
BrainMap: The social evolution of a functional
neuroimaging database. Neuroinformatics 3, 65-78.
Liu, X., Wang, H., Corbly, C. R., , Zhang, J., & Joseph, J.
E. (2006). The involvement of the inferior parietal
cortex in the numerical stroop effect and the distance
effect in a two-digit number comparison task. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1518-1530.
Marshuetz, C., Smith, E.E., Jonides, J., DeGutis, J., &
Chenevert, T.L. (2000). Order information in working
memory: fMRI Evidence for parietal and orefrontal
mechanisms. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12:
Supplement 2, 130-144.
Millikan, R. (1984). The language of thought and other
biological categories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Noël, M.-P. (2005). Finger gnosia: A predictor of
numerical abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology,
11, 413-430.
Norris, D. G., Zysset, S., Mildner, T., & Wiggins, C. J.
(2002). An investigation of the value of spin-echobased fMRI using a Stroop color-word matching task
and EPI at 3 T. NeuroImage, 15, 719-726.
Numminen, J., Schurmann, M., Hiltunen, J., Joensuu, R.,
Jousmaki, V., Koskinen, S. K., Salmelin, R., & Hari, R.
(2004). Cortical activation during a spatiotemporal
tactile comparison task. NeuroImage, 22, 815-821.
Owen, A. M., Stern, C. E., Look, R. B., Tracey, I., Rosen,

B. R., & Petrides, M. (1998). Functional organization
of spatial and nonspatial working memory processing
within the human lateral frontal cortex. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.
Penner-Wilger, M., & Anderson, M.L. (2008), An
alternative view of the relation between finger gnosis
and math ability: Redeployment of finger
representations for the representation of number. In
B.C. Love, K. McRae & V.M. Sloutsky (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1647–1652). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J., Smith-Chant, B.
L., Skwarchuk, S., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J. (2007).
The foundations of numeracy: Subitizing, finger gnosia,
and fine-motor ability. In D. S. McNamara & J. G.
Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1385-1390). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Pesenti, M., Thioux, M., Seron, X., & De Volder, A.
(2000). Neuroanatomical substrate of Arabic number
processing, numerical comparison and simple addition:
A PET study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12,
461-479.
Petit, L., Orssaud, C., Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Crivello, F.,
Berthoz, A., & Mazoyer, B. (1996). Functional
anatomy of a prelearned sequence of horizontal
saccades in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 16,
3714-3726.
Pihlajamaki, M., Tanila, H., Hanninen, T., Kononen, M.,
Laakso, M., Partanen, K., Soininen, H., & Aronen, H. J.
(2000). Verbal fluency activates the left medial
temporal lobe: A functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. Annals of Neurology, 47, 470-476.
Pinel, P., Piazza, M., LeBihan, D., & Dehaene, S. (2004).
Distributed and overlapping cerebral representations of
number size and luminance during comparative
judgements. Neuron, 41, 983-993.
Ragland, J. D., Turetsky, B. I., Gur, R. C., GunningDixon, F., Turner, T., Schroeder, L., Chan, R., & Gur,
R. E. (2002). Working memory for complex figures:
An fMRI comparison of letter and fractal n-back tasks.
Neuropsychology, 16, 370-379.
Shapiro, K. A., Moo, L. R., & Caramazza, A. (2006).
Cortical signatures of noun and verb production.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103,
1644-1649.
Tettamanti, M. & & Weniger, D. (2006). Broca’s area: a
supramodal hierarchical processor? Cortex, 42, 491 –
494.
Tremblay, P., & Gracco, V. L. (2006). Contribution of the
frontal lobe to externally and internally specified verbal
responses: fMRI evidence. NeuroImage, 33, 947-957.
Venkatraman, V., Ansari, D., & Chee, M.W.L. (2005).
Neural correlates of symbolic and non-symbolic
arithmetic, Neuropsychologia, 43, 744-53.
Zago, L., Pesenti, M., Mellet, E., Crivello, F., Mazoyer,
B., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2001). Neural correlates of
simple and complex mental calculation. NeuroImage,
13, 314-327.

2450

