UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Autism Spectrum Disorder on the Categorisation of External Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mp2367b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Grawemeyer, Beate
Johnson, Hilary
Brosnan, Mark
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Autism Spectrum Disorder on the Categorisation of External
Representations
Beate Grawemeyer (b.grawemeyer@bath.ac.uk)1, Hilary Johnson (h.johnson@bath.ac.uk)1,
Mark Brosnan (m.j.brosnan@bath.ac.uk)2, Emma Ashwin (e.l.ashwin@bath.ac.uk)2,
Laura Benton (l.j.benton@bath.ac.uk)1
1

Human-Computer Interaction Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Bath
2
Department of Psychology, University of Bath
Bath, BA2 7AY, UK
Abstract

The knowledge structures and reasoning processes that
underlie the use of external representations (ERs) in
individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are not well
understood. This paper compares the organisation of
knowledge of ERs in young people with a diagnosis of ASD
and an age-matched typically developing control group. ASD
and non-ASD participants (twenty-eight in each group) were
given an untimed ER card-sorting task. The ERs were based
on representations used in educational software, for example
graphs, charts, and text. Cluster analysis of the card sort task
revealed similar clusters for both groups: maps, drawings,
text, graphs and charts, and network and tree diagrams.
However, comparison of the card sorts of the two different
groups showed a difference in ‘basic level’ categories. While
in the non-ASD group, maps and non-maps were the most
distinctive category, analysis of the ASD cluster revealed, in
addition, another ‘basic level’ category of textual
representations. These results are discussed in relation to
theories of information processing in autism. Our ultimate
research aim is to develop educational software tailored to the
specific needs of users with ASD. We wish to use our
research results to inform requirements for the development
of such educational software, in which ERs are able to
support differences in information processing for individuals
with ASD.
Keywords: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD); external
representations; categorisation; organisation.

Introduction
To investigate aspects of knowledge of external
representations (ERs) which influence their usability, we
examined the clustering of ERs by young people with and
without autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
As more children are diagnosed with ASD, there is a need
to develop software (particularly the user interface) that
takes into account the specific needs of individuals affected
by ASD. Current estimates suggest that 1% of the
population have a diagnosis of ASD, which includes autism
and Asperger’s Syndrome (Baird et al., 2006). The
characteristics that are associated with ASD include
impairments in social reciprocity and language
development, restricted (obsessional) interests, and
repetitive behaviour (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 2000).
In order to inform the design criteria for effective and
efficient user interfaces for those with ASD, particularly

their textual and visual aspects, we were interested to
explore how the differences in cognitive abilities in
individuals with ASD impacted upon the usability of ERs.
Here, ERs are defined as representations, used in
educational software and diagrammatic reasoning, including
graphs, charts, text, drawings, maps, network diagrams and
tree diagrams.
Research has shown that ASD is related to an imbalance
in cognitive abilities. For example, Minshew and Goldstein
(2001) have shown that individuals with ASD have
relatively weaker language skills. In contrast, other studies
have reported that spatial cognition in ASD might be intact
or even superior to that of individuals without ASD (Kamio
and Toichi, 2000; Caron et al., 2004). This implies that
spatial reasoning within ASD might be preferred, and of
higher utility.
Research indicates that individuals with ASD might
represent information internally in different ways to those
without ASD, in order to compensate for certain impaired
brain areas (Jolliffe and Baron-Cohen, 2001). The difference
in how information is internally represented might impact
the way information is processed. For example, Mottron et
al. (2006) describe how individuals with ASD may process
and perceive visual information differently, based upon a
different organisation of the visual regions of the brain.
Matessa (2008) proposes a cognitive model in which the
reduced declarative function associated with ASD is
compensated by a ‘visual module’, where for example,
mental imagery processing is used for sentence
comprehension (e.g. Grandin, 1995; Kana et al., 2006). As
described by Kunda and Goel (2008), the bias towards
visual processing in individuals with ASD may explain
differences in cognition.
The above research in ASD might imply that weaker
language skills and a deficit in text processing in ASD
might be a result of a lack of declarative processing which is
not fully compensated by visual processing. If this is the
case, user interface design for ASD individuals needs to
accommodate this difference. In particular, ERs need to be
developed which support and enhance visual processing of
text, implying that interfaces for individuals with ASD
should be guided by specific requirements. These may differ
to those aimed at individuals without ASD.
This paper reports the results of an ER card sort study,
focusing on a number of relevant issues: participants’

2202

perception of similarity and dissimilarity of ERs; the level
of difficulty in understanding different ERs reported by
participants; and their preferences for different types of ERs.
These issues will be discussed in respect to differences in
information processing in ASD and non-ASD individuals.

Each group was enrolled (respectively) in specialist and
non-specialist schools, in years 7, 8 and 9 of the UK
curriculum. Every effort was made to include schools that
were of a similar socioeconomic status. All schools were
urban and non-faith. Additionally, neither of the schools
were fee paying nor impoverished schools.

Design and materials

Hypotheses

Participants’ knowledge of ERs (their view of which ERs
were similar and belonged together) was assessed by a card
sort task.
The ER stimuli were based on a card sort task developed
by Cox and Grawemeyer (2003) and Cox et al. (2004), who
examined ER clustering by typical adults. For the study
reported in this paper, the original ER stimuli were adapted
in view of participants’ younger age range. The types of
ERs deployed as stimuli were based on ERs used within
educational software and diagrammatic reasoning for young
people between 11 and 15 years of age. Additionally, the
number of cards was limited to 40, as it was found that the
time spent to sort and organise a higher number would be
too great for young people.
Figure 1 shows examples of the ER stimuli that were used
in this study.

Our research aim is to investigate differences in the
effectiveness and efficiency of ERs between young people
with and without ASD. Specifically, we explore the
following three hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1:
Young people with and without ASD will show discernable
differences on the perception of similarity and dissimilarity
of ERs. Individuals with ASD will perceive the visual
features of textual representations, reflecting a bias towards
visual processing, whereas individuals without ASD will
perceive text in ways that reflects declarative processing.
Hypothesis 2:
For young people with ASD the perception of how easy or
difficult an ER is to understand will depend on how far the
ER supports visual processing. The perception of
individuals without ASD will be less dependant on the ERs
ability to enable visual processing.
Hypothesis 3:
Young people with ASD will show a strong preference for
ERs that enhance spatial reasoning, whereas ERs that
restrain visual processing will be least preferred. These
preferences will be different or less distinctive in individuals
without ASD.
To address these hypotheses we conducted an ER card sort
task. By means of this task, participants’ perception of
similarity and dissimilarity of ERs and their ER knowledge
structure can be made explicit. Card sorts have been used as
a technique for eliciting and structuring expert knowledge
(e.g. Schreiber et al, 1999). Using card sorts, Minshew et al.
(2002) suggest that there are differences in category
formation in ASD.

Figure 1: ER examples used in the card sort task (40 stimuli
in total)

Methodology
Participants
The study involved 28 high-functioning young people with
ASD (24 male; 4 female) aged between 11-15; and 28
young people without ASD (18 male; 10 female) aged
between 11-14.
The groups were matched on age, mathematical ability
(according to the UK maths curriculum years 7-9, Key
Stage 3), and verbal ability (Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of
Intelligence).

Each ER was mounted on a 12.5cm by 7.5cm white card
that was numbered on the reverse.
The 40 cards utilised different representations that were
primarily used for educational purposes and in educational
software, carefully chosen for use in this study. The ERs
included graphs, charts, text, mathematical notations,
drawings, maps, network diagrams and tree diagrams. The
primary aim was to see how the cards were classified and
distinguished by the two populations.

2203

Tasks

were just under 20 units apart, whereas those clusters were
only around 7 units apart within the non-ASD group.
Also, the ASD group clustered maths notations with
network/tree diagrams and graphs and charts. This contrasts
with the non-ASD group, which includes maths with textual
representations.
However, in both groups drawings and non-drawings
clusters were between 10 and 15 units apart, whereas the
remainder of the clusters (network and tree diagrams, as
well as graphs and charts) in both groups showed a scaled
distance close to 5 units or lower, which included the
text/math cluster distinction within the non-ASD group at a
distance of around 7 units.

For each participant the 40 cards were shuffled and
presented in a random order. Participants were instructed:
“Here is a stack of representations. I would like you to sort
them into different piles, each representing a particular
category. You decide on what the categories are, and how
many. I would like you to label your categories when you
have finished. After you have given each of your piles a
name I would like you to write down a number from 1 to 10
of how easy it is to understand the category. 1 is easy to
understand and 10 is difficult to understand.”
In order to identify preferences for particular ER types,
participants were asked, at the end of the session: “Which
out of the cards did you like the most and why. Which one
did you like the least and why.”

Data collection
The clusters participants created were recorded along with
the cluster’s name, as well as the representations in each
cluster (using the relevant card number from reverse).
Additionally, participants’ ratings of how easily the ERs
within a cluster could be understood, and the most and least
liked ER, were also noted.

Results
ER cluster analysis
From participants’ card sorts a similarity matrix for each
group was created, which was then input to the SPSS
CLUSTER procedure to produce a hierarchical cluster
analysis.
One participant from the ASD group was excluded from
the analysis, as s/he created only one cluster, justifying each
ER with his/her own reason why it should belong to the
cluster, which kept changing as s/he went through the pile of
cards.
Figure 2 shows the resulting dendrograms from the
analysis (‘Rescaled Distance Cluster Combined’) for the
ASD and non-ASD groups, respectively. The dendrograms
represent the result of applying complete linkage clustering
(agglomerative clustering) to a set of individual items. The
clusters are arranged hierarchically with single clusters at
the root and individual items at the leaves. The horizontal
scale (scaled distance) indicates the distance between the
clusters being merged. For example, for both groups map
and non-map clusters are 25 units apart.
It can be seen that, overall, both groups showed similar
clusters: maps, drawings, text, graphs and charts, and
network and tree diagrams. However, looking at the clusters
at the scaled distance of 15, it can be seen that for the ASD
group the major clusters were: 1. Maps; 2. Text, 3.
Drawings, graphs, charts, network diagrams and tree
diagrams. In contrast the non-ASD clusters were: 1. Maps,
2. Drawings, text, graphs, charts, network diagrams and tree
diagrams. For the ASD group text and non-text clusters

Figure 2: Dendrograms of participants’ ER clusters for the
ASD group (left), and the non-ASD group (right).

Rating of ER types
Looking at the individual representations that participants
clustered together, and the ratings of how difficult
participants thought the clusters were to understand (where
1 is easy and 10 is difficult), Table 1 shows means, standard
deviations and medians of clusters that include the different
representation types1.
On average, both groups rated clusters that included maps
similarly, as the easiest to understand. They also rated
textual representations and mathematical notations
similarly: as the most difficult to understand.
However, a difference between the groups can be seen in
how graphs and charts were perceived. The ASD group
perceived those representations easier to understand than the
non-ASD group.

1

Please note that the representation types are not the different
clusters participants created.

2204

Table 1: Participants’ rating of clusters that include the different ER types.
ER type
Maps
Graphs and charts
Trees and networks
Text
Maths
Drawings

ASD
Mean
3.80
4.25
4.45
4.72
4.77
4.30

SD
2.75
2.96
2.92
3.04
3.28
2.84

Non-ASD
Mean
3.71
4.66
4.67
4.96
4.71
4.06

Median
3.00
3.50
5.00
5.00
4.00
4.00

SD
2.44
2.06
2.13
2.46
2.58
2.40

Median
3.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
5.00
4.00

Preferences
Participants were asked to identify an ER that they liked
most and one they liked least out of the 40 stimuli, and to
give a reason why. During this task, 5 participants within
the ASD group were unable to identify a preferred ER.
Also, one participant within the non-ASD and 6 participants
in the ASD group failed to identify a representation that
they liked least.
Figure 3 shows the categories of the preferred ERs. It is
interesting to see that both groups preferred maps most (11
out of 23 within ASD; 12 out of 28 within non-ASD).

Figure 4: Least preferred representation types.
The explanations given by participants as to why they
preferred a particular representation included, for example
this from a participant in the ASD group: “I like this map,
because it is a picture of Cornwall, where I go on holiday”.
An explanation given by a participant in the non-ASD group
was: “I like this drawing, it is like a picture – easy to
understand”. The explanations given for least preferred ERs
included, for example from a participant in the ASD group
regarding a textual representation: “Looks really boring and
complicated.” Another comment from the ASD group was:
“don’t like English”. Comments from participants without
ASD regarding maths included: “I don’t like maths” or that
representation “looks complicated”.

Figure 3: Most preferred representation types.
Within both groups, participants expressed preferences
across the different ER types. Remarkably, no participant of
the non-ASD group expressed a preference for an ER that
included mathematical notations.
Figure 4 shows the least preferred representations for the
ASD and non-ASD group. While the ASD group preferred
text least (7 out of 22), the non-ASD group mainly disliked
mathematical notations (8 out of 27).
Turning to the distribution of the least and most preferred
ERs, 4 out of the 7 participants in the ASD group that
preferred text the least, preferred maps the most. In contrast,
in the non-ASD group, 5 out of 6 participants who preferred
text least, preferred drawings the most.

Discussion
The results indicate that high-functioning young people with
ASD share many similarities to young people without ASD.
We discuss possible explanations for our findings below.

ER clusters
In respect of our first hypothesis that there will be
discernable differences in the perception of similarity and
dissimilarity of ERs (especially for text) between
participants with and without ASD, the difference between
the groups was supported to some extent.
The clearest top level distinction for both groups was
maps. Maps can be seen as the most spatial type of ER and
have been identified as a ‘basic level’ ER category in Cox
and Grawemeyer (2003). Rosch (1978) suggests that from

2205

an early age ‘basic level’ categories are formed, which are
the most distinctive. Maps are isomorphic with the real
world and of different levels of categorical structure. The
comprehension of maps seems to be natural and is required
early in life as described by Liben (2001).
However, the results of the cluster analysis also showed
that the ASD group distinguishes textual representations
differently to the non-ASD group. While the text cluster of
the non-ASD group is less distinct from other clusters, the
ASD group clearly separates text from other ERs. For the
ASD group, textual representations – after maps - form a
distinct cluster at the high level branching factor, which
means that text and non-text clusters were perceived to be
highly dissimilar.
Some of the textual representations referred to the main
visual ER stimuli categories, such as, a textual description
of bar charts, or some text fragments that refer to networks.
The non-ASD group clustering shows a less clear distinction
between the textual representations and graphs/charts or
tree/network diagrams clusters. However, for ASD
participants there is a clear distinction of textual
representations, which suggests a further categorisation at
the ‘basic level’ (in Rosch’s 1978 terms).
A different organisation of certain brain regions within
ASD (e.g. Mottron et al., 2006) may imply that individuals
with ASD perceive textual information as a distinctive
visual category rather than a linguistic category. This may
also explain why mathematical notations were semantically
clustered with graphs and charts. In contrast, the non-ASD
group formed a linguistic category that included maths and
textual representations, presumably based on superficial
features as opposed to deeper meaning.
A visual instead of a linguistic text category might
underpin a bias towards visual processing in individuals
with ASD (Kunda and Goel, 2008) and/or the use of mental
imagery for sentence processing (Grandin, 1995; Kana et
al., 2006).

information seems to be more difficult than processing
graphical information. However, this depends on whether
participants’ introspections are accurate. A better indication
might be derived by gathering ER reasoning performance
measures, rather than subjective self reports
A difference between the groups was found in how graphs
and charts were perceived. Participants from the ASD group
seem to perceive those representations easier to understand
than participants from the non-ASD group, who rated
clusters that contained graphs and charts as one of the most
difficult to understand. This supports our hypothesis that
participants with ASD will find ERs that enable visual
information processing easier then participants without
ASD.

Preferences
In our third hypothesis we expected differences in ER
preferences based upon how the ER would enable
information processing. Here also, the difference between
the groups was much less marked than expected.
Both groups preferred maps. Maps can be seen as one of
the most spatial types of ER. As predicted individuals with
ASD preferred highly spatial ERs. This was also true for
participants in the non-ASD group.
The ASD group rated mainly text and the non-ASD group
rated mainly maths as the least preferred ER. Here also,
participants from the ASD as well as the non-ASD group
disliked low spatial ERs the least.
It was interesting to see that within both groups a dislike
of a low spatial ER seems to relate to a preference of highly
spatial ERs, such as maps or drawings.
Garcia-Garcia and Cox (2008) describe how graphs and
charts were more commonly used in the UK national
curriculum than maps. Out of the ERs used within the card
sort, tree and network diagrams were encountered the least
in educational material. There does not seem to be a link
between the frequency of particular ERs within educational
material and ER preferences.

Rating of ER types
According to our second hypothesis, we expected to see
differences between the groups in the perception of how
easy or difficult ERs were to understand according to the
ERs ability to enable visual processing. This difference was
less than expected.
Both groups rated high and low spatial ERs in similar
ways. Participants from the ASD and the non-ASD group
rated maps (high spatial) as the easiest to understand. As
described in Cox and Grawemeyer (2003) maps are
isomorphic with the real world. They are not as
metaphorical as other ERs, for example, a bar chart, where
the length of the bars act as a metaphor for the values they
present. This might explain why both groups rated clusters
that contained maps as the easiest of the different ER types
to understand.
Additionally, both groups rated clusters that contained
text as one of the most difficult to understand. For
individuals with and without ASD, processing textual

Conclusion and Future work
The research presented in this paper is part of a process by
which the assessment of ASD and non-ASD capabilities
will lead into the design of educational software,
specifically design principles for user interfaces for different
populations, in this case ASD user groups.
A positive finding from our investigation was that highfunctioning young people with ASD were similar in many
ways to young people without ASD. Both groups identified
‘maps’ as the clearest top level distinction, which confirms
the result of Cox and Grawemeyer (2003), who identified
maps as a ‘basic level’ ER category. The difference between
the groups in how text was clustered might reflect the
impairments of cognitive abilities within ASD.
The results of this study will enable us to design
educational software that is tailored to young people with
ASD. The detection of participants’ ER classification and

2206

preferences will help us to create user interfaces that reflect
children’s wishes, which might enhance learning outcomes.
The results could help not only in supporting an individual’s
learning, but also in providing easier forms of interactions,
which are tailor-made rather than the same for everyone.
Additionally, to cater for strength in visual processing,
educational software should also at some stage address
weakness with text.
The next step in our research is therefore to investigate
how user interfaces could be adapted to the special needs of
the ASD population, based upon the differences in
information processing we have discussed. This will include
the detection of preferences for ERs via a computerised
environment.
Finally, further research is needed to delineate the
differences between individuals with and without ASD, in
terms of category formation, category assignment,
identification of concepts, identification of instances of
category members and the overlap between categories.

Acknowledgments
We are especially grateful to the study participants who
willingly gave their time, and to their parents who gave
consent for their children to take part in this study. The
authors gratefully acknowledge Ashgrove School in
Penarth, Brislington Enterprise College (BEC) in Bristol
(especially the ASD unit), and Ralph-Allen School in Bath
who enabled us to conduct the card sort study at their
schools. Special thanks to Richard Cox for the original card
sort, which was modified for our study. The support of the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC, EP/G031975/1) is also gratefully acknowledged.

References
Baird, G., Simonoff, E., Pickles, A., Chandler, S., Loucas,
T., Meldrum, D., Charman, T. (2006). Prevalence of
disorders of the autism spectrum in a population cohort of
children in South Thames: the Special Needs and Autism
Project (SNAP). Lancet (British edition) 368, 9531, 210215.
Caron, M. -J., Mottron, L., Rainville, C., Chouinard, S.
(2004). Do high functioning persons with autism present
superior spatial abilities?. Neuropsychologia, 42(4), 467481.
Cox, R., & Grawemeyer, B. (2003). The mental
organisation of external representations. European
Cognitive Science Conference (EuroCogSci - joint
Cognitive Science Society and German Cognitive Science
Society conference), Osnabrück, September, 2003.
Cox, R., Romero, P., du Boulay, B., Lutz, R. (2004). A
Cognitive
Processing
Perspective
on
Student
Programmers' 'Graphicacy'. In Alan Blackwell, Kim
Marriott and Atsushi Shimojima (Eds.) Diagrammatic
Representation and Inference, Third International
Conference, Diagrams 2004. Lecture Notes in Artificial

Intelligence, Vol 2980. Springer-Verlag, 344-346.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
(2000) 4th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing Inc., 69-84.
Grandin, T. (1995). How people with autism think. In: E.
Schopler, & G.B. Mesibov (Eds.), Learning and cognition
in autism. New York, NY, USA: Plenum Press.
Garcia Garcia, G. and Cox, R. (2008). Diagrams in the UK
National School Curriculum. In Gem Stapleton, John
Howse, and John Lee (Eds.) Diagrammatic
Representation and Inference, Fifth International
Conference, Diagrams 2008. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Vol 5223. Springer-Verlag, 360-363.
Jolliffe, T., Baron-Cohen, S. (2001). A test of central
coherence theory: Can adults with high-functioning
autism or Asperger syndrome integrate fragments of an
object?. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 6, 193-216.
Kamio, Y., & Toichi, M. (2000). Dual access to semantics
in autism: Is pictorial access superior to verbal access.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 41(7), 859-867.
Kana, R.K,. Keller, T.A., Cherkassky, V.L., Minshew, N.J.,
Just, M.A. (2006) Sentence comprehension in autism:
thinking in pictures with decreased functional
connectivity. Brain. 129(9), 2484-2493.
Kunda, M., Goel, A. (2008) Thinking in Pictures: A Fresh
Look at Cognition in Autism. Proceedings of the Thirtieth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Washington, DC.
Liben, L.S. (2001). Thinking through maps. In M. Gattis
(Eds.) Spatial schemas and abstract thought, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Matessa, M. (2008). An ACT-R Representation of
Information Processing in Autism. Proceedings of the
Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Washington, DC.
Minshew, N.J., & Goldstein, G. (2001). The Pattern of
Intact and Impaired Memory Functions in Autism.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42(8), 10951101.
Minshew, N.J., Meyer, J., Goldstein, G. (2002). Abstract
Reasoning in Autism: A Dissociation Between Concept
Formation and Concept Identification. Neuropsychology,
16(3), 327-334.
Mottron, L., Dawson, M., Souliéres, I., Hubert, B., Burack,
J. (2006). Enhanced Perceptual Functioning in Autism:
An Update and Eight Principles of Autistic Perception.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36(1),
27-43.
Rosch, E. (2002) Principes of Categorization. In D.J.
Levitin (Eds.) Foundations of cognitive psychology: core
readings, Cambridge: MIT Press, 251-69.
Schreiber, G., Akkermans, H., Anjewierden, Al, de Hoog,
R., Shadbolt, N., va deVelde, W., Wielinga, R. (1999).
Knowledge engineering and management: The
commonKADS methodology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2207

