UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Prototyping and Critical Feedback on Fixation in Engineering Design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5kq942pr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Kershaw, Trina
Holtta-Otto, Katja
Lee, Yoon Soo

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Prototyping and Critical Feedback on Fixation in Engineering Design
Trina C. Kershaw1, Katja Hölttä-Otto2, & Yoon Soo Lee3
tkershaw@umassd.edu, kotto@umassd.edu, ylee@umassd.edu
Departments of 1Psychology, 2Mechanical Engineering, and 3Design, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
285 Old Westport Road, North Dartmouth, MA 02747 USA

method (Pahl & Beitz, 1996) to compare the concepts for a
next-generation alarm clock of freshmen and senior
mechanical engineering students. They found that freshmen
and senior groups produced concepts with similar, high
levels of feasibility. However, freshmen students were less
fixated on the sample alarm clocks than seniors. Instead of
just attempting to promote divergent thinking at the
beginning of the design process, engineers need to avoid
fixation throughout the design process.

Abstract
Design fixation is a common problem in engineering. In two
experiments, we implement two educational interventions,
prototyping and critical feedback, to help reduce design
fixation, which is defined as adherence to one's own design.
We found that constant prototyping across the design process
reduced fixation in the final product. Surprisingly, we also
found that not receiving feedback reduced fixation in the final
product. Implications for engineering design education are
discussed.
Keywords: fixation; engineering; prototyping; feedback;
metacognition; education

Avoiding Fixation through Prototyping
The typical engineering design process involves coming
up with a few ideas, quickly selecting one, and taking that
idea through the design cycle (Ulrich & Eppinger, 2004).
Prototyping is a common part of engineering design. We
loosely define prototyping as a representation of a design
idea before the final artifact exists (Lim et al., 2008). In the
beginning of the process rough prototypes can be used to
capture latent customer needs and to prove a concept.
During the design process the level of detail of the
prototypes improves and they are used for communicating
concepts to the client, testing the usability, and exploring
and evaluating the design (Lim et al., 2008). A prototype
can ensure the final product will work as desired and it can
answer questions that would be otherwise hard to answer.
Prototyping has many benefits, and thus prototyping is
common in most design projects. Design requires the mental
manipulation of complex relationships among design
features, thus taxing cognitive capacity (Youmans, 2011).
Prototypes could reduce fixation by releasing cognitive
load. Youmans found that using prototypes reduced fixation
compared to situations in which participants, both design
experts and undergraduate psychology students, were unable
to manipulate objects. The point at which prototypes are
used during the design process might also influence
creativity. For example, Jang and Schunn (2010) found that
engineering designers who used prototypes during the
ideation phase produced more innovative designs. However,
use of prototypes during the concept refinement phase had
no impact on innovation. Despite these reported positive
effects of prototyping, there is evidence that exposure to
prototypes can lead to design fixation during concept
generation (Christiansen & Schunn, 2007; 2009). We varied
the point at which prototyping occurred during the design
process in Experiment 1.

One of the greatest challenges facing future engineers is to
create innovative products to stay competitive in the real
world (Duderstadt, 2008). Unfortunately, there is
considerable evidence that current engineering curricula
may not support creativity. Graduating engineers are often
less innovative than entering freshman (Yang, 2008) and the
standard design process tools often lead to safe rather than
innovative solutions (Cooper, 2005). Engineers tend to stick
with the same idea throughout the design cycle (Ulrich &
Eppinger, 2004), often even if the idea has severe flaws. In
the following paper, we review possible hindrances to
creativity in engineers, and describe two educational
interventions that we hope can lead to greater creativity in
engineering design.

The Problem of Design Fixation in Engineering
Being stuck is common in design. One means of
measuring ‘stuckness’ is measurement of design fixation,
the unintentional adherence to a set of features or concepts
limiting the output of conceptual design (Janson & Smith,
1991). Design fixation is typically measured as similarity to
the design brief the designers were shown in the beginning
of the design project. However, designers can also show
fixation on concepts learned outside of the experimental
setting (Purcell & Gero, 1996) or to the initial idea they had
(Sachs, 1999). Design fixation is a prevalent problem in
engineering, yet it is often unrecognized by the person
committing it; even teachers of engineering design are
unaware of their own fixation (Linsey et al., 2010).
Numerous creativity methods have been proposed to
overcome design fixation. These methods generally focus
on one-time generation of ideas at the beginning of the
design process, which is not enough (cf. Mehalik & Schunn,
2006) because innovative design should be a continuous
string of divergent and convergent thinking (Dym et al.,
2005). For example, Genco et al. (2010) used the 6-3-5

Avoiding Fixation through Reflecting on
Critical Feedback

807

Assessment of engineering design is typically focused on
problem solving skills, communication, and meeting of the
stakeholder needs (McKenzie et al., 2004) instead of on
self-reflection about the design process. Since a student is
typically grade driven (Cross & Steadman, 1996), it is better
in the eyes of the student to steer toward known working
solutions than to explore the design space more openly. It is
likely that this same behavior is prominent also in industry.
In contrast to engineering designers, other designers
(graphic, industrial, and architectural) receive more critical
feedback. The third author developed a participatory Peer
Crit which she uses in her design courses (Lee, 2010).
During the crit process, students explain and defend their
design choices. This process often leads to the restructuring
of their designs when they are not able to explain their
design choices. The crit leads to metacognitive awareness of
the design process. Reflective thinking is one of the traits of
good engineering design (Cross & Steadman, 1996), and
enables effective inquiry between divergent and convergent
questions (Dym et al., 2005).
In order to test the effect of critical feedback on fixation
during the design process, we varied the type of feedback
that participants received in Experiment 2.

assorted k-nex plastic building toys (including sticks and
wheels), a two meter long piece of string, and a pair of
scissors. Two square plastic bowls were used to represent
the boxes of the Balls and Boxes problem, and five ping
pong balls were used to represent the balls in the problem.

Procedure
Each participant was a member of only one condition (see
Table 1 for the n in each condition). Participants were run in
groups of two to six. They were told that they would be
following a standard design process to solve the balls and
boxes problem. All participants were told that they would
build a prototype at some point during the process, and were
told that a prototype worked like one's intended device, but
might not look like it, might not be made from the same
material, and was generally not made using the same
manufacturing methods as the intended device. Participants
then went through a four-phase design process, consisting of
initial idea generation, concept generation, concept
refinement, and final build. Table 1 shows the experiment
flow for each phase within each condition. The phases are
explained in greater detail below.
Initial Idea Generation Phase Participants were given two
minutes to generate multiple ideas for moving the balls from
one box to another. Participants were asked to sketch ideas,
instead of writing a list.

Experiment 1: Prototyping Method
Participants
Participants were 50 students enrolled in introductory
psychology classes at the University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth who received research credit for their
participation. While the students had different majors, none
of the participants were engineering majors. We chose
participants from a research pool to pilot the prototyping
intervention prior to its implementation in engineering
classes. No demographic data were collected about the
participants.

Concept Generation Phase Participants were given up to
12 minutes to either sketch or prototype one or more of their
ideas. They were told to draw as much as possible, but that
they could use words to clarify aspects of the sketch.
Participants were instructed to notify the experimenter as
soon as they had an idea or ideas they wanted to share. Once
alerted, the experimenter then began the first Feedback
Phase with the participant.
Participants who were building prototypes were given a
bin that contained all the materials listed above. Individuals
in the multiple early prototype condition were given two
bins. The balls and boxes were set up on the table.
Participants in the multiple early prototype condition were
asked to build two or more prototypes; all other participants
were asked to build at least one. All participants were
reminded that they were building a representation of the
device, not the device itself.

Materials
Participants were asked to design a device to move balls
from one box to another, referred to as the Balls and Boxes
problem. The problem sheet showed the start state to have
two boxes set 10" apart from each other, with five balls in
box 1 and box 2 empty. The end state of the problem
showed five balls in box 2.
During the introductory and sketch phases (sketching
could occur during the Concept Generation Phase, the
Concept Refinement Phase, or both) of the experiment,
participants were provided with a stack of blank paper and a
set of colored markers. During the prototype (which could
occur during the Concept Generation Phase, the Concept
Refinement Phase, or both) and Final Build phases of the
experiment, participants were given a bin of materials to
build their designs. These materials consisted of 15 popsicle
sticks, seven pipe cleaners, six rubber bands of varying
sizes, two thick paper napkins, a small jar of playdough,

Concept Refinement Phase Participants were given 12
minutes to modify their ideas by adding, taking away, or
changing some element of the current design. They were
also told that they could come up with a new design.
Participants were reminded that after this phase, they would
need to be ready to produce their final design during the
Final Build phase. Depending upon the experimental
condition they were in, participants either sketched or
prototyped during this phase. The sketch and prototype

808

Table 1: Experiment Conditions and Phases
Condition
 Multiple Early
Prototype
 Constant Prototype
 Early Prototype
 Late Prototype
 No Prototype

N

7

Experiment Phase
Initial Idea Gen. Concept Gen.
Feedback
Concept Refine.
Experiment 1
2+ protos
tech
sketch
X

10
12
10
11

X
X
X
X

8
 No Feedback
 Technical Feedback 11
10
 Full Crit

X
X
X

1 proto
tech
1 proto
tech
sketch
tech
sketch
tech
Experiment 2
sketch
none
sketch
tech
sketch
full crit

procedures were the same as during the Concept Generation
Phase. Participants were again instructed to notify the
experimenter once they had an idea or ideas to share. Once
alerted, the experimenter began the second Feedback Phase
with the participant.
Feedback Phases Participants received feedback on their
designs twice, after the Concept Generation and Concept
Refinement Phases. Participants were asked to explain how
their designs worked and then asked if their designs met
each of the technical criteria, such as being at least six
inches away from the balls, etc. The experimenter then
pointed out any technical failures of the design.
Final Build Phase Participants were given 12 minutes to
build their final concept. They were told to be prepared to
explain how it worked and solved the Balls and Boxes
Problem. Participants were reminded that their final build
functioned as a prototype, and therefore was only a
representation of the device itself. Participants were again
instructed to notify the experimenter as soon as they had a
prototype to share. After reviewing the participant's final
build, the experimenter explained the purpose of the study
and thanked the individual for his/her participation.

Analysis of Feedback Reaction
We developed a coding scheme to describe the ways in
which participants could respond to the feedback. We
compared their designs before and after each feedback
sessions by examining the differences between the designs
produced during the Concept Generation and Concept
Refinement phases, and the differences between the designs
produced during the Concept Refinement and Final Build
phases.
The feedback reaction coding categories are detailed in
Table 2. Participants could react in multiple ways to the
feedback. For example, they could add padding to a device
in order to protect the balls from damage, yet ignore the
experimenter's reminder that the user needs to be at least six

Feedback

Final Build

tech

X

1 proto
sketch
1 proto
sketch

tech
tech
tech
tech

X
X
X
X

sketch
sketch
sketch

none
tech
full crit

X
X
X

inches away from the balls. In this example, the response
would be coded as fix failure for the addition of padding,
and ignore feedback for not making a change to comply
with the six inches rule.
Initial coding was completed by all three authors. Coding
agreement was high. The third author completed the final
coding, as reported in the Results section.
Table 2: Feedback Reaction Coding
Feedback
Reaction
No Change
Ignore
Feedback

Fix Failure

Change
Design
Create New
Concept

Coding Description
Sticks with current design. E.g. Final
Build is the same as Concept Refinement.
Ignores feedback about a particular
feature. E.g. Remind about 6" distance
from the balls or boxes, but participant
leaves the distance alone.
Modifies an aspect of a current feature to
fix a criterion failure. This can be done by
modifying, adding, or taking away a
feature. E.g. Raise box 1 in order to make
it easier for balls to travel to box 2.
Changes a feature in order to improve the
design, but not to fix a failure. This can be
done by modifying, adding, or taking
away a feature. E.g. Make claw more
stable by adding extra prong.
Abandons current design and creates
something new.

Results
The frequency of the coding categories was not evenly
distributed across the feedback reactions (Table 3). Some
categories, such as ignore feedback, were rare. Fix failure
was more prevalent during the first feedback reaction than
the second. In contrast, no change was more likely to occur
during the second feedback reaction.

809

Table 3: Percent of Feedback Reactions, Experiment 1
Coding Category
No Change
Ignore Feedback
Fix Failure
Change Design
New Concept

Feedback 1
14%
6%
28%
52%
16%

phases. The other percentages of participants making no
change were as follows: early prototype = 25%, multiple
early prototype = 16.7%, late prototype = 12.5%, and
constant prototype = 8.3%. A chi-square test comparing the
frequency of the no change feedback reaction among the
groups was marginally significant, χ2 (4, N = 50) = 9.73, p =
.05. Examination of the adjusted standardized residuals
(ASR) indicated that the locus of this significant result was
due to the constant prototype (ASR = -2) and no prototype
(ASR = 2.5) groups.

Feedback 2
48%
4%
6%
38%
2%

Feedback reactions with 6% or less occurrence were
eliminated for the next analysis, in which we examined the
types of feedback reactions in each condition. The percent
of feedback reactions by condition is shown in Table 4. We
ran chi-square analyses to compare the frequency of each
feedback reaction between the Concept Generation and
Concept Refinement phases among the prototype
conditions. We found no difference between the prototype
conditions in the no change (χ2 [4, N = 50] = 4.23, p = .38),
fix failure (χ2 [4, N = 50] = 1.80, p = .77), or create new
concept reactions (χ2 [4, N = 50] = 2.51, p = .64). A chisquare test comparing the frequency of the change feedback
reaction among the groups was marginally significant, χ2 (4,
N = 50) = 8.93, p = .06. Examination of the adjusted
standardized residuals (ASR) indicated that the locus of this
significant result was due to the multiple early prototype
(ASR = 1.9) and late prototype (ASR = -2.3) groups.

Experiment 2: Type of Feedback Method
Participants
Participants were 29 students enrolled in introductory
psychology classes at the University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth who received research credit for their
participation. While the students had different majors, none
of the participants were engineering majors. We chose
participants from a research pool to pilot the feedback
intervention prior to its implementation in engineering
classes. No demographic data were collected about the
participants.

Materials and Procedure
Participants in Experiment 2 used the same materials and
followed the same procedure as in Experiment 1, following
a design process through the Initial Idea Generation,
Concept Generation, Concept Refinement, and Final Build
phases (see Table 1). Unlike the participants in Experiment
1, they received different types of feedback during the
Feedback Phases, and only produced sketches, not
prototypes, during the Concept Generation and Concept
Refinement phases. Sketch instructions for Experiment 2
were the same as Experiment 1.

Table 4: Percent of Feedback 1 Reactions between Concept
Generation and Concept Refinement Phases by Condition,
Experiment 1
Condition
Multi-early
Constant
Early
Late
No Prototype

No
Change
14.3%
0%
14.3%
42.9%
28.6%

Fix
Failure
21.4%
21.4%
28.6%
14.3%
14.3%

Change
Design
23.1%
15.4%
30.8%
7.7%
23.1%

New
Concept
12.5%
25%
12.5%
37.5%
12.5%

Feedback Phases Participants received feedback on their
designs twice during the experiment, after the Concept
Generation and Concept Refinement Phases. All participants
were first asked to explain how their designs worked.
Participants in the no feedback condition were only thanked
for explaining their designs, and were not given any
additional feedback. Participants in the technical feedback
condition followed the same procedure from Experiment 1.
Participants in the full crit condition were given technical
feedback, and then asked a series of questions to encourage
reflection upon their design. The questions were as follows:
1) Why do you think this product has the restrictions that it
does (such as keeping a certain amount of space in between
the person and the balls and boxes)?
2) Imagine this device in a real life environment with a real
person packaging these products. What is the sequence the
user goes through in order to use this device?
3) What are the strengths of your device?
4) What are the weaknesses of your device?
5) How could you improve this device?

We also examined the feedback reactions that were shown
within each group between the Concept Refinement and
Final Build phases (Feedback 2). Only changing the design
and making no change were examined because the other
categories had 6% or less prevalence. Participants in the
early prototype group (31.6%) made up the largest
percentage of participants who changed their designs.
Participants in the constant prototype and late prototype
groups were equally likely to change their designs (21.3%),
followed by participants in the multiple early prototype
condition (15.8%) and the no prototype condition (10.5%).
A chi-square test comparing the frequency of the change
feedback reaction among the groups was not significant, χ 2
(4, N = 50) = 2.67, p = .61.
Participants in the no prototype condition made up the
largest percentage (37.5%) of participants who made no
change between the Concept Refinement and Final Build

810

categories had 3% or less prevalence. Participants in the
technical feedback condition made up 45% of the no change
category, followed closely by the full crit condition (40%),
with the category being far less prevalent among the
feedback reactions of the no feedback group (15%) A chisquare test comparing the conditions was marginally
significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 5.12, p = .07. Examination of
the adjusted standardized residuals (ASR) indicated that the
locus of this significant result was due to the no feedback
group (ASR = -2.3).
In contrast, no participants in the full crit condition made
changes to their designs between the Concept Refinement
and Final Build phases, while 33.3% of the change category
consisted of participants in the technical feedback and
66.7% of category consisted of participants in the no
feedback condition. A chi-square test comparing the
conditions was significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 6.84, p = .03.
Examination of the adjusted standardized residuals (ASR)
indicated that the locus of this significant result was due to
the no feedback (ASR = 2.4) and full crit (ASR = -2)
groups.

Analysis of Feedback Reaction
We coded participants' feedback reactions in the same
manner as in Experiment 1 (see Table 2).

Results
As in Experiment 1, we first examined the frequency of the
feedback reaction types during the first and second feedback
phases. As shown in Table 5, some of the feedback
reactions were not seen in the data, such as ignore feedback.
Fix failure, change design, and new concept were more
frequent during the first feedback reaction, while no change
was more frequent during the second feedback reaction.
Table 5: Percent of Feedback Reactions, Experiment 2
Coding Category
No Change
Ignore Feedback
Fix Failure
Change Design
New Concept

Feedback 1
7%
0%
31%
66%
10%

Feedback 2
69%
0%
3%
21%
0%

General Discussion
While there was variety in the feedback reactions shown in
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 between the Concept
Generation and Concept Refinement stages, none of the
group differences reached significance except for the change
category within Experiment 1, in which more participants in
the multiple early prototype condition made changes to their
designs than participants in the late prototype condition.
We saw more group differences in the feedback reactions
shown between the Concept Refinement and Final Build
stages. In Experiment 1, many participants in the no
prototype condition made no changes to their designs, while
few participants in the constant prototype condition made
no changes. This could be because lack of a prototype can
make it hard to identify failures or other areas of
improvements, and the designer is thus more likely to stick
with same concept. This is in line with Youmans' (2011)
finding that a designer may be better able to handle complex
problems by reducing the cognitive load via prototyping.
When prototyping is not required, participants were most
likely to just build their final refined concepts. Sketching
did not give them enough information to make changes to
Final Build. This supports use of prototypes in general.
It remains to be tested which prototyping strategy leads to
the most creative final concepts. Jang and Schunn (2010)
found that prototyping during ideation, but not during
concept refinement, correlated with high levels of creativity
of the final output. While this point was not examined per
se, we found that prototyping, when used throughout the
design process, led to more changes, presumably
improvements.
In Experiment 2, participants did not build prototypes
until the final build, and they differed by the type of
feedback received. We found that participants in the
technical feedback condition accounted for 45% of the no

Feedback reactions with 7% or less occurrence were
eliminated for the next analysis, in which we examined the
types of feedback reactions that were shown in each
condition (see Table 6).
Table 6: Percent of Feedback 1 Reactions between Concept
Generation and Concept Refinement Phases by Condition,
Experiment 2
Condition
No Feedback
Tech. Feed.
Full Crit

No
Change
0%
100%
0%

Fix
Failure
22.2%
22.2%
55.6%

Change
Design
36.8%
31.6%
31.6%

New
Concept
66.7%
33.3%
0%

The technical feedback condition was the only group that
made no change between the Concept Generation and
Concept Refinement phases. A chi-square test comparing
the conditions was not significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 3.52, p =
.17. Participants in all conditions fixed failures, with the full
crit condition showing the highest prevalence of this
feedback reaction. A chi-square test comparing the
conditions was not significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 2.67, p =
.26.Changing one's design was the most likely, and occurred
fairly equally in each condition. A chi-square test comparing
the conditions was not significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 2.43, p =
.30.Participants in the no feedback and technical feedback
conditions created new concepts, while participants in the
full crit condition did not. A chi-square test comparing the
conditions was not significant, χ2 (2, N = 29) = 3.03, p = .22.
We also examined the feedback reactions that were shown
within each group between the Concept Refinement and
Final Build phases (Feedback 2). Only changing the design
and making no change were examined because the other

811

change feedback reactions between Concept Refinement
and Final Build, followed closely by the full crit condition
(40%). Participants in the no feedback group only accounted
for 15% of this category. In the change category,
participants from the no feedback condition accounted for
66.7% of the no change category for the period between the
Concept Refinement and Final Build stages, with the
remaining 33.3% of this feedback reaction coming from the
technical feedback condition. No participant from the full
crit condition fell within this category. This result was
surprising, in that one might expect more detailed feedback
to lead to less design fixation. One possibility is that
participants who receive feedback may feel that their
designs were validated by the experimenter, and thus they
can stop making changes, while participants who do not
receive feedback are forced to engage in self-reflection
because their ideas have not been validated by someone
else. However, additional data collection and analyses are
needed to further elucidate the effects of critical feedback.
While our results are not conclusive, it is likely that
critical feedback will help the overall design process,
particularly in educational settings. Critical feedback could
help engineering professors change the way they give
feedback. Encouraging self reflection may help students to
focus on the quality of their designs rather than ease of
building in the belief that the easy build would result in a
good grade. This could help solve the problem of senior
level engineering students performing worse compared to
their freshman counterparts in terms of innovativeness of
their designs (Genco et al., 2010). We are currently
implementing the crit process in the senior design class to
test this hypothesis.

Genco, N., Hölttä-Otto, K., & Seepersad, C.C. (2010). An
experimental investigation of the innovation capabilities
of engineering students. Proceedings of the ASEE Annual
Conference and Exposition, Louisville, KY.
Jang, J., & Schunn, C.D. (2010). Physical design tools
support and hinder innovative engineering design.
Unpublished manuscript.
Jansson, D. G., & Smith, S. M. (1991). Design fixation.
Design Studies, 12(1), 3-11.
Lee, Y. S. (2010). Functional criticism: Guide to critiques in
the graphic design classroom. Design Principles and
Practices: An International Journal, 4 (1), 401-408.
Lim, Y.-K., Stolterman, E., & Tenenberg, J. (2008). The
anatomy of prototypes: Prototypes as filters, prototypes as
manifestations of design ideas. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 15(2), Article 7, 27 pages.
Linsey, J.S., Tseng, I., Fu, K., Cagan, J., Wood, K.L., &
Schunn, C. (2010). A study of design fixation, its
mitigation and perception in engineering design faculty.
Journal of Mechanical Design, 132.
McKenzie, L. J., Trevisan, M. S., Davis, D. C., & Beyerlein,
S. W. (2004). Capstone Design Courses and Assessment:
A National Study. Proceedings of the 2004 ASEE Annual
Conference & Exposition.
Mehalik, M. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2006). What constitutes
good design? A review of empirical studies of the design
process. International Journal of Engineering Education,
22(3), 519-532.
Pahl, G., & Beitz, W. (1996). Engineering design: A
systematic approach. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Purcell, A. T., & Gero, J. S. (1996). Design and other types
of fixation. Design Studies, 17, 363-383.
Sachs, A. (1999) ‘Stuckness' in the design studio, Design
Studies, 20(2), 195-209.
Ulrich, K. T. & Eppinger, S. D. (2004) Product design and
development (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Yang, M. (2008). Prompt versus Problem: Helping Students
Learn to Frame Problems and Think Creatively. 2nd
Design Creativity Workshop, Third International
Conference on Design Computing and Cognition. Atlanta,
GA.
Youmans, R.J. (2011). The effects of physical prototyping
and group work on the reduction of design fixation.
Design Studies, 32, 115-138.

References
Charyton, C. & Merrill, J. (2009) Assessing general
creativity and creative engineering design in first year
engineering students. Journal of Engineering Education,
98(2), 145-156,
Christensen, B. T., & Schunn, C. D. (2007). The
relationship of analogical distance to analogical function
and preinventive structure: The case of engineering
design. Memory & Cognition, 35(1), 29-38.
Christensen, B. T., & Schunn, C. D. (2009). The role and
impact of mental simulation in design. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 23(3), 327-344.
Cooper, R. (2005). Product leadership (2nd edition). New
York NY: Basic Books.
Cross, K., & Steadman, M. (1996). Classroom research:
Implementing the scholarship of teaching. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Duderstadt, J. J. (2008). Engineering for a changing world,
Millennium Project. University of Michigan.
Dym, C L, Agogino, A. M. Eris, O. Frey, D. D. & Leifer,
L. L. (2005) Engineering design thinking, teaching and
learning. Journal of Engineering Education, 94(1), 103–
120.

812

