UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The emergence of probabilistic reasoning in very young infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4gz753km

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Denison, Stephanie
Reed, Christie
Xu, Fei

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The emergence of probabilistic reasoning in very young infants
Stephanie Denison (smdeniso@berkeley.edu), Christie Reed (cereed@berkeley.edu)
& Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract

(Denison & Xu, 2010a; Gweon, Tenenbaum & Schulz,
2010; Teglas et al. 2007; Xu & Denison, 2009).
In the current experiment, we explore the age at which
infants begin to make inferences from samples to
populations. We ask whether 4- and 6-month-old infants can
make basic probabilistic inferences using a variant of the
paradigm first introduced by Xu and Garcia (2008). In their
experiments, a violation of expectancy looking-time
paradigm was employed to reveal whether 8-month-old
infants have an intuitive ability to make generalizations
from samples to populations. In Experiment 1, infants were
shown samples being drawn from a large covered box and,
on alternating trials the experimenter either removed 4 red
balls and 1 white ball or 4 white balls and 1 red ball. Then
the experimenter revealed the population of balls in the box
– a 9:1 ratio of red to white balls. Eight-month-old infants
looked longer at the 4 white and 1 red ball sample (the
improbable outcome) than the 4 red and 1 white ball sample
(the probable outcome; see Figure 1).
Although at first blush this appears to suggest that infants
have a rudimentary ability to reason about probability, the
authors note that two interpretations of this looking-time
pattern exist: The first, which we will call the “probabilistic
account”, suggests that infants looked longer at the 4 white
and 1 red ball sample because they understand the predictive
relationship between samples and populations and thus they
considered it to be a relatively improbable sample. The
second, termed here the “perceptual mismatch account”,
suggests that infants simply prefer to look at displays in
which the population box and sample container contrast in
perceptual appearance. That is, infants simply looked longer
at trials displaying the less probable sample because it
created a perceptual mismatch between the two displays
present on stage (see the outcomes in Figure 1). This
account represents a lower-level interpretation of infant
performance, as it predicts an identical looking pattern as
the probabilistic account but does not require that infants
understand anything about the relationship between the
sample and population.1
To distinguish among these accounts, Xu and Garcia
(2008, Expt. 3) designed an experiment in which the 4:1
sample of balls was no longer drawn from the population
box. Another group of 8-month-old infants participated in a
procedure that was equivalent to the one just described
except that the relationship between the sample and

How do people make such rich inferences from such sparse
data? Recent research has explored this inferential ability by
investigating probabilistic reasoning in infancy. For example,
8- and 11-month-old infants can make inferences from
samples to populations and vice versa (Denison & Xu, 2010a;
Xu & Garcia, 2008). The current experiment investigates the
developmental origins of this probabilistic inference
mechanism with 4- and 6-month-old infants. Infants were
shown 2 large boxes, 1 containing a ratio of 4 pink to 1
yellow balls, the other containing the opposite ratio. The
experimenter sampled from, e.g., the mostly pink box, and
removed either 4 pink and 1 yellow or 4 yellow and 1 pink
ball on alternating trials. 6- but not 4-month-olds looked
longer at the 4 yellow and 1 pink ball sample (the improbable
outcome) than the 1 yellow and 4 pink ball sample (the
probable outcome).
Keywords: Statistical inference; Probabilistic reasoning;
Infant cognition.

Introduction
A wide range of evidence exists to show that human
learners are capable of making large inductive leaps in the
face of very small amounts of data. It is easy to appreciate
why this might be such an important and ubiquitous ability.
For example, imagine a person from our hunter-gatherer
ancestry trying to determine which types of trees produce
berries that are good for eating. Let’s say they sample
roughly five berries from a couple of trees and find that one
tree produces four good tasting berries and the other only
produces one or two. They may make the inference that all
berries from the former tree are good for eating and that the
latter tree type should be avoided.
What is the cognitive mechanism that allows human
learners to make such rapid and often highly accurate
inductive inferences with such small amounts of data?
Recent literature in cognitive development has focused on
the origins of statistical inference in infancy as a possible
starting point. At least three lines of work have emerged
exploring various aspects of infant probabilistic reasoning:
First, we know that infants as young as 8 months are
capable of making inferences from small samples to large
populations as well as from populations to samples (Xu &
Garcia, 2008). Second, we know that 12-month-old infants
can make inferences from populations to samples when
reasoning about single-event probability (Denison & Xu,
2010b; Teglas, Girotto, Gonzalez & Bonatti, 2007). Third,
evidence suggests that infants as young as 11 months take
into account the implications of sampling conditions (e.g.,
random vs. non-random sampling) and object properties
(e.g., solidity and cohesion) when making these inferences

1

Adults viewed the Expt. 1 displays and rated the improbable
outcome as “unexpected” and the probable outcome as “expected.”
They did not note perceptual mismatches or probability in their
explanations. This suggests that computations of probabilities may
generally be largely implicit and inaccessible to conscious thought.

441

domains such as rule learning, phoneme discrimination, and
visual pattern learning (e.g., Dawson & Gerken, 2009;
Kirkham, Slemmer & Johnson, 2002; Maye, Werker, &
Gerken, 2002).
We tested a group of 6-month-old infants using the same
procedure of Xu and Garcia (2008). The findings were
inconclusive. Infants performed as expected in the
replication of Experiment 1, looking longer at trials in
which the experimenter sampled 4 white and 1 red ball than
4 red and 1 white ball from the mostly red population.
However, infants continued to follow this looking pattern in
the control experiment during which the experimenter drew
from her pocket (i.e., the replication of Expt. 3).
Although this pattern of findings does not support the
probabilistic account, it also does not necessarily rule out
the possibility that infants did make a correct generalization
from sample to population in the Experiment 1 replication.
It is possible that 6-month-olds do appreciate the
relationship between samples and populations but they also
looked longer at the perceptual mismatch in the control task
because they continue to react to the mismatch when the
sample was drawn from the experimenter’s pocket.
Unfortunately the experimental design cannot tease apart the
two interpretations when infants continue to look longer at
the mismatches when the sample is not drawn from the box.
In the current study, we use an experimental design
appropriate for testing younger infants in a task where the
perceptual mismatch is eliminated but the displays remain
easy to process. We equated the overall quantity of each ball
color present on the stage in population boxes during test
trials by keeping two complementary boxes on display
throughout all trials (see Figure 2). After familiarizing
infants with the two population boxes (one mostly pink; one
mostly yellow), each test trial began with the two covered
population boxes on the stage, one on the left and one on the
right and a small transparent container to hold a sample in
the middle. The experimenter drew the infants’ attention to
each of these boxes and drew a sample of, e.g., 4 pink and 1
yellow ball from the box on the right and placed it in the
container. She then mimicked this action with the box on
the left to equate the amount of attention paid to each box.
Finally the experimenter revealed to the infant that the box
on the right side of the stage had a 4:1 ratio of pink to
yellow balls, and the box on the left side had the opposite
ratio. On each trial the sample alternated between a 4 pink
and 1 yellow sample (the more probable sample) and a 4
yellow and 1 pink sample (the less probable sample). If
infants are only sensitive to perceptual mismatches and not
sampling, they should look equally at all test trials, as the
large boxes on display have equal amounts of each color
and the sample therefore creates a slight but equal mismatch
across every trial. If, on the other hand, infants are sensitive
to the relationship between the sample and population, they
will look longer on trials where the less probable sample is
drawn from the relevant population box (e.g., the 4 pink and
1 yellow sample drawn from the mostly yellow box). We
tested 4- and 6-month-old infants in this new design.

Figure 1: The sequence of a test trial in Expt. 1 (Xu & Garcia,
2008). The experimenter shakes the box, closes her eyes and draws
out balls from the closed box. She then reveals the population.

population was eliminated. Test trials began in the exact
same manner as Experiment 1 with the closed large box and
empty sample container present on the stage. During the
sampling phase, the experimenter shook the box but instead
of reaching into the box to draw the sample of either 4 white
and 1 red ball or 4 red and 1 white ball, she reached into her
pocket to draw the sample instead. She then revealed the
contents of the box just as in Experiment 1. This resulted in
identical test trial displays to those in Experiment 1 but in
this case, infants should have no reason to expect a
relationship between what they saw in the small container
and the population box presented on the stage. The 8month-old infants looked about equally when the mostly red
box was displayed with the 4 red and 1 white ball sample
(the perceptual match) or the 4 white and 1 red ball sample
(the perceptual mismatch). This suggests that neither display
violated infants’ expectations when the relationship between
the box and container was eliminated. This result provides
evidence in favor of the probabilistic account of infants’
performance in Experiment 1, i.e., that infants were in fact
reacting to the relative improbability of the sample and not
the perceptual mismatch between the box and sample.
In a follow-up experiment, we began to explore whether
even younger infants have some of these probabilistic
intuitions in place. It is plausible that younger infants could
succeed at a version of this task, given that evidence exists
revealing statistical learning in 2- to 6-month-old infants in

442

through the Plexiglas windows. The “mostly pink” box
contained 60 pink and 15 yellow ping-pong balls (pink to
yellow = 4:1); the “mostly yellow” box contained the
opposite (pink to yellow = 1:4). The boxes looked identical
when viewed with the curtains down.

Apparatus
Testing occurred in a room divided in half by curtains
spanning the width and height of the room and objects were
presented on a puppet stage. The viewable area of the stage
measured 94 cm x 55 cm (width x height). The experimenter
sat behind the stage with her upper body and head visible to
the infant. An observer, present to code the infant’s looking
times, sat in a corner of the room and was not visible to the
infant. She watched the infant on a TV monitor and coded
the infant’s looking behavior online using JHAB version
1.0.0 (R. Casstevens, 2007). She was blind to the order of
the test trials.
The infant sat in a high chair approximately 70 cm from
the center of the stage. The parent sat next to the infant
facing the opposite direction of the stage and was instructed
to avoid looking at the stage. Two camcorders were used to
record the experimental session, one to record the infant’s
looking behavior and the other to record the experimenter’s
presentation of the objects.

Figure 2: The two possible outcomes in the current experiment.
The population boxes displayed simultaneously ensure equal
amounts of pink and yellow are displayed.

Method
Participants
Participants were 32 infants: Sixteen 6-month-olds (6 males;
M = 6;4 [months; days], R=5;15 to 6;17) and sixteen 4–
month–olds (12 males; M = 4;15; R = 4;1 to 5;0). Ten
infants (six 6-month-olds and four 4-month-olds) were
tested but excluded due to fussiness (4), not attending
during sampling (2), providing looking times over 3.5
standard deviations above the average (1) or parental
interference (3). Infants were recruited from the San
Francisco Bay Area and they received a small gift for
participating in the study.

Design and Procedure
Calibration To calibrate each individual infant’s looking
window, a squeaky toy or keys were used to direct the
infant’s attention to the outside parameters of the stage.

Ping-Pong Balls A total of 166 (83 yellow and 83 pink)
ping-pong balls were used in the experiment.

Free Play Phase After calibration, the infant was shown the
box with 3 pink and 3 yellow ping-pong balls. He/she was
encouraged to play with the balls for approximately 30
seconds to allow infants to become familiar with the objects.

Boxes and Containers A small open white box (15.5 cm x
17.5 cm x 8 cm) constructed from foam core was used in the
“Free Play” phase of the experiment (see Procedure
section). The box contained 3 yellow and 3 pink balls.
A small, transparent Plexiglas container with an open top
(20 cm x 4.5 cm x 4.5 cm) was used to display the 5-ball
samples during test trials. It was narrow enough that the
balls lined up in a row when placed in the container.
Two large 31 cm x 23.5 cm x 23.5 cm boxes were used to
display the populations during the familiarization and test
trials. The boxes were black rectangular cubes and the
inside of each box was partitioned into two parts with
Plexiglas inserted in the front to provide a transparent
window and a board in the middle to hold the populations of
balls. A hidden center compartment measuring 10 cm x 24
cm x 10 cm was cut in the top of the two boxes to hold the
samples to be removed from the box during test trials. From
the infants’ perspectives, the box appeared as one single
unit, filled completely with ping-pong balls. The Plexiglas
display windows were covered with a black fabric curtain
that could be lifted to reveal the contents of the boxes

Familiarization trials (4 trials) To begin each trial, the
experimenter placed the two large boxes on the stage 30 cm
apart with the front curtains down. She shook the box on the
right side of the stage a few times, saying, “What’s in this
box?” She then shook the box on the left a few times,
saying, “What’s in this box?” She lifted the front covers of
both boxes simultaneously, revealing the separate
populations of mostly pink and mostly yellow balls, and
said “Look, [baby’s name], look!” She put her head down
and directed her gaze to the floor. The observer began
timing upon hearing the second, “look”. Trials ended when
the infant looked away for 2 consecutive seconds.
The same two boxes of mostly pink and mostly yellow
ping-pong balls were presented in the same locations for all
4 familiarization trials within a single experimental session.
Between trials the boxes were removed from the stage and a
black curtain was lowered at the back of the stage to conceal
the experimenter. These trials were included to familiarize
infants to the large boxes, as well as to the general
procedure of the study. Additionally, exposing the infants to
these two contrasting populations, one of mostly pink balls,

Materials

443

the other of mostly yellow balls, might cue them to attend to
ratios. The familiarizations lasted approximately 3 minutes.

order (probable-outcome vs. improbable-outcome first) or
the population box sampled from (mostly pink or mostly
yellow). Subsequent analyses collapsed over these variables.
Looking times for test trial outcomes were analyzed using
a 2 x 2 ANOVA with outcome (probable vs. improbable) as
the within-subjects factor and age (4-month-olds vs. 6month-olds) as the between-subjects factor. A significant
interaction between Outcome and Age was found, F (1, 30)
=7.03, p = .013, effect size (ηp2) = .190. No other significant
main effects or interactions were found.
To break down the interaction, we conducted follow-up ttests exploring the effect of test trial outcome (probable vs.
improbable) for each age group separately (see Table 1 for
mean looking times). Six-month-old infants looked reliably
longer at the improbable outcome (M= 8.63s, SD=5.05) than
the probable outcome (M= 5.96s, SD= 2.81), t(15) = 2.67, p
= .011. Twelve of sixteen infants looked longer on average
at the improbable outcome, Wilcoxon signed ranks test, z =
2.23, p = .013. In contrast, 4-month-olds looked about
equally at the improbable outcome (M = 6.05s, SD = 3.14)
and the probable outcome (M = 7.45s, SD = 5.18), t(15) =
1.19, p =. 250. Seven of sixteen infants looked longer on
average at the improbable outcome, Wilcoxon signed ranks
test, z = 0.27, p = .605.

Test trials (6 trials) On each test trial, the experimenter
placed the two large boxes on the stage (keeping them in
this same location on all 6 trials) with the front curtains
closed. The experimenter always sampled from the box on
her right. She shook each box one at a time just as in the
familiarization trials while saying, “What’s in this box?”
She then closed her eyes, turned her head away, and reached
into the box on her right. She pulled out 3 ping-pong balls
and placed them into the small Plexiglas container in the
middle of the stage one at a time. She then closed her eyes,
turned her head away, and reached into the box on her left
(not pulling out any ping-pong balls) and placed her hand on
top of the small Plexiglas container in the middle of the
stage to mimic the sampling motions made from the box on
the right. She then repeated this action, pulling out 2 more
ping-pong balls from the right hand box and placing them in
the Plexiglas container and again mimicking this action with
the box on the left. Thus the small Plexiglas container held a
total of 5 balls. On alternating trials the sample removed
from the population box was either 4 pink and 1 yellow
balls or 4 yellow and 1 pink balls. Then the experimenter
lifted the front covers of both boxes on the stage
simultaneously and said “Look, [baby’s name], look!” She
put her head down and directed her gaze toward the floor.
The observer began timing upon hearing the second, “look”,
and ended the trial after the infant looked away for 2
consecutive seconds. Between trials, the stage was cleared
and the back curtain was lowered. The test trials lasted
approximately 6 minutes.

Table 1: Mean Looking Times in Seconds By Age Group

4-month-olds
6-month-olds

Probable sample
(SD)
7.45 (5.18)
5.96 (2.81)

Improbable sample
(SD)
6.05 (3.14)
8.63 (5.05)

We also performed a preliminary analysis to address the
potential concern that infants only directed their attention to
the sampled box and not the additional complementary box
despite efforts to draw attention to both population boxes on
test trials. Although a more in-depth analysis should include
overall duration of looks to each box, to begin we obtained
an average number of looks to the sampled and non-sampled
boxes for six randomly chosen infants of each age group.
We analyzed the looking behavior only during test trials
(not familiarization trials) and included infants’ looking
behavior while the experimenter was sampling and while
the static displays were presented after the experimenter
revealed the populations. Four-month-old infants looked an
average of 7.67 times (SD = 6.31) to the sampled box and an
average of 10.50 times (SD = 8.29) to the non-sampled box.
Six month-old infants looked an average of 8.50 times (SD
= 4.67) to the sampled box and 11.00 times (SD = 6.42) to
the non-sampled box. There were no differences between
the average number of looks to the sampled box between 4month-olds and 6-month-olds (t(10) = .66, p = .52) or the
average number of looks to the non-sampled box between
the two age groups (t(10) = .12, p = .91). There were no
differences in the number of looks to the sampled vs. nonsampled box for 6-month-olds (t(10) = .77, p = .46) or the
number of looks to the sampled vs. non-sampled box for the
4-month-olds (t(10) = .67, p = .52).

Design The side that the population boxes (mostly pink or
mostly yellow) were on and whether the infant saw the 4
pink and 1 yellow ball sample first were fully
counterbalanced across infants.

Predictions
If infants are sensitive to the relationship between samples
and populations (i.e., assuming random sampling, the
composition of a sample is likely to reflect the overall
composition of a population) they should look longer at test
trials displaying outcomes that violate this expectation than
outcomes that are in line with this expectation. Therefore
infants who saw the experimenter sampling from the
population with a 4 pink: 1 yellow ratio should look longer
at trials in which 4 yellow and 1 pink balls were sampled
than trials in which 4 pink and 1 yellow balls were sampled.
Conversely, infants who saw the experimenter sampling
from the 4 yellow: 1 pink population should show the
opposite looking pattern.

Results
A second observer, blind to trial order, coded 50% of the
infants offline. Interscorer reliability averaged 92%.
Preliminary analyses found no effects of gender, test trial

444

Discussion

ability to integrate physical and psychological constraints in
their statistical computations (Denison & Xu, 2010a; Xu &
Denison, 2009). This evidence, from both looking-time and
action-based measures, is particularly impressive given the
extensive experimental findings suggesting that adults often
make faulty probabilistic inferences in a wide range of
experimental tasks (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1974,
1981). Kahneman and Tversky find that adult judgments are
often hindered by the incorrect application of reasoning
heuristics when making probabilistic inferences. The infant
findings suggest that humans do have an intuitive, implicit
probabilistic reasoning mechanism.
Although we now have evidence of intuitive probabilistic
reasoning in 6-month-olds, it appears that 4-month-olds do
not share similar intuitions. Two classes of explanations
might account for this difference. One possibility is that our
task was simply too challenging for 4-month-olds and that
competence could be revealed in an even simpler task. For
example, they may have had difficulty tracking the sampling
behavior of the experimenter, or struggled to encode
displays with such a large number of balls. On the other
hand, encoding of the displays should be simple, as infants
were familiarized to the boxes on a number of trials and the
configuration of the boxes did not change throughout the
experiment. We will continue to investigate this possibility
in future work. A second alternative is that the 4-montholds’ failure could represent a true inability to make
generalizations from samples to populations.
If 4-month-olds do in fact lack this ability, it raises the
question of why and how it emerges at roughly 6 months.
Although we do not wish to commit to any strong claims
here, some speculations are in order. First, it is possible that
infants learn through experience that samples tend to reflect
populations. Between 4 and 6 months of age, infants may
accumulate evidence pointing to a relationship between the
samples and populations they encounter. For example, they
may notice that, day after day, when their mom gives them
items from a particular container, the items tend to be tasty.
After a number of exposures of this nature, they might
eventually make the inference that most items in this
container are tasty and thus the container might be filled
with a larger quantity of the sampled items. Of course, this
requires an initial ability to track regularities in the
behaviors of the people and objects in the infant’s
environment. Once infants gain enough evidence of the
predictive relationship between samples and populations,
they may begin to use their experience to make
generalizations in novel situations such as our task. It could
be the case that infants assume random sampling (i.e.,
strong sampling, see Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001 and Xu
& Tenenbaum, 2007) and that this is the basis for making
inferences given small samples. A second possibility is that
this probabilistic reasoning ability emerges through
maturation between 4 and 6 months.
Should the capacity to make basic generalizations from
samples to populations not emerge until 6 months, we must
consider the implications of this suggested developmental

We found that 6-month-old infants can make
generalizations from samples to populations in a
probabilistic inference task. When perceptual features are
equated in the displays and infants cannot react based solely
on perceptual mismatches, 6-month-old infants look longer
at the less probable sample of, for example, 4 yellow and 1
pink ball drawn from a mostly pink box than at a more
probable sample of 4 pink and 1 yellow ball. Four-montholds, however, did not show this pattern; they looked
roughly equally at both samples. This suggests that the
ability to reason about random sampling emerges at around
6 months of age.
One might question whether the current attempt to equate
perceptual features in the displays was adequate to rule out
the perceptual mismatch account. It is possible that, despite
efforts to draw attention to both boxes on stage, infants still
only attended to the sampled box and then simply reacted to
the mismatch between that box and the sample container on
the trials that were probabilistically less likely. In order to
assuage this concern, an analysis of infant scanning
behavior was performed. The analysis provided preliminary
evidence that infants of both ages did attend to both boxes
throughout the test trials and they looked a roughly equal
number of times at both boxes. This weakens the argument
that 6-month-old infants were simply reacting to perceptual
mismatches, as 4-month-olds appeared to attend to the same
perceptual information as 6-month-olds but did not show
differences in looking time between the probable and
improbable events. In future work we will include a more
detailed analysis of the looking behaviors, providing
duration of looks to both boxes and the sample container for
each age group.
The findings reported here, in combination with recent
evidence from a number of other experimental paradigms,
provide strong evidence for early competence in
probabilistic reasoning in young infants. In one study,
Teglas et al. (2007) found that 12-month-old infants can
correctly reason about single-event probability in a looking
time task. In this task infants were shown a lottery machine
on a computer screen with 3 identical objects and 1 different
object moving around in the machine. Infants were able to
reason that the 1 different object was more likely to exit the
machine on a random draw than 1 of the 3 identical objects.
In another study, Denison and Xu (2010b) used a choice
task to explore infants’ ability to make predictions about
single-event probability. In this task, infants were shown
two large populations of 4:1 desirable to undesirable objects
and 4:1 undesirable to desirable objects. The experimenter
removed a single occluded object from each population and
infants were able to identify and retrieve the hidden object
that was sampled from the population most likely to yield a
desirable object (e.g., if infants preferred a pink object, they
crawled/walked to the cup that contained an object drawn
from the population jar that was mostly pink). Finally, in
two studies using the Xu and Garcia (2008) probabilistic
inference task, 11-month-old infants have demonstrated the

445

References

time course. If this is a general-purpose mechanism to be
used across the lifespan to acquire domain knowledge, how
does one reconcile this time of onset with the evidence of
genuine domain knowledge – mostly in the domain of
physical knowledge – in infants 4 months of age and
younger? Again here we can only speculate: One possibility
is that the core cognition thesis is correct and much of the
domain knowledge present very early on is innately given
(Carey, 2009). Another possibility builds on Baillargeon’s
(2008) suggestion that much early physical knowledge is in
fact learned. It is possible that infants are endowed with a
very simple object concept such as persistence, and they
build on the concept by making revisions based on observed
evidence. If domain knowledge, at least regarding physical
objects, is acquired in this way, a domain-general
mechanism like the one reported here might be at play in
informing these revisions early on.
We will attempt to provide further support for the
probabilistic account of 6-month-olds’ performance in
future work. For example, we may test 6-month-olds’
abilities to make inferences in the reverse direction of that
reported here — from populations to samples (see Xu &
Garcia, 2008 Expt. 2 for design details). In this design,
infants are required to make probabilistic inferences when
they cannot simultaneously view the sample and population.
That is, infants will first view the population, the
experimenter will occlude the population and a sample will
be drawn. During timing, the contents of the population box
will no longer be present. This design will help to further
rule out the perceptual mismatch account of our findings.
Future experiments will also investigate the sophistication
of 6-month-old infants’ probabilistic inferences. We will
explore whether infants at this age are using the simple
heuristic that samples and populations ought to match or if
they have a more nuanced conception of probability.
Eleven-month-old infants can integrate domain knowledge
regarding objects and agents into these probabilistic
inference tasks (Denison & Xu, 2010; Xu & Denison,
2009). This integration requires a realization that imposing
physical constraints on objects or psychological constraints
on agents can drastically change the consequences of
sampling. Do 6-month-old infants who appear to be just
beginning to show competence in probabilistic inference
understand that the consequences of sampling behavior vary
depending on sampling conditions? Or, do infants initially
deploy this mechanism in all sampling contexts and only
later learn the appropriate applications?
Our findings suggest that six- but not four-month-old
infants are able to make accurate generalizations from
samples to populations and their success in our task cannot
be explained by positing a low-level perceptual matching
strategy. This pattern of findings suggests that reasoning
about the predictive relationship between samples and
populations emerges between 4 and 6 months of age.

Baillargeon, R. (2008). Innate ideas revisited: For a
principle of persistence in infants’ physical reasoning.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 2-13.
Carey, S. (2009) The origin of concepts. Oxford University
Press.
Casstevens, R.M. (2007). jHab: Java Habituation Software
(Version 1.0.0) [Computer software]. Chevy Chase, MD.
Dawson, C., & Gerken, L. A. (2009). From domaingenerality to domain-sensitivity: 4-month-olds learn an
abstract repetition rule in music that 7-month-olds do not.
Cognition, 111(3), 378-382.
Denison, S. & Xu, F. (2010a). Integrating physical
constraints in statistical inference by 11-month-old
infants. Cognitive Science, 34, 885-908.
Denison, S. & Xu, F. (2010b). Twelve- to 14-month-old
infants can predict single- event probability with large set
sizes. Developmental Science, 13, 798-803.
Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Schulz, L.E. (2010).
Infants consider both the sample and the sampling process
in inductive generalization. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(20), 9066-9071.
Kirkham, N., Slemmer, J., & Johnson, S. (2002). Visual
statistical learning in infancy: evidence of a domain
general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35-B42.
Maye, J., Werker, J., & Gerken, L. (2002). Infant sensitivity
to distributional information can affect phonetic
discrimination. Cognition, 82(3), B101-B111.
Schulz, L.E., Bonawitz, E. B., & Griffiths, T. (2007). Can
being scared make your tummy ache? Naive theories,
ambiguous evidence and preschoolers' causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology 43(5), 1124-1139.
Tenenbaum, J. & Griffiths, T. (2001). Generalization,
similarity, and Bayesian inference. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 629-641.
Teglas, E., Girotto, V., Gonzalez, M., Bonatti, L. (2007).
Intuitions of probabilities shape expectations about the
future at 12 months and beyond. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104, 19156-19159.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185(4157),
1124-1131.
Tversky, A.; Kahneman, D. (1981). "The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice". Science
211(4481), 453–458.
Xu, F. & Denison, S. (2009). Statistical inference and
sensitivity to sampling in 11-month-old infants.
Cognition, 112, 97-104.
Xu, F. & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 5012-5015.
Xu, F. & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Sensitivity to sampling in
Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science, 10(3),
288-297.

446

