UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Writing Experiences on Holistic Processing in Chinese Character
Recognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7713h8m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Van Yip Tso, Ricky
Kit-Fong Au, Terry
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Writing Experiences on Holistic Processing in Chinese Character
Recognition
Ricky Van Yip Tso (richie13@hku.hk)
Terry Kit-fong Au (terryau@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
604 Knowles Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract
Holistic processing has been shown to be a behavioral marker
of face recognition and object recognition in experts. We
tested Chinese literates who can read and write Chinese
characters (Writers) and Chinese literates whose reading
performance
far
exceeded
their
writing
ability
(Limited-writers). We found that Writers perceived Chinese
characters less holistically than Limited-writers. In addition,
the holistic processing effect was found to be dependent of
writing experiences rather than reading and copying
performances. This effect may be due to Chinese Writers
exhibiting a better awareness of the orthographic components
of Chinese characters than Limited-writers. While Hsiao and
Cottrell (2009) showed that reduced holistic processing is a
marker of visual expertise in Chinese character recognition,
our findings further suggest that such reduction is related to
writing experiences in Chinese. This study is also the first to
report on the Chinese reading population that has far poorer
writing performance than reading performance.
Keywords: Chinese character recognition, holistic processing,
reading, writing, copying

Introduction
Holistic processing has been found to be a marker of
expertise in face recognition as well as for object recognition
(e.g. Bukach, Gauthier, & Tarr, 2006; Gauthier & Buhach,
2007; Wong, Palmeri, & Gauthier, 2009; although some
argued that it is specific to face recognition; see e.g., McKone,
Kanwisher, & Duchaine, 2007). Chinese characters, with
their many shared visual properties with faces (McCleery et.
al., 2008), had been hypothesized to induce a similar holistic
processing effect in expert readers. Yet the expertise marker
for Chinese character recognition is reduced holistic
processing (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009).
It is understandable why Chinese characters were thought
to induce holistic processing in Chinese readers. The Chinese
reading system is logographic. While words in alphabetic
languages such as English are linear in structure, consisting
of series of letters in varying lengths, Chinese characters
have a more homogenous configuration and each character is
considered as a grapheme that maps onto a morpheme (Shu,
2003; Wong & Gauthier, 2006). The basic units of a Chinese
character are strokes, which combine to form more than a
thousand different stroke patterns in the Chinese writing
system (Hsiao & Shillcock, 2006). Recognizing Chinese
character means recognizing different constituent units
formed by different combinations of stroke patterns and a
typical literate recognize 3,000 to 4,000 Chinese characters

(Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009). Chinese characters are recognized
regardless of variation in font, similar to face recognition
regardless of difference facial expressions (Hsiao & Cottrell,
2009), and experts recognize Chinese characters individually
like faces (Wong & Gauthier, 2006).
However, the reason why experienced Chinese readers
have a reduced holistic processing effect compared with
novices in perceiving Chinese characters (Hsiao & Cottrell,
2009) may be because Chinese readers are sensitive to the
internal constituent components of Chinese characters and
have the ability to ignore the overall configural information
(Ge, Wang, McCleery, & Lee, 2006). In contrast, these
internal constituent components of Chinese characters do not
look easily separable to novices who lack the orthographic
sensitivity that expert readers possess to distinguish
individual features and components in Chinese characters
(Chen, Allport, & Marshall, 1996; Ho, Ng, & Ng, 2003;
Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009).
Chinese children have better orthographic awareness as
they progress to higher grades (Ho, Ng, & Ng, 2003). One
explanation has to do with motor programming through
extensive copying and reading at school (Tan, Spinks, Eden,
Perfetti, & Siok, 2005). Tan et al. (2005) identified that
copying performance significantly predicts reading ability,
while a more recent study further demonstrated a significant
correlation between dictation and reading performance (Ho
et al., 2006). Both copying and dictation were shown to
predict reading performance because children may
consolidate orthographic structures of Chinese characters
with graphomotor memory of strokes as they copy the stroke
sequence (Tan et al., 2005; Tse, Kwan, & Ho, 2010). Other
research also suggested that our writing experience plays an
important role in shaping the neural representation
specialized for reading (e.g., James & Atwood, 2008;
Longcamp Anton, Roth, & Velay, 2003). He et al. (2003)
showed that a neural pathway linking the Broca’s area and
the supplemental motor area was activated during silent
reading of Chinese pinyins (Romanized transcriptions of
Mandarin pronunciation) in an fMRI study. Siok, Perfetti, Jin
and Tan (2004) identified the left middle frontal gyrus, an
area just anterior to the premotor area, was activated in
normal but not dyslexic Chinese readers when reading. These
results consistently suggest a close relationship between the
development of sensory-motor integration through writing
practice and the development of reading skills.

1442

However, there exist some Chinese readers who have high
reading proficiency with writing ability far poorer than their
reading performance. These readers are usually from
international schools or foreigners living in Chinese speaking
countries who learned to read Chinese from the environment,
or overseas Chinese immigrants who acquired reading
Chinese from the mass media. These readers thus are a
counter-example of the claim that writing skills are required
in learning to read Chinese. Yet, there is virtually no existing
literature that investigated such a Chinese community on
their reading abilities and behavior. This discrepancy
between reading performance and writing performance in
Chinese is possible because writing in Chinese is more
complex and resource-demanding than writing in alphabetic
languages (Tse, Kwan, & Ho, 2010). When recalling an
English word to write, remembering the 26 letters in the
alphabet together with the combination corresponding to its
sounds is much simpler than writing Chinese characters, in
which one has to retrieve more than a thousand pieces of
script information from long term memory. Given the higher
cognitive load when producing a Chinese character, it is
possible that the above-mentioned limited-writing Chinese
community use a more efficient strategy, recognizing the
holistic structure similarly to face recognition, as they do not
need to analyze the constituent structures of Chinese
characters for writing. Nevertheless, it remains unclear
whether their Chinese reading performance is comparable to
native readers who received intensive character writing
training, and whether different cognitive processes are
involved in Chinese reading between these two groups of
readers.
Here we aim to investigate the reading and writing
performance differences between proficient Chinese readers
who know how to write (i.e. Writers) and those with
substantially
poorer
writing
performance
(i.e.
limited-writers). In addition, we examine whether writers
perceive characters less holistically than limited-writers, and
whether the reduced holistic processing effect is related to
their reading and writing performance. Since writing practice
may enhance orthographic awareness of characters and
de-emphasize configural information in character
recognition, we predict that writers may be more sensitive to
components and less sensitive to configural information than
limited-writers, and consequently recognize characters with
reduced holistic processing.

reported being capable of reading Chinese characters but
with far poorer writing ability. Their average age was 21.06
(S.E. = .39) and all of them had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.

Procedures
Test for holistic processing
To test for holistic processing effects, procedures were
adopted from Hsiao and Cottrell (2009). 80 pairs of medium
to high frequency Chinese characters in Ming font having a
top-bottom configuration as adopted by Hsiao and Cottrell
(2009) were chosen. Participants were asked to attend to only
half (either top or bottom) of each character on any given trial.
Twenty pairs were presented in each of the four conditions
(Fig. 1): same in congruent trials, different in congruent
trials, same in incongruent trials and different in congruent
trials. A complete composite paradigm (Gauthier & Bukach,
2007) was adopted so that in congruent trials, the attended
and irrelevant halves of the Chinese characters corresponded
to the same response (i.e. both were the same or different)
while in incongruent trials, the attended and irrelevant halves
corresponded to different responses (i.e. one halves were the
same while the others were different). We adopted this
experimental design to avoid response biases that may occur
in the partial composite design in which the irrelevant halves
of the Chinese characters would always be different (Robbins
& McKone, 2007; see Gauthier & Bukach, 2007). The
stimuli were of relatively low contrasts to enhance the
difficulty of this task to avoid ceiling effects.
In each experimental trial, participants were cued with a

500 ms

Methods
Participants
34 Cantonese native-speaking Chinese readers (14 males and
20 females) from Hong Kong participated in our study. They
had similar (college) education background. Half of them had
always attended conventional local schools and reported to
have fluent reading and writing proficiency (i.e. Writers),
while the other half had either studied overseas or in an
international school and had not received formal Chinese
lessons that prepared them for the local public Chinese
examinations (i.e. Limited-writers). All Limited-writers

1443

Fig. 1. Illustration of stimulus pairs in the complete
composite paradigm and trial sequences (Hsiao &
Cottrell, 2009, p. 456). In (a), the attended
components are shaded in grey in this example for
trials when attended halves are the bottom halves.
In (b), a 1,000 ms central fixation cross precedes
each trial followed by a cue either below or above
the cross to indication which half (top or bottom)
of the characters participants should attend to in
the following display.

symbol that indicated which half (top or bottom) of each
character they should attend to, after 1,000 ms of central
fixation, in judging whether the pair of word part was the
same. The pair of characters was then presented, with one
above and one below the initial fixation point. During the 500
ms presentation time, participants looked at each character
once and responded as quickly and accurately as possible,
pressing a button to judge if the character parts were the same
or different. Accuracy and reaction time were collected. If the
participants judged characters holistically, they should make
more error and respond more slowly in the incongruent trials
compared with the congruent trials. We measure
participants’ holistic processing effect D' as:
D' = d’congruent – d’incongruent
Where d’ is the discrimination sensitivity measure of the
congruent and incongruent trials. We also measure the
response time difference between incongruent trials and
congruent trials (i.e. holistic Response Time).
Fig. 1 illustrates how the stimuli appeared in each condition
and summarizes the events that occurred in each trial.
Tests for reading and writing performance:
Four tests were employed to obtain data on participants’
reading and writing ability:
1. Character naming task
2. Word naming task
3. Character copying task
4. Word dictation task.
Task 1 and 2 tested participant’s reading ability while task
3 and 4 tested their Character copying and word recalling
ability respectively. Two-character words were presented in
Task 2 and the same words were given in task 4 instead of
characters to reduce ambiguity due to homophonic characters
in the Chinese lexicon. Task 4 was compared with Task 2 to
examine the discrepancy between word naming and word
recalling as both tasks used the same words.
Reading tests:
1. Character naming task:
Participants were presented with 84 high frequency
Chinese characters of similar visual complexity one at a time
and asked to read aloud as quickly and as accurately as
possible (the characters had an average frequency of 443.3
(S.E. = 45.4) and stroke number of 10.9 (S.E. = .16)). The
information of the stimuli’s frequencies and stroke numbers
was obtained from the database from Humanities Computing
and Methodology Programme at the Chinese University of
Hong Kong (Kwan, 2001). In each trial, participants first
fixated on a screen with a fixation cross at the center for 500
ms, followed by the presentation of the character. After they
had responded, the screen turned blank and the experimenter
pressed a button to record the accuracy and to start the next
trial. Their response time and accuracy rate were recorded.
2. Word naming task:
Participants read aloud 40 high frequency two-character
words (average frequency = 194.7, S.E. = 19.6) as quickly
and accurately as possible. The information of the stimuli’s
frequency and stroke number was obtained from the database

of Taiwan Ministry of Education (1997). In each trial,
participants first fixated on a screen with a fixation cross at
the center for 500 ms, followed by the presentation of the
character. After they had responded, the screen turned blank,
and the experimenter pressed a button to record the accuracy
and to start the next trial. Their response time and accuracy
rate were recorded.
Writing tests:
3. Character copying task:
Participants copied 60 characters (20 real characters, 20
pseudo-characters, and 20 Korean characters) as quickly and
as accurately as possible. The Chinese characters were high
frequency characters that were randomly selected from the
characters used in task 1 with an average frequency of 348
(S.E. = 65.9) and average stroke number of 10.7 (S.E. = .48).
The pseudo-characters were orthographically legal but
non-sense characters. In each trial, participants first fixated
on a screen with a fixation cross at the center for 500 ms,
followed by the presentation of the character. After they had
copied each character, they pressed a button on the response
box immediately and the screen turned blank. Then the
experimenter pressed a button to record the accuracy and to
start the next trial. Their response time was recorded.
4. Word dictation task:
Participants wrote down 40 two-character words as
quickly and as accurately as possible when they heard each
word said in a female voice presented by a computer. In each
trial, participants first fixated on a screen with the words “Get
ready” for 500 ms. After hearing the word, participants
immediately pressed a button to indicate whether they could
recall the word, or another button if they could not, before
they started writing. The experimenter then pressed a button
to indicate accuracy and to reveal the next word. Accuracy
rate was recorded.
These experiments were all conducted using E-prime v2.0
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).

Results
One-way ANOVAs were used for the analysis. The results
showed that Writers and Limited-writers did not differ in
their word naming accuracy [F(1, 32) = 0.995, n.s.; Fig. 2(a)],
suggesting that both groups had high Chinese reading
proficiency. Nevertheless, Writers had significantly shorter
response times in word naming than Limited-writers [F(1, 32)
= 12.365, p < 0.01; Fig. 2(b)]. In character naming, Writers
outperformed Limited-writers in both accuracy [F(1, 32) =
5.23, p < 0.05; Fig. 2(c)] and response time [F(1, 32) = 14.45,
p < 0.01; Fig. 2(d)]. Writers also had shorter response times
in the character copying task than Limited-writers [F(1, 32) =
15.39, p < 0.01; Fig. 2(e)]. In the dictation task, Writers were
significantly more accurate than the Limited-writers [F(1, 32)
= 140.15, p < 0.01; Fig. 2(f)]. As for holistic processing
effects, a significant difference was found in the response
time difference between the incongruent and congruent trials
(i.e. holistic Response Time) between the two groups [F(1,
32) = 13.61, p < 0.01; Fig. 2(g)]. Writers perceived Chinese
characters less holistically than Limited-writers. A marginal

1444

a)

c)

e)

g)

effect in holistic D’ was also observed [F(1, 32) = 3.044, p <
0.1; Fig. 2(h)].

b)

d)

f)

h)

Analysis of Covariates
To examine whether the difference in holistic processing
between Writers and Limited-writers was due to their
difference in reading or copying performance rather than
writing experience, we analyzed the holistic response time
difference between Writers and Limited-writers by putting
the variables of reading and writing performances as
covariates (ANCOVA). We found that the effect of writing
experiences on holistic processing was still significant when
either character naming response time [F(1, 32) = 4.759, p <
0.05], character naming accuracy [F(1, 32) = 7.637, p < 0.05],
word naming accuracy [F(1, 32) = 12.17, p < 0.01], or
character copying response time [F(1, 32) = 5.201, p < 0.05]
was put as a covariate, and a marginal effect was found when
word-reading response time was put as a covariate [F(1, 32)
= 2.953, p < 0.1]. However, when dictation accuracy was
used as a covariate, the effect became insignificant [F(1, 32)
= .059, n.s.]. These effects suggest that the difference in
holistic Response Time between Writers and Limited-writers
was due to their writing experiences and performance in the
dictation task (i.e. the ability to recall and write down
characters), instead of their reading or copying performances.
Copying Task:
To further understand the performance of Writers and
Limited-writers in the copying task, we investigated their
copying performance for real Chinese characters,
pseudo-characters and Korean characters separately. The
results showed that Writers copied significantly faster for
real characters [F(1,32) = 15.39, p =.003], Korean characters
[F(1,32) = 10.257, p = .003] and pseudo-characters [F(1,32)
= 14.706, p =.001] than Limited-writers, as summarized in
Fig. 3. These results suggest that writers are able to
generalize their Chinese character copying ability to copying
novel characters that have similar structures (i.e. Korean
characters in this case).

Discussion

Fig.2. Bar charts showing the word naming
accuracy (a) and response time (b); character naming
accuracy (c) and response time (d); character copying
response time (e); dictation accuracy (f); holistic
Response Time (g); and holistic D' (h) in
Limited-writers and Writers

In the current study, we tested the reading and writing
performance of Writers and Limited-writers and examined
which variables uniquely predict holistic processing. We
found that Limited-writers processed Chinese characters
more holistically than Writers. Further analyses showed that
this effect could be accounted for by their performance
difference in the dictation task, but could not be accounted
for by their differences in any of the reading performance
measures, including character and word naming accuracy
and response times. This result suggests that the holistic
processing effect in Chinese character recognition is
dependent on writing experience, or more specifically, the
ability to recall and write down Chinese characters rather
than reading performance.
Analyzing the constituents and stroke information
probably facilitates recalling and writing down Chinese

.

1445

Limited-writers had slower naming time for Chinese words
compared to Writers.
Complementing Hsiao and Cottrell (2009)’s study, we
found that holistic processing uniquely depended on writing
experiences, or more specifically, the ability to recall and
write Chinese characters, by focusing on a little noticed
population of Chinese readers with limited writing ability.
Since orthographic sensitivity and writing/copying
performance had been shown to strongly predict reading
ability (Tan et al., 2005; Tse, Kwan, & Ho, 2010), our study
may implicate a different Chinese character recognizing
strategy employed by Chinese readers who have limited
writing experience. Further investigation can examine a
possible causal relationship between Chinese writing
performance and holistic processing preferably with
age-matched and reading-level matched participants.
In conclusion, our study is the first to report on the
community of Chinese readers with limited writing ability
and to suggest a close relationship between writing
performance and holistic processing in Chinese character
recognition.

Real Characters
Korean Characters
Pseudo-characters

Fig.3. Bar chart showing the copying response
time for real characters, Korean characters and
pseudo-characters in Limited-writers and Writers

Acknowledgments

characters substantially. Such ability can be honed by
extensive writing experience. This perhaps explains why the
Writers in this study not only outperformed the
Limited-Writers in the dictation task, but also in the task
involving Korean characters. Note that each Korean (hangul)
character typically consists of several phonetic symbols
arranged in configurations commonly found in Chinese
characters. The Writers' ability to analyze Chinese characters
may have generalized to Korean characters, thereby reducing
their holistic processing of Korean characters as well.
Reading performance in Chinese has generally been shown
to be similar among good and poor readers when copying
performance in Chinese was controlled (Tan et. al, 2005; Tse,
Kwan, & Ho, 2010). This phenomenon suggests a close
relationship between reading and copying performance. Thus,
in a separate analysis, we analyzed reading performance
difference (response time in character naming) between
Writers and Limited-writers with character copying
performance (response time) as a covariate. We found that
the effect of writing experiences on character naming
response time was still significant even when character
copying response time was used as a covariate (p < .05). Our
finding suggests that reading performances may not depend
on copying ability. Moreover, both Writers and
Limited-writers scored similar accuracy in the word naming
task while Limited-writers performed much poorer in the
dictation task than Writers, despite the same words were used
in the two tasks. This further suggests that word reading
accuracy in Chinese is not related to the ability to recall and
write down characters (assessed in the dictation task), though

We are grateful to the HKU Seed Funding Program for Basic
Research (project #10400471 to J.H. Hsiao) and the Research
Grant Council of Hong Kong (project code: HKU 744509H
and 745210H to J.H. Hsiao).

References
Bukach, C. M., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2006). Beyond
faces and modularity: The power of an expertise
framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 156-166.
Chen, Y. P., Allport, D. A., & Marshall. J. C. (1996). What
are the functional orthographic units in Chinese word
recognition: The stroke or the Stroke pattern? Q. J. Exp.
Psychol-A, 49, 1024-1043.
Gauthier, I., & Bukach, C. (2007). Should we reject the
expertise hypothesis? Cognition, 103, 322-330.
Ge, L., Wang, Z., McCleery, J. P., & Lee, K. (2006).
Activation of face expertise and the inversion effect.
Psychological Science, 17, 12-16.
He, A. G., Tan, L.H., Tang, Y., James, A., Wright, P., Eckert,
M. A., Fox, P. T., & Liu, Y. J. (2003). Modulation of
neural connectivity during tongue movement and reading.
Human Brain Mapping, 18, 222–232.
Ho, C. S., Chan, D., Tsang, S. and Lee, S. (2000). The Hong
Kong Test of Specific Learning Difficulties in Reading
and Writing. Hong Kong: Hong Kong Specific Learning
Difficulties Research Team.
reading development in Chinese: The role of semantic
radicals and phonetic radicals. Journal of Literacy
Research, 35, 849-878.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2009). Not all visual
expertise is holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of

1446

Chinese character recognition. Psychological Science , 20,
455-463.
Hsiao, J. H., & Shillcock, R. (2006). Analysis of a Chinese
phonetic compound databse: Implications for
orthographic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 35, 405-426.
James, K. H., & Atwood, T. P. (2009). The role of
sensoritmotor learning in the perception of letter-like
forms: Tracking the causes of neural specialization for
letters. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26, 91-110.
Kwan, T. W. (2001) Hong Kong, Mainland China & Taiwan:
Chinese character frequency-A trans-regional, diachronic
survey. Character Frequency. Retrieved December 30,
2010 from http://arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/chifreq/
Longcamp, M., Anton, J. L., Roth, M., & Velay, J. L. (2003).
Visual presentation of single letters activates a premotor
area involved in writing. NeuroImage, 19, 1492–1500.
McCleery, J. P., Zhang, L., Ge, L., Wang, Z., Christiansen, E.
M., Lee, K., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008). The roles of visual
expertise and visual input in the face inversion effect:
Behavioral and neurocomputational evidence. Vision
Research, 48, 703-715.
McKone, E., Kanwisher, N., & Duchaine, B.C. (2007). Can
generic expertise explain special processing for faces?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 8–15.
Robbins, R., & McKone, E. (2007). No face-like processing
for objects of expertise in three behavioural tasks.
Cognition, 103, 34–79.
Shu, H. (2003). Chinese writing system and learning to read.
International Journal of Psychology, 38, 274-285.
Siok, W. T., Perfetti, C. R., Jin, Z., & Tan, L. H. (2004).
Biological abnormality of impaired reading is constrained
by culture. Nature, 431, 71-76.
Taiwan
Ministry
of
Education.
(1997).
八十六年常用語詞調查報告書. Retrieved December 30,
2010
from
http://www.edu.tw/files/site_content/M0001/86news/ch2
.html?open
Tan, L. H., Spinks, J. A., Eden, G. F., Perfetti, C. A., & Siok,
W. T. (2005). Reading depends on writing, in Chinese.
PNAS , 102, 8781-8785.
Tse, H. M.-Y., Kwan, D. P.-L., & Ho, C. S.-H. (2010).
Should dyslexic children stop copying? Exploring the
relationship between word reading, copying and
dictation. Poster presented at the 35th Annual
International Academy for Research in Learning
Disabilities Conference in Taipei, Jan 12-15, 2011.
Wong, A. C., & Gauthier, I. (2006). An analysis of letter
expertise in a levels-of-categorization framework. Visual
Cognition, 15, 854-879.
Wong, A. C., Palmeri, T. J., & Gauthier, I. (2009).
Conditions for face-like expertise with objects: Becoming
a ziggerin expert-but which type? Psychological Science,
20, 1108-1117.

1447

