UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Social-Pragmatics of Category Learning
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qz3303g
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Voiklis, John
Corter, James
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                       The Social-Pragmatics of Category Learning
                                                     John Voiklis
                                            Stevens Institute of Technology
                                                    James Corter
                                         Teachers College, Columbia University
Abstract: Collaborators generally coordinate their activities through communication, during which they negotiate
a shared lexicon for activity-related objects. This social-pragmatic activity both recruits and affects cognitive and
social-cognitive processes ranging from selective attention to perspective taking. We ask whether negotiating reference
also facilitates category learning or might private verbalization yield comparable facilitation? Participants in three
referential conditions learned to classify imaginary creatures according to combinations of functional features –
nutritive and destructive – that implicitly defined four categories. Remote partners communicated in the Dialogue
condition. In the Monologue condition, participants recorded audio descriptions for their own later use. Controls
worked silently. Dialogue yielded better category learning, with wider selective attention. Monologue offered no
benefits over working silently. We conclude that negotiating reference compels collaborators to find communicable
structure in their shared activity; this shareability constraint accelerates category learning and likely provides much
of the benefit recently ascribed to learning labeled categories.
                                                           774

