UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Peer Tutoring and Teachable Agent on Interest and Task Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09g6x3nt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
So, Yeonhee
Kim, Youngok

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Peer Tutoring and Teachable Agent on Interest and Task
Performance
Yeonhee So (yukgam91@kyungnam.ac.kr)
Department of Education, Kyungnam University, Masan, 631-701, South Korea

Youngok Kim (youokim@ kyungnam.ac.kr)
Department of Mathematical Education, Kyungnam University, Masan, 631-701, South Korea

due to the tutors’ inexperience in teaching skills (Kim et al.,
2003). Peer tutoring also has restrictions in space and time,
while unnecessary interactions between tutor and tutee,
which can interfere with the learning process, might occur
with younger participants.
Various highly developed fields of information and
technology are presently available. Accordingly, with the
development of computers and communication technologies,
students are growing up with technology. It is therefore
desirable to effectively utilize such technologies in
education. In fact, the traditional computer assisted learning
(CAL) system has been utilized in educational settings for a
long time. However, CAL systems such as the intelligent
tutoring system (ITS) are based on passive learning
activities in which the students are provided with learning
materials and required to memorize them repeatedly via
CAL. Thus, many researches have criticized the iterative
and passive practice problems of CAL. In addition,
traditional CAL does not reflect individual differences such
as learner’s cognitive ability and motivational aspects.
Actually, the use of an identical interface, regardless of the
individual differences, might be not only less effective in
cognitive aspects of learning but also less interesting in
terms of motivation.
To overcome the limitations of peer tutoring and CAL,
Schwartz et al (2000) proposed the new concept of learning
by teaching through an agent called the Teachable Agent
(TA). TA is a computer program in which students teach the
computer agent to enhance their motivation and cognitive
ability based on the instructional method of ‘learning by
teaching’. That is, a computer-based system utilizing the
benefits gained from the act of teaching has been developed
to use TA as one of the ITS programs. In this TA, the agent
provides student tutors with an active role and positive
attitude toward the subject matter. Thus, learners are
enabled to organize and acquire problem solving knowledge
about various domains for instructing an intelligent agent
(Biswas et al., 2001)
In this study, we developed a kind of TA, the KORea
university intelligent agent (KORI) (Kim et al., 2005a,
2005b), and investigated its effectiveness in comparison
with peer tutoring on students’ task performance and
interest according to their level of self-efficacy.

Abstract
This experiment was conducted to compare the effects of peer
tutoring with an intelligent teachable agent (TA), the Korea
university intelligent agent (KORI), on students’ interest and task
performance according to their level of self-efficacy. The results
showed a significant interaction effect on interest between the peer
tutoring/KORI and the level of self-efficacy. The high selfefficacious group had greater interest in peer tutoring than in KORI,
whereas the low self-efficacious group had greater interest in
KORI than in peer tutoring. Analysis of the task performance
revealed that there was a main effect of peer tutoring/KORI and
interaction effect on the task performance between peer tutoring/
KORI and the level of self-efficacy. The participants with high
self-efficacy received high scores in both peer tutoring and KORI,
whereas the participants with low self-efficacy gained higher
scores in KORI than in peer tutoring.
Keywords: teachable
performance

agent,

peer

tutoring,

interest,

task

Introduction
Peer tutoring is an effective learning method based on the
concept of learning by teaching. Previous studies have
provided plenty of evidence that peer tutoring is an effective
method of learning for both tutor and tutee (e.g., Kulik &
Kulik, 1982). Ginsbug-Block and Fantuzzo (1997) reported
that peer tutoring enhanced the tutee’s academic
achievement, social relationship, self-concept and
motivation to learn, while simultaneously promoting the
tutor’s patience and ability for task performance, selfcontrol, and motivation. Furthermore, peer tutoring
increased the tutor’s positive attitude toward the tutee and
basic understanding of the subject areas (Cohen et al., 1982).
Thus, peer-tutoring activities have been regarded as a
meaningful learning method for improving cognitive ability
and academic motivation for both tutor and tutee.
Despite these potential benefits, peer tutoring has some
limitations in practical learning settings. In face-to-face peer
tutoring, tutors can experience a cognitive burden because
of the large amount of information they are required to
remember for effective teaching, and thus lose confidence in
tutoring. In addition, we can’t completely rule out the
possibility that tutees don’t perfectly understand what tutors
teach and even worse may learn misconceptions because
1

3530

Interface Design of the Teachable Agent (TA),
KORI
KORI is a new TA developed to enhance the students’
academic motivation and facilitate learning, and was applied
in this study to students learning about the rock cycle.
Similar to the typical TA, KORI consists of four
independent modules: planning, teaching, testing and
resource. Unlike previous TAs such as Betty, Milo and
Orbo which were developed at AAA lab in Stanford
university, KORI contains a narrative structure and various
learning activities, which were designed to enhance learning
motivation. As the story-like context of KORI (e.g., travel
story) is presented, the student tutor perceives that the
interaction with KORI is more like a game than boring
instructions (Figure. 1).

Figure 2: Lesson Plan to Teach KORI
Teaching module The teaching module consists of two
units: concept teaching and relation teaching. In the former,
the student can teach the true propositions to KORI and
correct the false propositions in KORI’s knowledge
structure by using the teaching tools (Figure. 3). In the
concept teaching activity of this study, the student teaches
the basic concepts of three kinds of rock: igneous,
sedimentary, and metamorphic. KORI is taught by inserting
five correct propositions and removing five incorrect
propositions among 15 given propositions. While teaching
KORI, students can also use the resource module whenever
they need information.
In relation teaching, as shown in the concept map
interface of Fig. 4, the students can teach KORI by drawing
the concept map by using the tool box. Like concept
teaching, the students can also use the resource module
while interacting with KORI.

Figure 1: Basic Interface
Planning module. The planning module asks the students
to write the teaching plan for three rocks and the rock cycle.
There are four empty boxes to type their own teaching plan
on the three kinds of rock and their transformation cycle.
This module introduces the students to the role of a tutor,
involves them more deeply in the teaching situation, and
increases their responsibility. In this module, the students
can make a teaching plan by themselves, which includes
collecting and sorting the learning materials to teach from
the learning resource, depending on the order of teaching
certain materials, the amount of teaching time, the
frequency of teaching, and the key points. Particularly,
planning activities might improve the learners’
metacognitive ability, which is the main skill for
formulating and following through on plans (Figure. 2).

Figure 3: Rock’s Concept Teaching
Testing Module: KORI’s knowledge is evaluated in the
testing module. KORI sets a quiz at the end of each teaching
session that consists of 6 questions on the content KORI
was taught. Although KORI appears to be taking the quiz, it
is in fact evaluating the student tutor’s level of knowledge
and comprehension. Since KORI’s answers on the quiz are
based on the information taught by the student tutor,
KORI’s achievement level reflects the cognitive learning
outcome of the student.
2

3531

The basic learning material was an eight-page long text
on the ‘rock cycle’ extracted from the 7th grade textbook.
Since the ‘rock cycle’ is the content for seventh graders, the
text of the ‘rock cycle’ was revised to be suitable for fifth
graders.
A revised version of the scale of academic self-efficacy
developed by Kim et al (2003) was used (Cronbach’s α=.85).
The questionnaire to measure interest comprised 9 items: 6
regarding the enjoyment and interest in the activity and
content and 3 regarding the feeling of satisfaction and
challenge. The reliability coefficient of interest in the
questionnaire was .75. The test score for task performance
was composed of 20 true-false questions on the ‘rock cycle’.
Figure 4: Relation Teaching

Procedure

Resource Module The students can access this module
by clicking the icons whenever they want to know more
about rocks while teaching KORI. The resource is made of
hypertext that links the basic concepts to concrete images
and examples. There are two different levels of learning
resource: basic and additional. The former is essential
knowledge about rocks and the rock cycle for teaching
KORI. The latter is practical knowledge about rocks and the
rock cycle to satisfy student’s curiosity in real life.
In order to develop an adaptive system in the new
generation of ITS to enhance academic motivation and
cognitive ability, individual differences were accounted for.
Self-efficacy among individual differences related to
motivation to learn is one of the main variables. Connell and
Wellborn (1991) reported that many people have three
fundamental needs, competence/self-efficacy, autonomy and
relatedness, of which the first is the most critical factor in
learning. Self-efficacy is individual’s belief as being capable
of producing desired outcomes and having the expectation
of success (Bandura, 1997).
The main purpose of this experiment was to examine the
effectiveness of the newly developed intelligent
TA, KORI, and to determine the best method to provide
learners with KORI or peer tutoring in terms of improving
interest and task performance. We therefore compared
KORI with peer tutoring according to the level of selfefficacy.

Before the experiment, all participants took a 30-minute
lesson on the ‘rock cycle’ together to acquire the base
knowledge in the domain. They then took a previous test on
general science including the rock cycle.
The participants were randomly assigned to one of the
two experimental conditions: peer tutoring and KORI. Next,
the participants of each condition moved into a separated
place and performed their own learning activity.
Participants in the peer tutoring condition were paired
based on their previous science test score and were asked to
teach each other by playing the role of either tutor or tutee.
The experimenter assigned tutor and tutee roles for those
with higher and lower science test scores, respectively,
because previous studies have shown that students with less
ability tend to have serious difficulty in peer tutoring (King,
1998). Both tutor and tutee believed that they were
randomly assigned to the role although, in fact, their role
was predetermined based on test score. Both tutor and tutee
were given the same text and asked to read it for 10 minutes,
after which the tutors were instructed to teach their tutees
freely for at least 20 minutes.
In the KORI condition, each participant was asked to
teach KORI individually and was informed of KORI’s basic
concept and method of use. Participants taught KORI for
approximately 30minutes, using the concept teaching and
map modules.
After finishing all of the learning activities in each
condition, all participants were asked to complete the items
for measuring self-efficacy, to rate their interest using a 5point scale on their own learning activity and learning
material, and were given the test for checking the ability of
the task performance.

Methods
Participants and Design
The sample consisted of 41 (22 male and 19 female) fifth
graders who were randomly assigned to either peer tutoring
or KORI. The independent variable, peer tutoring and KORI,
was manipulated while interest and task performance were
chosen as the dependent variables. The level of self-efficacy
was an individual variable.

Results
We conducted two-way (anal ysis of covariance)
ANCOVA to test the main effect and interaction effect on
interest and task performance, using the participants’
previous test scores as a covariate. The means and standard
deviation of interest are shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5.

Materials and Measures
3

3532

Interest
Table 2. Means and Standard Deviation for Task
Performance

There was a significant, two-way interaction effect on
interest between conditions such as peer-tutoring and KORI
and the level of self-efficacy [F(1, 35)=9.79, p<.01]. To
explicate the exact interaction effect, the simple main effect
(SME) was analyzed. Participants with high self-efficacy
revealed higher interest in the peer tutoring condition than in
the KORI condition [t(18)=2.204, p<.05], whereas
participants with low self-efficacy were more interested in
the KORI condition than in the peer tutoring condition
[t(19)=-2.219, p<.05].

Conditions
Peer tutoring
(N=20)
Teachable
agent(TA),
KORI(N=21)

Selfefficacy
High

MEAN

SD

N

16.50

1.64

10

Low

13.75

.05

10

High

16.62

2.20

10

Low

17.37

1.99

11

20
19

Table 1. Means and Standard Deviation for Interest

18
17

16.5

Self-efficacy

MEAN

SD

N

16

16.62

Peer tutoring
(N=20)

High

4.23

.31

10

15

Low

3.73

.40

10

14

Teachable
agent(TA),KORI
(N=21)

High

3.82

.43

10

13

Low

4.34

.38

11

12

Conditions

17.37

Peer tutoring
Teachable Agent, Kori
13.75

11
10

High

Low
Self-efficacy

5
4.5

Figure 6: Task performance’s scores by peer tutoring/KORI and
self-efficacy

4.21

4.33

4

Conclusions

3.73
3.5

3.82

Peer tutoring
3

Peer tutoring and the TA, KORI, were compared in terms
of interest and task performance according to the level of
self-efficacy. The high self-efficacious group showed more
interest in peer tutoring than in KORI, while the low selfefficacious group exhibited a reverse interest. In task
performance, participants with high self-efficacy received
higher scores in both peer tutoring and KORI, whereas
participants with low self-efficacy gained higher scores in
KORI than in peer tutoring. Actually, previous studies have
demonstrated positive effects on academic achievement and
motivation to learn (Cohen et al., 1982). However, our
findings were inconsistent with such prior research,
particularly in the low self-efficacious group.
We can infer that face-to-face peer tutoring might provide
students who have a low self-efficacy with an excessive
cognitive burden due to the need to memorize lots of
teaching contents (Kim et al., 2003), whereas KORI might
make students less anxious and more comfortable with the
teaching activity due to the inclusion of various resources
and experts able to help the participants. Thus, participants
with low self-efficacy revealed higher interest and task
performance in KORI, whereas the high self-efficacious

Teachable Agent, Kori

2.5
2
1.5
1

High

Low
Self-efficacy

Figure 5: Interest rating by peer tutoring/KORI and self-efficacy

Task Performance
There was a significant main effect of conditions and
interaction effect of conditions such as peer-tutoring/KORI
and the level of self-efficacy [F(1, 35)=5.09, p<.05]. The SME
result indicated that participants with low self-efficacy
showed higher scores of task performance in KORI than in
peer tutoring [t(19)=-2.807, p<.05], whereas there was no
significant difference between conditions in high selfefficacy [t(18)=-.138, p>.05].
4

3533

group had low interest in KORI, possibly because they felt
monotonous and boring with the teaching activity in KORI.
Accordingly, students with high self-efficacy should be
provided with a challengeable situation featuring
complicated and dynamic, teaching activities.
The present study suffered several limitations. The sample
size was small in each condition, and we only examined
self-efficacy among individual differences. Future research
needs to be expanded to cover other grades and domains
such as social studies and science, and also to examine the
effect of KORI on other individual variables such as
metacognition, goal orientation, cognitive ability in order to
continue the development of KORI as an individualized
intelligent TA.

Schwartz, D. L., & Lin, X. D. (2000). Computers,
productive agency, and the effort after shared meaning.
JournalofComputinginHigherEducation,12, 3-33.

References
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory
of behavior change. PsychologicalReview,54,191-215.
Biswas, G., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J. & TAG-V (2001).
"Technology support for complex problem solving: From
SAD environments to AI," In Forbus and Feltovich,
(Eds.), Smart Machines in Education (pp.71-98). Menlo
Park, CA: AAAI Press.
Cohen, P.A., Kulik, J.A., & Kulik, C.C. (1982). Educational
outcomes of tutoring: A Meta-analysis of findings.
AmericanEducationalResearchJournal19,237-248.
Connell, J. P., & Wellborn, J. G. (1991). Competence,
autonomy, and relatedness: A motivational analysis of
self-system process. In M. R. Gunner & L.A. Sroufe(Eds.)
Selfprocessanddevelopment.TheMinnesotasymposiaonchi
ldpsychology(Vol23,pp.43-77).Hillsdale.NJ:Erlbaum.
Ginsburg-Block, M., & Fantuzzo, J. (1997). Reciprocal peer
tutoring: An analysis of "teacher" and "student"
interactions as a function of training and experience.
SchoolPsychologyQuarterly,12(2),134-149.
Kim. S., Kim, W.S., Yun, M.S., So, Y.H., Kwon, E.J., Choi,
J.S., Kim, M.S. Lee, M.J., & Park, T.J. (2003).
Conceptual understanding and Designing of Teachable
Agent. Journal of Korean Cognitive Science, 14(3),13-21.
Kim, S,, Yun, S. H., Yoon, M., So, Y., Kim, W., Lee,
M.,Choi, D., & Lee, H. (2005a). Design and
implementation of the KORI: Intelligent teachable agent
and its application to education. ICCSA 2005,
LectureNotesinComputerScience,3483, 62-71.
Kim, S,, Yun, S. H., Choi, D., Yoon, M., So, Y., Lee, M.,
Kim, W., Lee, S., Hwang, S., Han, C., Lee, W., & Lim, K.
(2005b). Design and Implementation of the
Individualized Intelligent Teachable Agent. ICNC'05FSKD'05, LectureNotesinComputerScience,3610, 797805.
King, A. (1998). Transactive Peer Tutoring: Distributing
CognitionMetacognition.EducationalPsychologyReview,1
0(1),57-74.
Kulik, C.-L. C., & Kulik, J. A. (1982). Effects of ability
grouping on secondary school students: A metaanalysis of evaluation findings. American Educational
Research Journal, 19, 415-428.
5

3534

