UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Relevance of a Probabilistic Mindset in Risky Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k80s955

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Camilleri, Adrian R.
Newell, Ben R.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Relevance of a Probabilistic Mindset in Risky Choice
Adrian R. Camilleri (acamilleri@psy.unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Abstract
Choice preferences can shift depending on whether outcome
and probability information about the options are provided in
a description or learned from the experience of sampling. We
explored whether this description-experience “gap” could be
explained as a difference in probabilistic mindset, that is, the
explicit consideration of probability information in the former
but not the latter. We replicated the gap but found little
evidence to support our main hypothesis. Nevertheless, the
data inspired a number of interesting proposals regarding
experimental design, preference for probability information,
sampling strategies, optimal presentation format, and the
probability judgment probe.
Keywords: decisions from experience; decisions from
description; description-experience; probability; risky choice.

Introduction
Individuals, businesses, and governments are continually
challenged by the prospect of making decisions in the face
of uncertainty. For example, Google’s acquisition of the
mobile start-up company Android in 2005 was considered a
risky move because, at the time, the smartphone industry
was dominated by the battle between the iPhone and
BlackBerry and few could see room for a new challenger.
However, just five years on, Android is now the leading
smartphone operating system in the U.S. by market share
(Whitney, 2010) and has been deemed by Google as their
best acquisition ever.
It is interesting to consider what mindset the Google
leadership team adopted when they decided to acquire
Android. The choice may have been predominately
“description-based”, that is, rooted in hard numbers of
estimated financial outcomes and their likelihoods. In
contrast, the choice may have been predominately
“experience-based”, that is, rooted in instinct sharpened by
the practice of having acquired dozens of other companies.
The question is more than academic in light of a growing
body of evidence showing that choice differences occur
between identical decisions depending on whether choicerelevant information is acquired from a description or
garnered from experience (Rakow & Newell, 2010).

Description- vs. Experience-based Choice
Hertwig, Barron, Weber and Erev (2004) contrasted
these two risky choice formats by presenting decisionmakers with the same problem in either the description or
the experience format. Those in the description group were
explicitly told the potential outcomes and their probabilities.

For example, Problem 1 was a choice between a “100%
chance of 3” and an “80% chance of 4, else 0”. In contrast,
those in the experience group were not explicitly told
anything but were instead allowed to repeatedly sample
outcomes, with replacement, from a distribution that
matched the description given to those in the other group.
Choice preferences were clearly influenced by
presentation format. For example, in Problem 1, just 36% of
participants selected the risky option when the decision was
made from description yet 88% preferred this option when
the decision was made from experience. Such large
differences have now been observed across many different
problems examined in numerous studies (for a review, see
Hertwig & Erev, 2009). The common finding is choice
behavior consistent with overweighting of rare events when
gambles are explicitly described but objective or
underweighting of the rare events when gambles are learned
from sequential feedback (Camilleri & Newell, 2011a).
Some researchers have argued that the gap is largely the
result of external and internal sampling biases present in the
experience format (e.g., Camilleri & Newell, 2011b).
External sampling biases occur when an observed sample of
outcomes does not accurately reflect the true outcome
distribution, which is common when participants take small
samples (Hertwig & Pleskac, 2010). Internal sampling
biases occur when a mental sub-sample of outcomes does
not accurately reflect the observed outcome distribution,
which is common when participants rely more heavily on
recent observations (Hertwig et al., 2004).
In addition to these causes, there remains a strong belief
that the gap is caused by yet additional factors (e.g., Hau,
Pleskac, Kiefer, & Hertwig, 2008; Hertwig & Erev, 2009;
Ungemach, Chater, & Stewart, 2009). The factor
investigated in the present study we term “probabilistic
mindset” and refers to the explicit consideration of outcome
distributions or probabilities during choice. Specifically, we
examined the possibility that the gap might partly be the
result of a probabilistic mindset in the description format
but a non-probabilistic mindset in the experience format.

Probability vs. Frequency Information
Most studies of description-based choices confer
likelihood information through probabilities. An alternative
that leaves explicit outcomes and their likelihoods is
frequency information (e.g., “32 out of 40 occasions get 4”),
which has been shown to produce behavior that is different
than when probability information is presented (e.g., Slovic,
Monahan & MacGregor, 2000). Cosmides & Tooby (1996)

2794

argue that evolution has shaped the mind to operate with
frequency information and go on to demonstrate that this
information format improves decision-making across a
number of tasks, including Bayesian reasoning.
In the context of the risky choice, evidence for a
frequency effect has been mixed. On the one hand, Gottlieb
Weiss, and Chapman (2007) presented their participants
with different risky problems in percentage and frequency
formats and found that choices in the latter were closer to
the choices made by participants who saw outcomes
sequentially (i.e., experience-based). On the other hand,
Rakow, Demes, and Newell (2008) found no differences
between percentage and frequency formats.
Thus, our first research question was whether probability
and frequency formats produce preference differences in the
context of risky choice.

Probabilistic vs. Non-probabilistic Mindset
Traditional accounts of description-based choice have
placed the consideration of probability information – in our
terms, a probabilistic mindset – at the fore. For example, in
prospect theory, the “value” of an option is determined by
summing the product of the possible outcomes by their
probabilities, with each being adjusted by different nonlinear weighting functions (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).
Accounts of experience-based choice are more diverse.
One school of thought suggests that prospect theory, with its
emphasis on explicit probability representation, can also
successfully account for experience-based choices (Hau et
al., 2008; Fox & Hadar, 2006). Indeed, participants can
provide fairly accurate probability estimates for the
outcomes they have observed (e.g., Ungemach et al., 2009).
However, probability estimates do not accurately predict
choice, suggesting that participants might be able to provide
precise estimates when explicitly probed, but refrain from
using such information when making the decision itself
(Camilleri & Newell, 2009). This hypothesis is consistent
with recent other findings including the coexistence of
overestimation and underweighting of rare events in
situations outside of the lab. For example, immediately
following a suicide bombing people believe the risk
decreases but at the same time exhibit more cautious
behavior (Barron & Yechiam, 2009).
An alternative perspective is that experience-based
choices do not naturally produce a probabilistic mindset
and, thus, are inexplicable by models that require explicit
probability representation. Many decisions appear to be
made without probabilistic representation, particularly when
probabilistic cues are not made salient (Huber, Wider, &
Huber, 1997; Rottenstreinch & Kivetz, 2006). Indeed, there
are several successful models of choice that do not depend
on the explicit representation of probability information
(e.g., the natural mean heuristic; Hertwig & Pleskac, 2010).
Thus, our second research question was whether the
description-experience choice “gap” can be at least partially
explained as a difference in probabilistic representation.

The Experiment
We designed a between-subjects experiment that crossed
information format with induced probabilistic mindset to
produce four different groups (see Table 1).
Table 1: The experimental groups produced by crossing
choice format with induced probabilistic representation.
Mindset
Probabilistic
Format

Description
Experience

D-Probability
E-Appraise

Nonprobabilistic
D-Frequency
E-Sample

To investigate our first question, we examined the choices
made by participants who received likelihood information in
either probability or frequency format. A difference in
preferences between the D-Probability and D-Frequency
groups would provide evidence consistent with a frequency
effect. Specifically, we expected those in the D-Frequency
group to more often select the objectively better option, that
is, the option with the higher expected value (EV; calculated
as the sum of each outcome multiplied by its probability).
To investigate our second question, we additionally
examined the choices made by participants who received
likelihood information through the experience of sequential
sampling, either with (E-Appraise group) or without (ESample group) the added obligation to occasionally appraise
outcome probabilities (see Method). A difference between
the average of the two Probabilistic groups and the average
of the two Non-probabilistic groups would provide evidence
consistent with the description-experience gap being at least
partially caused by a difference in probabilistic mindset.

Method
Participants
The participants were 100 undergraduate UNSW students
(63 females) with a median age of 19 years. Participation
was in exchange for course credit plus payment contingent
upon the outcome of one randomly selected choice.

Design
The experiment used a 2 (information format: description
vs. experience) x 2 (probabilistic mindset: probabilistic vs.
non-probabilistic; Table 1) between-subjects design. The
dependent variable was the choice in each problem.
Participants in the two description groups were given all
information regarding outcomes and their probabilities.
Those in the D-Probability group were presented with the
percentage chance of each outcome (e.g., “80% chance of
4”) whereas those in the D-Frequency group were presented
with the outcome occurrence frequency in forty samples
(e.g., “32 out of 40 occasions get 4”).
Participants in the two experience groups had to discover
the possible outcomes and their likelihoods by sampling

2795

exactly forty times. Participants were given the outcome and
probability of the safe option and thus had only to sample
from the risky option (cf. Hau, Pleskac, & Hertwig, 2010).
The sequence of outcomes was randomly ordered but
perfectly matched the description given to participants in the
description groups. Those in the E-Appraise group were
asked after every ten samples to judge the probability of a
zero outcome occurring on the next trial (all risky options
involved a zero outcome; see below). The intent here was to
induce a probabilistic representation of the outcome
likelihoods. Those in the Sampling group were not required
to provide probability estimates, nor were probabilities ever
explicitly mentioned. Following all forty samples
participants in both the experience groups made a choice
regarding which option was preferred.

Materials
Choice Problems: The four choice problems used were
taken, with slight modification, from the set created by Hau
et al. (2010). Each problem consisted of two options with
similar expected values, with at most two outcomes per
option. All problems were in the gain domain. The problems
were specifically chosen to be able to discriminate between
five different choice strategies: risk aversion, risk seeking,
adherence to expected value (EV), underweighting of rare
events, and overweighting of rare events (see Table 2).

Procedure
As the opening scenario makes clear, real-world risky
choices are always embedded within a context, which can
often provide various grounds, beyond outcomes and their
likelihoods, from which to base choice. Thus, each of the
four problems was presented within the context of a
scenario. Participants’ were instructed that their overall task
was to maximize the amount of points won from their
decisions. Each scenario followed the same format:
introduce context, decision problem, measure of success,
safe option, and risky option. An example of one scenario
inspired by the opening illustration was the following:
You are the CEO of a successful multinational
computer corporation. One of the most important
decisions you make each year is whether or not to
acquire and integrate a smaller company into your
corporation. Your measure of success is year-end
profit. On the one hand, you know that if you do not
acquire any other smaller companies, then you will
make moderate profits. On the other hand, if you
risk acquiring another company then you could
make large profits.

The options in the scenario were then presented (e.g., do
or do not acquire a small company) along with information
about the possible outcomes and likelihoods as expected
from hypothetical previous occasions (e.g., “100% of the
time an acquisition was not made, profit was 14”). The
problems and scenarios were completely counter-balanced.
Participants were not given feedback during the experiment.
At the conclusion of each problem, participants typed a
response detailing what their choice strategy was.

Results
Description- vs. Experience-based Choice
The percentage of risky choices is shown in the rightmost
column of Table 2. Since preferences are contingent on
whether the rare event is desirable or not, averaging across
problems tends to obscure interesting comparisons. Thus,
we remapped choices onto a single directional scale by recategorizing choices in terms of whether the “predicted”
option was preferred. The predicted option is the alternative
appearing favorable if rare events are overweighted. In
practice, this required inverting the percentages reported in
the rightmost columns of Table 2 for Problems 1 and 2.
The proportion of participants selecting the predicted
option, averaged across problems, is shown in Figure 1. The
predicted option was selected significantly more often by
those in the two description groups (red bars) than those in
the two experience groups (blue bars; 54% vs. 36%; χ 2(1) =
12.4, p < .001). Interestingly, this difference was primarily
driven by the large difference between the D-Probability
and E-Sample groups (χ2(1) = 10.6, p = .001), as opposed to
the small difference between the D-Frequency and EAppraise groups (χ2(1) = 2.9, p = .09). Nevertheless, our data
clearly replicated a description-experience choice gap.

Probability vs. Frequency Information
Our first research question examined the possibility of a
frequency effect in the context of risky choice. Consistent
with our hypothesis, those in the D-Frequency group more
often selected the option with the higher EV, however, this
difference was not reliable (58% vs. 49%; χ2(1) = 1.6, p = .2).
Moreover, as evident in Figure 2, there was little difference
in preference for the predicted option between the DProbability group (filled red bar) and the D-Frequency
group (lined red bar; 57% vs. 50%; χ2(1) = .9, p = .3). Our
power to detect a difference here with an odds-ratio of 2 was
77.5% (calculated with G*Power3; Erdfelder, Faul, &
Buchner, 1996). Thus, our data did not show a clear
frequency effect in the context of risky choice.

Table 2: Choice option, expected choice pattern under certain strategies, and percentage selecting the risky option.
Problem
Number

Choice Options

Expected Choice Pattern Under Strategy

Risk
Risk
Adhere
Underweight
Overweight
aversion
seeking
to EV
rare events
rare events
1
3(1.0)
4(.8)
Safe
Risky
Risky
Risky
Safe
2
14(1.0)
15(.9)
Safe
Risky
Safe
Risky
Safe
3
5(1.0)
24(.2)
Safe
Risky
Safe
Safe
Risky
4
3(1.0)
32(.1)
Safe
Risky
Risky
Safe
Risky
* Group abbreviations: P = D-Probability, F = D-Frequency, A2796
= E-Appraise, S = E-Sampling.
Safe

Risky

% selecting the
risky option*
P

F

A

S

36
32
52
44

44
36
28
52

60
56
20
48

64
72
32
40

bars) were most common in the two the experience groups.
Contrary to expectations, choices consistent with
overweighting of rare events (right diagonal bars) were not
at all common in the two description groups. Interestingly, a
strategy that consistently selected the option with the higher
expected value (black bars) was relatively more common in
the D-Frequency (16%) and E-Appraise (20%) groups.

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

80
60
40
20

e
pl
ESa
m

pp
ra
i
EA

-P
ro
ba
bi
li
D

se

0
ty

Figure 1: Proportion in each group selecting the option
consistent with overweighting of rare events (i.e., the
“predicted” option). Red bars represent description and blue
bars represent experience. Filled bars represent probabilistic
and lined bars represent non-probabilistic.

100

-F
re
qu
en
cy

pl
e
ESa
m

pp
ra
is
e
EA

D

-P
ro
ba
bi
lit
y
D
-F
re
qu
en
cy

0.0

D

Proportion of participants
using choice strategy

Proportion selecting
the "predicted" option

1.0

Probabilistic vs. Non-probabilistic Representation

Inconsistent

Adhere to expected value

Our second research question examined the possibility
that different probabilistic mindsets may contribute to the
gap. As is apparent from Figure 1, there was little difference
between the two probabilistic groups (filled bars) and two
non-probabilistic groups (lined bars) when averaging across
problems (48% vs. 42%, respectively; χ2(1) = 1.2, p = .3).
Our power to detect a difference here with an odds-ratio of 2
was 96.0% (Erdfelder et al., 1996).
We sorted participants’ choice strategy explanations
according to whether they included any of the following
terms: chance, odds, percent, %, probability, expected value,
likely, and likelihood. Responses that included these words
were categorized as adopting a “probabilistic” mindset. In
support of our manipulation, more responses were
categorized as adopting a probabilistic mindset in the
probabilistic groups than in the non-probabalistic groups
(55% vs. 31%, respectively; χ2(1) = 24.5, p < .001).
Specifically, in each group the proportions of responses
categorized as adopting a probabilistic mindset were: DProbability = 60%, E-Frequency = 35%, D-Appraise = 50%,
and E-Sample = 26%. Reanalyzing the data using this
classification to assign participant to levels of the
independent variable did not change the results (44% vs.
45%, respectively; χ2(1) = .01, p = .9). Thus, our data did not
provide any evidence for a probabilistic mindset effect.

Risk seeking

Risk aversion

Overweight rare events

Underweight rare event

Choice Strategies
We compared the choices made by each participant to the
expected patterns under the strategies listed in Table 2. As
shown in Figure 2, the vast majority of participants (58%)
made choices that were inconsistent with any of the
strategies. This was most true in the D-Probability group
(80%) and least true in the E-Appraise group (36%).
Inspection of Figure 2 suggests a number of interesting,
though highly provisional points. As expected, choices
consistent with underweighting of rare events (left diagonal

Figure 2: Proportion of participants whose four choices
matched a specific choice strategy listed in Table 2.

Memory Order Effects
Following Hertwig et al. (2004), we compared
participants’ choices with those predicted based on both the
first and second half of observed outcomes. For those in the
E-Appraise group there was no difference in number of
choices correctly predicted when based on the first or the
second half of observations (53% vs. 48%; χ2(1) = .5, p = .5).
In contrast, for those in the E-Sample group there was a
weak primacy effect in that more choices were correctly
predicted when based on the first rather than the second half
of observations (52% vs. 40%; χ2(1) = 2.9, p = .09).

Probability Judgments
The estimated probabilities of the zero outcome, made
only by participants in the two probabilistic mindset groups,
are plotted against the objective probabilities in Figure 3.
For those in the E-Appraise group only the final estimate
was used. In general, there was a tendency in both groups to
overestimate rare events and underestimate common events.
However, estimation error was significantly larger in the DProbability group than in the E-Appraise group (27.1% vs.
19.1%, respectively; F(1,1,98) = 12.7, p = .054), suggesting
that participants in the experience condition were better
calibrated and less susceptible to this judgment error.
A logistical regression with choice made (i.e., predicted
option or not) as the dependent variable and presentation
format, objective probability, and estimated probability as
the independent variables found an effect only for
presentation format (B = .79, Wald(1) = 7.4, p = .007). Thus,
estimated probability was not a good predictor of choice.

2797

Figure 3: Estimated probability plotted against objective
probability for the zero outcomes. The size of the circle
indicates the number of identical data points. The solid lines
depict the least-square linear regression lines.

Discussion
Consideration of our two research questions in light of the
current dataset provide little evidence that the descriptionexperience gap is driven by a probabilistic mindset in the
former paradigm but not the latter. Nevertheless, we did
make a number of interesting observations that provide
valuable input to future work.
With respect to our first research question, we found no
difference in preference for the predicted option between
those provided with likelihood information in probability
format and those in frequency format. However, there was a
tendency for participants presented with frequencies to more
often adopt a maximization strategy. This finding is
consistent with the argument that frequency information is
more compatible with the intuitive, evolutionary-based
cognitive “algorithms” that have developed, which can
produce better decision-making (Cosmides & Tooby, 1996).
The absence of a clear frequency effect in the current
dataset is consistent with the observations made by Rakow
et al. (2008) but inconsistent with those made by Gottleib et
al. (2007). One potential reason for such inconsistency may
be the different designs used: the two studies finding no
effect used a between-subjects design whereas the one study
finding an effect used a within-subjects design. As

Kahneman (2003, pg. 477) notes, the latter “design provides
an obvious cue that the experimenter considers every
manipulated variable relevant”. It is therefore recommended
that future studies studying the frequency effect adopt a
between-subjects design.
With respect to our second research question, we were
able to find a clear description-experience gap even without
the influence of external sampling biases (since experienced
samples perfectly matched the described distribution). The
persistence of the gap implies that it is caused by a number
of different contributing factors (Hertwig & Erev, 2009).
Our dataset suggests that adoption of a probabilistic
mindset – explicit consideration of outcome probabilities –
is not one of these contributing factors. Participants in the
description and experience conditions were not greatly
influenced by inducing either a probabilistic or nonprobabilistic mindset. This null effect is unlikely to be due
to an ineffective manipulation, which appeared to be
moderately successful when gauged by the content of free
responses. However, we were surprised by how infrequently
probabilistic terms were mentioned in free response strategy
descriptions, especially for those cued with probability
estimates. This tendency supports the argument that people
are not naturally interested in probability information
(Huber et al., 1997). Future studies should continue to
investigate the factors that cause people to prefer probability
information (e.g., problem simplicity; Lejarraga, 2010).
There was a greater tendency for those in the E-Appraise
group to adopt a maximization strategy (Figure 2). Indeed,
the description-experience gap was not reliable when
contrasting the E-Appraise group with the D-Frequency
group. This observation is consistent with the argument that
different information formats each come with a unique set
of advantages and disadvantages such that the most
effective mode of risk communication may be through
multiple formats (Slovic et al., 2000). This strategy may
induce “dialectical bootstrapping”, that is, reasoning
through the exchange of opposing ideas (Herzog & Hertwig,
2009). Future studies could examine whether prompting
participants to consider the same information in multiple
formats leads to greater maximization.
We detected a primacy effect in the E-Sampling group,
indicating that earlier observations had a greater influence
on choices than later observations. Since any subset of
outcomes tends to under-represent rare events, this internal
sampling bias reveals at least one cause of the descriptionexperience gap in our data (Camilleri & Newell, 2011b).
Note also that no memory effect was detected in the EAppraise group where the gap was not reliable.
Primacy is a curious result in that it is opposite to the
more common recency effect (e.g., Hertwig et al., 2004).
Our hypothesis is that many participants adopt a two-stage
sampling strategy whereby earlier samples are used to
assess the potential outcomes and later samples are used to
assess their likelihoods. Since we told participants what the
safe outcome was, it is possible that they moved on to the
second stage very quickly and subsequently became bored

2798

by the end of the task. Presumably, those in the E-Appraise
group were resistant because they were required to
periodically make judgments and therefore remained alert
throughout. To test this hypothesis, future studies could
experiment with telling participants the number or value of
possible outcomes (e.g., Hadar & Fox, 2009).
Some have argued that judgment error may also be
implicated as a cause of the gap (e.g., Fox & Hadar, 2006).
Consistent with this argument, we found that judgments
tended to overestimate rare events and this overestimation
was greater for those in the description condition.
Worryingly, however, judgments were also incredibly
inaccurate, particularly in the D-Probability group where
participants had only to remember the recently presented
probability. Moreover, and in line with Camilleri & Newell
(2009), estimates themselves were unable to predict
subsequent choices. These findings challenge the relevance
of judgment biases to the choice gap discussion and
question the very enterprise of explicitly probing decision
makers for outcome probability estimates. Future studies
pursuing this issue could experiment with less explicit
probes (e.g., Gottlieb, et al. 2007).

References
Barron, G., & Yechiam, E. (2009). The coexistence of
overestimation and underweighting of rare events and the
contingent recency effect. Judgment and Decision
Making, 4, 447-460.
Camilleri, A. R., & Newell, B. R. (2009). The role of
representation in experience-based choice. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4, 518-529.
Camilleri, A. R., & Newell, B. R. (2011a). When are why
rare events are underweighted: A direct comparison of
sampling-, feedback- and description-based choice.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Camilleri, A. R., & Newell, B. R. (2011b). Description- and
experience-based choice: Does equivalent information
equal equivalent choice? Acta Psychologica.
Cosmides, L. J., & Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans good
intuitive statisticians after all? Rethinking some
conclusions from the literature on judgment under
uncertainty. Cognition, 58, 1–73.
Erdfelder, E., Faul, F., & Buchner, A. (1996). GPOWER: A
general power analysis program. Behavior Research
Methods Instruments & Computers, 28, 1-11.
Fox, C. R., & Hadar, L. (2006). "Decisions from
experience" = sampling error + prospect theory:
Reconsidering Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev (2004).
Judgment and Decision Making, 1, 159-161.
Gottlieb, D. A., Weiss, T., & Chapman, G. B. (2007). The
format in which uncertainty information is presented
affects decision biases. Psychological Science, 18, 240246.
Hadar, L. & Fox, C. R. (2009). Information asymmetry in
decision from description versus decision from
experience. Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 317-325.

Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., & Hertwig, R. (2008). The
description-experience gap in risky choice: The role of
sample size and experienced probabilities. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 1-26.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., & Hertwig, R. (2010). Decisions
from experience and statistical probabilities: Why they
trigger different choices than a priori probabilities.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 48 - 68.
Herzog, S. M., & Hertwig, R. (2009). The wisdom of many
in one mind: Improving individual judgments with
dialectical bootstrapping. Psychological Science, 20, 231–
237.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534-539.
Hertwig, R., & Erev, I. (2009). The description–experience
gap in risky choice. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13,
517-523.
Hertwig, R., & Pleskac, T. J. (2010). Decisions from
experience: Why small samples? Cognition, 115, 225237.
Huber, O., Wider, R., & Huber, O. W. (1997). Active
information search and complete information presentation
in naturalistic risky decision tasks. Acta Psychologica, 95,
15-29.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-91.
Lejarraga, T. (2010). When experience is better than
description: time delays and complexity. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 23, 1, 100–116.
Rakow, T., Demes, K. A., & Newell, B. R. (2008). Biased
samples not mode of presentation: Re-examining the
apparent underweighting of rare events in experiencebased choice. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 106, 168-179.
Rakow, T., & Newell, B. R. (2010). Degrees of uncertainty:
An overview and framework for future research on
experience-based choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 23, 1-14.
Rottenstreich, Y., & Kivetz, R. (2006). On decision making
without likelihood judgment. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 101, 74–88.
Slovic, P., Monahan, J., & MacGregor, D. (2000). Violence
risk assessment and risk communication: The effects of
using actual cases, providing instruction, and employing
probability versus frequency formats. Law and Human
Behavior, 24, 271-296.
Ungemach, C., Chater, N., & Stewart, N. (2009). Are
probabilities overweighted or underweighted, when rare
outcomes are experienced (rarely)? Psychological
Science, 20, 473-479.
Whitney, L. (2010). Android hits top spot in U.S.
smartphone market. Accessed 19th December 2010 from
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1035_3-20012627-94.html.

2799

