UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The emergence of procedural conventions in dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p28n6v1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Mills, Gregory

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The emergence of procedural conventions in dialogue
Gregory J. Mills (gjmills@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract

The importance of interaction
A key problem for models of dialogue is to explain how
conventions are established and sustained. Existing accounts
emphasize the importance of interaction, demonstrating how
collaborative feedback leads to more systematized, stable and
arbitrary referential conventions. However, co-ordination in
dialogue requires both co-ordination of content and of
process. To investigate procedural co-ordination we report a
collaborative task which presents participants with the
recurrent co-ordination problem of ordering their actions and
utterances into a single coherent sequence. The results
provide evidence of the development of group-specific
procedural conventions, resulting in elliptical utterances
whose communicative meaning is determined by their
sequential location within the dialogue.

One of the earliest findings (Krauss and Weinheimer, 1967)
in studies of conventions is that interlocutors’ descriptions
of novel objects rapidly converge on a shared set of
referring expressions that become more concise on
successive use. Importantly, this referential contraction does
not occur in monologue (Clark, 1996).
Interaction in dialogue also directly affects the semantics
of referring expressions: In a series of maze game
experiments, Garrod and Doherty (1994) found that
interlocutors who interacted with many different
participants from the same sub-community used more
abstract and systematized schemas than participants who
had only interacted with a single interlocutor. Further, when
interlocutors from one sub-group interacted with another
sub-group they resorted to less abstract schemas (Healey,
2004). Similarly, experiments conducted by Schwartz
(1995) on problem-solving compared the representations
used by individuals with those used by dyads; here too, the
representations used for communication were more abstract
and systematized.
The importance of interaction has also been underscored
by similar findings in graphical communication. The
“Music Drawing Task” (Healey, 2007) required participants
to create novel graphical representations for referring to
pieces of music: Participants developed more systematic,
abstract and concise representations if they were able to give
each other feedback and reuse portions of each other’s
representations (see also Garrod et al., 2007). In another set
of maze game experiments conducted by Galantucci (2005),
participants who were given the collaborative task of
creating novel graphical symbols for referring to locations
in a maze developed highly systematized conventions for
referring to maze locations.
Interaction also plays a central role in how interlocutors
distinguish individual actions from communicative actions:
When boot-strapping an entirely novel communication
system, participants developed dyad-specific taskextraneous behavior to signal communicative intent (ScottPhillips et al., 2009).
Despite these studies’ very different approaches, a
common methodological choice is their study of referential
conventions, whether pieces of music, objects, shapes or
locations in a maze. Put simply, the common question being
asked is how two (or more) speakers of a community come
to use the same signs in the same context, ideally on
subsequent turns, to refer to the same referents. The
immediate question that emerges is: If dialogue and
interaction are of key importance, what exactly is it that

Keywords: Dialogue; conventions; co-ordination; routines;
sequentiality; language games; conversation analysis;
(mis)communication.

Introduction
One of Wittgenstein’s (1969) most quoted examples of
language use concerns a building supervisor who utters the
single-word command “Slab!” to refer to a slab that another
builder is to retrieve. Wittgenstein uses this example to
demonstrate how words depend for their meaning on the
particular language game in which they are situated. For
example, one could imagine a different group of builders
using “paving stone” to refer to the same object.
Alternatively, one could imagine another group of builders
who use “Slab!” as a confirmation (after placing the object
in the correct location).
A fundamental question concerning language use is how
conventions such as “Slab!” are established and sustained.
In recent years there has been a growing realization of the
importance of addressing this question experimentally by
observing how groups of participants develop their own
conventions.
In what follows we argue that the basic findings of this
research point towards the importance of the communicative
use of language in interaction. We then argue that one of the
key properties of dialogue is that it is underpinned by
procedural regularities that have so far escaped direct
experimental investigation. We then describe an experiment
designed to test the hypothesis that these procedural
regularities become conventionalized.

471

interaction is contributing - are these the only kinds of
convention that emerge in interaction?

The alphabetical sorting task
In contrast to existing dialogue tasks that focus primarily on
referential communication, the alphabetical task is designed
to make reference as transparent as possible (the words are
the referents), while presenting participants with the
recurrent procedural coordination problem of ordering their
utterances and actions into a single coherent sequence.
The task involves pairs of participants communicating
with each other via a text-based chat tool (Healey and Mills
2006; 2011). Each participant’s computer displays two
windows: (1) A chat tool program used to communicate
with the other participant; (2) A task window displaying the
participant’s score and a list of randomly generated words.
Solving the task requires participants to combine their
lists of words into a single alphabetically ordered list. To
ensure collaboration, participants can only select words that
the other participant sees on their screen, and vice versa. To
select a word, participants type a backslash “/”, followed by
the word. A further asymmetry introduced to ensure
collaboration is that participants cannot see each other’s
selection, and if a participant makes a mistake, for example,
by selecting an item that has already been selected, the other
participant receives a status message saying that the item
has already been selected. Participants are able to type
“/restart” at any point to begin again.
For example, suppose Participant1 has the words BETA
and GAMMA displayed on his screen, and Participant2 has
the words ALPHA and OMEGA displayed on her screen: to
solve the task, the participants need to communicate the lists
of words to each other and then type the following:

Procedural organisation in dialogue
Empirical investigations of dialogue in Conversation
Analysis (CA) demonstrate how dialogue is underpinned by
procedural regularities across turns by different speakers
that frequently consist of different kinds of utterance1:
Questions are ordinarily responded to with an answer, not
with another question; offers and invitations are ordinarily
followed by acceptances or declinations (Levinson, 1983).
These adjacency pairs (Schegloff, 1986) consist of a first
pair part and a second pair part that operate normatively:
Production of the first part creates an expectation that the
second half is accountably “due” (Heritage, 1984), leading
any response to be interpreted as pertaining to the second
half. This locally managed system of local sequential
coherence between turns results in global coherence through
the hierarchical interleaving of embedded sequences that
resolve local problems through, e.g. clarification,
elaboration and reformulation (Levinson, 1983).
However, CA’s primary concern with individual
transcripts of naturally occurring dialogue has led to
analyses eschewing experimental manipulation to probe
specific predictions (Schegloff, 1992). As a result, CA has
typically treated procedural regularities as static phenomena,
already shared and known to be shared by interlocutors, and
hence has not led to any systematic investigation of how
they might develop during conversation.
The basic question this paper addresses is whether these
procedural regularities existing between turns become
conventionalized during interaction.

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Methods
To test whether procedural conventions develop in a speech
community, we drew on the methodology developed by
Garrod and Doherty (1994) and Healey (1997) of assigning
participants to different sub-groups. In the convergence
phase of the experiment, participants only interact with
members of the same sub-group. In the second phase, half
the participants interact again with members of the same
sub-group, while the other half interacts with members of
the other group. This contrast between Within- and Crossgroup communication allows a direct test of the
development of group-specific conventions.
Crucially, the interlocutors are unaware of their
assignment into different groups: Participants played a
collaborative computer game which requires them to
communicate using a text-based chat tool. All messages are
passed through a server that obscures participants’
identities, replacing them with automatically generated
names that are changed on each trial.

Participant1: /ALPHA
Participant2: /BETA
Participant2: /GAMMA
Participant1: /OMEGA

Note that for an individual participant, ordering words
alphabetically is a relatively straightforward task. However,
for pairs of participants, this task presents the coordination
problem of interleaving their selections correctly. Each set
of words has only a single correct solution.
To hinder the development of group-specific referential
expressions, different sets of randomly generated words
were used in both phases.

Group assignment
24 participants were assigned to 6 sub-groups comprising 4
participants each. At any given moment, there are 12
conversations occurring simultaneously, relayed by the
experimental chat tool.
The experiment was divided into two phases: (1) A
convergence phase comprising 6 trials and lasting 40
minutes and (2) a test phase comprising a single trial lasting
5 minutes. To assist co-ordination, initial trials were slightly
longer (see Table 1 below). On each trial participants see a
new artificially generated name identifying their

1

Cf. Millikan (2005) who proposes an alternative account of
conventionalization (counterpart reproduction).

472

interlocutor, leading participants to believe they are
speaking with a new partner on each trial.

Trial No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 Test phase

Test phase: Trial 7
The second phase comprised a single trial, in which half the
participants interacted with the remaining member of their
sub-group (Within-Group), and the other half interacted
with a participant from a different group (Cross-group).

Length
9 mins
8 mins
7 mins
6 mins
5 mins
5 mins
5 mins

Table 1: Trial length (mins)

Convergence phase: Trials 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
In the first phase, participants alternated between speaking
to two participants from the same sub-group. Every second
trial, each participant was assigned to the same participant
(alternating between the configuration of Figures 1 and 2
below).

Figure 3: Trial 7. Black diagonal lines represent
conversations within the same sub-group. Dotted vertical
lines represent conversations between different sub-groups.

This second phase permits a focused comparison that is
sensitive to the development of group-specific conventions:
On the seventh trial all the participants interact with a
participant with whom they have not interacted previously.
However, participants in the Within-group condition are
interacting with a participant who has interacted with both
of their prior interlocutors. By contrast, those in the Crossgroup condition are interacting with a participant from an
entirely different sub-group.

Hypotheses
If the procedural conventionalization hypothesis is
correct, Cross-group dyads will comprise participants who
have developed different, sub-group specific procedural
conventions. This should lead to participants in the Crossgroup condition experiencing greater difficulty in coordinating their turns, and worse task performance than
Within-group dyads.
Conversely, if the null hypothesis is correct, either there
should be no difference between Within-group and Crossgroup co-ordination, or members of the Cross-group should
perform better, owing to the interlocutors benefitting from
cumulative experience of two different sub-groups. (i.e. if
there are no procedural differences, then all things being
equal, the knowledge accrued from two groups’ solution of
problems should lead to better task-performance).

Figure 1: Trials 1, 3, 5. Circular dots represent
participants and vertical bars represent participants
interacting with each other.

Results
24 Participants were recruited from the undergraduate
student population of Stanford University, and received
either course credit or payment ($15) for participating. On
debriefing, no participant reported having detected that they
were speaking with the same participant.
Overall, interlocutors produced 8246 turns, 794 turns of
which were produced in the final phase.

Figure 2: Trials 2, 4, 6. Circular dots represent
participants and vertical bars represent participants
interacting with each other.

473

Global development of co-ordination
To verify that participants become more co-ordinated at the
task, the chat logs were used to determine the proportion of
correct/incorrect solutions for each participant. Participants’
performance in the first half of the convergence phase (trial
1, 2, 3) was compared with their performance in the second
half (trial 4, 5, 6). Logistic regression showed a significant
increase (χ² (1) = 11.1, p=0.01) from 58% correct to 75%
correct. (see Figure 4, right).

Within vs. Cross-Group
Focusing on trial 7 (Test phase), to test for the effect of
group-specific conventions on task performance, the
proportion of correct/incorrect answers in Within-group
dialogue was compared with Cross-group dialogue. Logistic
regression showed Within-group participants generating
significantly more correct answers (88%) than Cross-group
participants (51%) (χ² (1) = 8.03, p<0.005).
To check that these differences are not due to individual
participant differences, the same comparison was made
between the same participants in the second half of the
convergence phase (trial 4, 5, 6). Logistic regression yielded
no differences between the pairs (χ² (1) = 0.07, p=0.79).
Cross-group participants scored 73% correct answers, while
the Within-group participants scored 75%, suggesting that
the observed differences in trial 7 are due to the Within /
Cross group manipulation.

Figure 4: Proportion of correct solutions (White = Crossgroup, Black = Within-group, Grey = Convergence phase).

Acknowledgments
Finally, all participants’ turns were automatically classified
according to whether they included acknowledgments such
as “ok”, “okay”, “okey”, “’kay”. These acknowledgments
have been shown to be deployed by interlocutors to
explicitly demarcate boundaries between different stages of
a dialogue (Clark and Bangerter 2004), for example using
“ok, so” to prefix the start of a new topic.
If the procedural convention hypothesis is correct, Crossgroup participants should experience greater difficulty in
coordinating their transition from one section of the activity
to the next, requiring the use of more acknowledgments to
signal the boundaries between actions. This was confirmed:
Cross-group dialogue contained more acknowledgments
(12% of all turns), whereas only 5.6% of Within-group turns
contained an acknowledgment. (χ² (1) = 4.4, p=0.035).

Turn length
Focusing on the turns produced by participants, all things
being equal, if different conventions make communication
more difficult, then Cross-group participants should expend
more effort in the Test phase in order to maintain coordination, and consequently produce longer turns than in
Within-Group dialogue. A 1-way ANOVA yielded no effect
F (1, 435) = 0.41, p = 0.52). Mean turn length = 14 chars.

Self-edits
To test for the effect of the intervention on participants’
confidence, all participants’ turns and selections were coded
for whether they were edited prior to sending. Logistic
regression showed participants in Cross-group dialogue
editing their turns more (34%) than participants in Withingroup dialogue (26%). (χ² (1) = 4.3, p = 0.036).

Discussion
The data provide strong support for the procedural
convention hypothesis. Overall, participants become
increasingly co-ordinated at the task. Participants in the
Cross-group condition performed worse, editing their turns
more, apparently spending more effort demarcating the
boundaries in the dialogue. These observations might
account for the faster typing speeds observed in Cross-group
dialogue: If the participants are using different conventions
for organizing their turns, this would place participants
under greater pressure to time their own contributions
correctly, hence the faster typing speeds, possibly
exacerbating the problem and leading to the greater
prevalence of typing errors.
Why is this finding important? Superficially it might
appear unsurprising that groups develop their own
conventions. However, the words being referred to are
referentially transparent, and the task only permits a single

Typing speed
As a further measure of participants’ confidence, keystroke
data was used to determine the typing speed. All things
being equal, if communication is made more difficult by
different conventions, interlocutors should be more hesitant
and type slower. The opposite is the case: 1-way ANOVA
showed Cross-group participants typing faster (4.7 chars/
sec) than Within-group participants (3.8 chars/sec).
F (1,435) = 9.63, p = 0.02).

474

solution that is trivially simple for an individual – what,
then, are these group-specific properties that are causing
interference in the Cross-group condition?
In the remainder of the discussion, we demonstrate that
participants have developed procedural conventions for
managing sequential constraints between turns, providing
evidence that these conventions are not simply regularities,
but are stronger normative conventions (Lewis, 1969).

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)

Participant2
Participant4
Participant4
Participant4
Participant2
Participant2:
Participant4
Participant2

AAA, CCC
BBB
/AAA
AAA
/BBB
BBB
/CCC
AAA, CCC

Transcript 2: Highly elliptical dialogue from 6th trial
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

Participant9:
Participant4
Participant4
Participant9:
Participant4
Participant9:
Participant4
Participant9:
Participant4
Participant9:
Participant9
Participant4
Participant9:
Participant4
Participant9:

Hold on. Ok?
Done
/AAAA
Have you selected anything?
Yeah what did you select?
I’m done I did CCCC
But I got to do BBBC first
Thought you said you’re done?
No I said you should
So which one have we selected
So tell me what to choose now
AAAAHH
Let’s start again?
Ok, tell me when you’re ok
/restart

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

Participant3
Participant7
Participant3
Participant3
Participant3
Participant7
Participant7
Participant7

BBB
AAA, CCC,
AAA
/AAA
BBB
/BBB
CCC
/CCC

Transcript 3: Highly elliptical dialogue from 6th trial
A striking feature of these highly coordinated sequences is
that (in contrast to Transcript 1) there are no overt questions,
acknowledgments, or indeed any explicit descriptions of
“what the turn is doing”. In Transcript 2, prior to the critical
juncture in turn (5), Participant4 says “AAA” in (4) to signal
completion of the prior selection. In this dialogue a single
word means2 ~“I have just selected this word, now you do
your selection, and tell me yours when you’re done”.
By contrast, in Transcript 3, the participants’ utterances
function differently. In turn (3), Participant3 types “AAA”,
to mean ~“I’m about to do AAA”. Here, a word by itself
means either ~“I’m going to select this word” or “You
select this word” (as in turn 5).
Note here that although both dyads accomplish the task in
almost the same number of steps, using highly elliptical
sequences, all of which are in alphabetical order, what the
single word utterances are doing at each point differs
between the groups – using Wittgenstein’s “Slab!” language
game, “Slab!” in one group means ~“I selected the slab,
now it’s your turn”, whereas in the other group it means
~“Now you select the slab”.
Although each set of words only permits a single logical
solution, it is striking to see how each group develops
highly idiosyncratic procedural solutions. Focusing on the
development of these elliptical sequences shows that in the
initial trials, participants’ attempts to explicitly negotiate a
system more often than not prove unsuccessful. This finding
resonates strongly with Pickering and Garrod (2004) who
found in a series of maze game experiments that explicit
negotiation was only successful once interlocutors had
developed sufficient co-ordination. It appears that similar
patterns occur in attempts by interlocutors to explicitly

Transcript 1: Task dialogue from 2nd trial.

Conventionalizing idiosyncratic solutions.
The alphabet task requires participants to coordinate their
turns: They cannot select each other’s words, words can’t be
selected twice, and the words need to be selected in the
correct order. This presents participants with the recurrent
co-ordination problem of signaling who should select which
words, as well as signaling the initiation and completion of
these selections. As shown in Transcript 1, in the initial
trials, participants barely manage to co-ordinate their
actions.
Here
the
participants
are
attempting
(unsuccessfully) to order three words: “AAAA”, “BBBB”
and “CCCC”, before restarting. (This pair took another 44
turns to solve this set of 3 words).
Over the course of the experiment, participants become
progressively more co-ordinated, developing subtly
different idiosyncratic solutions to the sequential coordination problem presented by the task. These include:
Proposing and ratifying the full sequence in advance;
negotiating each juncture incrementally; signalling pre- or
post- selection (see Transcripts 2 and 3 below); avoiding
complex signalling by co-ordinating on timing intervals.
Towards the end of the experiment, this culminates in the
most co-ordinated pairs developing highly elliptical
solutions, as outlined below: Transcripts 2 and 3 show two
groups’ different solutions to the same set of words
(“AAA”, “BBB”, “CCC”, “DDD”).

2

These explications of “what the turn means”
approximations for expository purposes.

475

are

negotiate procedures, as terms such as “now” or “wait”, are
inherently ambiguous: e.g. How long after uttering “now”
still counts as “now”?; If the other participant says “ok”, is
that an instruction to stop waiting?

References
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27, 195-225.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the
emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive
Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 29(5), 737–767.
Garrod, S. & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation,
coordination and convention.. Cognition, 53, 181–215.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of Representation: Where Might
Graphical Symbol Systems Come From? Cognitive
Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 31(6), 961–987.
Healey, P.G.T. (1997). “Expertise or expert-ese: The
emergence of task-oriented sub-languages.” Proceedings
of the 19th Annual Conference of The Cognitive Science
Society. Stanford University, CA.
Healey, P. G. T. (2004). Dialogue in the degenerate case?
Peer commentary on Pickering & Garrod (2004).
Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 27(2), 201.
Healey, P. G. T. & Mills, G. (2006). Participation,
precedence and co-ordination. In Proceedings of the 28th
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Canada.
Healey, P. G. T. and Mills, G. (2011 in prep) DiET: The
Dialogue Experimental Toolkit.
Healey, P. G. T., Swoboda, N., Umata, I., & King, J. (2007).
Graphical Language Games: Interactional constraints on
representational
form.
Cognitive
Science:
A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 31(2), 285–309.
Heritage, P. (1984). Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Krauss, R. M. and Weinheimer, S. (1966). Concurrent
feedback, confirmation and the encoding of referents in
verbal communication. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 4 (3), 343–346.
Levinson, S. C. (1983). Pragmatics. CUP, Cambridge.
Lewis, D. (1969). Convention: A philosophical study.
Harvard University Press.
Millikan, R. (2005) Language: A Biological Model, OUP.
Pickering, M. J. and Garrod, S. (2004). Towards a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioural and
Brain Sciences, 27(2), 169–190.
Schegloff, E.A. (1986). The routine as achievement. Human
Studies, 9 (2/3), 111-151.
Schegloff E. A. (1992) Repair after next turn AJS 97(5).
Schwartz, D. L. (1995). The emergence of abstract
representations in dyad problem solving. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 4(4), 321–354.
Scott-Phillips, T., Kirby, S., & Ritchie, G. (2009).
Signalling signalhood and the emergence of
communication. Cognition, 113(2), 226–33.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). Philosophical Investigations.
Blackwell, Oxford.

Patterns of (mis)communication
Focusing now on trial 7, when participant2 and participant3
subsequently interact with each other in the Cross-group
condition, they encounter each other’s different procedural
uses of exactly the same words resulting in the following
attempt to resolve the problem elliptically:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Participant3
Participant3
Participant2
Participant3
Participant2

/APPLE
BAR
BAR?
Yeah of course
WHAT?

Transcript 5: Misunderstanding in trial 7.
Here Participant3 says “BAR” to mean ~“Now you select
BAR”. However, Participant2 perceives Participant3 as
having said ~“I’ve just selected BAR”, which, to
Participant2 makes no sense as it is neither the first word
alphabetically, nor is it an object that Participant3 ought to
select. Participant2’s “BAR?” seeks clarification, but
Participant3 perceives Participant2 as having asked ~“Do
you want me to select BAR?”, which Participant3 confirms,
thereby perpetuating the misunderstanding.
Importantly, the prevalence of interlocutors initiating
clarification requests, as in transcript 5, that query the
procedural function of the elliptical utterances, indicate they
are not simply regularities, but are actual conventions in the
stronger normative sense: Participants notice deviations
from what they expect to encounter and query their
interlocutor for an account of what is missing.

Conclusions
This is to our knowledge the first experiment that has
directly addressed the emergence of procedural conventions
in dialogue. The results strongly suggest that they develop
rapidly during interaction, over timeframes similar to those
observed for referential conventions3, leading to sequences
of interleaved actions and utterances whose function is
determined by their position within the sequence.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by an individual Marie Curie IOF
Fellowship: PIOF-GA-2009-236632-ERIS. I am grateful to
Herb Clark and the anonymous reviewers of this paper for
valuable comments and suggestions.
3
One important caveat: It is currently unclear to what extent
participants are associating these conventions with their
interlocutors, as the manipulation of this study obscured the
identity of their partners, making “strangers” seem more coordinated on each subsequent trial.

476

