UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The spatially cued Go/NoGo in children. Brain activity analysis of the major inhibitory
components.
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/52163253
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Vuillier, Laura
Szucs, Denes
Whitebread, David
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                       University of California

The spatially cued Go/NoGo in children. Brain activity analysis of the
                                     major inhibitory components.
                                                    Laura Vuillier
              Departement of Experimental Psychology,University of Cambridge Faculty of Education,
                                                 University of Cambridge
                                                      Denes Szucs
                           Departement of Experimental Psychology,University of Cambridge
                                                 David Whitebread
                                      Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge
Abstract: This study aimed to investigate cognitive inhibitory control using a spatially cued Go/NoGo task in
combination with EEG. We measured reaction times and ERP components such as the LRP and the NoGo-N2 and
NoGo-P3 following Nogo trials and valid and invalid cues. Adults were significantly faster than children for all
trial types suggesting a general improvement in cognitive abilities between childhood and adulthood. The LRPs
were bigger in children suggesting stronger response preparation. Interestingly, a Nogo-P3 like effect was observed
following invalid vs valid trials, whereas an opposite Nogo-N2 like effect was observed as Nogo-N2 amplitudes were
larger following valid vs invalid trials. This indicates that different mechanisms are used to solve conflict in Go/Nogo
trials and in Valid/Invalid trials. This is the first study to analyse the LRP following validly and invalidly cued
stimuli in children and to examine Nogo-N2 and Nogo-P3 like effects following invalid and valid cues.
                                                            1887

