UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Self-Explanation and Practice on Strategy Use
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91g9055w
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
McEldoon, Katherine
Durkin, Kelley
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

         The Effects of Self-Explanation and Practice on Strategy Use
                                              Katherine McEldoon
            Department of Psychology & Human Development, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University
                                                  Kelley Durkin
            Department of Psychology & Human Development, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University
                                            Bethany Rittle-Johnson
            Department of Psychology & Human Development, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University
Abstract: The effect of self-explanation was evaluated against an alterative way to spend the same amount of time:
completing additional practice. Self-Explanation was compared against an Additional Practice and a Same Practice
condition. Problem solving strategy use and explanation quality within mathematical equivalence were investigated.
Seventy-five second through fourth grade students received an instructional intervention on solving mathematical
equivalence problems (i.e. 2 + 4 + 5 =          + 5), while being asked to self-explain six items, complete twelve
items, or only complete six items. Both self-explanation and additional practice increased procedural learning, but
self-explanation resulted in increased procedural transfer at post and retention test. Self-explain students adapted
the most flexible strategy sooner than the non-explain groups. High quality explanations were correlated with
conceptual knowledge at retention test. Microgenetic analyses of strategy use are discussed. Findings highlight the
role of prompting for self-explanation in strategy discovery.
                                                         3258

