UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of LEGO Robotics and Embodiment in Elementary Science Learning
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1gb8q2xt
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Lu, Carol M.
Black, John B.
Kang, Seokim
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

The Effects of LEGO Robotics and Embodiment in Elementary Science
                                                   Learning
                                                  Carol M. Lu
                                       Teachers College, Columbia University
                                                 John B. Black
                                       Teachers College, Columbia University
                                                Seokmin Kang
                                       Teachers College, Columbia University
                                              Shih-Chieh Huang
                                       Teachers College, Columbia University
Abstract: Elementary school students often find science a complex subject to learn (Johnstone, 1991; Millar, 1991).
Robotics have been used in previous studies to promote science learning as they provide students an environment
to observe abstract concepts through the use of tangible, hands-on objects (Nagchaudhuri et al., 2002; Barker &
Ansorge, 2007; Druin & Hendler, 2000). However, few studies have investigated the effects of integrating embodiment
and LEGO Robotics to encourage students to physically experience abstract science concepts using their own bodies
to enhance their conceptual understanding. This study aimed to examine the importance and role of embodiment
in elementary science learning through the use of LEGO Robotics. Participants were fifth graders attending a
semester-long after-school program for two hours each week. The results revealed that the children in the embodiment
intervention group had a better understanding of and a more positive attitude toward science than those without
the embodiment intervention.
                                                        2208

