UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Response Set Size on the Stroop Interference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7qr8z6ht

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Chuderski, Adam
Smolen, Tomasz

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Response Set Size on the Stroop Interference
Adam Chuderski (adam.chuderski@gmail.com)
Institute of Philosophy, Jagiellonian University
Grodzka 52, 31-044 Krakow, Poland

Tomasz Smolen (tomasz.smolen@mailplus.pl)
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University
Mickiewicza 3, 31-120 Krakow, Poland

Abstract
Previous research on the effect of response set size on the
interference resulting from processing in the Stroop task – a
paradigmatic test of executive control – brought equivocal
conclusions. In the present paper, we analyze what predictions
regarding this effect should be drawn from the most
influential computational models of the Stroop as well as from
our own new model. Then we test these predictions in an
experiment, by manipulating response set size as well as the
stimuli/response set sizes proportion, finding both evidence in
favor of our model and data which is not explained by any
Stroop model.

Introduction
An intensively studied human mental faculty is executive
control, being the ability of the human mind to influence
and organize its own cognitive processing, including control
over perceptual stimulation and motor programs. Work on
various executive control functions, such as preponent
response inhibition, task switching, and multitasking, has
inspired models of integrated control of human cognitive
architecture (Gray, 2007).
The Stroop task (MacLeod, 1991) is probably the most
popular test measuring an interesting aspect of executive
control, namely interference resolution, which in general
requires focusing on a new, weakly-learned process when
dealing with a stimulus, while overriding another process,
which is well-learned, strongly associated with that stimulus
and automatically activated by it. The Stroop task has been
used as an important tool for the verification of several
computational models of executive control (e.g., Botvinick,
Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001; Cohen, Dunbar, &
McClelland, 1990; Herd, Banich, & O’Reilly, 2006;
Roelofs, 2003; Smoleń & Chuderski, 2010; van Maanen,
van Rijn, & Borst, 2009; Verguts & Notebaert, 2008)
In its standard version, the Stroop test requires the naming
of the ink color of a word, which itself refers to another
color. The so-called interference effect is being observed,
which consists of increased response latency in such
incongruent trials, when compared to RT in neutral trials
(i.e., when it is required to name the color of a colorunrelated string, like XXXXX). If a color and a word match,
the facilitation effect is also being observed, which consists
of a decreased response latency in such congruent trials in
comparison to neutral trials. Other interesting experimental
effects have been also found (cf. MacLeod, 1991).

One of the most intensively examined effects related to
Stroop interference is the response set size effect – in some
studies, increasing the number of color-response pairs
increased the observed interference effect (this effect should
not be mistaken for the response-set effect: a word meaning
a color, which is not associated with any response, usually
yields little interference. This latter effect is not the focus of
this paper). The response set size effect has been used in the
testing of some Stroop models (e.g., Cohen et al., 1990;
Kanne, Balota, Spieler, & Faust, 1998).
However, numerous studies (for a review see MacLeod,
1991) did lead to ambigous findings regarding whether
increasing the number of possible responses in the Stroop
task really increases the interference or whether it decreases
it or does not have any effect. This mutually contradictory
data might have resulted from differences in experimental
designs, as both the standard Stroop (so-called the colorword) task and its analogs (e.g., the picture-word or wordword tasks) were used in various settings. Moreover, most
of the studies confounded response set size with stimulus set
size, as most commonly one-to-one SR mappings were
applied (especially, in an oral version).
In his paper, MacLeod (1991) cited several studies
(published between the sixties and the eighties) which
reported no effect of stimulus/response set size on the
amount of interference. He also cited three studies which
showed an increase in interference resulting from an
increase in set size (e.g., Williams, 1977), and three other
studies, which demonstrated the opposite effect (e.g., La
Heij & Vermeij, 1987). In two more recent studies (Kanne
et al., 1998; La Heij & van den Hof, 1995) the increasing
interference was found as a result of an increase in the
number of SR mappings. However, in the former study, set
size was manipulated only in range from two to four
stimuli/responses. The two-stimuli condition is an unusual
one, because if the exact stimulus is not repeated, the
presentation of two consecutive incongruent trials always
involves the priming of the second target (i.e., if in a
preceding incongruent trial a distractor word is presented,
then it has to be a target in a following trial). In three- or
four-stimuli versions, consecutive incongruent trials need
not involve priming.
The difference in the amount of priming may cause
differences in interference effects (Chuderski & Smoleń,
unpublished data). In fact, the increase of interference in
Kanne et al.’s study was only significant between two- and
three-stimuli conditions (∆ = 61 ms) but not between three-

2162

and four-stimuli conditions (∆ = 9 ms). On the contrary, in
La Heij & van den Hof’s study, the difference in set sizes
was so huge (4 vs. 16) that the set size factor might have
been substantially confounded with other variables (e.g.,
working memory load). In general, the pattern of the cited
results seems to be mixed and unconvincing.
Moreover, all cited experiments were applied with the use
of oral versions of the Stroop task (or its analogs), which
require naming the color. It would be interesting to see what
results would be observed if manual responses had been
required, as such responses are in fact the most common
procedure in psychological experiments.
In the present paper we tested the effect of increasing the
number of manual reactions required in the Stroop task on
the amount of Stroop interference. Moreover, we attempted
to investigate the influence of the ratio of stimuli to responses, namely what will happen if not only one but two or
three stimuli are associated with one response. The main
goal of the study was theoretical: as we believe that the
effects of set size on Stroop performance are important
indicators of processes responsible for coping with the
interference, we wanted to test some existing models of
Stroop against data from our experiment on set size effects.

Predictions of Stroop models regarding
stimulus/response set size
We analyzed predictions of three (groups of) Stroop models:
(a) Cohen et al.’s (1990) connectionist model and its
extensions (Cohen, Usher, & McClelland, 1998), which
explain the Stroop interference in terms of differences in
practice (strength) between color and word naming as well
as of the attentional modulation of color/word processing,
(b) Roelofs’ (2003) theory and similar models (Altmann &
Davidson, 2001; van Maanen et al., 2009), which identify
the interference as resulting from access to declarative
memory, and (c) our own new model (Smoleń & Chuderski,
2010), which localizes the causes of the interference in the
resolution of response conflicts. We focus only on how each
model would handle increasing set sizes. For details of
particular models see the original papers.
The model by Cohen at al. (1990) was a feed-forward
network, which represented processing pathways for color
naming and word reading as two separate interconnections
of input, hidden, and output nodes, which shared only the
output layer. Nodes which processed reading were
associated more strongly than those for color naming.
However, as an additional task-unit activated the color
naming pathway, this pathway was able to determine a
response, but at the cost of coping with the interference
yielded by the other path. Though Cohen et al. simulated the
Stroop task versions including two and ten stimuli, they did
not directly compare interference effects generated by these
two model versions. However, Kanne et al. (1998)
attempted to test Cohen et al.’s model against the results of
their experiment cited above. They extended the tworesponse architecture to account for three responses, and
then for four responses. Surprisingly, the model showed the
opposite behavior than the subjects, as the simulated
interference effect decreased with larger set sizes. Cohen et

al. (1998) responded to this test with a modified model.
Three model versions had the same architecture, which
accounted for multiple responses, but they differed in the
number of stimuli/responses that attention had been
allocated to. The simulations yielded virtually no size set
effect (equaling 8.8, 8.9, and 8.9 model’s cycles, for set
sizes 2, 3, and 4, respectively).
Another influential Stroop model was developed by
Roelofs (2003), who proposed distinct mechanisms for color
and word naming, based on differences in assumed language
production architecture. His model included three levels of
word representations: concepts, lemmas (syntactic representations), and word forms. Color perception, via related
concepts, activated a corresponding lemma, which had to be
retrieved in order to select a proper word form. However, a
perceived word was able to directly initiate the relevant
lemma and form representations. In the Stroop task, color
naming could be achieved by an additional selection
process, modulated by a color concept representation, which
acted as a goal. However, due to a shorter route from
perception to response in the case of words, the interference
emerged. Two other models, which are similar to Roelofs’
in their assumptions about access to memory and which
identify the loci of interference in memory retrievals, have
been implemented in ACT-R cognitive architecture
(Altmann & Davidson, 2001; van Maanen et al., 2009).
In the context of predictions of response set size effects,
the most important assumption shared by all those models is
that the latency of retrieval of a representation, which is
crucial for color naming RT, depends on the activity of
other memory representations related to the very task. For
example, this assumption is precisely expressed by van
Maanen et al., who implemented the RACE/A (retrieval by
accumulating evidence in an architecture; van Maanen &
van Rijn, 2007) theory of the time course of memory
retrievals on short time scales. This model predicts that the
latency of a retrieval (the time needed by the activation of a
retrieved memory representation to reach a retrieval
threshold) will be inversely proportional to the ratio of
activation of the yet to be retrieved chunk to the sum of the
activations of other relevant chunks, which also compete for
retrieval. The ratio is expressed as a respective Luce’s
(1986) formula. Analogous formulations of retrieval rate
can also be found in Roelofs (2003; Appendix A) and
Altmann and Davidson (2001; Equation 1). Neither of these
three models was used in order to replicate set size effects.
However, on the assumption that all color names and color
concepts relevant for a particular Stroop administration will
form a set of potentially competing memory representations,
such a pre-diction directly follows: with an increasing set
size, the number of competing representations will increase,
so the denominator of Luce ratio will increase. Thus, this
very ratio will decrease, which will result in larger latency
of the retrieval of color representations and, consequently,
of color naming. As word reading, which is believed to be
involved in congruent trials, is not sensitive to set size
manipulation (MacLeod, 1991), some increase in latency
difference bet-ween incongruent and congruent trails should
be expected within each of the afore mentioned models.

2163

Finally, we (Smoleń & Chuderski, 2010) have recently
presented the architecture implementing the Stroop task.
The architecture was primarily focused on describing
executive control, so “ordinary” processes (like perception,
visual attention, declarative memory etc.) were simplified.
Elementary cognitive processing was represented as a
choice among the set of potential cognitive and behavioral
actions expressed as production rules. Rules were added to
the choice set only if they matched the current context,
defined as the contents of visual and central attention (the
latter constituted the most available part of working
memory). A utility value was assigned to each rule, which
reflected the history of reinforcement-based learning related
to the use of this rule. When no conflict was present, the
model simply used the rule which would probably be the
most successful one according to model’s learning history
(i.e., the rule of the highest utility). However, if more than
one rule matched the context, a conflict arose. The model
estimated the amount of conflict as a ratio of the sum of all
utilities of rules, which would lead to different actions than
a rule of the highest utility, to the sum of all utilities. In
other words, it estimated the conflict value as the function of
how strong the competitors to the most dominant rule(s) are.
Then, the model increased the goal-related control as a
function of conflict. The less a given rule was related to the
goal, the more this top-down control lowered its utility. Due
to the control, a non-dominant but highly appropriate rule
could be selected for further processing. However, the
model assumed that the control takes time, so the more the
utilities of goal-unrelated rules had to be decreased (i.e., the
higher the conflict was), the longer the selection of the rule
to be fired required, which finally resulted in larger RTs.
In the context of the set size effect, the most important
property of our Stroop model is that only the rules which
exactly match the visual input will be included in the choice
set. So, assuming that each perceptual aspect of the stimulition (i.e., words and colors) related to the Stroop task is
processed by one associated rule, and assuming that utilities
for all rules processing words are equal and that the same is
true for color processing rules (but the former have higher
utility than the latter, as reading is trained more than naming
colors), one can predict that the number of stimuli/responses will not affect the interference effect. No matter how
large the set size is, both in incongruent and congruent trials
only two rules will be considered, one which processes a
color and one which processes a word. In congruent trials,
both rules will lead to the same response, so the conflict will
be low and latency small. On the contrary, in incongruent
trials, a color naming rule will become a competitor to a
word reading rule and thus the conflict and a resulting
interference will be large.
In the administered experiment we aimed to test whether
increasing the number of S-R mappings would increase the
interference or would have no effect on it. Moreover, if
there was an increase, it would be interesting to know
whether it is the number of responses (i.e. potential response
keys) that matters or whether it is the number of stimuli that
counts. In order to answer this latter question, we designed
experimental conditions which assigned more than one
stimulus to one and the same response key.

Experiment 1
Participants
The recruitment was conducted via publicly available social
networking websites in Krakow, Poland. Seventy nine
women and forty three men participated (122 people in
total). Mean age was 22.9 years (SD = 4.4, range 18 – 45).
For a two-hour session each participant received the
equivalent of seven euro in Polish zloty. All participants had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Materials and design
The figure-word analog of the Stroop task was used. The
participants were randomly assigned to one out of four task
conditions. Each condition involved either four or six
stimuli and either two responses or the same number of
responses as stimuli. This resulted in four conditions: four
stimuli – two responses, four stimuli – four responses, six
stimuli – two responses, and six stimuli – six responses.
Six geometric figures (approx. 5 cm × 5 cm in size) were
used: square, rhombus, rectangle, circle, oval, and ring,
presented in blue, with black outlines, on a gray background. Each stimulus was presented at the center of a computer screen. A word naming a figure, in Polish, printed in
black (approx. 3 cm × 3 cm in size), was placed in the
center of each figure. Congruent stimuli had the same meaning of the word as the shape of the figure. Incongruent
figures were different than words. The same distractor word
was always associated with a particular figure (e.g., “ring”
was always put into a rectangle and vice versa). In each
two-response condition, the distractor primed a response
with the opposite hand than a hand associated with a target.
Direct stimuli repetitions were not allowed. In four-stimuli
conditions, only the square, rhombus, circle, and oval were
used.
In each condition, the task started with a training
sequence including 10 congruent and 30 incongruent trials
in four-response condition or 15 congruent and 45 incongruent trials in six-response condition. Then a test sequence
was presented in random order, which included 72
congruent and 48 incongruent trials in four-response conditions or 108 congruent and 72 incongruent trials in sixresponse conditions. The six-stimuli sequences were longer
in order to give an equal number of presentations of each
stimulus. Stimuli were presented for 2.5 s and then were
followed by a mask which was shown for 1 s.
In two-response conditions, the square, rhombus, and
rectangle (the latter only in the six-stimuli condition) were
assigned to the ‘Z’ key, while the circle, oval, and ring (the
latter only in the six-stimuli condition) were assigned to the
‘M’ key. In conditions with more than two responses, the
square was assigned to the ‘Z’ key, rhombus – to ‘X’,
rectangle – to ‘C’ (but only in the six-response condition),
circle – to ‘B’, oval – to ‘N’, and ring – to ‘M’ (again, only
in the six-response condition). So, one, two, or three fingers
of each hand were dedicated to responding, depending on
the condition. An instruction told participants to avoid
reading and to press quickly and accurately the button
assigned to the shape of the presented figure. In order to

2164

place equal demands on participants’ working memory in
both four- and six-responses conditions, the hints reminding
stimulus-response mappings were placed at the bottom of
the screen. Incorrect responses were signaled with a beep
sound. The independent variables were: the number of
stimuli (four or six), the number of responses (two or as
mant as the no. of stimuli), and the trial (congruent/
incongruent) The dependent variable (DV) was the latency
of correct responses directly following a correct response.
RT less than 250 ms or more than 2200 ms were excluded.

Procedure
First, participants solved an analogy-making test which was
not related to the present study. Then, the Stroop task was
applied. Testing took place in a large, dimly lit room, in
groups of no more than four people. Each participant was
equipped with headphones and was sitting at a visually
isolated desk.

Results
The mean proportion of errors was .047 and did not differ
significantly between stimuli and response conditions. This
indicated that correct respondse was not difficult in either
four- or six-response conditions.
The mean latencies for all conditions are presented in
Figure 1. All main effects were highly significant: participants responded more slowly in incongruent trials than in
congruent ones, F[1, 114] = 99.0, p < .001, when six stimuli
were involved in comparison to the case of four stimuli,
F[1, 114] = 115.5, p < .001, and in one-to-one SR mapping
conditions in comparison to two-response conditions,
F[1, 114] = 5655.4, p < .001. A two-way interaction
between the number of stimuli and the number of responses
was also significant, F[1, 114] = 36.2, p < .001, and
indicated that mean latency was larger when six stimuli
were applied than when four stimuli were used, but it
increased more in one-to-one SR mapping conditions than
in many-to-one mapping conditions.

For the purpose of the present study, the most important
are the interactions regarding the type of trial and two other
factors, namely whether both numbers (of stimuli and of
responses) have any influence on the interference effect. The
two-way interaction between the type of trial and the
number of responses was highly significant, F[1, 114] =
50.2, p < .001, demonstrating that association of more than
one stimulus with each response dramatically reduces the
interference effect. However, the number of stimuli had
virtually no effect on interference (F = .1) in any response
condition (i.e., a three-way interaction was not significant, F
= .3). The interference effect equaled 60 ms and 67 ms in
four- and six-responses conditions, respectively, and fell to
11 ms on average in two-response conditions. However, the
latter effect was significant, F[1, 114] = 4.3, p = .038.
No meaningful change in the above presented analyses
occurred when only the first 120 trials from six-stimuli
conditions were analyzed (i.e., when the equal numbers of
trials for all conditions was taken into account).

Discussion
The main result yielded by this study is virtually no
difference in the interference effects (∆ = 7 ms) between
four- and six-response conditions. Though the mean RT
increased in the latter condition compared to the former one,
it did so in equally the same amount for both congruent and
incongruent stimuli.
A surprising result regarded two-response conditions. An
extremely low interference effect was observed in both
these conditions, in comparison to versions of the Stroop
with one-to-one SR mappings, even if within the former
conditions an incongruent stimulus always primed both
competing responses. A question naturally arises: was this
residual but significant interference observed in tworesponse conditions anyway related to response conflict or
was no response conflict elicited, but the interference was
rather related to the non-matching aspects of stimulus?
In order to answer this question a two-response condition,
which includes the incongruent stimuli priming a single
response, should be examined. If a small but significant
interference effect still shows up, then it will suggests that
factors other than response conflict are responsible for
interference in manual versions of Stroop. However, if the
effect disappears, then the conflict which is present in
stimuli but is not related to responding, should not be taken
into account as a factor causing the Stroop inter-ference.
Thus, another experiment was administered in order to test
these hypotheses.

Experiment 2
Participants

Figure 1: Mean response latency in all conditions of
Experiment 1, for both congruent (solid lines)
and incongruent (dashed lines) trials. Bars represent 95%
confidence intervals.

The recruitment procedure was the same as in Experiment 1.
Twenty four women and twenty men participated (44 people
in total). Mean age was 22.2 years (SD = 2.8, range 18 –
32). Again, for a two-hour session each participant received
the equivalent of seven euro. All participants had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.

2165

Materials, design, and procedure
The materials, DV, and procedure were analogous as in
Experiment 1, with two exceptions. Firstly, only the fourstimuli, two-response condition was applied. Secondly, a
distractor always primed the same response as one assigned
to a target figure, namely the word “square” (in Polish) was
always a distractor assigned to the shape of rhombus (and
vice versa) and the word “circle” (in Polish) was always a
distractor placed in the shape of oval (and vice versa). The
only factor was the type of the trial.

Results
The mean proportion of errors was .053. The only relevant
effect surpassed the adopted level of statistical significance,
F[1, 42] = 4.2, p = .042. However it was a reversed effect:
the mean latency observed in congruent trials was larger
than the mean latency observed in incongruent trials (525
vs. 516 ms, respectively).

Discussion
No Stroop effect was found. When both a target figure and a
non-matching word did prime the same response, the
response latency was even smaller than when a word
matched a figure. This unexpected result surely needs
replication, perhaps with a material different than geometric
figures. However, an unequivocal conclusion can be
formulated that no amount of Stroop interference, which
was observed in the manual task version, can be related to
the very conflict in stimulus appearance, when a response
conflict was eliminated in the incongruent trials.

General discussion
A methodological issue regarding the present research
concerns whether increasing set size from four to six
elements was indeed an effective experimental
manipulation. We believe it was. On one hand, four is the
lowest reasonable set size in Stroop tasks because, as we
mentioned above, set sizes of two and of three impose
methodological problems concerning stimuli repetitions and
negative priming. On the other hand, the set size of eight
elements is the upper limit that can be tested with manual
versions of the Stroop. So, the choice of four and six SR
mappings seemed reasonable. The substantial increase in
mean response time for set size six, in comparison with set
size four, indicates that indeed the task became more
difficult in the former condition. However, in future studies
it would be interesting to also test also set sizes of eight.
The fact that an increase in the number of stimulusresponse mappings in the manual version of the Stroop has
virtually no effect on the amount of the Stroop interference
is in concord with the predictions of two models, which
explain Stroop phenomenon as the resolution of conflict
either between processing paths (Cohen et al., 1990) or
between response tendencies (Smoleń & Chuderski, 2010).
Although the former model was shown to wrongly predict
RT distributions yielded by the Stroop task (Mewhort,
Braun, & Heathcote, 1992), as well as to miss the effect of
temporal asynchrony between the presentation of colors and
words on the interference effect (Roelofs, 2003), at least in

the case of the response set size effect, this model correctly
predicts the observed data. Thus, the critique of the model
made by Kanne et al. (1998) may have missed the point,
because it relied on artefactual effects from the experimental
design, which used only two stimuli. However, the lack of
set size effect was an accidental rather than an intended
property of Cohen et al.’s model.
On the contrary, our model’s prediction on the lack of set
size effects is a direct consequence of model’s theoretical
assumptions. The response conflict resolution, which is the
main cause of the emergence of interference effects in the
model, always relates to only those responses, which are
primed by actual stimuli presented to the model. All other
potential stimuli-response mappings, which are not related
to the actual stimuli, have no effect on the value of the
conflict being resolved. This assumption naturally also
explains the lack of the interference effect observed in the
many-to-one Stroop task version, in which non-matching
aspects of a stimulus prime the same response. Our model
predicts that in such a situation simply no conflict is present
(i.e., there are no competing responses), so there is no need
for conflict resolution and thus no interference is involved.
However, for both our and Cohen et al.’s models, the
outstanding decrease in interference from one-to-one to
many-to-one SR mappings would be a problematic phenomenon to explain. In the case of many-to-one SR mappings,
in both models, two competing response tendencies/
processing paths (depending on the model) would still be
activated and remain in conflict, leading to similar
interference effects as in the one-to-one mapping task. In
order to account for the effect of the ratio of stimuli set size
to response set size, probably some additional assumptions
would have to be adopted. For example, one might seek an
explanation in a categorization processes, preceding the
processing/response conflict. Maybe, before the activation
of a certain path or response, the cognitive system dealing
with many-to-one SR mappings firstly needs to categorize a
stimulus as assigned to the proper response, and this process
somehow stops the conflict and, consequently, lowers the
interference. However, the present study does not provide
any explanation as to why when there is a decrease in the
number of potential responses, while a number of stimuli is
constant, it results in such a huge reduction of Stroop
interference. Surely, some further studies are needed.
Evidently, overtly expressed predictions of the models,
which explain the Stroop interference in terms of additional
memory retrievals needed for color or picture naming, were
not supported by the present study. According to these
models, an increase in the number of stimuli within a task
should probably have made the color/picture name retrievals more difficult because there were more candidate
memory chunks to be selected from. This should have
resulted in a significant increase in Stroop interference with
increasing set sizes. Such a prediction was not supported by
results of our experiment, which applied the manual Stroop
task. In fact, there is little evidence for this prediction even
in the case of oral versions (but see La Heij & van den Hof,
1995; Williams, 1977). We suppose that if memory
retrievals account for any part of Stroop interference at all,
then they do it only when oral responding is involved,

2166

which may probably require recalling the elements of the
motor program for oral response. On the contrary, manual
response is much simpler, so it may require just activating
the proper effector not mediated by any memory retrieval.
However, though these differences in experimental
paradigms are superficial and not related to the main
purpose of the Stroop task, namely measurement of the
cognitive costs of executive control, they seem to result in
discrepant experimental effects. Thus, it is very interesting
whether one general model of the Stroop task, which would
explain processing in both oral and manual versions of the
Stroop, can be constructed. If it can, then it will constitute
some evidence for the general control mechanism (see van
Maanen et al., 2009) processing Stroop interference, which
is responsible for a variety of Stroop-related phenomena. If
such a model cannot to be found, then the view of executive
control as a bunch of low-level, local regulatory processes
(Egner, 2008), each focused on one specific type of conflict
(e.g., regarding attentional focusing, memory retrievals,
response selection etc.) would seem more probable, at least
in the domain of coping with interference.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education (grant N106 417140).

References
Altmann, E. M., & Davidson, D. J. (2001). An integrative
approach to Stroop: Combining a language model and a
unified cognitive theory. In J. D. Moore & K. Stenning
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 21-26): Hillsdale, NJ:
Laurence Erlbaum.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive
control. Psychological Review, 108, 624–652.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
processing model of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332-361.
Cohen, J. D., Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). A PDP
approach to set size effects within the Stroop task: Reply
to Kanne, Balota, Spieler, and Faust (1998).
Psychological Review, 105, 188-194.
Egner, T. (2008). Multiple conflict-driven mechanisms in
the human brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 374380.
Gray, W. D. (2007). Integrated models of cognitive systems.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Herd, S. A., Banich, M. T., & O’Reilly, R. C. (2006).
Neural mechanisms of cognitive control: An integrative
model of Stroop performance and fMRI data. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 22-32.
Kanne, S. M., Balota, D.A., Spieler, D. H., & Faust, M. E.
(1998). Explorations of Cohen, Dunbar, and McClelland’s
(1990) connectionist model of Stroop performance.
Psychological Review, 105, 174-187.

La Heij, W., & van den Hof, E. (1995). Picture-word
interference increases with target-set size. Psychological
Research, 58, 199-133.
La Heij, W., & Vermeij, M. (1987). Reading versus naming:
The effect of target set size on contextual interference and
facilitation. Perception and Psychophysics, 41, 355-366.
Luce, R.D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford
University Press.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of a research on the
Stroop Effects: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163-203.
Mehwort, D. J. K., Braun, J. G., & Heathcote, A. (1992).
Response time distributions and the Stroop task: A test of
the Cohen, Dunbar, and McClelland (1990) model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 18, 872-882.
Roelofs, A. (2003). Goal-referenced selection of verbal
action: Modeling attentional control in the Stroop task.
Psychological Review, 110, 88-125.
Smoleń, T., & Chuderski, A. (2010). Modeling strategies in
Stroop with a general architecture of executive control. In
S. Ohlsson, R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 931-936). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
van Maanen, L., van Rijn, H., & Borst, J. P. (2009). Stroop
and picture-word interference are two sides of the same
coin. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 987-999.
Williams, T. (1977). The effects of amount of information
in the Stroop color word test. Perception and
Psychophysics, 22, 463-470.
Verguts, T., & Notebaert, W. (2008). Hebbian learning of
cognitive control. Psychological Review, 115, 518-525.

2167

