UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking for Seeing: Enculturation of Visual-Referential Expertise as Demonstrated by PhotoTriggered Perceptual Reorganization of Two-Tone “Mooney” Images

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n10g78h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Yoon, Jennifer M.D.
Witthoft, Nathan
Winawer, Jonathan
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thinking for Seeing: Enculturation of Visual-Referential Expertise as Demonstrated
by Photo-Triggered Perceptual Reorganization of Two-Tone “Mooney” Images

1

Jennifer M.D. Yoon (jennifer.yoon@stanford.edu)1
Nathan Witthoft (witthoft@stanford.edu) 1
Jonathan Winawer (winawer@stanford.edu) 1
Michael C. Frank (mcfrank@stanford.edu) 1
Edward Gibson (egibson@mit.edu)2
Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu) 1

Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge MA 02139

2

Abstract

was. This serves as a powerful demonstration of the ability
of information outside the image to drive perceptual
reorganization.

Two-tones (”Mooney”-esque transformations of grayscale
photographs) can be difficult to recognize. However, after
viewing the photographs from which two-tones were created,
adults experience rapid “perceptual reorganization,” and the
two-tones become immediately recognizable. In contrast to
the effortless post-cue recognition seen in adults, preschoolaged children are generally unable to recognize two-tone
images even when the photograph is simultaneously
available. While simple instructional and perceptual
interventions were ineffective, a cognitive intervention in
which children were convinced that the photo and two-tone
images were transformations of the same physical object
improved children’s recognition. We found a similar deficit in
recognition in adults from a hunter-gatherer tribe (Pirahã)
with a sparse visual symbolic culture and limited exposure to
modern
visual
media.
Photo-triggered
perceptual
reorganization of two-tone images may therefore be a product
of prolonged enculturation, reflecting visual-referential
expertise. As we gain skill in representing visual
correspondences, one of the surprising consequences may be
the ability to literally see things we couldn’t see before.

Figure 1. Dalmatian in the snow from Gregory, 2001.

Keywords: vision; perception; recognition; development;
culture; top-down effects; perceptual reorganization;
expertise; referential and symbolic understanding.

Introduction
Object and scene recognition are typically rapid and
automatic (Potter & Levy, 1969). When viewing
impoverished images however, recognition may be difficult.
One class of such images is two-tones. Two-tones are
created by adjusting and thresholding photographs to render
them in two values (pure black and pure white). Some of
these images, similar to the famous “Dalmatian in the snow”
(Gregory, 2001), can be difficult to interpret because the
foreground objects are not easily segmented from the
background scenes. When briefly viewed for the first time, a
two-tone image may be perceived as a disorganized
smattering of black and white patches. With the right cue,
such as the photo from which the two-tone was derived,
viewers find the image suddenly and vividly transformed
into a coherent percept (Gregory, 2001). Moreover,
following reorganization, it is difficult if not impossible to
see the image as the meaningless array of patches it once

Kovacs and Eisenberg (2004) showed 4-5 year old
children two-tone images and their corresponding photos.
None of the eight children were able to verbally identify the
two-tone images, even with simultaneous presentation of the
corresponding photo. This phenomenon is striking in that
children appear to not just be slower or less accurate; rather,
when viewing the two-tone images and photos side-by-side,
they fail to see what adults see automatically.
In our previous work, we replicated and extended the
Kovacs & Eisenbergy (2004) finding in children. For our
experiments we quantified performance with a measure of
“drawing accuracy”: observers were asked to mark several
corresponding features in the two-tone image and the
matching photograph (Yoon, Winawer, Witthoft, &
Markman, 2007). They received a maximum score of 1 if
they were able to correctly mark corresponding parts in the
two-tone and photo images, and a minimum score of 0 if no
parts corresponded. Adults drawing accuracy was nearly
perfect (Figure 4, Control 2), while children’s drawing
accuracy was very low (Figure 4, Verbal report). The low
marking scores were not due to an inability to understand
the task or to relatively poor drawing skills. The same
children had nearly perfect performance marking

2896

corresponding parts in easily recognizable but non-identical
image pairs (Figure 4, Control 1).
Children’s striking difficulty in marking corresponding
parts of two-tone and photo images was observed in two
subsequent experimental conditions. In the first condition,
the experimenter explicitly informed the children on every
trial that the two-tone and photo images were the same
(“Actually, this is a picture of the same thing as this. So
there is a [name of object] in this picture and in this
picture”). This manipulation did not improve performance
(Figure 4, Instruction). Second, we changed the order in
which showed the stimuli: we first presented the photo and
only presented the two-tone afterwards with explicit
instruction about the relationship between the photo and
two-tone. This manipulation tested the possibility that poor
performance was due to “perceptual interference”, that is,
that an initial incorrect interpretation of the two-tone
blocked reorganization. However, this manipulation also
failed to improve children’s performance (Figure 4,
Interference reduction).

likelihood
of
children
experiencing
perceptual
reorganization can improve if the burden of dual
representation is reduced. The second experiment shows
that an adult population with minimal expertise in visual
symbols
has
difficulty
experiencing
perceptual
reorganization of two-tone images.

Experiment 1
The first experiment was inspired by a “shrinking machine”
experiment conducted by Deloache and colleagues (1997).
We showed children pairs of identical photos. One of these
photos was sent through a “special machine” that led
children to believe the photo transformed into a two-tone.
Participants Eleven preschool children (3y,9m – 5y0m,
average 4y6m) from Bing Nursery School participated in
the study. Four additional children were excluded for
inability to finish the experiment or experimenter error.
Stimuli Two-tone images were created by thresholding
blurred gray-scale photographs of a kitten, dolphins (the
example image used in the Kovacs & Eisenberg, 2004), a
cheetah, a dog, a polar bear, a tiger, and an athlete (Figure
3). Each trial included a two-tone image paired with the
gray-scale photograph from which it was derived. Two
additional practice image pairs were created using simpler
image transformations. A photograph of a deer was paired
with a blurred version and a house was paired with a higher
contrast version. Each image was printed onto a 12 x 12 cm
card.

Figure 2 An example in which the child indicated a match
but could not draw corresponding parts. In red, a 4-year-old
has drawn the nose (arrow 1) and claws (arrow 2) of the
bear in the photo, and what she claims are the same parts in
the two-tone image of the bear.
One hypothesis to explain the lack of perceptual
reorganization in young children is that their early visual
system is not yet mature, perhaps due to a lack of fully
developed long-range connections. Another hypothesis for
children’s deficient perceptual reorganization is that using
the photograph as a cue for reorganization requires an
appreciation of the dual nature of the photograph as both a
concrete object in and of itself, and a representation of
something else—the two-tone image. This skill is a form of
visual-referential expertise entrained by a visual symbolic
culture typical in the US. For example, we “read” visual
symbols such as representational art, maps and models, and
writing, by appreciating their relationship to the visual
objects they refer to. Difficulty in such visual-referential
expertise or “dual representation” (DeLoache, Miller, &
Rosengren, 2007) may prevent children from capitalizing on
the photo as an important cue. Here, we report two
experimental results that are consistent with the referential
expertise hypothesis. The first experiment shows that the

Figure 3:Full stimulus set used in Experiment 1 including
seven two-tone and photo pairs, and two practice pairs (deer
and blurred version, house and contrast increased version).
Procedure The experimenter sat across from the child at a
small table and explained: “In this game, I’m going to show
you some pictures. You just tell me what you think is in this
picture. Sometimes, the pictures will be very clear and

2897

sometimes they will look all fuzzy and blurry.” Following
the perceptual interference reduction manipulation (Yoon et
al, 2007), we did not start trials with uncued two-tone
identification. We instead began with photo identification
before proceeding to cued two-tone identification and
finished by asking the child to draw corresponding parts of
the two-tone and photo images.
Experiments began with photo cue identification. The
experimenter placed a photo card before the child and
asked, “What do you think this pictures is?” She then placed
an identical photo next to it and asked “What about this
picture? What do you see?” The experimenter sent one of
the two identical photos through a “special machine” that
“makes pictures look a little different, even though they are
really still the same.” The machine was a modified HP
Business Inkjet 2300 printer that would feed the photo card
through a hidden slot behind the printer and would output a
two-tone card from a hidden tray within the printer. Special
care with timing and presentation gave the impression that
the 12x12cm card that came out of the machine was the very
same card that went into the machine
Photo cue identification was followed by cued two-tone
identification. In this stage, the experimenter placed the
two-tone card that emerged from the machine next to its
corresponding photo. She explained, “Look what the
machine did to the picture! Even though it looks different
it’s still a pictures of the same [name of object].” Finally,
children were invited to draw corresponding parts of the
two-tone and photo image.
Drawing measure The experimenter picked two or three
features of the named image and asked, “Can you draw for
me where the [feature] is in this picture?”, pointing to the
photo. Then the experimenter asked, “Can you draw for me
where the same [feature] is in this picture?”, pointing to the
two-tone image. The experimenter gave positive feedback
no matter what the child drew, “Wow, that looks great!
Thank you.”
For each trial, drawings on the paired two-tone and photo
images were then given a single score of 0, 0.5 or 1.
Drawings earned a score of 1 if all parts drawn on the twotone image corresponded correctly to the parts drawn on the
photo. Drawings earned a score of 0.5 if at least one part
(e.g., nose) drawn on the two-tone image corresponded
exactly with the part drawn on the two-tone image, but some
remaining drawn parts did not correspond. Drawings
received a score of 0 if no parts drawn on the two-tone
image corresponded to parts drawn on the photo. Drawings
were scored by the first author (JMDY).
Results and discussion The average drawing scores on all
test trials was 0.66 (SD = 0.14) (Figure 4, bar outlined in
green). This score was lower than the average drawing score
on practice trials (0.97, SD = 0.08; t(10) = 5.28, p < .001,
paired two-tailed t-test). However, this score was also
significantly higher than the average drawing score on all
test trials in a similar design that did not reduce dual

representation demands (Figure 4, Interference reduction
study, 0.33, SD = 0.19; t(19) = 5.24; p < 0.001, unpaired
two-tailed t-test). Even though children in the interference
reduction experiment were explicitly instructed about the
correspondence between two-tone and photo image pairs
and asked to identify the two-tone only after first seeing the
photo, their drawing scores did not improve (Yoon et al,
2007). In contrast, removing the need to represent the
correspondence between two distinct visual objects by
convincing children the photo physically transformed into
the two-tone was sufficient to improve their perception of
the two-tones.

Figure 4: Performance in drawing corresponding parts on
image pairs. Children are significantly worse at drawing
corresponding parts of two-tone and photo image pairs
compared to adults and compared to children drawing on
two identical photographs. Neither instruction about the
identity between the two-tone and photo images nor
reducing perceptual interference helped to improve drawing
scores significantly. The cognitive intervention described in
Study 1 (outlined in green), however, doubled performance.

Pirahã Adults and Controls
Although an experimental manipulation improved children's
performance in Experiment 1, it may still be the case that
physiological maturation is sufficient to guarantee perfect
performance in adults. Physiological maturation of the
visual system, regardless of cultural environment, could
explain differences in perception between children and
adults. However, children may also become more strongly
enculturated into the practices of perceptual inference and
interpretation accepted in their particular community over
time, similarly predicting differences in how children and
adults perceive the world. But is the rapid perceptual
reorganization reported by US adults a necessary
consequence of having a mature visual system or is it the
result of knowledge and experience acquired in a specific
cultural context?

2898

If US children’s difficulty with photo-triggered two-tone
reorganization is due to their lack of visual-referential
expertise, and such expertise is provided by a culture that
trains individuals how to “read” visual symbols such as
representational art, maps and models, and writing – then
we should find a similar pattern of performance in adults
whose culture does not require such expertise. We therefore
showed two-tone images and their photo pairs to adult
members of the Pirahã, a hunter-gatherer tribe with a sparse
visual symbolic culture and limited exposure to modern
visual media. Like young children in a modern industrial
culture, Pirahã adults have little experience or knowledge of
the visual transformation that links a photo and two-tone
image. However, they possess both physiologically mature
visual systems and a lifetime of experience with complex
visual tasks such as hunting and fishing.

Experiment 2A
The procedure and stimuli were modified from those
reported in Yoon et al, 2007, to be appropriate for the Pirahã
participants.
Participants Adult members of the Pirahã tribe (n = 9,
mean estimated age = 30y). The visual acuity of the Pirahã
population was tested some years earlier as part of a basic
screen for medical services; the population was on the
whole normal, with no cataracts and a small incidence of
nearsightedness.

Figure 5. Stimuli used in Experiments 2A, 2B, 2C.
Stimuli Ten two-tone images were created by blurring and
thresholding grayscale photographs of animals and
individuals found in the Pirahã participants’ everyday
environment: tribe members, monkeys, a toucan, ocelot,
tapir, and sloths. The amount of blur and the black/white
threshold point were set independently for each photograph
to meet the subjective criteria that the two-tone was hard to
recognize without first seeing the photograph from which it
was derived ("uncued") but easy to see after seeing the
photograph ("cued"). Two other image pairs were tested
which did not include two-tones and for which the
correspondence was easier to see (blurred jaguar, grayscaled
houseboat). These served as warm-up items and to ensure
subjects understood the task. Images were printed onto
12x12cm cards (see Figure 5).
Procedure The experimenter sat with the participant at a
small table. Each trial consisted of three stages. In stage 1,
subjects were shown a two-tone image and asked to indicate
their recognition by pointing to the location of the eye or
Pirahã person in the picture. Responses were marked by
placing a sticker at the indicated locations. Trials in which
the target was not initially identified were considered
“candidate reorganization trials.” These trials were of
particular interest as they provided a test of whether an
initially unrecognized two-tone image could be successfully
reinterpreted after seeing the corresponding photo. These
trials proceeded to stages 2 and 3. In stage 2, subjects were
shown the corresponding photograph alone and asked to
point to the location of the eye or Pirahã person. In stage 3,
the two-tone image and photograph were shown side-byside and the subject was again asked to point to the location
of the eyes or person in the two-tone image.
Results and discussion Pirahã participants successfully
indicated the target locations (either eye or person) on the
non-two-tone practice images without the corresponding
photo cue (93%), showing subjects understood the task
(Figure 6, blue bars). Uncued two-tone recognition in Pirahã
subjects was infrequent (22% of trials). They identified the
targets in the corresponding, untransformed photos 87% of
the time (Figure 3, left bars). All Pirahã subjects correctly
indicated the target on at least 7 of the 10 photos. Data from
trials where the Pirahã did not correctly recognize the photo
were excluded from subsequent analysis.
Performance was assessed on candidate reorganization
trials by calculating the percentage of two-tones recognized
after viewing the photo cue out of all two-tones not initially
recognized. Pirahã subjects succeeded on candidate
reorganization trials only 30% of the time. Two Pirahã
subjects never demonstrated perceptual reorganization, and
the highest rate of reorganization for any Pirahã individual
was 60%.

2899

Experiment 2B
We tested US adults under identical experimental conditions
as a control.
Participants Stanford University students, faculty, and staff
(n = 8, mean age = 26y).
Stimuli See Experiment 1.
Procedure See Experiment 1.
Results and discussion U.S. control subjects on the same
task successfully indicated the target locations (either eye or
person) on the non-two-tone practice images without the
corresponding photo cue (controls 100%) showing subjects
understood the task (Figure 3, middle bars). Controls
located the targets successfully in uncued two-tone images
on 73% of trials, more frequently than the Pirahã subjects.
Controls identified the targets in the corresponding,
untransformed photos 100%. Controls consistently showed
photo-triggered perceptual reorganization, always (100%)
correctly indicating the eye or Pirahã person on previously
unrecognized two-tones.
Experiment 2C
Misaligned presentation was used to control for the
possibility that the U.S. subjects succeeded on the task not
by recognizing the two-tone images, but merely by locating
the point on the two-tone in the same location relative to the
image frame as the corresponding point in the photograph.
Participants Stanford students (n = 10, mean age = 19y).
Stimuli Images used in Experiments 1 and 2 were cropped
by 10% on two adjacent sides (e.g,. top and left) chosen at
random, with the constraint that the corresponding two-tone
and photo were not cropped on the same two sides. Thus the
eye or head was in a different location relative to the image
frame in the photo and in the two-tone.
Procedure See Experiment 1.
Results and discussion Control subjects in the misaligned
condition, like the controls in the main experiment and in
contrast to the Pirahã subjects, showed near perfect
performance on candidate reorganization trials (94%), as
would be expected if control subjects experienced
reorganization, and did not depend solely on a spatial
alignment strategy to localize features.

General Discussion
These data suggest at a minimum, that a mature visual
system is insufficient to guarantee photo-triggered
perceptual reorganization. It is possible that a similarly low
rate of photo-triggered reorganization of two-tone images in
young US children and Piraha adult are the result of

unrelated causes. But the existence of reduced
reorganization in an adult population opens up the
possibility that developmental failures in perceptual
reorganization in young US children may also be explained
by a mechanism distinct from visual system maturation.
Thus, one possibility is that the results reported here,
together with the previous studies on young children
(Deloache et al, 1997; Kovacs & Eisenberg, 2004; Yoon et
al., 2007), suggest that the very act of bringing our
knowledge and experience to bear on perception in the way
required for photo-triggered reinterpretation of a two-tone
image may be the result of training and experience that is
culture-specific – a kind of perceptual literacy.

Figure 6: Data summary from Experiments 2A, 2B, 2C.
Culture-specific experience with visual symbols may
provide the training required for observers to navigate the
dual nature of the two-tone and photo as objects in and of
themselves, as well as representations of one another that
are mutually informative. Eliminating the need to achieve
such dual representation aids inexperienced members of a
culture (young US children) in using symbolically
corresponding visual representations, such as a scale model,
before they acquire expertise in 'reading' visual symbols
such as writing and maps (Deloache et al, 1997). Of course,
dual representation per se is not impossible for children
even much younger than those we tested, depending on the
nature of the correspondence. By age two, children infer that
a pictorial image corresponds to a real world threedimensional object even if they have not yet seen such an
object. By age three, children are readily able to use a scale
model as a “map” to a larger scale room. Therefore,
whatever cognitive operation is involved in “pure” dual
representation is likely available to children as young as
two. Some additional difficulty must explain why it takes an
additional year to master dual representation problems
involving scale models and a further two or three years
when two-tone and photo pairs are involved.
Children’s two-tone recognition is somewhat, though not
completely, improved when they are given a strong
conviction that the two-tone is a physical transformation of
a photo image. One idea is that they must understand that

2900

the photo and two-tone should be mapped onto each other in
a particular way that preserves spatial relationships even if
many local details are mismatched – much as the way a
subway diagram preserves the relative relationships between
stations while distorting some details about specific
distances, and not in the way a Picasso painting can
represent a human figure. This may represent a
correspondence problem more difficult in degree or kind
than that of scale models, where overall spatial layouts are
perceptually unambiguous. The two-tone image is
ambiguous because the strong edges within the image itself
can be grouped in many ways, many of which do not
resolve into a meaningful, coherent percept. Unlike
unambiguous line drawings and scale models, phototriggered two-tone reorganization requires a representational
override. A conviction that the two highly dissimilar visual
objects are transformations of one another is one way to
trigger this perceptual override. This practice of perceptual
revision, a habit of reinterpreting images when receiving
information extrinsic to the image, is part of what may be
entrained in a visual symbolic culture and may explain why,
by adulthood, a transformation cover story is no longer
necessary.
Further research should identify what cognitive skills are
entrained by visual symbolic cultures, and how such
enculturation may influence other practices of perceptual
inference and interpretation necessary for photo-triggered
perceptual reorganization.

Kovacs, I. & Eisenberg, M. (2004). Human Development of
Binocular Rivalry, in Binocular Rivalry, D. Alais and R.
Blake, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 101-116.
Potter, M.C., Levy, E.I. (1969). Recognition memory for a
rapid sequence of pictures. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 81, 10–15.
Yoon, J.M.D., Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., & Markman, E.M.
(2007). Striking deficiency in top-down perceptual
reorganization of two-tone images in preschool children.
Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on
Development and Learning.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to all the participants in these studies: the
teachers and children of Bing Nursery School, Stanford
University community members, and the Pirahã. Special
thanks to Daniel Everett for arranging access to Pirahã, and
his prior work characterizing their culture and language. We
also thank research assistants who helped with stimulus
preparation and/or US data collection and scoring in
alphabetical order: Hannah Jaycox, Ben Kessler-Reynolds,
Caitlin McLean, Katie O’Neal, Heather Purnell. Special
thanks to David Montez and William Beecher for the
procurement and modification of the “special machine” used
in Experiment 4.

References
DeLoache, J.S., Miller, K.F., & Rosengren, K. S. (1997).
The credible shrinking room: Very young children's
performance with symbolic and non-symbolic relations.
Psychological Science, 8, 308-313.
Gregory, R.L. (2001). The Medawar Lecture 2001
knowledge for vision: vision for knowledge, Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 360, 1231-51.

2901

