UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
To catch a liar: The effects of truthful and deceptive testimony on inferential learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7t67z4kh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Montague, Robert
Navarro, Daniel J.
Prefors, Amy
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

To catch a liar: The effects of truthful and
deceptive testimony on inferential learning
Robert Montague1, Daniel J. Navarro2, Amy Perfors2, Russell Warner1, & Patrick Shafto1
1

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Louisville
2
School of Psychology, University of Adelaide

and focus on superficial cues to deception in one-off
situations.
We are interested in how deceptive interactions play out
over time. For example, guilty criminal suspects often try to
convince the police of their innocence. In response, police
officers verify as many details of their testimony as possible
and then decide whether to continue to focus on the suspect
or pursue other leads. Analogously, consider a game in
which a learner tries to learn a rectangular concept based on
clues provided by an informant, who may be deceptive or
helpful (see Figure 1). Like the police, the learner can ask
the informant or gather information on their own. Like the
suspect, the informant can lie or tell the truth, providing
helpful or evasive information. To optimize learning, the
learner must infer whether the informant is helpful or
deceptive in order to decide whether to continue asking for
help or gather information on his own. Learners can also
verify their information by investigating different points
independently.

Abstract
Much of what people learn is based on the testimony of
others, but not all testimony is helpful. This study explores
how people deceive and how they deal with deceptive
information in the context of a conceptual learning task.
Participants play a game in which a learner infers the location
of a rectangle based on the testimony of an informant, who is
either helpful or deceptive. We investigate the behavior of
both informants and learners in this scenario. On the
informant level, we demonstrate that people provide different
information depending on whether they are helpful or
deceptive. Although deceptive informants do lie outright,
they more often opt to mislead. From the learner’s
perspective, we show that people do choose to verify
information but no more often when the informant is
deceptive. Despite this, we also find that learners are capable
of accurately identifying who is deceptive and who is helpful.
We conclude by examining common strategies used in the
two conditions and their implications in real-world settings.
Keywords: Lies; Pedagogical reasoning; Testimony.

Introduction
Much of what people learn is based on the testimony of
others.
Unfortunately, not all informants are well
intentioned. For example, law enforcement officials must
often reconstruct a series of events based only on
information obtained from witnesses and suspects, some of
whom may attempt to deceive the authorities. For deceptive
informants, there are many possible strategies: do they
deceive by lying outright or by providing unhelpful
information? Similarly for learners, do people attempt to
verify a potential deceiver’s testimony? How do the results
of this interaction affect people’s ability to recognize
deception?
Most of the research in this area has focused on people’s
ability to recognize deception using its verbal and nonverbal
characteristics (Brandt, Miller, & Hocking, 1982; DePaulo,
Stone, & Lassiter, 1985; DeTruck & Miller, 1985;
Littlepage & Pineault, 1985; Buller, Strzyzewski, &
Hunsaker, 1991; Burgoon, Buller, & Floyd, 2001; Bond &
DePaulo, 2006). A typical deception detection study
involves participants watching video clips of people either
truthfully or falsely describing an experience or opinion.
Based only on that information, participants are asked to
distinguish the honest statements from the lies. Most people,
including police officers, judges, and psychiatrists, perform
at close to chance levels (Ekman & O'Sullivan, 1991).
These results typically ignore the content of the information

Figure 1a

Y$
Y

Y$

Figure 1c

Figure 1b

N

Y
Y

N

Y
$ $

Figure 1: The solid black line represents the rectangle presented to
the informant. The task of the informant is to enable the learner to
guess the rectangle by providing interior (Y) and exterior (N)
points. The learner can also independently explore certain points to
verify ($ indicates a verified interior point, X a verified exterior
point). The broken black line represents the learner’s attempt in
that trial to reproduce the informant’s rectangle. Figure 1a shows a
successful cooperative strategy with verified corner hints. Figure
1b shows deceptive hints that were exposed as lies. Figure 1c
shows how hints can be truthful but unhelpful.

Prior studies of inferential learning suggest that an
informant’s intentions affect what information they provide.
In a study using the game described above, informants were
instructed to provide helpful examples for their learners
(Shafto & Goodman, 2008). These informants provided
interior points that marked the rectangle’s corners or
exterior points that marked its boundaries significantly more
often than chance would predict. This suggests that helpful

1312

informants do not provide information at random but rather
tailor their examples to the concepts they are trying to
communicate.
This purposeful sampling is not lost on learners. Children
as young as five years old interpret information differently
depending on how it is communicated. In a 2009 study, one
function of a novel toy was demonstrated by a teacher, by
apparent accident, or not at all (Bonawitz, Shafto, Gweon,
Chang, Katz, & Shulz, 2009). Children in the latter two
conditions explored the toy’s other functions much more
often than children who saw the purposeful demonstration,
suggesting that children in the pedagogical condition
inferred that there were no other functions to be found.
How data are sampled also matters when learning words.
Xu and Tenenbaum (2007) presented both children and
adults with names for novel objects. In one condition, the
experimenter picked two other objects as examples; in the
other, the participant chose the examples themselves.
Participants who were given only one example by the
experimenter tended to apply the object’s name more
broadly.
Again, these results suggest that learners
appreciate the significance of purposefully sampled
information.
Learners can also reason effectively about information
from deceptive sources at an early age. In a 2009 study,
children were asked to find a piece of candy that had been
hidden in one of two boxes (Mascaro & Sperber, 2009).
The children watched while a puppet looked in both boxes.
After the experimenter explained that the puppet always
tells lies, the puppet told the child where the candy was.
Four year-old children usually indicated that the candy was
actually in the other box. If the children are merely warned
that the puppet does not want them to find the candy,
comparable performance does not emerge until age six.
In this paper, we contrast learning from teachers and
deceivers. Informants in both Bonawitz et al. (2009) and
Xu and Tenenbaum (2007) were presented as
knowledgeable and helpful. Different issues may arise
when the informant has ambiguous intentions. In this paper,
we present people with situations similar to those described
in Figure 1. Because participants interact by computer,
most cues to deception are unavailable to learners and they
must rely instead on their informant’s testimony. We
contrast the information provided by helpful and deceptive
informants, focusing on three key questions. First, how does
the information provided by helpful and deceptive
informants differ? Second, how often do learners verify the
information provided, and does this differ based on whether
the informant is deceptive or not? Third, how effectively do
people recognize when they are being deceived, given only
the content of the testimony?

Methods
Participants
One hundred and sixteen students at the University of
Louisville participated in exchange for course credit.

Procedure
Pairs of participants were randomly assigned to a
cooperative (n = 29) or competitive (n = 29) condition. Each
individual was then randomly assigned to the role of
informant or learner. Participants were seated at computers
on opposite sides of a solid screen. They were then told that
they were part of a police investigation of the Rectangle
Gang, who got their name from their habit of splitting up the
loot from a robbery into bags and burying them in
rectangular plots of land.
In both conditions, the learner was told that they would
play the role of investigator. They were also told that an
informant, a former member of the gang who knew the
locations and dimensions of all the rectangular plots of land
where money had been hidden, was part of the investigation.
Informants were told that they would play the role of the
knowledgeable informant.
When the investigator asked for a hint, informants were
shown a blue rectangle in a white field. This rectangle
indicated the area where the money was buried. Informants
were instructed to click on a point in the field, mark it as
either inside or outside the rectangle, and then send it to the
learner.
The instructions to the informant differed for the
cooperative and competitive conditions.
Cooperative
informants were instructed to be as helpful as possible and
that their score would depend on how accurately the learner
could reproduce the rectangle’s location. In contrast,
competitive informants were told to prevent the learner from
discovering the true location of the rectangle and that the
less accurately the learner could reproduce the rectangle’s
location, the higher their score would be. Although the
accuracy of the learners’ drawings was recorded, the game
score was not visible during the experiment.
Learners in both conditions were instructed to find the
edges of the rectangular plot in which money was buried. A
blank white field on the computer screen represented the
search area. Learners could either ask the informant for a
hint or make exploratory “digs” by clicking anywhere in the
field. If they chose to dig, they would “find” either a green
$ (representing a point inside the rectangle) or a red X (an
exterior point). If they asked for a hint, the informant’s
response would appear on their field as either a green Y
(indicating a place where the informant said that money is
buried) or a red N (indicating a place where the informant
said that there was nothing). Learners did not know whether
their informant was cooperative or competitive but were
warned of both possibilities.
Learners had five
opportunities to gather evidence in any combination of digs
or hints for a given field. They were then asked to infer the
location of the rectangular plot by clicking and dragging
with the mouse. A total of twenty fields were presented.
In the final part of the experiment, learners were asked to
rate their informants on a scale from 1 (extremely deceptive)
to 21 (extremely helpful). Learners were told that choosing
11 (the midpoint) meant that they did not have an opinion
either way. Learners were then asked for a written

1313

Results
Our first question was about how informant type affects
the kind of information given. To explore this, we define the
information’s helpfulness based on how accurately a learner
could use it to reproduce the informant’s rectangles. For
each field, the distance in pixels from each vertex of the
informant’s rectangle to the corresponding vertex of the
learner’s rectangle was calculated. These distances were
summed to provide a measurement of the learner’s error for
that rectangle. As Figure 2 demonstrates, learners in the
cooperative condition had lower error than those in the
competitive condition (cooperative: M = 594.30 pixels, SD
= 266.27; competitive: M = 825.12 pixels, SD = 168.78,
t(50) = 3.73, p < 0.001). This suggests that cooperative
informants may have provided more helpful information.
rectangle error

1000

500

0

cooperative
competitive
Figure 2: Mean rectangle error by condition. Participants made
more errors when faced with a deceptive informant (competitive
condition). Error bars represent ±1 SEM.

rectangle error

proportion of lies

1200

0.4

0

cooperative competitive

condition

600

0
0

0.5

proportion of lies

1

Figure 3: Left: Informants lied about 40% of the time in the
competitive condition but only rarely in the cooperative condition.
Error bars represent ±1 SEM. Right: Increased lying is related to
higher error in guessing the rectangle.

Just as in real life, it was possible to mislead even while
giving apparently truthful information. For instance,
providing a negative example far away from the rectangle’s
edge may be technically accurate but gives a misleading
sense of the rectangle’s boundaries. How often did
deceptive informants rely on this type of misinformation?
We explored this by calculating what percent of hints were
exterior points at least 35 pixels away from the rectangle’s
edges. As Figure 4 shows, competitive informants provided
many more of these (competitive: M = 0.31, SD = 0.32;
competitive: M = 0.10, SD = 0.12; t(50) = 3.06, p < .01).
Figure 4 also shows the proportion of interior points that
were at least 35 pixels inside. Interestingly, cooperative
informants provided these clues much more often
(cooperative: M = 0.36 SD = 0.30; competitive: M = 0.12,
SD = 0.17; t(50) = 3.54, p < .01), which may be related to
the fact that learners were allowed five hints (considerably
more than the two required to mark the corners). Neither
the exterior nor the interior hints were correlated with
rectangle error (exterior: r = 0.23, p = 0.10; interior: r = 0.10, p = 0.48).
0.4

What information was provided? Comparing
deceptive and helpful informants
Why did learners in the cooperative condition perform
better? One possibility is that they simply requested more
information. However, learners in the cooperative condition
did not ask for significantly more hints than those in the
competitive condition (cooperative: M = 22.81, SD = 18.43;
competitive: M = 17.08, SD = 14.79; t(50) = 1.24, p =
0.22).
Another possibility is that informants in the deceptive
condition told more lies. In this game, a lie is either an
interior point that the informant labeled as exterior or vice
versa. The number of lies in each game was divided by the
total number of hints. As Figure 3 shows, competitive
informants lied more than cooperative informants (M =
0.41, SD = 0.34 vs. M = 0.067, SD = 0.14, t(50) = 4.70, p <
0.001). Moreover, the proportion of lies told was correlated
with rectangle error, suggesting that lying to learners did
affect their ability to ascertain the truth (r = 0.40, p < 0.01).

r = 0.40

0.8

proportion of total

justification for their rating. A review of these justifications
indicated that in two cases one or other of the participants
had not understood their instructions. Those data were
excluded. In addition, a review of the data indicated that
some cooperative informants gave more deceptive hints than
helpful ones and some learners made more than five errors
(including a verified exterior point or excluding a verified
interior point) when drawing their rectangles. The data
from these four games were also excluded, leaving twentysix games in each condition.

0.2

0

cooperative

competitive

Figure 4: Cooperative informants gave many more unhelpful
interior points (black), while competitive informants gave many
more unhelpful exterior points (white). Error bars represent ±1
SEM.

The results suggest that correctly labeled points marking
the inside corners of the rectangles (as in Figure 1a) were
especially helpful. Eighty-five percent of the hints given to
the five most successful learners in the cooperative
condition (those more than one standard deviation below the
mean error) were points of this type. The proportion of

1314

How often did learners verify information?
Our second question was whether learners would verify
the information given to them, and whether the tendency to
verify would be affected by whether the informant was
helpful or deceptive. Because they had the option of
searching for evidence independently, learners could request
a hint and then “check” the hint by digging in the same
place. This checking strategy could be used to verify
truthful hints and catch lies. One might expect that learners
in the competitive condition would check their hints more
often, but this was not the case. The mean proportion of
hints checked was the same for both conditions and was not
correlated with rectangle error (cooperative: M = 0.28, SD =
0.31; competitive: M = 0.29, SD = 0.32; r = -0.10, p =
0.46). This result seems to reflect a reluctance among
learners in the competitive condition to check their hints,
possibly because they had only five opportunities to gather
information about a given field. Checking information
would have meant one less opportunity to gather additional
information. However, considering that games consisted of
twenty fields with five chances to gather information in
each, learners actually had ample opportunity to establish
whether their informants were cooperative or competitive,
suggesting that learners in the competitive condition did not
see a need to check their informants’ hints.
Interestingly, 19 of the 52 learners – more than a third –
did not check a single hint. Did checking help the
remaining learners to guess the rectangles’ dimensions more
accurately? As Figure 5 shows, we found that checking
hints was weakly associated with higher accuracy in the
cooperative but not in the competitive condition (ANOVA:
2 (condition: cooperative vs. competitive) x 2 (checking:
checkers vs. non-checkers); F(1,48) = 3.27, p = 0.077).
Still, the mean proportion of checks was significantly
correlated with rectangle error in the cooperative condition
(r = -0.51, p < 0.01).

r = -0.51

rectangle error

these hints is the best predictor of rectangle error (r = -0.63,
p < 0.001).
Other kinds of information seem to have been of
relatively little use. In contrast to the steady stream of
corner hints given to the most successful learners, the four
worst learners in the competitive condition (those more than
one standard deviation above the mean error) received a
mixture of different hints. Although deceptively labeled
exterior points made up 52% of the hints, correctly labeled
interior points marking corners (11%), correctly labeled
exterior points marking edges (9%), and correctly labeled
interior points close to the center of the rectangle (11%)
were also represented.
How does the information provided by cooperative and
competitive informants differ?
Higher error in the
competitive condition was associated with fewer corner
hints and more deceptive hints. Evasive hints were also
more common. This suggests that competitive informants
successfully misled their learners by providing unhelpful
information.

1000

1000

500

500

0

check no check
learner type

0
0

0.5
1
proportion checks

Figure 5: Left: A marginal interaction between condition (white =
cooperative, black = competitive) and learner type suggests that
checking was only helpful for learners in the cooperative
condition. Error bars represent ±1 SEM. Right: increased
checking is related to lower error in the cooperative condition.

How often do learners verify the information provided,
and does this differ based on whether the informant is
deceptive or not? The data suggest that learners checked
about 30% of their hints in both conditions on average,
although individual behaviors varied widely. Not all
learners attempted to verify information from a potentially
deceptive informant.

How well do learners recognize deception?
Our third question was whether people were capable of
recognizing deception even in the absence of superficial
cues like affect or tone. As Figure 6 demonstrates,
cooperative informants received significantly higher ratings
than competitive informants (cooperative: M = 16.64, SD =
3.82; competitive: M = 9.48, SD = 5.43, t(49) = 5.43, p <
.001).
How were people able to identify the deceptive
informants? One possibility is that they made use of the
verifiable information to check the hints offered by the
informant. However, Figure 6 also shows that checking did
not affect ratings in either condition (ANOVA: 2 (condition:
cooperative vs. competitive) x 2 (checking: checkers vs.
non-checkers); F(1,47) = 25.59, p < 0.001).
The data do suggest that different types of checked hints
may communicate different information. Intuitively, a
verified truthful hint should boost learners’ confidence in
their informants, while an exposed deceptive hint (caught
lie) should lower it. We define verified truthful hints and
caught lies as proportions of the number of requests. Both
types of hints were correlated with informant ratings in the
expected directions (verified truthful: r = 0.56, p < 0.001;
caught lies: r = -0.76, p < 0.001). Figure 6 shows the
relationship between the proportion of verified truthful hints
minus the proportion of caught lies (check difference) and
informant rating (r = 0.79, p < 0.001). This suggests that
learners may be willing to give inconsistent informants the
benefit of the doubt as long as the majority of the
information provided is truthful.

1315

mean ratings

r = 0.79

20

20

10

10

0

check no check
learner type

0
-1

0
check difference

1

Figure 6: Left: Cooperative learners (white) rated their informants
as more helpful whether they checked hints or not. Right: Ratings
were strongly associated with the proportion of verified truthful
hints minus the proportion of caught lies. This suggests that the
ability to identify deception is more dependent on the results of
checking rather than the frequency.

Another clue to the informants’ intentions may have been
the information itself. The proportion of corner hints was
correlated with informant rating, as was the proportion of
unhelpful exterior hints (corners: r = 0.50, p < 0.001;
unhelpful: r = -0.28, p < 0.05). These correlations were
strengthened by including other types of hints. Cooperative
learners received mostly corner hints and unhelpful interior
hints (M = 0.69, SD = 0.27). Taken together, the proportion
of truthful interior hints was correlated with informant
rating (r = 0.76, p < 0.001). In contrast, competitive
learners received mostly distant exterior points (M = 0.61,
SD = 0.28). Fifty-one percent of these hints were accurately
labeled but evasive. The rest were lies. Taken together, the
proportion of distant exterior points was negatively
correlated with rectangle error (r = -0.77, p < 0.001).
These results suggest that learners made inferences about
the deceptiveness or helpfulness of an informant in order to
guide their overall strategy. Although the mean number of
requests did not vary by condition, it was correlated with
informant rating (r = 0.42, p < 0.01). This suggests that
learners who believed that their informants were helpful
asked for more hints. Furthermore, these learners tended to
interpret positive examples as corner hints, as predicted by
Shafto and Goodman (2008). This result also agrees with
the findings of Bonawitz et al. (2009) regarding exploration.
Learners who believed that their hints were purposefully
sampled rarely searched beyond the boundaries suggested
by positive examples.
How effectively do people recognize when they are being
deceived? Learners had little difficulty distinguishing
cooperative and competitive informants, even when they did
not verify their information. This suggests that learners may
have based their inferences on the type and frequency of
hints they received.

General Discussion
In this experiment we addressed three fundamental
questions about how people behave in situations involving
deception. We found that deceptive informants give a
different pattern of data than helpful informants and that the

most effective liars combine outright lying, misleading
truths, and helpful hints. Surprisingly, we also found that
learners did not verify more often when faced with
deceptive agents and that increased verification was only
associated with improved performance in the cooperative
condition. However, learners were very good at recognizing
deceptive agents, even when they did not verify their
information.
One intriguing implication of our results is that long-term
deception may have as much to do with evasion as actual
lies. Although competitive informants lied more often than
their cooperative counterparts, they still provided more
accurately labeled hints than lies (probably because outright
lies would be easier to spot). However, unlike the corner
hints characteristic of cooperative informants, accurately
labeled hints from competitive informants tended to mark
distant exterior points. This suggests that competitive
informants understood what kinds of hints would be most
helpful and deliberately avoided providing them.
These findings suggest a possible strategy for identifying
deceptive sources of information. Consider a police officer
interviewing a suspected murderer. The officer need not
structure the interrogation around catching the suspect in a
lie. A cautious suspect may never tell one. An alternative
strategy would be to compare the suspect’s testimony to the
“ideal” testimony: information that the officer would find
most helpful in terms of cracking the case. Discrepancies
would suggest an uncooperative suspect, assuming that the
suspect has some knowledge of the crime.
Our results also illustrate how people’s expectations guide
their inferences. Earlier research has shown that learners
interpret purposefully sampled examples more narrowly
than randomly sampled information (Bonawitz et al., 2009;
Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007). In other words, learners have
expectations about information from helpful sources. These
expectations may help explain why informant ratings were
related to the proportion of verified truthful hints and caught
lies.
Informants whose hints matched the learners’
preconceptions of what helpful hints would be were given
relatively high ratings, while informants whose hints did not
meet the standard were assumed to be unhelpful.
These findings suggest how the hypothetical murder
suspect may successfully deceive his interviewing officer.
The officer expects testimony that is both truthful and
helpful. The murder suspect, assuming that he is guilty and
wants to get away with his crime, should provide a mixture
of information: enough helpful information to maintain the
officer’s trust but enough deceptive and evasive information
to confound the investigation. The suspect could build his
credibility further by providing truthful, helpful information
that the officer can verify. Our research suggests that these
verifications may even offset the damage caused by the
occasional lie.
Because the design of the game used in this study allows
us to clearly define abstract concepts such as evasion and
trust, it can be used to explore other aspects of deception.
Future possibilities include variations in which the

1316

informant decides whether or not to provide information.
The findings would be most relevant to commercial
transactions. For example, a person trying to sell a used car
chooses what aspects of the car’s history to share with
potential buyers, who then decide whether or not to make
the purchase. Ideally, these results would used to construct
computational models of human deception that would
generalize to more naturalistic settings.

Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Sensitivity to sampling in
Bayesian word learning. Developmental Science, 10,
288-297.

Acknowledgements
Daniel J. Navarro was supported by ARC grant
DP0773794.

References
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Chang, I., Katz, S., &
Schulz, L. (2009). The double-edged sword of pedagogy:
Modeling the effect of pedagogical contexts on
preschoolers’ exploratory play. Proceedings of the 31st
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1575-1581). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Bond, C., & DePaulo, B. (2006). Accuracy of deception
judgments. Personality & Social Psychology Review, 10,
214-234.
Brandt, D., Miller, G., & Hocking, J. (1980). The truthdeception attribution: effects of familiarity on the ability
of observers to detect deception. Human Communication
Research, 6, 99-110.
Buller, D., Strzyzewski, K., & Hunsaker, F. (1991).
Interpersonal deception: II.
The inferiority of
conversational participants as deception detectors.
Communication Monographs, 58, 25-40.
Burgoon, J., Buller, D., & Floyd, K. (2001). Does
participation affect deception success? A test of the
interactivity principle. Human Communication Research,
27, 503-534.
DePaulo, B., Stone, J., & Lassiter, G. (1985). Telling
ingratiating lies: effects of target sex and target
attractiveness on verbal and nonverbal deceptive success.
Journal of Personality and Psychology, 48, 1191-1203.
DeTruck, M., & Miller, G. (1985). Deception and arousal:
isolating the behavioral correlates of deception. Human
Communications Research, 12, 181-201.
Eckman, P., and O’Sullivan, M. (1991). Who can catch a
liar? American Psychologist, 46, 913-920.
Littlepage, G., & Pineault, M. (1985). Detection of
deception of planned and spontaneous communications.
Journal of Social Psychology, 125, 195-201.
Mascaro, O., & Sperber, D. (2009). The moral, epistemic,
and mindreading components of children’s vigilance
towards deception. Cognition, 112, 367-380.
Shafto, P., & Goodman, N. (2008). Teaching games:
Statistical sampling assumptions for pedagogical
situations. Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1632-1637). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1317

