UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toddlers’ understanding of prediction, intervention, and means of transmission: When
psychological outcomes are easier than physical ones

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2mf614wh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Muentener, Paul
Friel, Daniel
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toddlers’ understanding of prediction, intervention, and means of transmission:
When psychological outcomes are easier than physical ones
Paul Muentener (pmuenten@mit.edu), Daniel Friel, & Laura Schulz
Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract

early childhood, children’s causal reasoning may be
restricted to such contexts.
Specifically, Bonawitz et. al (2010) showed toddlers
several trials of predictive relations in which a block began
moving spontaneously towards, and contacted, a base, after
which a toy airplane connected to the base immediately
began to spin. For adults, evidence that event A predicts
event B suggests the possibility that intervening on A might
generate B (i.e., intervening on A to see if B occurs is a
good way to learn whether the relationship is genuinely
causal). However, although both four-year-olds and toddlers
readily learned the predictive relationship, only four-yearolds spontaneously pushed the block into the toy and
anticipated the outcome (i.e., looked predictively towards
the toy). Toddlers succeeded only in restricted contexts, in
particular when the events were initiated by dispositional
agents. 2
One possibility is that although toddlers recognize
predictive relations and are capable of learning the
relationship between their own interventions and outcomes
they do not bind these two kinds of reasoning into a single,
adult-like concept “cause”. Indeed, many researchers have
proposed that adult humans may be unique in integrating the
kind of predictive reasoning involved in classical
conditioning with the ability to anticipate the outcome of
interventions characterized by operant learning (Gopnik et
al., 2004; Tomasello & Call, 1997; Woodward, 2007).
Although animals can make different predictions under
observation and intervention (Blaisdell, Sawa, Leising, &
Waldmann, 2006), there is no evidence that animals
spontaneously design novel interventions after learning
predictive relations. Arguably, this ability develops
relatively late, even in human ontogeny.
Alternatively, toddlers might have an adult-like concept
of causation but fail to token many physical event sequences
as potential causal relationships. Several findings suggest
that children develop an expectation of “causation-oncontact” very early. Research has shown that infants expect
objects to move or change state on contact (Ball, 1973;
Muentener & Carey, 2010; Kotovsky & Baillargeon, 2000;
Luo, Kaufman, & Baillargeon, 2009) and this expectation
persists through early childhood; although four-year-olds
can learn to accept causation-at-a-distance, they too initially

Adults recognize that if event A predicts event B, intervening
on A might generate B. Research suggests that although
preschoolers draw this inference much like adults, toddlers do
not (Bonawitz et. al, 2010). Here we look at whether
toddlers’ failure is domain-general (i.e., they lack an adultlike concept of causality that integrates prediction,
intervention, and agency) or domain-specific (i.e., toddlers
have trouble recognizing some physical processes as causal
but might succeed with psychological events). We showed
toddlers (24 months) a block moving into a base, after which
an effect occurred; we then gave children the block and asked
them to generate the effect.
Toddlers performed the
intervention and predicted the outcome when the effect was
psychological (a puppet laughing) but, replicating previous
studies, not when the effect was physical (a toy activating).
Experiment 2 showed that this was not due to the relative
saliency of the psychological effect.
Keywords: causal reasoning; domain-specific; domaingeneral; physical causality; psychological causality;
prediction; intervention.

Causal representations are central to human cognition. They
support prediction, explanation, and intervention and
underlie folk theories across domains (Carey, 1985; Gopnik
& Meltzoff, 1997; Wellman & Gelman, 1992). Moreover,
causal representations cross-cut conceptual boundaries.
Adults are equally adept at reasoning about causal events in
the physical domain (e.g., driving a car) and psychological
domains (e.g., making someone laugh).
Considerable research testifies to the sophistication of
causal inferences even early in development. Children can
distinguish spurious associations from genuine causes,
reason about unobserved variables, and use the conditional
dependence of interventions and outcomes to distinguish a
range of causal structures (e.g., Bullock, Gelman, &
Baillargeon, 1982; Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Gopnik et al.,
2004; Kushnir & Gopnik, 2007; Schulz, Goodman,
Tenenbaum, & Jenkins, 2008; Schulz & Sommerville, 2006;
Shultz, 1982; Sobel & Kirkham, 2006; Williamson,
Meltzoff, & Markman, 2008.) Critically however, studies
of causal reasoning tend to investigate children’s inferences
in the context of an agent’s goal-directed actions: children
are almost uniformly asked to reason about events initiated
by people or puppets.1 Recent research suggests that in very

2
One might worry that toddlers failed to intervene simply
because they were troubled by the spontaneous movement of the
block. Control conditions in the earlier study (Bonawitz, et al.,
2010) ruled out this possibility. In particular children succeeded
with spontaneously moving blocks as long as there were other cues
that the events were causal (i.e., causal language).

1

Investigations of Michottian causality (Michotte, 1963) are an
important exception to this claim; however, Michottean causality is
arguably a modular process, divorced from causal knowledge more
broadly (Scholl & Tremoulet, 2000; Woodward, in press; though
see Saxe & Carey, 2006, and Schlottmann, 2000)

201

expect that effects occur only on contact (Kushnir &
Gopnik, 2007).
Bonawitz et. al (2010) focused on physical causal events
in which the block contacted a base, which was connected to
the toy by a bright orange wire. From an adult perspective,
a block contacting a base and activating an airplane
connected to the base by a wire does not involve any
violation of contact causality. However, it is possible that
toddlers failed to understand the transmission relationship
involved in these events. The lack of any apparent
transformation or visible transmission of force or energy
within the wire itself might have impaired the children’s
ability to recognize the instantiation of contact causality.
This suggests the possibility that toddlers might be able to
integrate prediction and action into an adult-like concept of
cause, and might succeed in domains where the transmission
relationships are less restricted: in particular toddlers might
be more successful in the domain of psychological causality
where events can occur either through direct contact or (and
even more typically) at a distance. That is, if we remove
constraints on toddlers’ expectations about mechanisms of
causal transmission, toddlers might have no difficulty with
the basic task of integrating prediction and intervention.
In the current study we replicate the Bonawitz et al.,
(2010) procedure and compare toddlers’ causal reasoning
about physical outcomes with their reasoning about
psychological outcomes.
We present toddlers with
predictive events in which a block moves spontaneously
towards a base, connected to a toy. In the Physical
condition, the toy is an airplane that immediately begins to
spin. In the Psychological condition, the toy is a puppet that
immediately begins to laugh. If toddlers lack a domaingeneral concept of causation and only integrate prediction
and action when events are initiated by agents, they should
fail in both conditions (since the block always begins to
move spontaneously; agents are never involved in initiating
the events). By contrast, if toddlers have a domain-general
understanding of causation but simply fail to understand
some mechanisms of physical transmission, they should fail
in the physical condition but succeed in the psychological
condition.

Figure 1: Procedure for Experiment 1. Toddlers viewed 4
On familiarization trials, an Off familiarization trial, and
another On familiarization trial. If toddlers failed to look
towards the effect in the Off familiarization trial, then they
viewed three additional trials (On, Off, On).
blue block (the base) and a green block (both 6 cm3) were
on opposite ends of the stage. The green block was attached
to a stick extending through the floor of the stage, allowing
the hidden confederate to surreptitiously move the block
across the stage to the base. In the Physical condition, a toy
airplane, attached to the base by a wire, was located on the
back stage wall. In the Psychological condition, a puppet
with eyes was seated on a perch on the back stage wall. The
confederate controlled the actions of the airplane and
puppet.

Experiment 1
Methods

Procedure
Familiarization There were two types of familiarization
trials: On trials and Off trials. Toddlers first viewed 4 On
trials, which provided an opportunity to encode the
predictive relationship between the block’s motion and the
effect. In the On trials, the block began at the far right of
the stage. The experimenter drew the toddlers’ attention to
the stage saying, “Watch my show.” The block then moved
towards and contacted the base. As soon as the block
contacted the base, an effect occurred. In the Physical
condition, the airplane spun for 3 s. In the Psychological
condition, the puppet, laughed and wiggled for 3 s. At the

Participants Forty two toddlers (mean: 24.5 months, range
–18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s Museum.
An additional 6 toddlers were recruited but not included in
the final sample due to: inability to complete the session (n
= 2), parental interference (n = 2), or experimenter error (n
= 2). Twenty-two toddlers were assigned to the Physical
condition and sixteen toddlers were assigned to the
Psychological condition. There were no age differences
between the conditions (p = ns).
Materials All events occurred on a white stage (60 cm2 x 50
cm) that blocked a confederate from view (See Figure 1.) A

202

end of the trial, the stage was covered by an occluder and
the scene was reset.
Following the On trials, the toddlers viewed one Off trial.
The Off trials were identical to the On trials, with the
exception that the effect did not occur. The experimenter
ended the trial after the toddler looked towards the airplane
or after 3 s, whichever came first. The Off trial served as an
indicator of whether the toddlers had encoded the predictive
relationship between the block’s motion and the effect. If
toddlers did not look towards the effect during the Off trial,
the experimenter repeated another On trial, followed by
another Off trial. All toddlers then viewed one final On
trial. Thus, all toddlers saw a maximum of 8 trials. (If
toddlers looked towards the effect on the first Off trial, then
they saw only 6 trials.)
Test At the start of the test phase, the experimenter
handed the block to the toddler and asked the child to make
the effect occur. If the child did not place the block in
contact with the base within 60 s, the experimenter
prompted the toddler to place the block in contact with the
base. The prompt involved the experimenter pushing the
block across the stage towards, but just short of, the base
block. The experimenter then returned the block to the
toddler and encouraged them to make the effect occur.

wanted to ensure that all toddlers included in the critical
analysis (predictive looking after the intervention) were in
fact willing and able to perform the target action.
Toddlers were less likely to intervene spontaneously in
the Physical condition than in the Psychological condition.
Seven of the 18 toddlers (38.89 %) in the Physical condition
spontaneously placed the block in contact with the base
during the test phase. By contrast, 11 of the 15 toddlers
(73.33 %) in the Psychological condition spontaneously
performed the action (χ2 (1, 33) = 3.92, p < .05). The
remaining 4 toddlers in the Psychological condition and 8 of
the 11 remaining toddlers in the Physical condition
completed the action following a prompt by the
experimenter. Three toddlers in the Physical condition
failed to perform the action either spontaneously or
following a prompt and were thus removed from further
analysis (i.e., toddlers were only included for the final
analysis if they performed the target intervention).
Our primary measure of interest was whether, having
learned the predictive relationship between the block and
the outcome, toddlers predicted that their own intervention
might generate the outcome. Thus the final analysis
assessed whether, after learning the predictive relationship
between the block’s motion and the effect and successfully
performing the intervention (whether spontaneously or
under prompting), toddlers looked up predictively to the toy
(which never activated at test). In the Physical condition,
only 5 of the 15 toddlers (33.00 %) looked to the toy after
intervening. By contrast, in the Psychological condition, all
of the toddlers did so (15/15 toddlers; 100.00 %; χ2 (1, 30) =
12.15, p < .0001).

Results
The first set of analyses assessed whether toddlers had
learned the predictive relationship between the block’s
motion and the effect. We assessed this by coding whether
toddlers looked up towards the effect on the Off trial, in
which the effect did not occur. We counted a behavior as
“looking up” if the toddlers either overtly moved their head
and looked towards the effect or only shifted their gaze
towards the effect. The majority of toddlers learned the
predictive relationship. In the Physical condition, 18 of the
22 toddlers (81.82 %) looked up towards the toy airplane
after the block contacted the base. In the Psychological
condition, 15 of the 16 toddlers (93.75 %) looked up
towards the puppet after the block contact the base. There
was no significant difference between the conditions (χ2 (1,
38) = 1.15, p = ns). To ensure that any differences that
emerged during the test phase were not due to differential
encoding of the predictive relationship, children were only
included in the test phase if they learned the predictive
relationship.
Next, we assessed whether toddlers were able to perform
the target intervention: pushing the block into the base.
Note that merely performing this action is not sufficient
grounds for inferring that toddlers’ recognized that the
action was causal: toddlers might push the block into the
base simply because they had encoded that portion of the
event sequence, or simply for fun. To assess whether the
intervention was causal, we also need to assess whether
toddlers predicted that the target outcome would occur.
Conversely, toddlers might understand the causal
relationships perfectly well and yet be unwilling or unable
to perform the target action (e.g., due to shyness). Thus we

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that the nature of the
effect influenced toddlers’ causal representations. We
replicated prior research in showing that toddlers do not
seem to represent non-agentive physical predictive
relationships as potential causal relationships. Although
toddlers learned the predictive relationship between the
block and the airplane’s motion, toddlers did not
spontaneously intervene to cause the event to occur.
Moreover, even after toddlers were prompted to intervene,
they did not look towards the airplane in expectation that the
effect might occur. In contrast toddlers represented the
predictive relations as potential causal relationships for
psychological events: they readily learned the predictive
relationship, spontaneously intervened on the event, and
expected their intervention to cause the outcome.
It is possible however, that toddlers might simply have
been more attentive to the task in the psychological
condition. The laughing puppet may have been more
interesting and salient than the activating plane. Arguing
against this account, there were no differences in toddlers’
ability to learn the predictive relationship between
conditions, suggesting that toddlers were equally attentive to
the familiarization events. Additionally, anecdotally,
toddlers were riveted by the activating plane and activated it

203

repeatedly at the end of the test period when they were all
shown how. However, in Experiment 2, we directly test this
alternative account by involving a laughing puppet in the
physical events. If mere increased arousal or attention
improves children’s performance, they should succeed in
this Psychological Control condition of Experiment 2; if
they continue to fail to represent non-agentive physical
relationships causally, toddlers should learn the predictive
relationship but fail to predict the outcome of their own
interventions.

Test The test trial was identical to Experiment 1. The
puppet, while present and seated on the Experimenter’s lap,
did not laugh or move.

Results
We compared toddlers’ performance in the Psychological
Control condition of Experiment 2 to their performance in
the Psychological and Physical conditions of Experiment 1.
We adjusted alpha to accommodate for multiple
comparisons (.05/3 or p < .0167). First, we found that as in
Experiment 1, toddlers readily learned the predictive
relationship between the block and the effect. Seventeen of
the 22 toddlers (77.27 %) looked up towards the plane
during the Off trial. Toddlers’ ability to learn the predictive
relationship in Experiment 2 was no different from their
performance in either the Psychological condition (χ2 (1,
38) = 1.89, p > .05) or the Physical condition (χ2 (1, 44) =
.14, p > .05) of Experiment 1. The 5 toddlers who failed to
learn the predictive relationship in the PsychologicalControl condition of Experiment 2 were removed from
subsequent analyses.
Ten of the 17 toddlers (58.82 %) spontaneously
intervened by placing the block in contact with the base.
Toddlers’ tendency to intervene spontaneously in the
Psychological Control condition did not differ from either
the Psychological condition (χ2 (1, 32) = .74, p > .05) or the
Physical condition of Experiment 1 (χ2 (1, 35) = 1.39, p >
.05). Five additional toddlers completed the intervention
following the experimenter’s prompted action. The final
two toddlers never performed the intervention and were
removed from subsequent analysis.
As in Experiment 1, our critical measure of interest was
whether, having learned the predictive relationship and
demonstrated their ability to perform the target intervention,
the toddlers predicted that the outcome would result from
their intervention. Only 6 of the 15 toddlers (40 %) did so.
Toddlers were significantly less likely to look predictively
towards the toy following their intervention in the
Psychological Control condition of Experiment 2 than in the
Psychological condition of Experiment 1 (χ2 (1, 30) =
12.85, p < .05); their responses were not significantly
different from the performance of children in the Physical
condition of Experiment 1 (χ2 (1, 30) = .14, p = ns).

Experiment 2
Participants Twenty three toddlers (mean: 23.65 months,
range – 18 - 30 months) were recruited at a Children’s
Museum. One additional toddler was recruited but not
included in the final sample due to an inability to complete
the session (n = 1). All children were assigned to a
Psychological Control condition. There were no age
differences between this condition and either condition from
Experiment 1 (p = ns).
Materials The same materials used in the Physical
condition of Experiment 1, and the puppet from the
Psychological condition of Experiment 1, were used in
Experiment 2.
Procedure
Familiarization The familiarization phase was identical
to the Physical condition in Experiment 1 except that at the
start of each familiarization trial, the experimenter drew the
child’s attention to the puppet, who was seated next to the
stage, on the experimenter’s lap. The experimenter asked
the child to say hello to the puppet and the puppet then
laughed and wiggled for 3 s (exactly as in the psychological
condition of Experiment 1). After the puppet laughed, the
experimenter told the child that the puppet was going to
watch the show with them and then turned the puppet to
face towards the stage. The puppet then giggled in an
identical manner at the start of every trial. (Note, we had the
puppet laugh before the trials rather than after so that the
puppet’s laughter could not be construed as an effect; we
had the puppet laugh on the experimenter’s lap rather than
on the stage so the puppet could not be construed as a
dispositional agent initiating the events.)
The trials then proceeded as an On trial or Off trial, which
mirrored the Physical condition from Experiment 1.
Toddlers first viewed 4 On trials, in which the block moved
towards and contacted the base and the effect occurred.
Following the On trials, the toddlers viewed one Off trial, in
which the effect did not occur. As in Experiment 1, if
toddlers did not look towards the effect during the Off trial,
the experimenter repeated another On trial, followed by
another Off trial. All toddlers then viewed one final On
trial. Thus, toddlers saw a maximum of 8 trials. If toddlers
looked towards the effect on the first Off trial, then they saw
only 6 trials.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 suggest that children’s success
in the Psychological condition of Experiment 1 was not due
merely to the inclusion of a salient, laughing puppet. When
the puppet was included in Experiment 2 toddlers’
performance did not improve; toddlers did not expect their
interventions to cause the physical effect. This finding
replicates the findings from Experiment 1 that, in the
absence of agent-initiated action, toddlers do not readily
represent physical predictive relations as causal events. The
results are also rule out the alternative explanation of
toddlers’ success in the Psychological condition of
Experiment 1, suggesting that toddlers’ success was due not

204

merely to the salience of the puppet but to children’s ability
to represent psychological events causally because they
permit a range of possible transmission relationships; by
contrast in physical relationships, toddlers may require
direct, unmediated contact.

those for physical events: causes do not have to contact the
entities they effect, nor do they need to be physically
connected to them. Nonetheless, there are constraints on
how psychological events can be transmitted. Adults for
instance, understand that visual access is often critical to
psychological outcomes; if a person cannot see an event, she
cannot laugh in response to it. Although we know that even
infants understand many aspects of informational access
(Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005) we do not know whether they
integrate their understanding of informational access into
their understanding of psychological causation.
For
example, if the puppet’s visual access to the blocks were
occluded (e.g., the puppet were blindfolded) would the
toddlers’ recognize that the block could not have caused the
puppet to laugh? In this context, would they know not to
not intervene on the block and look up predictively? We are
currently
investigating
constraints
on
toddlers’
understanding of psychological transmission relationships in
our laboratory.
The current study adds to a growing body of research
suggesting that children may develop rich abstract
inferences in tandem with or even before they have an
accurate understanding of concrete details or specific
mechanisms (Wellman & Gelman, 1992; Schulz, Jenkins,
Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2008; Goodman, Ullman, &
Tenenbaum, in press). These studies suggest that, although
children may have an adult-like abstract understanding of
the concept of causation that binds prediction and action
very early in development, their ability to recognize any
particular event sequence as an instance of causation may
depend on domain-specific constraints and develop in a
piecemeal manner, in which they must learn viable means of
causal transmission event by event.

General Discussion
The results of previous work (Bonawitz et al., 2010) left
open the possibility that toddlers lacked a domain-general
concept of causation that integrated prediction and
intervention. The current study provides evidence against
that view. Toddlers were able to observe a non-agentive
predictive relationship and move from learning the
prediction to designing an appropriate intervention and
anticipating the outcome. Critically however, they only did
so when the outcome was a psychological one (and the
events might plausibly have occurred at a distance). That is,
toddlers appear to have access to an integrated concept of
causation which bridges the gap between prediction and
intervention, but they the events to which they apply this
concept depend on how causation is instantiated in
particular domains.
How then do children reason about physical causal
events? One speculative possibility is that children initially
only recognize agent-initiated events as causal: events
involving their own actions, Rovee-Collier, 1987; Watson &
Ramey, 1987, or those other goal-directed agents (e.g.,
Gergely et al., 2002; Meltzoff, 2007; see also Slobin, 1981,
1985). With respect to non-agentive events, infants might
initially apply the concept of causation only to contact
causality resulting in object motion (i.e., Michottian
launching events; see Leslie & Keeble, 1987; Cohen &
Oakes, 1990). Evidence suggests that recognizing contact
causality for object changes of state (Muentener & Carey,
2010) may be a later development. By the second year,
toddlers may recognize non-agentive causal relationships as
long as there is a continuous, visible transmission of force
or energy (e.g., consistent with work by Thompson &
Russell, 2004). Only relatively late in development may
children realize that they can engage in causal reasoning for
a larger class of events, including non-agentive events that
occur without visible transmission of energy or information
(through wires) or even through invisible connections.
In future work, we hope to conduct empirical studies to
test this developmental story about how children might
understand mechanisms of physical transmission. Even if
an account like this is correct however, the question remains
of why children readily accept the entire range of these
transmission events as causal, as long as the events are
initiated by goal-directed agents. Future research might
look at whether children can bootstrap from their
understanding of the goal-directed causal events to their
understanding of means of transmission in the absence of
dispositional agency.
What about causal transmission for psychological events?
We have suggested that mechanisms of transmission for
psychological outcomes are relatively less constrained than

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF Faculty Early Career
Development Award, a John Templeton Foundation Award,
and James S. McDonnell Collaborative Interdisciplinary
Grant on Causal Reasoning to L.S. We also thank Rosa
Hernandez for her assistance in stimuli construction, data
collection, and coding.

References
Ball, W. (1973). The perception of causality in the infant.
Presented at the Meeting of the Society for Research in
Child Development, Philadelphia, PA.
Blaisdell, A. P., Sawa, K., Leising, K. J., & Waldmann, M.
R. (2006). Causal reasoning in rats. Science, 311, 1020–
1022.
Bonawitz, E.B., Ferranti, D., Saxe, R., Gopnik, A.,
Meltzoff, A., Woodward, J., & Schulz, L. (2010) Just do
it? Toddlers’ ability to integrate prediction and action.
Cognition, 115, 104-117.
Bullock, M., Gelman, R., & Baillargeon, R. (1982). The
development of causal reasoning. In W. F. Friedman
(Ed.), The developmental psychology of time (pp. 209–
254). New York: Academic Press.

205

Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, L. & Oakes, L. (1993). How infants perceive a
simple causal event. Developmental Psychology, 29, 421 433.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Király, I. (2002). Rational
imitation in preverbal infants. Nature, 415, 755.
Glymour, C., Spirtes, P., & Scheines, R. (2001). Causation,
prediction and search (2nd revised, ed.). MIT Press.
Goodman, N., Ullman, T., & Tenenbaum, J. (in press).
Learning a theory of causality. Psychological Review.
Gopnik., A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz., L., Kushnir,
T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in
children: Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological
Review, 111, 1-31.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A. & Schulz, L. (2007). Causal learning. Oxford
University Press.
Gopnik, A., & Sobel, D. M. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about causal properties in
categorization and induction. Child Development, 71,
1205–1222.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D., Schulz., L., & Glymour, C. (2001).
Causal learning mechanisms in very young children:
Two-, three-, and four-year-olds infer causal relations
from
patterns
of
variation
and
covariation.
Developmental Psychology, 37, 620-629.
Kotovsky, L. & Baillargeon, R. (2000). Reasoning about
collision events involving inert objects in 7.5-month-old
infants. Developmental Science, 3, 344-359.
Kushnir, T. & Gopnik, A. (2007). Conditional probability
versus spatial contiguity in causal learning: Preschoolers
use new contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial
assumptions. Developmental Psychology, 43, 186-196.
Leslie, A., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants
perceive causality? Cognition, 25, 265-288.
Luo, Y., Kaufman, L., & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Young
infants’ reasoning about physical events involving selfand nonself-propelled objects. Cognitive Psychology.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). Infants’ causal learning:
Intervention, observation, imitation. In A. Gopnik & L.
Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology, philosophy,
and computation (pp. 37–47). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Blumenthal, E. J. (2007, March). Causal
understanding and imitation: Effect monitoring in infants.
Paper presented at Harvard University pre-SRCD
meeting, Cambridge, MA.
Muentener, P. & Carey, S. (2010).
Infants’ causal
representations of state change events. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 63-86.
Onishi K., & Baillargeon R. (2005) Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science. 308: 255-258.
Pearl, J. (2000).
Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rovee-Collier, C. (1987). Learning and memory in infancy.

In J. D. Osovsky (Ed.), Handbook of infant development
(2nd ed., pp. 98–148). NewYork: Wiley.
Saxe, R., & Carey, S. (2006). The origin of the idea of
cause: Critical reflections on Michotte’s theory with
evidence from infancy. Acta Psychologica, 123, 144–
165.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 19261928.
Schlottmann, A. (2000). Is perception of causality modular?
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 441–442.
Schulz, L. E., Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., &
Jenkins, C. A. (2008). Going beyond the evidence:
Abstract laws and preschoolers’responses to anomalous
data. Cognition, 109(2), 211–223.
Schulz, L, Gopnik, A., & Glymour, C. (2007). Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Developmental Science, 10, 322-332.
Schulz, L. E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and children’s inferences about
unobserved causes. Child Development, 77(2), 427–442.
Scholl, B., & Tremoulet, P. (2000). Perceptual causality and
animacy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 299–309.
Shultz, T. R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 47 (Serial No. 194).
Sobel, D. M., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2006). Blickets and babies:
The development of causal reasoning in toddlers and
infants. Developmental Psychology, 42, 1103-1115.
Thompson, D., & Russell, J. (2004). The ghost condition:
Imitation versus emulation in young children’s
observational learning. Developmental Psychology, 40,
882–889.
Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997). Primate Cognition.
Oxford University Press.
Watson, J. S., & Ramey, C. T. (1987). Reactions to
response-contingent stimulation in early infancy. In J.
Oates et al. (Eds.), Cognitive development in infancy.
Hove, England: Erlbaum.
Wellman H., & Gelman, S. (1992). Cognitive development:
Foundational theories of core domains. Annual Review of
Psychology, 43, 337–375.
Williamson, R. A., Meltzoff, A. N., & Markman, E. M.
(2008). Prior experiences and perceived efficacy influence
3-year-olds’ imitation. Developmental Psychology, 44,
275–285.
Woodward, A., Phillips, A., & Spelke, E. (1993). Infants’
expectations about the motion of animate versus
inanimate objects. Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Boulder, CO.
Woodward, J. (2007). Interventionist theories of causation
in psychological perspective. In Gopnik & Schulz (Eds.),
Causal learning. Oxford University Press.
Woodward, J. (in press). Causal perception and causal
understanding. In Roessler (Ed.), Causation, Perception,
and Objectivity: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology,
Oxford University Press.

206

