UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards a cross-linguistic scale for pragmatics of deference and closeness
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4xx200n4
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Aist, Gregory
Sudhakar, Prakalp
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                   Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                     University of California

       Towards a cross-linguistic scale for pragmatics of deference and
                                                     closeness
                                                    Gregory Aist
                                                  Iowa State University
                                                 Prakalp Sudhakar
                                                  Iowa State University
Abstract: Social status and relationships affect language production. Consider the converse: can socio-cultural
information be inferred from linguistic evidence? Specific phenomena naturally vary by language, so an interme-
diate variable, language use, abstracts over diverse phenomena such as formal/informal pronouns (Russian vy),
indirect/direct phrasing (English), or related features (e.g. Navajo fourth person, Faltz 1998 p. 32).
   Typical scales for socio-cultural analysis use labels or natural numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.) as in teineigo, sonkeigo, and
kenjogo for Japanese keigo (Wetzel 2004, p. 4). Labels do not translate well, but neither do natural numbers: The
bottom level ”1” in each language may describe dissimilar situations; the middle level in one language may be ”3”
but in another ”2”. What scale might work cross-linguistically? We introduce a scale with ”zero” as a neutral level,
developed for closeness and deference in Tamil, Korean, and Russian. We also examine French, Hindi, and English
examples.
                                                           1749

