UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards Cognitive Models of Communication and Group Intelligence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3s6417rw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Reitter, David
Lebiere, Christian

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards Cognitive Models of Communication and Group Intelligence
David Reitter and Christian Lebiere
Department of Psychology
Carnegie Mellon University
second, agents have accurate and infinite memory, but
lack the ability to process more than a single piece of
information at a time. Which communication policies
would be appropriate for the two cases? Perhaps, in the
first case, agents would have to re-send questions regularly, while in the second, they would send out questions
only once. Human attentional and memory capacities
are both limited; hence, they are subject to a strategic tradeoff. The costs of producing and comprehending linguistic communication, of attentional bottlenecks
and decaying memory are relevant to a model, as is the
structure of the network. One argument in support of
co-adaptation could come from rational behavior in a
dynamic group context. This means that cognitive parameters such as memory decay and perceptual speed
should influence communication and team success, and
that cognitively plausible parameter choices in a model
correspond to high performance during collaborative and
communicative tasks, when other human performance
parameters such as speed of communication are realistic.

Abstract
In social tasks, communication and task execution are
often co-dependent, yet they represent a tradeoff. We
present a cognitive model of an experimental task consisting of a collaborative and competitive game played
by groups of human participants organized in a smallworld graph. In an experiment involving teams of humans playing a cooperative game, the effect of local
communication policies on the efficiency and the performance of networked participants was observed. The
model follows the ACT-R theory and provides a formalization of the decision-making processes and tradeoffs
involved. A simulation of the hypothetical case of unnatural memory decay shows decreased performance and
supports a prediction of the thesis that memory limitations have co-evolved with social structure.
Keywords: Communication Networks; Belief Propagation; Cognitive Modeling.

Introduction
Among our most fascinating abilities is communication
and cooperation with others. To solve problems, we
organize ourselves as teams and exchange information
effortlessly. This achievement is the result of both innate and culturally acquired abilities. The combination
of language-based communication, social interaction and
the emergence of distributed human information systems
is ubiquitous, but has seen relatively little empirical exploration. Many of the implicit (subconscious) decisions
taken in communication may be the result of innate
mechanisms of cognition, specifically memory. Cognition
is the result of adaptation to the environment according
to the rational analysis of cognition (Oaksford & Chater,
1999). Therefore, mechanisms may have evolved that
influence individual’s interaction with a social network.
Advances in cognitive modeling on the one hand, and
in the description of structural properties of networks
on the other allow us to correlate universal properties
of social structures with the cognitive limitations of the
individual. Performance or bounded rationality may be
a rational optimization that supports an emergent group
intelligence, or specifically the externalization of memory
through a community of collaborators.
Any computational cognitive model of team communication needs to take into account the simple fact that
humans have limited attentional and memory capacities. To illustrate, consider a thought experiment. Assume a network of communicating, cognitive agents that
pass questions and answers about distributed information from node to node. Suppose two extremes: in the
first, agents have unlimited attentional capacity, that is,
their ability to process information in the environment
is not constrained. However, agents have no memory to
retain information that may be needed later on. In the

Lab-based experiments, in which humans are networked artificially, playing an abstract game, represent
a class of non-computational simulations that examine
real-world phenomena at the group level. In this paper,
we describe an experimental paradigm and previously
presented data, a computational model and simulations
that interpolate between the hypothetical cases of either perfect or absent human memory. The experiment
looks beyond one-on-one dialogue to iterated communication in social word-of-mouth networks. It involves a
new cooperative foraging game, the Geo Game, in which
medium-size and larger (20+) teams of players engage
in information exchange, exploration of a game landscape, and foraging for goods. The game elicits a cognitive tradeoff between a core task and a communication
task, in which we expect the human cognitive apparatus to maintain a purposeful balance. In the experiment
that provided the basis for our model, we used different communication policies to explore both sides of this
tradeoff. To quantify the success of communication, we
use a combined individual and team task as a benchmark. It measures the limits of individual and team
performance in dynamically changing and time stressed
environments. The cognitive model then explains performance data obtained with the experiment and is ultimately used to show how team performance would be
affected if basic memory parameters were different from
their known, constrained values. We propose that indi-

734

vidual cognitive constraints lead to communication and
cooperation that optimize outcomes for the individual,
but also for the dyad, the group and the community.

Participants can visit a neighboring city (directly connected by a road to his current location) by clicking on
its symbol on the map. Each city has a small number
of items available; this item set differs for every city.
Items located in a city are revealed to the participant
only while the participant is “visiting” the city. After
finding the goal item, a subsequent item in the list is
shown to the participant. Moving from city to city takes
time, so players are pressured to rely on their knowledge
and that of others to find the city efficiently rather than
to merely scavenge for items. Participants are asked to
find as many items as possible within the duration of the
session; a timer is displayed that indicated the remaining
time. Once an item is found, it may be either removed
permanently from the inventory of the city or it may be
replenished (half the item types are replenishable). This
renders the environment dynamic. Dependency on
communication: The key feature of the game is that
players can improve their performance through communication. They may exchange information through natural language, such as requests for an item they need or
responses about the whereabouts of items. A chat interface allows each player to broadcast written messages
to a fixed set of other players (“neighbors”). A player,
receiving a message, may chose to re-broadcast the information since his set of neighbors is likely to differ from
the original message sender. Players use this facility to
ask about the whereabouts of their goal item, or to tell
them about the locations of items. The task was designed so that the crucial decision a participant had to
make was whether to send a piece of information or not,
possibly based on its relevance. In practice, the language
used by participants is simple and easy to decode automatically. Facts could be analyzed as either Information
Requests (Item, Requester) (“I need a towel!”) or Fact
(Item, Location) (“The cat is in Pittsburgh”). Players
are organized in a graph structure, with participants as
nodes, and vertices indicating communication channels.
In our experiments, the underlying network topology is
one in which the numer of connections per node is powerlaw distributed; this topology is typically called a small
world, because it is possible to connect any two vertices
in the network through just a few links. The graphs
used in the present experiment are “re-wired ring lattices” (Watts & Strogatz, 1998): starting with a ring in
which each node is connected to exactly two neighbors,
long-range links are added to a few pairs of randomly
chosen nodes. The communication network embodies
principles well-known to participants from online networks such as Facebook. Individual and collective
payoffs: Players move around the road network until
they find a city that can provide the item (the road network is fixed and unrelated to the graph that defines the
social/communication network). Players are rewarded
for finding a goal item with r0 = 1000 game points. As

Prior Work
Much recent work on social networks has focused on
their structural and resulting computational properties,
but does so independently of two major aspects of realworld networks: Humans, and their joint objectives, or
task. The study design presented here uses human participants and employs a task that individuals connected
over the network have to execute. We provide a measurable objective and a task that depends both on individual performance and collaboration. We connect to work
by Bavelas (1950) and Leavitt (1951), who detailed the
effects of network structure with human nodes, arguing
that networks with centrality show more stable performance, but increased dependency on those central nodes
and decreased flexibility with respect to the integration
of information.
We have been engaged in a program of scaling up cognitive models from the case of learning-based adaptation
in dyads to a model of domain language evolution (Reitter & Lebiere (2011)), and extrapolating the results
to investigate the effect of network structure on such
convergence processes (Reitter & Lebiere, 2010b). The
influence of structural properties in social tasks is evident even when payoffs are determined by individual
performance: Judd et al. (2010); Kennedy (1999); Bhattacharyya & Ohlsson (2010). With our task we intend
to also complement readily available datasets with an
experimental design that gives us communication data
ready to be analyzed in terms of its semantics and its
timing. Datasets of language-based communication show
the spread of memes (idealized ideas) or opinions (e.g.,
Twitter datasets), or they represent socializing or debate
that is difficult to analyze and operationalize for the purposes of problem-solving research (Klimt & Yang, 2004).
Such datasets, however, are not the result of explicit human collaboration in the context of a well-defined task.
Tasks, in such datasets, are coincidental, while the task
in Geo Game is central to driving communication and
provides an objective basis for evaluating the effect of
communication on performance.

The Geo Game
The Geo Game is a spatial search game, where all players simultaneously engage in a foraging task. Players
are shown a map of several named cities, connected by a
road network. At any given time, each player is located
in one city or is moving between two connected cities;
players are shown their own location, but not that of the
others (see Fig. 1). The key features of this game are
as follows. Collaborative problem-solving: Participants are tasked to find items by moving via roads to
a city; they find one item at a time (their goal item).

735

Figure 1: The Geo Game participant interface.
from unlimited communication in the dump condition.
This is not the case: Subjects scored higher in the target condition than in the dump condition (Table 1).Even
when the main effects of message quantity and network
position are taken in to account do we observe benefits of
targeted communication policy on residual task performance, i.e., we see an effect of message quality (Figure ).
An analysis of efficiency (score over messages) in different network positions suggested a decreased efficiency
advantage from targeting with each additional neighbor.
Human networks can filter information and direct it to
where it is needed, provided that humans are encouraged
to make decisions about local information distribution.
Communication processes are not necessarily mechanistic: people can pay attention to the informational needs
of dialogue partners if asked to do so. In networks and in
a situation where individuals communicate one-to-one,
this appears to be beneficial to their task success.
The increase in performance suggests that maximizing
“targeting” of information accommodates attentional
limitations at the cost of losing information. Given memory decay, information that is left on a single (or a few)
nodes risks being forgotten and have to be rediscovered
through experience at possibly significant cost. Conversely, decreased targeting of information may improve
the life and utility of information by spreading its availability and hedging against its decay, at the cost of attentional overload and interference with more important
knowledge. Finding the optimum requires a computational account of human memory and attention.

a further incentive to not only ask for information, but
also provide useful information to their contacts, we reward each participant (node x) with game points whenever a node y to which they are connected obtains a goal
item. The reward is highest for immediate neighbors and
r0
is defined as rd = 2d(x,y)
for all y for which the distance
between x and y expressed in intermediate nodes along
the shortest connection, d(x, y) ≤ 3. This reward distribution system follows common pyramid schemes and
also Pickard et al. (2010). The final game score of a
player is the sum of all rewards obtained during one session. Task success metrics: The game was designed
to give measurable task success metrics, where the communication within the player network would be critical
to task success. These include the accumulated payoff
(the communicated objective), the number of goal items
found, and the average time it takes to receive an answer
to one’s information request.
In the following, we summarize the experiment and its
results (refer to Reitter et al., 2011, for the primary discussion). In the experiment participants were split into
two groups with 17 participants each. These teams then
played the game during two 30-minute sessions, one for
each of two conditions (in permuted order). Participants
were instructed to adapt their communication strategy:
In the dump condition, participants were asked to indiscriminately broadcast a maximum of information available. In the target condition, they were asked to request
and target information so that only such knowledge was
disseminated (and passed on) that was known to be relevant to others in the network through prior requests.

Modeling the Geo Game task
The Geo Game model follows the ACT-R architecture
Anderson (2007). It is implemented in ACT-UP (Reitter
& Lebiere, 2010a) to provide a suitable abstraction of a
high-fidelity model. The goal is to achieve a tractable
computational model of the perceptual and cognitive
processes involved in the foraging task that interact with
the multi-agent interaction over the social network. Our

The first question we asked is whether the information
propagation policy influences task performance in the
community. If either dump or target condition prove substantially advantageous, then the manipulation would
appear to interact with the specific task. Under the assumption that humans can effortlessly integrate information, we would expect that the team directly benefits

736

Cond.
dump
target
dump
target

Degree
2
2
>2
>2

Score
19512
22576
27455
28000

Received Msgs
198.6
111.9
299.6
166.9

Msgs Sent
68.7
37.3
64.4
40.8

Items Taken
6.45
7.1
6.36
6.5

n
20
18
11
14

Table 1: Performance and communication: Human participant means in the two conditions for low- and highly
connected nodes. The degree describes the number of links a node has; degrees ranged from 2 to 5 (power-law
distributed). n shows the number of participants for each degree (networks were randomized between conditions).
The navigation subtask is focused on the target item
to collect. When given a new target item, the model
attempts to retrieve a known location for that item from
memory. If successful, a path to that location from the
current city is constructed, and the first step along that
path is taken. Otherwise, the model explores the map
randomly, selecting any of the directly reachable cities
with equal probability. When arriving in a new city, the
model first identifies the items available. If one of them
matches the target item, the model picks it up and the
cycle restarts with a new target item. Otherwise, the
model takes its next step, either along a known path to
the item’s location, or another random step in the graph.
The chat management subtask is focused on handling
the information flow to and from the user when not focused on the primary navigation task, that is while in
transit between cities. The model reads the next message, processes it appropriately for the experimental conditions, then repeats the cycle if it hasn’t yet arrived at
its next destination. Processing the message means reading its contents, which can be of two primary types: requests for the location of a target item, and information
about the presence of item(s) at a given location. For requests, the model determines if it knows the information
needed, and if so replies to the message. In either case,
if the model is in the dump experimental condition, the
model retransmits the message as long as it doesn’t remember doing so previously (to avoid overwhelming the
network by repeatedly broadcasting the same message).
The two subtasks are not entirely independent, however. Each involves a processing step related to the
other. In the navigation subtask, when the model arrives at a new city, in addition to searching the local
items for the one that it needs, it will also broadcast the
location of the items in the chat if in the dump condition, or of a specific item that is known to have been
requested if in the target condition. Conversely, when
processing chat messages, the model will check an information message to see if it contains the location of its
current target item, and if so set course for that location.

target
dump

Score gain per minute

1000

500

5

10

15

Received messages/min

Figure 2: (a) Score gain per minute vs. number of messages received: At the same numbers of received messages, communities gained a higher score in the target
condition than in the dump condition. Note that even
in the dump condition, sparsely-connected players may,
at some points, send very few messages. (Means are
over per-user/minute measures for all users. Dotted lines
show 95% confidence intervals, assuming bins per user
for each minute elapsed and gaussian distributions).

model of the team is made up of a number of individual
cognitive models, one for each player, which can communicate via a simulated natural language interface. They
exchange information requests and replies to those. The
models are organized in a graph as in the social network of the Geo Game experiment; they communicate
by broadcasting to their network neighbors.

ACT-R Model
The basic structure of the model is an iterative process that allocates attention over two separate subtasks.
The main subtask focuses on navigating around the map
while the other involves processing messages received
through the chat interface. That structure is similar to
that of the model of the AMBR air traffic control simulation (Lebiere, 2005) and many other interactive tasks,
suggesting a general, reusable modeling pattern.

Model performance
We obtained measurements from 30 model runs of 30
simulation minutes, simulating 17 players each. The network graph generation, the distribution of items over
locations and the starting points of each player were

737

Discussion

randomized as in the Geo Game experiment; the road
network was fixed and the same as in the experiment.
The parameters governing memory performance in the
ACT-R architecture were left at their defaults (base-level
learning decay bll =0.5, latency factor lf =1.0). The baselevel constant blc was set to 5.0.
The model shows behavioral metrics slightly below
those of the human teams. Each agent collects, on average, 4.6 items (dump : 4.11, target : 5.15) and obtains
a mean score of 15, 750 points. Mirroring the empirical
results, agents receive significantly higher scores in the
target condition than during dump (β = −61504, SE =
12868, p < 0.001 for score totals, i.e., an effect of 3, 617
points per agent for target ).
While model performance(expressed in game points)
is variable and influenced by details of the communicative behavior, model runs during development suggested
that the effect of communication policy is robust. We
consider the model preliminary, mainly for two reasons.
First, the model does not achieve full human performance. Second, the model adopts a specific strategy that
involves committing seen item-location facts to memory.
It is possible that subjects adapt their strategy depending on whether they expect to remember information. In
an information-overload situation, they may refrain from
memorizing, or they may lack the time for rehearsal.
Thus, players may shift between internal and externalized memorization. The simulation does, however, implement the internal memory and some of the tradeoffs
implicated in the experiment, allowing us to cautiously
extrapolate to our hypothetical cases.

The Geo Game task manages to replicate a common
real-life observation: that communication with collaborators is fundamental to task success when it is considerate and targeted, but detrimental to success if communication becomes overwhelming. Ignoring many less
intuitive results concerning network structure, communication overload does not change our thinking about
information exchange, but it helps define the correct
cognitive model that explains network-based exchanges.
The model we describe performs similarly well as humans and shows the same sensitivity to communication
policies and attentional demands. The experiment is designed such that participants seek out information that
originates from places far beyond their network neighborhood. Thus, the results show that careful communication practices impact the information state and attentional demands not just among interaction partners,
but also further away in the network. A network of basic cognitive models can replicate those demands. The
model, just as participants, can employ targeted communication, or audience design to address attentional
limitations of their interaction partners.
The description of the model has not mentioned the
specifics of the cognitive and perceptual operations involved in both subtasks, but they play a fundamental
role. Learning is a pervasive process that takes place
at almost every step. In the navigation subtask, the
items encountered in the current location are not only
broadcast to the network using the chat interface, but
also automatically committed to memory. Similarly, information read in chat messages, whether requests for
information or availability of items at locations, is also
internalized in memory. Parameters controlling access to
memory information for future use will play a fundamental role in determining the effectiveness of those learning
processes, and whether they need to be supplemented
with strategic processes such as rehearsal or deliberate
organization. Similarly, the parameters of perceptual
processes (scanning and reading latency, typing speed)
affect how fast external information can be processed,
and thus what the optimal tradeoff is in propagating
that information over the network.
The information learned decays with practice and is
reinforced with subsequent presentations. The resulting
activation in memory plays an important role, not only
determining which facts can be retrieved at any given
point in time, but also which facts take precedence over
others. For instance, when attempting to retrieve the location of the current target item, it is possible that multiple such locations are known. One possible strategy
would be to retrieve all such locations, then determine
which is the closest. However, some of that information
might also be obsolete, since some of those items might
have been harvested since the information was first com-

Model predictions
The model allows us to make predictions for two hypothetical situations described in the introduction. First,
we simulate team performance for the case of poor memory performance. Setting a base-level learning decays of
1.5 and 3.0, we manipulate the cognitive architecture
into forgetting facts at higher rates1 . Second, we simulate the absence of memory decay: how would the team
perform if its members had infinitely-large, infinitelylasting memory? Having set base-level learning decay
to 0.0, the architecture allows models to retrieve information even long after it was last presented. In this
condition, memory retrievals no longer prefer recent information. The model was not optimized towards the
following results.
The simulation results show significantly decreased
performance for the case of high decay bll =3.0 (β =
−27419, p < 0.005, total points), but also for the case of
no memory decay (bll =0.0, β = −27612, p < 0.006). The
middle condition of increased decay at bll =1.5 yields a
nonsignificant performance boost (β = 13227, p = 0.16).
1
Bll represents the negative exponent; with the time since
information presentation as base. The resulting activation
influences the log-odds of retrieval of the piece of information.

738

References

municated. Instead, the model simply retrieves the most
active of the competing facts, relying on the property
that the most recent one is also likely to be the most
active, and also corresponds to the item that is least
likely to have been harvested. We admit that in some
subjects, this basic heuristic could, conceivably, give way
to more complex metacognitive strategies, which might
control attentional resources and the time allocated to
the tasks.
The exploration of a activation decay revealed, empirically, the influence memory has on the performance of
the team. We show that too little or too much decay
will impede targeted communication. Memory decay in
the individual provides contextualization and is beneficial to the team. That said, we do not claim that memory decay is the only way to prioritize recent information.
More explicit strategies such as mental timestamps associated with pieces of information are conceivable; yet
they would be complex and acquired. Our thesis of innate cognitive mechanisms that are optimized towards
cooperation within social networks predicts the pattern
of results.

Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur
in the physical universe? Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Bavelas, A. (1950). Communication patterns in task-oriented
groups. J. Acoustical Soc. America, 22 , 725-730.
Bhattacharyya, S., & Ohlsson, S. (2010). Social creativity as
a function of agent cognition and network properties: A
computer model. Social Networks, 32 (4), 263-278.
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., & Salas, E. (1997). Teamwork competencies: The interaction of team member knowledge, skills,
and attitudes. In J. H. F. O’Neil (Ed.), Workforce readiness: Competencies and assessment (p. 151-174). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Guetzkow, H., & Simon, H. A. (1955). The impact of certain
communication nets upon organization and performance
in task-oriented groups. Management Sciences(233-250).
Judd, S., Kearns, M., & Vorobeychik, Y. (2010). Behavioral
dynamics and influence in networked coloring and consensus. PNAS , 107 (34).
Kennedy, J. (1999). Small worlds and mega-minds: effects
of neighborhood topology on particle swarm performance.
In Proc. evolutionary computation.
Klimt, B., & Yang, Y. (2004). The enron corpus: A new
dataset for email classification research. In J.-F. Boulicaut,
F. Esposito, F. Giannotti, & D. Pedreschi (Eds.), Machine
learning: Ecml 2004 (Vol. 3201, p. 217-226). Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg.
Leavitt, H. (1951). Some effects of certain communication
patterns on group performance. Abnormal and Social Psychology, 46 , 38-50.
Lebiere, C. (2005). Constrained functionality: Application of
the act-r cognitive architecture to the ambr modeling comparison. In K. A. Gluck & R. Pew (Eds.), Modeling human
behavior with integrated cognitive architectures. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (Eds.). (1999). Rational models
of cognition. Oxford University Press.
Pickard, G., Rahwan, I., Pan, W., Cebrián, M., Crane, R.,
Madan, A., et al. (2010). Time critical social mobilization:
The DARPA network challenge winning strategy. CoRR,
abs/1008.3172 .
Reitter, D., & Lebiere, C. (2010a). Accountable modeling in
ACT-UP, a scalable, rapid-prototyping ACT-R implementation. In Proceedings of the 10th international conference
on cognitive modeling (iccm) (p. 199-204). Philadelphia,
PA.
Reitter, D., & Lebiere, C. (2010b). Did social networks shape
language evolution? A multi-agent cognitive simulation.
In Proc. cognitive modeling and computational linguistics
workshop (cmcl). Uppsala, Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Reitter, D., & Lebiere, C. (2011). How groups develop a
specialized domain vocabulary: A cognitive multi-agent
model. Cognitive Systems Research, 12 (2), 175-185.
Reitter, D., Sycara, K., Lebiere, C., Vinokurov, Y., Juarez,
A., & Lewis, M. (2011). How teams benefit from communication policies: information flow in human peer-to-peer
networks. In Proc. behavior representation in modeling and
simulation (brims).
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393 (6684), 440–442.

Conclusion
The Geo Game allows us to observe performance and
communication efficiency in communities of human participants. The game is neither limited to a single group
objective (as in joint problem-solving), nor do humans
act as individual, adversarial agents. We have presented
a cognitive model describing data in which teamwork
benefits from communication policies that make use of
active information filtering by humans. Human Geo
Game players do very well with a strategy of carefully
targeting information, which perhaps is a natural or acquired communication maxim.
A relatively simple, high-level cognitive model can account for the attentional trade-offs involved. We demonstrate the influence of individual memory on task success in communication-based tasks. Counter to intuition, better memory does not help humans communicate or perform the task. The benefits of perfect memory are overcome by the lack of contextualization: agents
fail to account for a rapidly changing environment, as it
presents itself with the Geo Game. This first version of
the model and the early Geo Game experiment are a step
towards an understanding of the mechanisms involved in
the interaction of individual cognition, communication
and resulting group phenomena.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jerry Vinokurov, Antonio Juarez for
their programming work, and Katia Sycara, Michael Lewis,
Paul Scerri for their collaboration in the design of the Geo
Game platform. This work was funded by the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research (MURI grant FA95500810356).

739

