UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Truth Table Tasks: Directionality and Negation-Type

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0td2t0dm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sevenants, Aline
Diessaert, Krisiten
Schaeken, Walter

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Truth Table Tasks: Directionality and Negation-Type
Aline Sevenants (Aline.Sevenants@psy.kuleuven.be)
Kristien Dieussaert (Kristien.Dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract

was the first to introduce the ‘defective truth table’ (which
we will call three-valued, following de Finetti, 1967, 2008;
Politzer, Over & Baratgin, 2010), in which false antecedent
cases (FT and FF) are considered to be irrelevant with
respect to the conditional rather than making it true. The
defective implication has a truth table of the form TFII and
the defective equivalence of the form TFFI.

Two types of truth table task are used to examine people’s
mental representation of conditionals: possibilities tasks and
truth tasks. Despite their high degree of resemblance, the two
task types not only differ regarding their number of answer
alternatives, but also regarding their directionality: The truth
task concerns the evaluation of the given rule on the basis of
situations, while the possibilities task concerns the
assessment of situations with respect to the given rule. The
aim of the present study is to assess whether participants’
answer patterns depend on the difference in directionality
when the difference in number of answer alternatives is
controlled for, by presenting both the extended possibilities
task and the truth task in both directions, i.e. from rule to
situation and from situation to rule. Moreover, we make use
of both implicit and explicit negations. Concerning the
negation type, we find more three-valued patterns with
implicit than with explicit negations. This is in line with the
robust phenomenon of ‘matching bias’. It was replicated that
possibilities tasks yield more two-valued answer patterns
than truth tasks, which in turn yield more three-valued
patterns than possibilities tasks. No effect of task
directionality was observed.

The truth table tasks: About possibility and truth
Conditional reasoning research has been conducted
largely within three main experimental paradigms: the four
card selection task, the conditional inference task and the
truth table task, the latter being the focus of the present
manuscript. Throughout psychological reasoning literature,
the truth table tasks takes two forms, know as the
possibilities task and the truth task. In the classical
possibilities task, participants indicate for each of the four
possible antecedent-consequent cases whether that specific
combination is either possible or impossible with respect to
the given rule. In the truth task, participants are asked to
evaluate for each of the four cases whether the combination
makes the given rule true, false or is irrelevant with respect
to the truth of the rule.

Introduction
The interest in the linguistic, psychological and logical
meaning of ‘if’ has provided us with a long history of
research on thinking and reasoning about conditionals,
designed in order to externalize people’s understanding and
mental representation of conditionals.

Mental models theory vs. Suppositional theory There
has been substantial debate in reasoning literature
concerning the processes and representations underlying
people’s understanding of conditional assertions. The two
main theories accounting for the mental representation of
conditionals are the mental models theory (MMT) (JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991, 2002; Johnson-Laird, Byrne &
Schaeken, 1992) and the suppositional theory (ST) (Evans,
Over & Handley, 2003a; Evans & Over, 2004; Evans,
Handley, Neilens & Over, 2007), making different
predictions about the ‘core meaning’, the mental
representation of conditionals. According to the MMT,
people reason with representations resembling two-valued
truth tables and according to the ST they reason with
representations matching with three-valued truth tables. The
starting point for much of the debate between the ST and the
MMT has been the diverging results on the two kinds of
truth table task. Classically it has been criticized that each
theory makes use of that type of truth table task that satisfies
their predictions the best: the possibilities task is used by

The meaning of ‘if’
Traditionally, there are four different meanings
ascribable to conditional ‘if Antecedent then Consequent’
sentences. According to standard logic, the connective ‘if’ is
represented as the truth table for the material implication,
meaning that only the TF falsifies the conditional. An
alternative logical possibility for the meaning of ‘if’ is the
truth table of the material equivalence: ‘C if and only if A’.
This is the situation in which the antecedent implies the
consequent and the consequent also implies the antecedent.
Material implication and material equivalence are the two
truth tables for conditionals under standard logic.
Psychologically however, there is quite a lot of evidence
that, next to ‘true’ or ‘false’, people make use of a third truth
value representing conditionals: ‘irrelevant’. Wason (1966)

1078

followers of the MMT and the truth task by followers of the
ST.
According to the MMT (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991,
2002; Johnson-Laird, Byrne & Schaeken, 1992), people tend
to list all logical possibilities compatible with the
conditional rule when they have to judge whether a situation
is possible given a conditional rule, as is the case in the
possibilities task. In line with the ‘truth principle’, reasoners
construct mental models of the possibilities compatible with
the premises, but they initially and by default do not
represent what is false. Therefore, their conclusion is based
on the initial model:
[A] C …1
Individuals do not represent what is false by default, but
under certain circumstances they make ‘mental footnotes’
about the falsity of clauses (represented by the ellipsis). If
they are able to retain these footnotes, people can flesh out
the implicitly represented information into fully explicit
models, which represent clauses even when they have false
antecedents2: A C
¬A C
¬A ¬C
These possibilities correspond to the three rows of the truth
table in which the material implication is true, including the
false-antecedent cases FT and FF. This in turn leads to a
two-valued truth table pattern. According to Johnson-Laird
(2006), states of affairs in which the antecedent is false (FT
or FF) are judged as irrelevant to the truth or falsity of the
rule in the truth task, because these situations correspond to
a model without explicit content (…), leading to the
conclusion that nothing seems to follow from the premises
and that the correct answer is ‘irrelevant’. So the MMT is
able to explain three-valued answer patterns if it is assumed
that people base their answer in this task-type solely on their
initial model: ‘[A] C’ in which the false-antecedent cases are
not explicitly represented.
According to the ST (Evans & Over, 2004; Evans,
Handley, Neilens & Over, 2007; Over & Handley, 2003a),
people evaluate conditionals by means of the Ramsey test.
That is, they “hypothetically add p to their stock of
knowledge and evaluate their degree of belief in q given p”
(Ramsey, 1931/1990 p.247). So they first estimate the
probability of the consequent and the antecedent occurring
together (the TT case), and then estimate the probability of
the antecedent together with the non-occurrence of the
consequent (the TF case). The combination of these two
stages then leads to an estimation of the probability of
occurrence of the consequent, given the antecedent. Running
this Ramsey test, participants disregard the false-antecedent
cases and only focus on those cases in which the antecedent
is true, resulting in a three-valued truth table pattern. Falseantecedent cases however are possible assuming any

conditional because they have no influence on the
believability of the conditional (P(C|A)). This implies that
the ST has no problem accounting for the two-valued answer
patterns yielded by the possibilities task in which falseantecedent cases are judged to be possible according to the
conditional.
Number of answer alternatives There is quite a lot of
evidence that the possibilities task and the truth task do not
yield the same pattern of results (for a review, see Evans,
Newstead & Byrne, 1993). However, as pointed out by
Evans and Over (2004), with the dichotomy
possible/impossible used in the classical possibilities task,
one cannot point out the difference between true and
irrelevant responses as the truth task does. Therefore,
Sevenants, Schroyens, Dieussaert, Schaeken and d’Ydewalle
(2008) developed an extended possibilities task in which
‘irrelevant’ is one of the three answer alternatives, similar to
the truth task. In this way an explicit comparison between
the results yielded by both truth table tasks is enabled, since
the addition of ‘irrelevant’ as a third answer alternative to
the possibilities task allows for a three-valued answer
pattern in both tasks, and not only in the truth task.
Task directionality The possibilities task and the truth
task differ not only regarding their number of answer
alternatives, but also regarding their directionality: The truth
task concerns the evaluation of a given conditional rule on
the basis of situations (“Does this situation make the rule
true/false or is it irrelevant with respect to the truth of the
rule?”), while the possibilities task concerns the assessment
of situations with respect to the given rule (“Is this situation
possible/impossible/irrelevant according to the rule?”).
Nevertheless, this is the directionality in which the tasks
have been administered in the conditional reasoning research
tradition for many years. Barrouillet, Gauffroy and Lecas
(2008) claim that the distinction between reasoning about
possibilities as in the possibilities task and reasoning about
truth values as in the truth task delineate two different kinds
of reasoning. In the former, people reason from assertions
they consider as true and try to find out what must, can, or
cannot occur in the world described by these assertions. In
the latter task, people start from a given state of affairs they
consider as existing, and they judge if a given assertion is
true or false in this case. According to Johnson-Laird &
Byrne (2002), the former is psychologically basic, whereas
the latter is more complex and difficult since it requires a
meta-ability that requires a notion of the relations between
assertions and the world through the predicates true and
false (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). So for logically
untrained individuals, tasks involving reasoning about
possibilities and tasks involving reasoning about truth values
elicit different processes and should be distinguished. In
daily life, there are numerous situations in which we are
confronted which conditionals. For example, there are
situations in which we learn new rules/ regulations/
instructions (if you press this button, you have to wait 10sec
before the application loads on your phone) - and examine

1

Square brackets [ ] are the notation for an exhaustive
representation. [A] C means that the antecedent is represented
exhaustively.
2
The symbol ‘¬’ denotes an abstract mental symbol representing
negation.

1079

the validity of the rule on the basis of different examples
experienced (slower than 10sec, 10sec, loaded, failed to
load), vs. situations where the focus is on the particular
instances and their implications for the rule (e.g., it took 30
sec to load).
Sevenants et al. (2008) investigated whether
participants’ answer patterns depend on the difference in
directionality when the difference in number of answer
alternatives is controlled for, by presenting both the
extended possibilities task and the truth task in both
directions, i.e. from rule to situation and from situation to
rule. So task directionality was manipulated the in order to
find out whether the frequently observed difference between
the possibilities task and the truth task tasks is due to the
difference in task directionality and whether the difference
in answer patterns dilutes when this difference in
directionality is controlled for. It was observed that more
three-valued answer patterns were yielded by the situation to
rule than by the rule to situation tasks so task directionality
indeed accounted for a part of the difference between both
task-types. That was the first time however that task
directionality was manipulated in a truth table task
experiment. So in the present study we aim to replicate the
result that tasks with a rule-to-situation directionality yield
more two-valued answer patterns than do tasks with a
situation-to-rule directionality and this in addition to the
effect that possibilities tasks yield more two-valued answer
patterns than do truth tasks.

rule is about a B and a 7, while the situation in the implicit
task is about a T and a 5. In that case, people are much more
inclined to judge a situation as irrelevant with respect to the
conditional. This phenomenon is called matching-bias and is
defined as a tendency for people to see implicitly negated
cases as irrelevant to the truth of the rule (Evans, 1998).
Evans states that the phenomenon is almost entirely
dependent on the use of implicit negation in the logical cases
to which rules are applied: Reasoners allocate selective
attention towards matching cases and away from
mismatching cases. It is concluded that matching bias is a
highly robust effect which largely or entirely disappears
when negations are made explicit. However, in most
selection task and truth table experiments described to date,
negation within the cases is implicit.
Since most of the truth table tasks in the literature make
use of implicit negations, and since those implicit negations
make the task vulnerable to matching bias, it is hard to
disentangle what proportion of the observed three-valued
answer patterns is due just to this matching bias and what
proportion is caused by the underlying mental representation
of conditionals and the extent to which false antecedent
cases are suppositionally processed. In the present study we
aim to shed light on this issue by making a direct
comparison between both negation-types, keeping all other
variables equal. The difference in three-valued answer
patterns observed between the tasks using different
negation-types is a measure of the amount of three-valued
answer patterns in an implicit negations task that is due to
matching bias.
Summarizing the aims of the present study, we firstly
want to shed light on the difference between possibilities
tasks an truth tasks, taking into account that both tasks differ
not only regarding their wording (possibility vs. truth) but
also regarding their directionality (situation-to-rule vs. ruleto-situation). Do both tasks still yield different results when
this difference in directionality is controlled for? We aim to
replicate Sevenants et al. (2008) in which it was observed
that next to wording directionality had an impact on the
resulting answer patterns. Secondly, with the present study
we aim to explore on the difference between implicit and
explicit negations, keeping all other variables (task-type and
task-directionality). Is it the case, as is to be expected from
Evans (1998) that tasks with implicit negations are more
prone to matching bias than tasks with explicit negations,
yielding therefore more irrelevance answers? Finally, we
seek to explore the interaction between task-type, taskdirectionality and negation-type.

Negation-type
Task-type (possibilities vs. truth) and
directionality (situation-to-rule vs. rule-to-situation)
however are not the only factors that can account for the
difference in results that have in the past been observed in
truth table task experiments. Negation-type is also a variable
that needs to be taken into consideration when interpreting
the results of a truth table task. Considering a conditional
rule, e.g. ‘If there is a B, then there is a 7’, there are two
ways in which negations can be accomplished: explicitly or
implicitly. In the present study we therefore add negationtype as a between subjects variable, making use of both
implicit and explicit negations. With explicit negations,
permuting the truth value of both the antecedent and the
consequent leads to the following situations:
TT: a B and a 7
TF: a B and not a 7
FT: not a B and a 7
FF: not a B and not a 7
With implicit negations, the same four situations look as
follows:
TT: a B and a 7
TF: a B and a 5
FT: a T and a 7
FF: a T and a 5
It is clear that with explicit negations, even in the FF
case, there is still some link with what is described in the
rule (not a B and not a 7). But with implicit negations, the

Method
Participants and design
In total 385 last-year high-school students (17-29 years of
age, M = 17.6), all unfamiliar with logic, participated on
voluntary basis. Participants were run in eight groups,

1080

respectively completing the R-S possibilities task, the S-R
possibilities task, the R-S truth task and the S-R truth task.
Task-Type (possibilities vs. truth) and Negation-Type
(implicit vs. explicit) were between subjects variables,
implying that each group of participants received only one
version of the tasks.
We used the three-option version of both the
possibilities and the truth task, and both tasks were
constructed in both directions. For the explicit negations, 45
participants received the three-option possibilities task in a
rule-to-situation directionality (RS-PT), 46 participants
completed the possibilities task from situation to rule (SRPT), 47 participants completed the situation-to-rule truth
task (SR-TT) and while finally 47 participants received the
rule-to-situation truth task (RS-TT). For the implicit
negations versions of the experiment, the number of
participants was 50 for the RS-PT, 50 for the SR-PT, 49 for
the SR-TT and finally 50 for the RS-TT. The students were
randomly assigned to the different task-types.

or impossible, or whether it was irrelevant with respect to
the possibility of the rule. Concerning the S-R truth task, for
each of the four combinations participants had to judge
whether the combination made the given rule either true or
false, or whether it was irrelevant with respect to the truth of
the rule. For the R-S truth task finally, participants had to
evaluate whether each of the four possible situations was
true, false or irrelevant according to the rule. In the explicitnegation versions of the experiment, negations of for
example the rule ‘If B then 7’ were formulated as ‘a B’ and
‘not a 7’ (TF), ‘not a B’ and ‘a 7’ (FT) and ‘not a B and ‘not
a 7’ (FF). In the implicit-negation conditions, the negations
were: ‘a B’ and ‘a 5’ (TF), ‘a T’ and ‘a 7’ (FT) and ‘a T’
and ‘a 5’ (FF).

Results and Discussion
Given the focus of this study on the nature of the mental
representation of conditionals, we first focus on participants’
individual answer patterns, that is the combination of
judgments per individual on the four different situations
presented in the truth table tasks. The ‘two-valued’ answer
patterns include the conjunctive answer pattern, the material
implication and the material equivalence responses
(respectively TFFF, TFFT and TFTT), whereas ‘defective’
or three-valued answer patterns include the defective
implication, the defective equivalence, the X-pattern and the
Y-pattern (respectively TFII, TFFI, TFIT and TFTI; see
Table 1 and Table 2).

Materials and Procedure
Tasks were constructed with ‘E-prime’ software
(Psychological Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) and
presented to the participants on individual PCs in a selfpaced manner. Responses were given with the arrow-keys
on an AZERTY keyboard. The experiment lasted between 3
and 7 minutes. All parts of the experiment were
administered in Dutch.
All participants received the same instructions,
appearing on the first screen and explaining that the purpose
of the experiment was to examine how people reason with
conditionals. The instructions also contained the description
of a machine producing cards with a letter on the front side
and a number on the back, always doing so following a
certain rule, for example ‘If there is an T on the front, there
is a 5 on the back of the card’. Participants could read that in
the upcoming task they were going to see four cards
produced by that machine, and that per card they had to
evaluate the compatibility of the card with the cardproducing rule. Participants were then provided with a
concrete example of a conditional rule, as well as with an
example of the item in the actual task (no correct answers
were provided). The instructions were followed by one
practice trial.
In all conditions, participants were successively
presented with four items. Each item consisted of the
abstract conditional rule followed by one of the four
combinations of occurrence and non-occurrence of A and C.
Both task directionality and negation type were manipulated
between subjects. In the R-S possibilities task, participants
had to evaluate for each situation whether that combination
was possible, impossible or irrelevant according to the rule.
In the S-R possibilities task, they had to evaluate for each of
the four possible antecedent-consequent combinations
whether the combination made the given rule either possible

Table 1: Answer Patterns (% and (n)) for the Possibilities
Tasks (PT) and the Truth Tasks (TT) with Explicit
Negations.

1081

RS-PT

SR-PT

RS-TT

SR-TT

Total

TFFF

4 (2)

9 (4)

13 (6)

2 (1)

7 (13)

TFFT

13 (6)

28 (13)

13 (6)

21 (10)

19 (35)

TFTT

40 (18)

17 (8)

11 (5)

4 (2)

18 (33)

TFFI

2 (1)

9 (4)

26 (12)

30 (14)

17 (31)

TFII

13 (6)

9 (4)

19 (9)

19 (9)

15 (28)

TFIT

13 (6)

4 (2)

4 (2)

6 (3)

7 (13)

TFTI

7 (3)

7 (3)

2 (1)

4 (2)

5 (9)

Other

7 (3)

17 (8)

13 (6)

13 (6)

12 (23)

Total

100 (45)

100 (46)

100 (47)

100 (47)

100 (185)

Table 2: Answer Patterns (% and (n)) for the Possibilities
Tasks (PT) and the Truth Tasks (TT) with Implicit
Negations.
RS-PT

SR-PT

RS-TT

SR-TT

Total

TFFF

6 (3)

16 (8)

14 (7)

18 (9)

14 (27)

TFFT

10 (5)

10 (5)

2 (1)

0 (0)

6 (11)

TFTT

8 (4)

4 (2)

0 (0)

0 (0)

3 (6)

TFFI

12 (6)

24 (12)

38 (19)

33 (16)

27 (53)

TFII

14 (7)

12 (6)

26 (13)

31 (15)

21 (41)

TFIT

0 (0)

4 (2)

0 (0)

0 (0)

1 (2)

TFTI

6 (3)

8 (4)

2 (1)

0 (0)

4 (8)

Other

44 (22)

22 (11)

18 (9)

18 (9)

26 (51)

Total

100 (50)

100 (50)

100 (50)

tasks (χ²(1) = 24.37, p < .01). Moreover, a higher proportion
of three-valued answer patterns was yielded by the truth
table tasks making use of implicit negations compared to the
tasks with explicit negations. This was the case for the truth
tasks (χ²(1) = 5.53, p < .05) and the possibilities tasks (χ²(1)
= 11.32, p < .01). These findings to be expected from the
phenomenon of matching-bias: Especially for the false
antecedent cases, with implicit negations there is no direct
link between the conditional rule and the situations that have
to be evaluated. Still, with the explicit negations there is a
wealth of three-valued answer patterns, even in the
possibilities tasks, bearing evidence to the suppositional
processing of the false antecedent cases (Evans, 2004).
We did not observe an effect of directionality as was the
case in Experiment 3 of Sevenants et al. (2008). A similar
proportion of two-valued answer patterns was yielded by the
rule-to-situation tasks (RS-PT and RS-TT) than by the tasks
with a direction from situation to rule (SR-PT and SR-TT).
Neither was there a difference regarding the proportion of
three-valued answer patters. This goes both for the explicit
and the implicit negations. Reasoning from rule to situation
might be a more natural and intuitive direction for
participants than reasoning from situation to rule as was
claimed by Sevenants et al. (2008), but confronting them
with a task with a situation to rule directionality (while
controlling for Task-Type), seemed to yield no difference in
the observed answer patterns in the present study. In line
with this finding however, Sevenants et al., (2008,
Experiment 3) already observed that, when asked to write
down a justification for their truth table task judgments,
none of the participants mentioned something concerning
the task directionality: Irrespective of the actual task-type or
directionality, they formulated their justifications with a
rule-to-situation direction (“E.g., “The situation is possible
according to the rule”, even when task directionality was
from situation to rule). Participants thus seem to overlook
task directionality when classifying the truth table cases.
Finally, comparing the most similar tasks, i.e. RS-PT to
RS-TT and SR-PT to SR-TT, Chi-square tests revealed more
two-valued patterns in the R-S possibilities tasks than in the
R-S truth tasks for the explicit negations (χ²(1) = 3.95 p <
.05) and for the implicit negations (χ²(1) = 5.85, p < .05).
Likewise, more three-valued answer patterns were yielded
by the R-S truth tasks than by the R-S possibilities tasks,
both for the explicit (χ²(1) = 5.0, p < .05) and the implicit
negations (χ²(1) = 5.63, p < .05). Comparing SR-PT to SRTT, we observed more two-valued patterns in the S-R
possibilities task than in the S-R truth task for the explicit
(χ²(1) = 15.48, p < .01) and the implicit negations (χ²(1) =
17.57, p < .01). Finally there were more three-valued answer
patterns in the S-R truth task than in the S-R possibilities
task, again both for the explicit (χ²(1) = 5.29, p < .05) and
the implicit negations (χ²(1) = 10.33, p < .01).

100 (49) 100 (199)

Focussing on the effect of Task-Type on the answer
patterns, we replicated the effect of previous studies
(Sevenants et al., 2008): Chi-square tests revealed that more
two-valued answer patterns were yielded by the possibilities
tasks (RS-PT and SR-PT) than the by the truth tasks (SR-TT
and RS-TT). This goes both for the explicit negations (χ²(1)
= 29.31, p < .01) and for the implicit negations (χ²(1) =
31.79, p < .01). Moreover, the truth tasks yielded a higher
proportion of three-valued answer patterns than the
possibilities tasks both with explicit (χ²(1) = 19.58, p < .01)
and implicit negations (χ²(1) = 41.8, p < .01). This relates to
the claim of Barrouillet et al. (2008) that reasoning about
truth or falsity of assertions given possibilities is a different
kind of reasoning than reasoning about possibilities given
the truth of assertions. According to Barrouillet et al., the
former requires a higher level of cognitive development and
might therefore be more difficult. However, there is also a
considerable amount of three-valued patterns in the
possibilities task and of two-valued patterns in the truth task.
This leads us to the interpretation that irrespective of the
task, some people have a three-valued truth table
representation (~ ST) and others have a possibilities-based,
two-valued MMT-representation. The mental representation
of this kind of conditionals can thus be seen as an individual
difference.
Regarding the effect of Negation-Type, we observed
that more two-valued answer patterns were yielded by the
truth table tasks with explicit negations than by the truth
table tasks with implicit negations. This goes both for the
possibilities tasks (χ²(1) = 24.52, p < .01) and for the truth

1082

General Discussion

de Finetti, B. (1967). Sur quelques conventions qui semblent
utiles. [On some conventions that seem useful]. Revue
Roumaine de Mathématiques Pures et Appliquées, xii,
1227- 1234.
de Finetti, B. (2008). Philosophical Lectures on Probability
collected, edited, and annotated by Alberto Mura (Vol.
340). Berlin: Springer.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D., (2004). If. Oxford University
Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D. E., & Handley, S. H. (2003a). A
theory of hypothetical thinking. In D. Hardman & L.
Maachi (Eds.), Thinking: Psychological perspectives on
reasoning, judgement and decision making (pp. 3-22).
Chichester: Wiley.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. H., Neilens, H., & Over, D.
E. (2007). Thinking about conditionals: A study of
individual differences. Memory & Cognition, 35, 17221784.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109, 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R. M. J., & Schaeken, W.
(1992). Propositional reasoning by model. Psychological
Review, 99, 418-439.
Politzer, G., Over, D., & Baratgin, J. (2010). Betting on
conditionals. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 172 – 197.
Ramsey, F. P. (1990). General propositions and causality
(original publication, 1931). In D. H. Mellor (Ed.),
Philosophical papers (pp. 145-163). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Schroyens, W. (2009). Mistaking the instance for the rule: A
critical analysis of the truth-table evaluation paradigm.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63(2), 246259.
Schroyens, W. (2010). A meta-analytic review of thinking
about what is true, possible, and irrelevant in reasoning
from or reasoning about conditional propositions.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 22 , 897 921.
Sevenants, A., Schroyens, W., Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W.,
& d'Ydewalle, G. (2008). Truth table tasks: The relevance
of irrelevant. Thinking & Reasoning, 14, 409-433.

First of all, we replicate the effect of task type we observed
in all previous studies: Irrespective of task directionality,
there are more two-valued answer patterns in the
possibilities tasks than in the truth tasks, and more threevalued answer patterns in the truth tasks than in the
possibilities tasks. This relates to our discussion that
reasoning about truth or falsity requires a higher level of
cognitive development than reasoning about possibilities
and might therefore be more difficult, since reasoning about
truth requires the understanding of the meta-linguistic
meaning of ‘true’ and ‘false’. However, there is also a
considerable amount of three-valued patterns in the
possibilities task and of two-valued patterns in the truth task.
This leads us to the interpretation that irrespective of the
task, some people have a three-valued truth table
representation (~ ST) and others have a possibilities-based,
two-valued MMT-representation. The mental representation
of this kind of conditionals can thus be seen as an individual
difference.
Secondly, we were not able to replicate the directionality
effect that more two-valued answer patterns were yielded by
rule-to-situation tasks than by situation-to-rule tasks, and
more three-valued answer patterns were observed with
situation-to-rule tasks than with rule-to-situation tasks, as
was observed by Sevenants et al. (2008). In the present
experiment, participants seem to overlook task directionality
when classifying the truth table cases, as is shown by the
similarity of the justifications in both task types.
As for the negation type, we observe that tasks making
use of implicit negations yield more three-valued answer
patterns than the tasks with explicit negations and that twovalued answer patterns are almost non-existent when
implicit negations are used. This was to be expected from
the phenomenon of matching bias: Especially for the false
antecedent cases, with implicit negations there is no direct
link between the conditional rule and the situations that have
to be evaluated. Still, with the explicit negations there is a
wealth of three-valued answer patterns, even in the
possibilities tasks, bearing evidence to the suppositional
processing of the false antecedent cases (Evans, 2004).

References
Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J. F. (1998). How can mental
models theory account for content effects in conditional
reasoning? A developmental perspective. Cognition, 67,
209-253.
Barrouillet, P., Gauffroy, C., & Lecas, J. F. (2008). Mental
models and the suppositional account of conditionals.
Psychological Review, 115, 760-772.
de Finetti, B. (1937/1964). Foresight: Its logical laws, its
subjective sources. Translated in H.E. Kyburg & H. E.
Smokier (eds), Studies in subjective probability (pp.55118) .New York: Wiley.

1083

