UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tutorial on using the Psychology Experiment Building Language (PEBL) in the laboratory, the
field, and the classroom
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1s01c78x
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Author
Mueller, Shane
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
  eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

               Tutorial on using the Psychology Experiment Building Language (PEBL)
                               in the Laboratory, the Field, and the Classroom
            https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/pebl/index.php?title=CogSci2011_Tutorial
                                     Presented by: Shane T. Mueller, Ph.D.
                                           Applied Research Associates
                                               smueller@obereed.net
Background:
        Laboratory and field research in cognitive science often uses computer-based tools to design
experiments and collect data. Although researchers are typically happy to exchange the data obtained
from such studies, sharing the actual software used to collect the data is more difficult. This partly
stems from the widespread use of special-purpose proprietary software tools to collect data, which
prevents exchange and review of the actual experiment specification (without purchasing costly
licenses) and can at times even prevent researchers from accessing their own past experiments. Yet
often, without a good understanding of the exact experiment, the data can be difficult to interpret.
Furthermore, such systems are typically tied to a particular operating system platform, reducing the
ability to exchange, modify, and evaluate details of an experiment. This is an obstacle to scientific
progress, where it is critical to be able to share, evaluate, modify, and test the paradigms that we use to
develop and test theory.
        The Psychology Experiment Building Language (PEBL; Mueller, 2004; 2010) was developed to
overcome these obstacles. It is a cross-platform Free (GPL) software tool for designing and running
computer-based laboratory research. PEBL has been used in research laboratories around the world as
the basis for approximately 40 published articles and reports. 1 PEBL also incorporates a set of
approximately 50 laboratory and clinical tests which are increasingly becoming the standard non-
commercial versions of classic neuropsychology tests (including, for example, tests such as the
Wisconsin Card Sort, Iowa Gambling Task, Tower of London task, and pursuit rotor task). The goal of
PEBL is to help researchers share their experiments as easily as they share data.
Objectives:
        This half-day tutorial will provide experiential training for using PEBL in laboratory and field
research, and in the classroom. It will begin with the basics of using PEBL and its standardized tests,
with a discussion of the growing body of published literature using PEBL. Basics of the language will
be covered to enable attendees to understand the workings of existing experiments and to modify them.
Following this, we will develop one or more experiments 'from scratch' to highlight the important basic
steps in experimental design. We will conclude with discussions and examples using PEBL outside the
laboratory, in field research, questionnaires, and classroom settings.
        As an outcome of this tutorial, attendees will have the ability to incorporate a powerful tool into
their teaching and research repertoire, which both makes research easier to conduct and enables
improved and open scientific exchange and standardization.
Need/Justification for Tutorial:
        Developing new experiments in PEBL is fairly simple, but can require guidance and direct
feedback to understand its operation, which is best handled in a tutorial setting. PEBL has the potential
to be broadly useful for laboratory researchers and instructors within the cognitive science community.
These especially include empirical laboratory research psychologists and linguists, which constitute a
large proportion of the membership of the cognitive science society, and the attendees of the
conference.
1 https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/pebl/index.php?title=Publications_citing_PEBL
                                                           54

Audience:
The target audience is primarily researchers in psychology and related disciplines who are involved in
empirical work doing laboratory data collection. It will be targeted to two main groups: (1) graduate
students, post-doctoral researchers, and faculty researchers who design and conduct laboratory
experiments; and (2) instructors who wish to enhance classroom instruction using experiment
demonstrations.
Special Requirements:
Participants will need to bring a laptop (Windows, Linux, or OSX), and should download/install the
PEBL software and PEBL User Manual at http://pebl.sourceforge.net prior to the tutorial.
About PEBL
      PEBL is Free psychology software for creating experiments
      PEBL allows researchers to design their own experiments or use ready-made ones
      PEBL enables the exchange of experiments without license or fee
PEBL offers a simple programming language tailor-made for creating and conducting many standard
experiments. It is Free software, licensed under the GPL, with both the compiled executables and
source code available without charge. PEBL is designed to be easily used on multiple computing
platforms, and compiles natively under Win32, Linux, and Macintosh Operating Systems. PEBL is
used by researchers around the world, and its most recent version (PEBL 0.11, released in August
2010) has been downloaded more than 5,000 times.
Qualifications:
        Dr. Mueller is the originator and developer of the PEBL, and has implemented each of the tests
in the PEBL Test Battery. He is a cognitive scientist studying human performance and decision making
in the field and laboratory, and created PEBL to reduce the complexity of developing experiments in
these settings. He is a Senior Research Scientist at Applied Research Associates, Inc., in Dayton, OH.
References
Mueller, S. T. (2004). An Introduction to PEBL: The Psychology Experiment Building Language. 34th
Annual Meeting of the Society for Computers in Psychology (SCiP), Minneapolis, MN, Nov, 2004
Mueller, S. T. (2010). A partial implementation of the BICA cognitive decathlon using the Psychology
Experiment Building Language (PEBL). International Journal of Machine Consciousness, 2, 273-288.
PEBL Website:
http://pebl.sourceforge.net
Tutorial Website:
https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/pebl/index.php?title=CogSci2011_Tutorial
                                                     55

