UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unconscious vs. Conscious Thought in Causal Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4wt2w7w8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Mangold, Stefan
Hagmayer, York

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unconscious vs. Conscious Thought in Causal Decision Making
Stefan Mangold (smangol@uni-goettingen.de)
York Hagmayer (yhagmay@uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Gosslerstr. 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

Abstract
Recently, Unconscious Thought Theory (UTT, Dijksterhuis &
Nordgren, 2006) claimed that unconscious processing of information yields better decisions. Related studies showed that
deliberate reasoning resulted in worse choices than unconscious reasoning. Causal reasoning is often considered to be a
form of deliberate, rule-based reasoning (Sloman, 1996) and
causal decision making is assumed to involve inferring the
potential consequences of different actions from mental causal models (Sloman & Hagmayer, 2006). Therefore, better
choices would be expected after deliberation. Two experiments investigated causal decision making using the UTT paradigm. It turned out that more effective actions were chosen,
when participants were asked to deliberate rather than to turn
their attention to another task or to decide immediately. These
results add to other findings indicating that the superiority of
unconscious thought may be limited to specific decision making situations.
Keywords: Causal reasoning; unconscious thought theory,
decision making

Introduction
When receiving a diagnosis of cancer a difficult period with
many important decisions lies ahead for many patients. One
important decision is which of the available treatment options should be pursued. Each option (e.g., chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, endocrine therapy) has many pros and
cons and entails substantial consequences for the patient‟s
wellbeing and survival. Until very recently the recommendation would have been to resort to deliberate decision making given such a complex problem. Now there is increasing
evidence suggesting that it may be better not to consciously
work on a problem, but to distract oneself for some time and
then make a choice without any further thought. For example, in a study conducted by Dijksterhuis, Bos, Nordgren,
and van Baaren (2006), participants were more likely to
choose the best out of four cars (i.e., the car having the
highest number of positive attributes) after a period of distraction than after a period of deliberate thought. These findings led to the development of Unconscious Thought
Theory (UTT, Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006).
Unconscious Thought in Decision Making
Unconscious thought theory assumes that unconscious
processes, which continue to work on a problem while the
conscious attention is directed somewhere else, are better
suited to adequately weight and integrate the given information than conscious deliberation. According to UTT there
are several more specific reasons for the inferior decision
performance after a period of conscious deliberation. First,

the capacity of conscious working memory is restricted in
terms of limited storage and sequential processing. Unconscious processing is assumed to have no such restrictions (cf.
Evans, 2008). Second, while conscious thought is guided by
expectancies, rules and schemas, which lead to increased
stereotyping and biased representations of the information
given, unconscious thought “slowly integrates information
to form an objective summary judgment” (Dijksterhuis &
Nordgren, 2006, p. 98). A third advantage of unconscious
thought is its ability to automatically weight different
attributes according to their relative importance. Conscious
thinking is assumed to disturb this process because it “leads
people to put disproportionate weight on attributes that are
accessible, plausible, and easy to verbalize” (ibid., p. 100).
Decisions based on unconscious thought are also assumed
to be better than decisions made immediately after receiving
all relevant information. During information acquisition a
mental representation of the object at hand is formed. While
this representation is the only basis for decisions made immediately, the representation is actively changed during
unconscious thought resulting in an improved performance
(see Dijksterhuis, 2004; Strick, Dijksterhuis, & van Baaren,
2010 for more details).
Predictions of UTT have been supported by numerous
studies on a variety of choice topics (e.g. Dijksterhuis et al.,
2006; Lerouge, 2009). However, there are also some contradictory findings (e.g., Newell, Wong, Cheung, & Rakov,
2009). One interesting finding by Payne, Samper, Bettman,
and Luce (2008) was that deliberate thought turned out to be
as successful as unconscious thought when decision makers
could determine the time for deliberation themselves. These
findings indicate that unconscious thought may not be generally better than deliberation.
Causal Reasoning in Decision Making
Many important decisions concern interventions into causal
systems, for example, medical treatments to improve health
or political interventions to stimulate economic growth.
Sloman and Hagmayer (2006) have argued that people tend
to construct mental causal models when a decision is made
with respect to a causal system. First, a causal model of the
choice situation is constructed that represents the causal
mechanisms relating options (i.e., available courses of action), outcomes, and payoffs. Second, possible interventions
are implemented in the model and consequences are predicted by mental simulation. Finally, the option resulting in
the best overall outcome is chosen. The crucial advantage of
causal reasoning in decision making is that it allows envi-

3104

sioning the consequences of actions never taken or observed
before (cf. Hagmayer et al., 2010).
In a number of studies Hagmayer and Sloman (2009)
demonstrated that peoples’ decisions are contingent on their
causal beliefs when making simple one-shot decisions in
hypothetical scenarios. The studies also showed that people
spontaneously activate causal beliefs before making a
choice. Similar findings are reported by research on naturalistic decision making (Klein, 1998). When experts are not
familiar with a particular problem, they tend to simulate
potential courses of action to figure out whether they would
allow to achieve the desired outcome.
Causal reasoning is a form of rule-based reasoning and is
therefore usually considered to be a form of analytic, deliberate, System 2 reasoning (Sloman, 1996). If this assumption
is correct, then causal decision making relies on deliberate
thought. Therefore decisions should be best when based on
deliberations.

Goals and Hypotheses
Studies on unconscious thought in decision making tend to
focus on consumer choice tasks, in which participants have
to choose between options characterized by various
attributes. It is manipulated whether participants have to
make their decision immediately after receiving all relevant
information (immediate choice condition), after working on
an attention grabbing task for a specified amount of time
(unconscious thought condition), or after deliberating for the
same amount of time (conscious thought condition). By contrast, studies on causal decision making usually ask participants to choose between actions having a differential impact
on a causal system. There are no restrictions with respect to
the processing of the given information and decision making. Although this lack of restrictions could be assumed to
facilitate deliberate thinking, the studies provide no empirical evidence for this hunch. On the other hand, studies on
unconscious thought have not investigated decision making
with respect to causal systems. Thus they provide no evidence on causal decision making.
The main goal of the present set of experiments is to close
this gap in knowledge by investigating unconscious thought
in causal decision making. Therefore we combined the unconscious thought paradigm with a task asking participants
to rate the causal consequences of different options (Experiment 1) or to choose between interventions (Experiment
2). Based on causal model theories of reasoning and decision making (Sloman, 1996, 2005, Sloman & Hagmayer,
2006) we hypothesized that time for conscious deliberation
would improve the decisions made. Thus we expected more
choices of the most effective intervention or the option having the best causal consequences after deliberation than after
unconscious thought or when the decision had to be made
immediately. Note that we do not predict that participants
would be unable to make an appropriate decision if they had
no extra time for deliberation. While acquiring the information to make a decision, persons may already engage in
some form of reasoning.

Experiment 1
The goal of this first experiment was to investigate how
different processing conditions affect decision making when
the structure of a causal system needs to be considered to
find the best option. The processing conditions were adapted
from Dijksterhuis et al. (2004) and Payne et al. (2008) and
required a decision either (i) immediately, (ii) after unconscious thought while being distracted, (iii) after conscious
deliberations for a fixed time interval, or (iv) after selfpaced conscious deliberations.
Method
Participants and Design 104 Göttingen university undergraduates participated for course credit or were paid €7.
They were randomly assigned to one of the four processing
conditions (Immediate, unconscious thought, conscious
thought, and conscious thought self-paced).
Materials and Procedure Experiment 1 consisted of three
phases: A familiarization phase, an instruction phase, and a
test phase. During the first phase participants were familiarized with their respective processing condition to ensure
that they could focus entirely on the task during the test
phase. First, all participants had to practice to rate objects
within 3 seconds by clicking on one of the buttons forming a
11-point rating scale. The time constraint was introduced in
order to prevent conscious deliberation during ratings.
Feedback on speed was provided.
Participants in the immediate choice condition then proceeded directly to the instruction phase. Participants in the
unconscious thought condition were confronted with the
distractor-task. They saw a set of four objects and had to
work for 30 seconds on a 2-back task that required yes/no
judgments about whether a digit presented on the computer
screen was identical to the digit presented two trials ago.
Immediately after the distractor-task the objects had to be
rated within 3 seconds. Previous research has shown that the
2-back task effectively blocks working memory and prevents conscious deliberation (cf. Dijksterhuis, 2004). Participants in the conscious thought and conscious thought selfpaced conditions saw the same objects but were asked to
deliberate for 30 seconds or as long as they wanted, respectively, before they had to rate each object.
During the instruction phase of the experiment, information about the causal system was presented. Participants
were told to imagine being a manager of a shoe-company
who had to decide which of four shoe-prototypes would go
into production. They were asked to base their decision only
on the number of stores in which each shoe would be sold in
the end. Two retail chains were introduced as relevant for
making this decision (see Figure 1). One chain of stores
formed a 4-variable common cause structure, in which one
superior store caused its three subordinates to sell the same
shoes. The other structure was a 4-variable causal chain
structure, in which each superior store determined the shoes
sold by its direct subordinate. Participants were explicitly
told that a store would sell a specific shoe if it had ordered

3105

the shoe itself or its superior store had ordered it. Only the
shoe participants picked would be produced, orders of the
other three shoes would be obsolete. To ensure that participants understood their task and the causal structures, they
had to complete a 7-question multiple-choice test error free.
Participants who did not answer all questions correctly had
to re-read the instructions. Participants failing the test six
times were excluded from later analyses.

entation (immediate condition), after a 4 minute period of
solving a 2-back task (unconscious thought condition), after
a 4 minute period of deliberate thinking (conscious thought
condition), or whenever the participant felt that he/she had
sufficiently thought about the decision (conscious thought
self-paced condition). In neither condition the stimuli were
visible during the period of (un-)conscious thinking. The
order of the shoes to be rated was randomized. If a participant took longer than 3 seconds to complete the rating, a
pop-up window reminded him/her to be faster the next time.
The experiment ended with a short debriefing.

Shoe 1

Figure 1: Causal system used in Experiment 1. The common cause sub-structure is shown on the left, the causal
chain sub-structure on the right. See text for details.

Orders for Prototypes
Shoe 2
Shoe 3

Shoe 4

S1:y

S5:y

S1:n

S5:y

S1:n

S5:n

S1:y

S5:n

S2:n

S6:y

S2:n

S6:y

S2:y

S6:y

S2:y

S6:n

S3:n

S7:y

S3:n

S7:y

S3:y

S7:y

S3:n

S7:n

S4:n

S8:n

S4:n

S8:y

S4:y

S8:y

S4:n

S8:n

S5:n

S1:y

S6:y

S2:y

S5:n
y
S6:n

Implied Sales

In the test phase participants were told that they would see
which stores had ordered the four prototypes and that they
would have to rate each shoe with respect to its sales prospects considering the later dissemination of the shoes within
the retail chains. Information about whether a store ordered
a specific prototype was presented at the center of the screen
for 2.5 seconds. In total 32 pieces of information were presented in trial by trial fashion (4 prototypes x 8 stores). Orders for each prototype were presented in blocks. The sequence of the shoes as well as the sequence of stores within
a block was randomized. During the entire test phase participants could not refer back to the instruction or the causal
structures.
Figure 2 shows which stores pre-ordered the shoes independently from each other. The four prototypes were ordered by different numbers of stores and had different prospects of being sold at more stores due to their causal relations. Figure 2 shows the implications of the causal structure
for the final number of stores. It turns out that Prototype 1,
which was ordered by only four stores initially, would be
sold by all eight stores, while Prototype 3, which was ordered by six stores, would remain at this level. Prototypes 2
and 4, which were ordered by four and two stores, would be
finally sold by four stores, making them the worst choices.
Thus, if participants were sensitive to causal structure, they
should rate Prototype 1 the best and Prototypes 2 and 4 the
worst.
After observing the orders placed by all stores, participants had to rate all four prototypes on an 11-point scale
ranging from „no store will sell the shoe‟ to „all stores will
sell the shoe. Depending on the experimental condition the
rating task was administered directly after the stimulus pres-

S1:y

S5:y

S1:n

S5:y

S2:y

S6:y

S2:n

S6:y

S1:n
y
S2:y

S3:y

S7:y

S3:n

S7:y

S3:y

S7:y

S3:y

S7:n

S4:y

S8:y

S4:n

S8:y

S4:y

S8:y

S4:y

S8:n

Figure 2: Options to be rated in Exp.1. S1-S8 = Stores,
y=order, n = no order
Results and Discussion
Eighty-eight out of 104 participants passed the knowledge
test. One participant was excluded, because his/her ratings
differed more than 3 standard deviations from the overall
mean. Thus data of 87 participants were considered. All
judgments that were made within 5 seconds after the rating
scale appeared were included in the analysis. The ratings on
the 11-point scale were re-coded to a scale from 0 to 100.
To examine whether participants differentiated between
the sales prospects of the different shoes we contrasted the
ratings for the best alternative (shoe1) from the mean ratings
for the two least preferable alternatives (shoes 2&4) on an
individual level (cf. Dijksterhuis, 2004). The mean ratings in
the four processing conditions were: Immediate MS1=77.2
(SE=4.63), MS24=71.4 (SE=4.02), UCT MS1=78.8
(SE=3.62), MS24=72.9 (SE=3.40), CT MS1=77.1 (SE=4.12),
MS24=66.8 (SE=5.71), CTSP MS1=82.8 (SE=4.70),
MS24=66.7 (SE=4.30). Statistical analyses revealed that
these ratings differed significantly only in the conscious
thought self-paced condition, t(17) = 2.75, p =.014. Marginally significant effects resulted in the conscious thought
condition, t(13)= 2.00, p =.07, and the unconscious thought
condition, t(16) = 1.84, p =.08; no differences were found in
the immediate condition, t(17)=1.52, p =.15 (all tests within

3106

subjects and one-tailed).
In order to test more specifically whether participants were
sensitive to the implications of causal structure, we compared ratings for shoe 1 and shoe 3. Shoe 1 is only better if
the implications of the causal structure are taken into account, otherwise shoe 3 would be better (cf. Fig. 2). Mean
rating of shoe 3 were: Immediate MS3=71.5 (SE=4.72), UCT
MS3=65.3 (SE=5.36), CT MS3=65.5 (SE=5.91), CTSP
MS3=68.2 (SE=5.51). Thus shoe 1 got higher ratings in all
conditions. However, differences again turned out to be significant only in the self-paced condition: Immediate
t(15)<1.18, p=.25, UCT t(11)=1.90, p=.083, CT t(13)=2.13,
p=.053, CTSP t(15)=2.26, p=.038 (all tests within subjects
and one-tailed).
Taken together, these findings indicate that only participants in the conscious thought self-paced condition were
able to take causal structure into account and to differentiate
between the normatively best and worst alternatives. Nevertheless, the findings only partially supported our hypotheses.
While we expected participants to clearly differentiate between options also in the conscious thought condition, we
expected to find a smaller difference in the unconscious
thought condition.

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 was to further examine the
role of conscious vs. unconscious thought when making
decisions with respect to a causal system. While participants
in Experiment 1 only had to rate different options, for which
the causal system had different implications, they now had
to choose between different interventions into the system. In
addition, we increased the complexity by using a single
causal structure with eight variables connected by eight
causal relations.
Method
Participants and Design 87 Göttingen university undergraduates participated for course credit or were paid €7. Participants were again randomly assigned to one of three
processing conditions (immediate, unconscious thought,
conscious thought).

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the causal system
used in Exp.2. V1 –V8 = shamanistic techniques or abilities:
V1: Knowledge of Gods‟ rules; V2: Usage of psychedelic

plants; V3: Skill in using Gods‟ language; V4: type of
dance; V5: duration of hunger meditation; V6: smoking
technique; V7: singing; V8: breathing technique); R1-R8:
causal relations (R1: profound (shallow) knowledge leads to
adequate (excessive) usage; R2: profound (shallow) knowledge leads to high (low) skill; R3: adequate (excessive)
usage leads to long (short) duration; R4: inhaling (whiffing)
leads to adequate (excessive) usage; R5: high (low) skill
leads to rhythmic (arrhythmic) singing; R6: rhythmic (arrhythmic) singing leads to trance (sun) dance; R7: recapulation (hyperventilation) leads to inhaling (whiffing); R8: recapulation (hyperventilation) leads to rhythmic (arrhythmic)
singing); Int A, Int B: possible interventions
Materials and Procedure The procedure was very similar
to Experiment 1. Participants were first familiarized with the
procedure in the test phase. Then they were instructed about
the causal system. Figure 3 depicts the causal system used in
Experiment 2. Its eight variables were introduced as techniques and abilities of a shaman‟s apprentice. The respective
technique could either be successful or less successful (see
caption of Figure 3 for details). Participants were told that
the probability of an apprentice to use a less successful
technique/ability was 80%. Some of the techniques/abilities
were introduced as causally linked. The usage of a successful technique caused other techniques to become more successful. For example, recapulative breathing (V8), the successful breathing technique, led to inhaling (V7), the more
successful smoking technique. Each technique, its successful and less successful version, and the causal relations were
explained in detail. The assignment of the abilities/techniques to the model was counterbalanced by mirroring the model depicted in Figure 3.
Participants were told that it was their task to decide which
of two trainings should be assigned to an apprentice in order
to improve his skills and techniques. One training (Intervention A) made ability V1 successful, while the other training
(Intervention B) did the same with technique V8. Participants‟ knowledge about the causal system was tested by a
10-item questionnaire. They were required to re-read the
instruction if they made any errors. Participants who failed
the test six times were excluded from later analyses.
The following test phase consisted of 8 trials in randomized order. On each trial the eight techniques/abilities of a
single apprentice were presented separately for 1.5 seconds
each in random order. Figure 4 shows the techniques/abilities of the apprentices serving as the eight test
cases. Note that in all cases both fundamental techniques/abilities (V1 and V8) were not successful, which
entails that both trainings would have some effect. Four of
the cases favored no specific intervention and served as a
baseline for analysis. The remaining cases had clear-cut best
interventions that could be figured out by considering the
structure and state of the causal system. For example, in
Case 2 Intervention A would only change V1 for the better
as V1‟s causally dependent techniques were already successful. Intervention B, by contrast, would not only improve

3107

Figure 4: Cases to be judged in Exp. 2. Gray fillings indicate successful techniques/abilities, white fillings less successful techniques/abilities. The more effective intervention
(A/B) is marked when applicable.
After the presentation of each test case, participants had to
judge whether Intervention A or B was preferable. As in
Experiment 1, participants could not refer back to the instruction or the causal model when making their judgment.
The judgment was made on an 11-point rating scale with the
two possible interventions as endpoints (the endpoints of the
scale were counterbalanced across participants). In the immediate condition participants were asked to indicate their
preference directly after observing each apprentice. In the
unconscious thought condition they worked on a two-back
task for 2 minutes and in the conscious thought condition
they deliberated about the best option for the same amount
of time before making a decision. Participants had 3 seconds
to indicate their answer. They were reminded to be faster
next time if they took longer. No feedback was provided.
The experiment ended with a short debriefing.
Results and Discussion
Eighty-one out of eighty-seven participants passed the
knowledge test. One participant was excluded, because
he/she did not provide any answers to the cases having differential implications for choice within the given time window. Thus data of 80 participants were considered. Participants‟ ratings on the 11 point scale were coded on a scale
from 0 (Intervention A) to 100 (Intervention B). All judgments that were made within 5 seconds after the rating scale
appeared were included in the analysis. To facilitate further
analyses, participants‟ ratings of cases that favored Intervention A, Intervention B, or no specific intervention were aggregated on an individual level. Figure 5 depicts the mean
ratings for the three types of cases in the three experimental

conditions. As can be seen from Figure 5, different ratings
resulted across conditions. Participants tended to favor the
specific intervention for the respective cases, and tended to
be indifferent for the rest. However, the differences between
cases seemed to be most pronounced in the conscious
thought condition.
For the statistical analyses we compared the mean ratings
for the cases affording a specific intervention with the mean
rating of the cases, for which both interventions would be
equally effective (indifferent cases). We conducted twosided t-tests with a Bonferrioni-corrected significance level
of α = .025. In the immediate condition there was a significant difference between cases favoring Intervention A and
the indifferent cases (t(30) = 3.18, p < .01) whereas the difference between cases favoring Intervention B and the indifferent cases was not significant (t(30) = 1.75, p =.08). In the
unconscious thought condition, the comparisons did not
reveal any significant differences: Intervention A vs. Indifferent t(25) = 1.07, p =.29 and Intervention B vs. Indifferent
t(25) = 2.16, p =.04. By contrast, both comparisons turned
out significant in the conscious thought condition: Intervention A vs. Indifferent t(22) = 2.83, p < .01 and Intervention
B vs. Indifferent t(22) = 6.05, p < .01. This pattern of results
indicates that deliberation improves decision making with
respect to interventions in a causal system.

Mean Ratings

V8 but also V6, V7, and V4, which would be causally affected by V8 becoming successful.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Int A best
Int B best
no Int best

Immediate unconscious conscious
thought
thought

Figure 5: Mean ratings for cases entailing that Intervention
A would be best (Int A best), cases for which Intervention B
would be best (Int B best) and cases for which both interventions would be equally effective (no Int best) in the three
processing conditions. Error bars indicate standard errors.
However, one may argue that the above tests are too strict.
In fact, the differences between ratings of cases that asked
for Intervention A and those that afforded Intervention B
were significant in all three conditions: Immediate t(30) =
2.76, p < .01; unconscious thought t(25) = 2.84, p < .01;
conscious thought t(22) = 5.14, p < .01. To further analyze
whether conscious deliberation did lead to superior results,
we tested whether the differences between the cases favoring specific interventions differed across conditions. The
differences of the differences did not approach significance
when the immediate and the unconscious thought condition
were compared (t(55) = 0.52, p =.6). But, the difference in
the conscious thought condition was significantly larger

3108

than the differences in the immediate thought condition
(t(52) = 2.03, p < .05) and the unconscious thought condition (t(47) = 2.82, p < .01). These results clearly indicate
that participants in the conscious thought condition were
more sensitive for the causal effects of the interventions
than in the other conditions.
Taken together, the results obtained in Experiment 2 provide further evidence for the claim that conscious deliberation enhances performance if a consideration of causal
structure is required to make appropriate decisions. Thus the
findings support our hypothesis. Interestingly, the results in
the other conditions indicate some sensitivity for causal
structure, whose origin may be due to some form of causal
reasoning during information acquisition.

General Discussion
The goal of the current set of experiments was to investigate
how unconscious thought and conscious deliberation affect
decision making with respect to a causal system. Both experiments used an experimental procedure introduced by
Dijksterhuis (2004) that forces participants to make their
decision either immediately after receiving the relevant information, after a period of distraction from the task, or after
a period of deliberate thinking about the task. Going beyond
previous studies, we asked participants to evaluate options
having different causal effects (Experiment 1) or to choose
between interventions having differential consequences
(Experiment 2). The results of both experiments demonstrated that a period of conscious deliberation led to better
decisions than unconscious thought.
These findings are at odds with Unconscious Thought
Theory (UTT, Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006), which assumes that the unconscious processing of decision relevant
information leads to better decisions. However, UTT has
only been applied to decisions requiring the weighting and
integration of multiple pieces of information. Decisions
which pertain to a causal system require more. They require
considering the causal consequences resulting from the
choice made (cf. Sloman & Hagmayer, 2006). To make
these inferences, causal reasoning seems to be necessary,
which takes into account the structure and state of the underlying causal system. Causal reasoning has been assigned
to System 2, the deliberate, rule based system of reasoning
(Sloman, 1996, Evans 2008). Therefore our results are in
line with causal model theories of decision making, which
assume that causal reasoning is involved when decisions are
made with respect to a causal system. Decision makers seem
to need some time to build up a causal model representation
and to figure out the causal consequences resulting from the
given options. This is probably why extra time for deliberation improves these kinds of decisions.
Although our findings were at odds with UTT, we believe
that they do not contradict this theory. They rather point out
UTT‟s limits. Several studies in different domains showed
that unconscious thought may lead to better decisions than
conscious thought (cf. Dijksterhuis et al., 2006; see Newell
et al., 2009, for contradictory findings). Unconscious

thought seems to have an advantage if a large amount of
information has to be integrated, holistic judgments are required, or recurring patterns have to be detected (Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006). Decision making with respect to a
causal system, however, seems to be beyond the scope of
UTT.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG HA 3406/3-1).

References
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L. F. (2006). A Theory of
Unconscious Thought. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1, 95-109.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M. W., Nordgren, L. F., & van
Baaren, R. B. (2006). On making the right choice: The
deliberation-without-attention effect, Science, 311,10051007.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think different: The merits of unconscious thought in preference development and decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 286-598.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition, The Annual Review of Psychology, 59,255-278.
Hagmayer, Y., Meder, B., Osman, M., Mangold, S., &
Lagnado, D. (2010). Spontaneous causal learning while
controlling a dynamic system. The Open Psychology
Journal, 3, 145-162.
Hagmayer, Y., & Sloman, S. (2009). People conceive of
their choices as intervention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 138, 22-38.
Klein, G. A. (1998). Sources of power: How people make
decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lerouge, D. (2009). Evaluating the benefits of distraction on
product evaluations: The mind-set effect, Journal of
Consumer Research, 36, 367-379,
Newell, B. R., Wong, K. Y., Cheung, J. C. H., & Rakow, T.
(2009). Think, blink or sleep on it? The impact of modes
of thought on complex decision making, The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62, 707-732.
Payne, J W., Samper, A., Bettman, J. R., Luce, M. F.
(2008). Boundary conditions on unconscious thought in
complex decision making, Psychological Science, 19,
1118-1123.
Sloman, S. A., & Hagmayer, Y. (2006). The causal psychologic of choice. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 407412.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models. Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning, Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Strick, Dijksterhuis, & van Baaren (2010). Unconscious
thought effects take place off-line, not on-line, Psychological Science, 21, 484-488.

3109

