UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unlocking potential: Individual differences in the use of concurrent scientific visualizations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7xv4q2z0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hinze, Scott
Rapp, David
Williamson, Vickie
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unlocking potential: Individual differences in the use of
concurrent scientific visualizations
Scott R. Hinze (s-hinze@northwestern.edu)
David N. Rapp (rapp@northwestern.edu)
School of Education and Social Policy
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208, USA

Vickie M. Williamson (Williamson@tamu.edu)
Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843, USA

Mary Shultz (mary.shultz@tufts.edu
Department of Chemistry, Tufts University
Medford, MA, 02155, USA

Ken C. Williamson (kcwilli@tamu.edu)
Department of Construction Science, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843, USA

Ghislain Deslongchamps (ghislain@unb.ca)
Department of Chemistry, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, New Brunswick, E3B 5A3, Canada

Abstract
The goal of this study was to identify whether individual
differences among students might influence the effectiveness
of visualizations; in particular, concurrently presented
alternative visualizations of chemical molecules. Thirty
beginning organic chemistry students of varying prior
knowledge completed: (1) a battery of tests measuring
reasoning ability, spatial ability, and need for cognition and
(2) an eye-tracking session, in which they viewed both balland-stick and potential plot representations, and answered
interpretation and application questions. Eye movement
patterns indicated that students tended to initially rely on the
already familiar ball-and-stick representations, especially for
more difficult application questions. As the task unfolded,
though, students' choice of which representation to refer to
was moderated by prior expertise and general reasoning
ability.
Keywords: Education, Multimedia, Eye Tracking, Prior
Knowledge, Expert vs. Novice Comprehension

Introduction
The goal of this study was to identify whether individual
differences among students might influence their reliance on
scientific visualizations. Previous work has focused on the
notion that visualizations are a useful and generally
effective means of enhancing comprehension of scientific
concepts, principles, and hypotheses (van Gog & Scheiter,

2010). However, the utility of such visualizations might be
mediated by individual differences in cognitive abilities,
functions, and propensities. To test this possibility, we
specifically focused on two types of chemistry
visualizations that are popularly used in both science
textbooks and classrooms; ball-and-stick representations of
molecules, and potential plot representations of molecules.
(We looked at these representations for alcohols, carboxylic
acids, and hydroxycarboxylic acids.) Our examination of
students’ reliance on and comprehension of chemistry
concepts with these representations employed eye tracking,
response accuracy and explanation data. This multi-method
approach afforded the means for identifying which
representations the students used, or didn’t use, to reason
about molecules.
Electrostatic potential (ESP) plots are color-coded surface
maps that visually encode charge distribution in molecules.
ESP maps can be informative since many chemical
interactions are governed by the principle that positive and
negative charges attract each other. These visualizations are
widely used for computer-aided drug design and materials
development, so student familiarity with ESP plots carries
benefits beyond immediate learning and testing issues. The
more familiar ball-and-stick models have been used in
chemistry classrooms for decades, and visual depictions of
those models are similarly popular. These models depict the
atoms and bonds of a molecule, but do not provide a
visualization of the distribution of electrons, like in the ESP

2721

plots. Neither ESP maps nor Ball-and-Stick graphics are
necessarily a superior visualization. Rather, their utility
depends on task demands. Ball-and-Stick plots may be most
useful for reasoning about molecular structure, while ESP
maps are most useful for reasoning about relative atomic
charges. Here, we were interested in whether students would
be willing or able to use unfamiliar ESP maps for questions
specifically designed to be answered based on relative
charges.
Although we were interested in determining whether
students differentially rely on these different
representations, ESP plots on their own present interesting
fodder for investigation. Chemical educators have advocated
the use of ESP maps in both general and organic chemistry
(Shusterman & Shusterman, 1997), and to our knowledge,
only a few studies have shown potential benefits of such
plots for STEM understanding (e.g., Sander & Badger,
2001), and those studies have often confounded plot
presentation with additional classroom activities. It remains
unclear whether and how these novel plots are utilized by
students, or whether different students differentially rely on
and benefit from these visualizations.
The effective use of visualizations is not guaranteed nor is
it a trivial activity (e.g., Ainsworth, 2006), so it is important
to know whether students have the representational
competence necessary to utilize both readily familiar and
new visualizations. Thus, the purpose of this experiment
was to examine whether students actually use different
representations to answer exam-type chemistry questions. In
addition, because visualization use and effectiveness is
potentially moderated by individual differences (e.g.
Canham & Hegarty, 2010; Kalyuga, Ayres, Chandler &
Sweller, 2003) we were also interested in whether prior
knowledge, reasoning or spatial abilities was associated
with effective or ineffective use and learning from the
visualizations.

Method
Participants
Participants were recruited from a large organic chemistry
course (N = 225). While these students had access to ESP
maps in textbooks, no formal instruction on the use of these
maps had occurred in class prior to the experiment. High
and low prior knowledge participants were recruited from
this sample based on their scores on a pre-test. A total of 30
students, (18 high prior knowledge; 12 low prior
knowledge) volunteered and completed all aspects of the
experiment and were compensated $20 for their time. The
30 participants consisted of 19 female and 11 male students;
the age ranged between 19-21 years (M = 19.47, SD = .68).
Most (N = 27) identified themselves as neither a chemistry
major or minor.

Materials and Apparatus
Pre-test. A 19 question general chemistry knowledge quiz,
created for this project, asked students to answer questions
regarding relevant chemistry concepts, including the
definition of electronegativity, the identification of atoms in
a ball-and-stick representation, and the interpretation of ESP
plots. This pre-test served as the basis for recruiting high
knowledge (top 1/3 of scores) and low knowledge (bottom
1/3 of scores) participants.
Eye Tracker. For some parts of the experiment, a Tobii
T60 eye tracker was used to track eye movements while
participants completed the problem set (see below).
Instructional Materials. Participants were introduced to
ESP maps with a 391 word multimedia text, presented using
Tobii Studio software. The text explained key concepts such
as the attraction of opposite charges and the role of
electronegativity differences in facilitating this process. This
concept was made more concrete by the use of two
examples: the ionic bond between Na+ and Cl- based on
their widely different electronegativity, and the less extreme
case of the bonds in H20. Two ESP maps were presented to
show positive (blue), negative (red) and neutral (green)
charges.
Problem Set. The main task of this experiment asked
participants to use the ball-and-stick and/or ESP map
representations of molecules to answer questions about
molecules. Examples of the questions and representations
are provided in Figure 1; all problems consisted of a
question displayed at the top of the screen along with
simultaneous presentation of both an ESP map and Balland-Stick representation of a molecule. There were a total of
six different molecules depicting alcohols, carboxylic acids,
and hydroxycarboxylic acids, half of which presented the
ESP map on the left side of the screen and half which
presented the ESP map on the right side of the screen. Each
participant answered the four questions shown for each of
the six molecules, for a total of 24 items, with the order of
presentation of the items randomized. Three answer choices
(one correct) numbered 1-3, were presented on both
representations. All questions were designed to be best
answered using ESP maps, since the maps provide a visual
cue as to the location of relative charges in a molecule,
information that was relevant to all questions. Two of the
questions for each molecule, as shown in the top two panels
of Figure 1, required participants to identify an atom which
met certain basic criteria (i.e. greatest positive charge,
highest electron density); we refer to these as Identification
questions. The two other questions for each molecule, as
exemplified in the bottom two panels of Figure 1, required
participants to determine where a positive or negative
charge would be attracted in the molecule. This necessitated
not only identifying the basic characteristics of the atoms,
but also the application of this information in the context of
a chemical interaction; we refer to these as Application
questions.

2722

Eye Tracking Metrics
To examine eye movement patterns of participants during
their completion of the problem sets, we concentrated
mainly on the pattern of fixations, which occur when the
eye stops for a period of time in a relatively stable spatial
location. We were mainly interested in fixations to the areas
containing either the ESP map or the Ball-and-Stick
representation for each item. These Areas of Interest (AOIs)
were similar in size (~20% of the area of the screen was
taken up by each AOI) and the size of the AOIs was held
constant across all trials. We calculated measures related to
the number and length of fixations within an AOI, the
number and length of visits to each AOI, and the total
amount of time spent within an AOI for a given trial.

Procedure
Figure 1: Example problems. The top two panels represent
Interpretation questions, while the bottom two panels
represent Application questions.
Baseline Presentations of Molecules. Prior to completion
of the problem sets, participants freely viewed the two
representations of all six molecules for five seconds each.
This baseline presentation served to make the participants
generally aware of the molecules they would be working
with and the format of the representations. It also served as
a check for whether participants’ attention would be
generally drawn toward one representation over the other
(e.g. participants could simply be more intrigued by the
colorful ESP plots). Such a baseline recording was
necessary to attribute eye-movement patterns to the attempts
at answering the questions, not simply to interest in one
representation over the other.
Individual Differences Measures. Participants completed a
battery of tasks presented via computer to assess their
reasoning abilities, spatial abilities, and need for cognition.
The reasoning abilities task was an electronic version of the
Test of Logical Thinking (TOLT; Tobin & Capie, 1981), a
10-question test containing a variety of reasoning problems,
which is generally positively correlated with successful
chemistry performance (Bunce & Hutchinson, 1993).
Spatial abilities were assessed using measures intended to
tap a variety of spatial components. All tests were
conducted using computers, some of which were adapted
from paper versions. Two tests were used to measure the
speed of mental rotation including the Card Rotation Test
(CRT; Ekstrom, French, Harman, & Derman, 1976) and the
Mental Rotation Test (MRT; Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978).
Complex visualization abilities were measured with the
Purdue Visualization of Rotations Test (ROT; Bodner &
Guay, 1997) and Guay’s Visualization of Viewpoints
(GVVT; Guay & McDaniels, 1976). Gestalt identification
ability was assessed using the Hidden Patterns Test (HPT;
Ekstrom et al., 1976). Participants also completed the Need
for Cognition scale (NFC; Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984).

The assessment of prior knowledge and the TOLT measure
were both completed prior to participation in the experiment
as part of the organic chemistry course. All other activities
took place in two counterbalanced laboratory sessions with
each participant’s second session occurring a week after the
first. Informed consent was provided at the beginning of the
first session, and payment was provided upon completion of
the second session.
Eye tracking session. Each participant’s eye tracking
session presented the instructional materials on ESP maps
and the problem set. A monitor containing the eye tracking
mechanism presented all tasks. After calibration,
participants read through the instructional materials at their
own pace. Next, participants examined the six molecules in
the baseline presentation. Each molecule was presented for
5 seconds and the six molecules were presented in the same
order for all participants. Next, participants answered the 24
items in the problem set, in random order. After providing
an answer to each question both by keypress and verbally
(recorded by an experimenter and by a microphone)
participants rated their confidence and provided an oral
explanation of why they chose their answer.
Individual differences session. This session was completed
in small groups in a private computer lab. Participants
completed the NFC followed by all spatial abilities tasks in
random order.

Results
Accuracy
Response accuracy was aggregated across molecules
(alcohol, carboxylic acid, etc.), to obtain a mean for each
type of question (Interpretation, Application) across twelve
items. This within-subject variable of question type was
crossed with the between-subject variable of prior
knowledge. We predicted: 1) Application questions would
be more difficult than Interpretation questions; 2)
Participants with low prior knowledge would make more
errors than participants with high prior knowledge; 3) The

2723

effect of prior knowledge would be strongest for the more
difficult Application questions.
Figure 2 displays the means which were subject to a 2 X 2
mixed factors ANOVA. As expected, Application questions
were more difficult than Interpretation questions (F(1, 28) =
10.71, p = .003, ηp2= .28), and overall participants with low
prior knowledge performed worse than participants with
high prior knowledge, F(1, 28) = 12.11, p = .002, ηp2= .30.
These main effects were moderated by the predicted
interaction (F(1, 28) = 4.06, p = .05, ηp2= .13); the
difference between prior knowledge groups was larger for
Application (.13, t(28) = 2.09, p = .05, d = 1.11) than for
Interpretation questions (.09, t(28) = 3.25, p = .003, d = .69).

Figure 2: Mean response accuracy for prior knowledge
groups based on type of question. Error bars represent 1
SEM.
Participants categorized as high prior knowledge
demonstrated better performance on the problem set in
general, and the Application questions were more
challenging, especially for participants with low prior
knowledge.

Cognitive Abilities and Accuracy
We correlated NFC and the cognitive abilities measures
with response accuracy for Interpretation and Application
questions. Possibly because of near-ceiling accuracy, no
individual difference measure correlated significantly with
performance on Interpretation questions (N = 30, all r’s <
.14). For Application questions, participants with higher
scores on the gestalt spatial Hidden Patterns Test, were
generally more accurate (r = .37, p = .05), and a trend
suggested participants with higher reasoning abilities, as
measured by the TOLT, were more accurate as well (r = .31,
p = .10). Interestingly, the HPT and TOLT were highly
interrelated (r = .62, < .001) indicating that these measures
may have been tapping similar constructs. There were no
significant relationships between Application accuracy and
any other spatial measures (r’s < .18) or NFC (r = -.04).

Eye Movements and Use of Representations
In the following analyses, we present data based on the total
fixation time in the AOIs associated with Ball-and-Stick and
ESP plots. While we also calculated a variety of other
metrics, the pattern of results was similar for all metrics, so
the total fixation duration metric will be used for simplicity.
Baseline visualizations. These screens without question
prompts serve to determine whether high or low knowledge
participants were drawn to a certain type of representation
naturally. Participants spent roughly equivalent amounts of
time focusing on Ball-and-Stick (M = 2.37 s, SD = .35) and
ESP representations, M = 2.30 s, SD = .39, F(1, 28) = .60.
This was not moderated by prior knowledge (F = .23),
indicating that neither high nor low knowledge participants’
visual attention was drawn to one visualization type over the
other without question prompts.
Problem set. Since questions regarding electrostatic
potential or the attraction of positive or negative ions could
be easily answered using the color-coded ESP maps, we
expected that more attention to these plots would be related
to success on the tasks. Similarly, since the Ball-and-Stick
representations are likely to be more familiar, we expected
that participants who struggle to understand the relatively
new ESP plots would rely more heavily on the Ball-andStick representations. Thus, we predicted that participants
with low prior knowledge, and participants who did not
accurately answer the questions, would fixate longer on the
Ball-and-Stick representation than the ESP representation.
This pattern of results may be especially prominent for the
more difficult Application questions as compared to the
Interpretation questions, as the Interpretation questions
could be answered without a sophisticated understanding of
the ESP maps.
These predictions were tested with a 2 (Visualization;
Ball-and-Stick, ESP) X 2 (Question Type; Interpretation,
Application) X 2 (Prior Knowledge; Low, High) mixed
factors ANOVA with prior knowledge a between-subjects
variable and Visualization and Question Type withinsubjects variables. Figure 3 displays the mean results.
Overall, participants with high prior knowledge spent less
time inspecting the problems than participants with low
prior knowledge as suggested by a marginal main effect of
Prior Knowledge, F(1, 28) = 3.09, p = .09, ηp2= .10. The
main effects of Question Type (F(1, 28) = 9.43, p = .01,
ηp2= .25) and Visualization (F(1, 28) = 5.23, p = .03, ηp2=
.01) were significant. However, each of these main effects
was qualified by significant 2-way interactions (all p’s <
.01). Most importantly, the 3-way interaction between Prior
Knowledge, Visualization, and Question Type was
significant, F(1, 28) = 5.99, p = .02, ηp2= .18. As seen in the
left panel of Figure 3, participants with low prior knowledge
spent much more time on Ball-and-Stick Representations
than ESP plots for the difficult Application questions (t(11)
= 3.53, p = .01, d = 1.02), but did not exhibit the same overreliance on the Ball-and-Stick representations for

2724

Interpretation questions, t < 1. In contrast, as seen in the
right panel of Figure 3, participants with high prior
knowledge did not differentially rely on either
representation for the difficult Application questions, t(17) <
1. Interestingly, high knowledge participants actually spent
significantly more time inspecting the ESP plots than Balland-Stick representations for the Interpretation questions,
t(17) = 2.58, p = .02, d = .42. In sum, more challenging
application problems led students with low prior knowledge
to rely on the more familiar Ball-and-Stick representations.
In contrast, less difficult problems that could easily be
answered by looking at the surface features of the ESP plots
led high-knowledge participants to rely more on those plots
than the Ball-and-Stick representations.

Ball-and-Stick use for application (r = -.01) or interpretation
(r = .02) questions.
Since TOLT and prior knowledge were related to reliance
on the representations, we checked whether high and low
prior knowledge groups differed on TOLT scores. The high
knowledge group had significantly higher scores on the
TOLT t(28) = 2.12, p = .04, d = .75). Thus, part of the
difference between high and low prior knowledge groups
may be related to the cognitive abilities which underlie
TOLT scores.
Use of representations over practice. Aggregating across
question trials obscures the role that practice with the plots
might have on use of the representations over the course of
the experiment. Since the ESP plots were novel for these
participants, students might only come to rely on those
plots, rather than the more familiar Ball-and-Stick, after
experience with them. We examined whether any
developing familiarity might emerge differentially for
participants with high and low prior knowledge.
We again used the relative use of representations measure
described above as the DV in an ANOVA with Question
Type (Interpretation, Application), Practice Trial (1-6), and
Prior Knowledge (Low, High) as independent variables. As
can be seen in the two panels of Figure 4, Practice appeared
to be moderated by Question Type, F(5, 140) = 2.37, p =
.04. Because of this, we analyzed the data for Interpretation
and Application questions separately.

Figure 3: Mean total fixation duration on Ball-and-Stick vs.
ESP maps based on Prior Knowledge and Question Type.
Error bars represent 1 SEM.

Use of representations and cognitive abilities. To explore
whether spatial abilities, reasoning abilities, or NFC
influenced fixation time on Ball-and-Stick or ESP
representations, we created a single continuous measure
reflecting relative use of the two representations. We
divided the total fixation duration on the Ball-and-Stick AOI
by the sum of the total fixation duration on Ball-and-Stick
and ESP AOIs (effectively controlling for time-on-task).
High scores on this measure indicate more time looking at
Ball-and-Stick than ESP representations.
Reasoning ability (as measured by the TOLT) correlated
negatively with relative Ball-and-Stick use on Application
questions (r(30)= -.48, p = .01), and showed a similar
though not significant pattern for Interpretation questions (r
= .30, p = .11.). That is, participants with higher TOLT
scores tended to spend less time viewing the familiar Balland-Stick plots, and more time viewing the ESP plots, while
answering the questions. All measures of spatial ability
demonstrated small negative correlations with Ball-andStick use, but none reached significance (all p’s > .24),
though the effect of HPT was marginal (r(30) = -.35, p =
.06). NFC also had no significant relationship with relative

Figure 4: Mean relative use of Ball-and-Stick representation
over practice trials based on question type and prior
knowledge.
For Interpretation questions, there was no main effect of
Practice (F(5, 140) = .74) and no main effect of Prior
Knowledge (F(1, 28) = .52). With respect to the interaction
between Practice and Prior Knowledge, there was a
significant quadratic trend (F(1, 28) = 4.47, p = .04).
Participants with low prior knowledge did not change their
relative use of Ball-and-Stick representations with practice
(F(1, 11) = .91), while participants with high prior
knowledge showed a significant quadratic trend (i.e. a
reduction and then leveling off of Ball-and-Stick use; F(1,
18) = 4.71, p = .05).
For Application questions, there was a significant effect
of Practice (F(5, 140) = 4.39, p = .001) and a significant
effect of Prior Knowledge, F(1, 28) = 4.69, p = .04. But, as

2725

can be seen in the right panel of Figure 4, the effect of
Practice differed for high and low prior knowledge
participants as confirmed by a linear interaction, F(1, 28) =
9.12, p = .01. Participants with low prior knowledge
demonstrated no linear effect of Practice on Ball-and-Stick
use (i.e. they continued to view Ball-and-Stick
representations more than ESPs throughout the experiment,
F(1, 11) = .01); in contrast, participants with high prior
knowledge demonstrated a linear decline in relative Balland-Stick use with Practice, F(1, 17) = 23.35, p < .001. In
sum, participants with high prior knowledge initially relied
on the familiar Ball-and-Stick representation, just as
participants with low prior knowledge did. However
participants with high prior knowledge learned to utilize the
ESP over the course of the experiment. Participants with
low prior knowledge, however, continued to rely on the
Ball-and-Stick representations more than ESP plots for
these Application questions.

Discussion
Chemistry educators advocating the use of ESP maps as
instructional tools have suggested that the models are easy
to understand, allowing students to efficiently appraise
relevant information about electron density (Shusterman &
Shusterman, 1997). In some ways, our data support this
contention. After only a short introduction, nearly all
students could correctly identify positive charges and
relative degrees of electron density. However, participants
did not immediately utilize the ESP plots when asked about
chemical interactions, relying instead on the more familiar
ball-and-stick representations. Interestingly, while
participants with higher prior knowledge (and reasoning
abilities) began to effectively apply the ESP maps on
application problems with practice, low prior knowledge
participants (who also had lower reasoning abilities)
maintained their use of ball-and-stick representations, and
continued to answer incorrectly. A preliminary analysis of
verbal explanations suggests that incorrect answers were
often associated with unnecessarily complicated (and often
faulty) reasoning about the atoms in the molecules, when
the correct answer could be more simply inferred based on
the information in the ESP maps. This suggests the
importance of developing competence with these
visualizations in reducing cognitive burdens and errors.
As with many experiences, individuals in the current
experiment relied on what they are already familiar with.
With practice, individuals with knowledge of chemistry and
reasoning skills moved beyond those familiarities to employ
less familiar visualizations. Clearly the effectiveness of
visualizations, both in drawing attention and influencing
learning, depends upon a host of individual differences;
visualizations are not necessarily the panacea they have
been made out to be, but they can help under particular
circumstances. These results demonstrate that the processes
and products of multimedia experiences emerge from the
interactions of prior knowledge, cognitive abilities, and task

demands, and that understandings of these interactions is
imperative for the design of effective learning interventions.

Acknowledgments
This project was funding by REESE grant #0908130 from
the National Science Foundation, David N. Rapp, Principal
Investigator.

References
Ainsworth, S. (2006). DeFT: A conceptual framework for
considering learning with multiple representations.
Learning and Instruction, 16, 183-198.
Bodner, G. M., & Guay, R. B. (1997). The Purdue
visualization of rotations test. The Chemical Educator, 2,
1-18.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984). The
efficient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 48, 306-307.
Canham, M., & Hegarty, M. (2010). Effects of knowledge
and display design on comprehension of complex
graphics. Learning and Instruction, 20, 155-166.
Ekstrom, R. B., French, J. W., Harman, H. H., & Derman,
D. (1976). Manual for kit of factor-referenced cognitive
tests. Educational Testing Service. Princeton: New Jersey.
Guay, R., & McDaniels, R. E. (1976).The visualization of
viewpoints. The Purdue Research Foundation. West
Lafayette, IN.
Kalyuga, S., Ayres, P, Chandler, P, & Sweller, J. (2003).
The expertise reversal effect. Educational Psychologist,
38, 23-31.
Sanger, M. J., & Badger, S. M. II. (2001). Using computerbased visualization strategies to improve students’
understanding of molecular polarity and miscibility.
Journal of Chemical Education, 78, 1412-1416.
Shusterman, G. P., & Shusterman, A. J. (1997). Teaching
chemistry with electron density models. Journal of
Chemical Education, 74, 771-776.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R..(1978). Mental rotations,
a group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-601.
van Gog, T., & Scheiter, K. (Eds.). (2010). Eye tracking as a
tool to study and enhance multimedia learning [Special
issue]. Learning and Instruction,20.

2726

