UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unreliable and Anomalous: How the Credibility of Data Affects Belief Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hq414vk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Sparks, Jesse R.
Rapp, David N.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unreliable and Anomalous: How the Credibility of Data Affects Belief Revision
Jesse R. Sparks (sparks@u.northwestern.edu)
School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

David N. Rapp (rapp@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology and School of Education and Social Policy, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

statement suggests that the conditional is no longer true. If,
instead, participants agreed that, “John did not click on
AA,” they were considered to have retained the AA-BB
belief. In this case, the contradictory observation was
rejected, but the conditional belief was maintained.
Participants were more likely to revise their belief in the
AA-BB relationship when the system contained a button
that operated randomly, lighting up one of two boxes in a
randomly alternating fashion, as compared to a version of
the system with a uniform operation, in which each button
lit up one and only one box. In this latter uniform condition,
participants were also less likely to revise the AA-BB belief
if they had extended rather than limited experience with the
relationship supporting that belief (e.g., pressing each button
5 vs. 15 times); in contrast, participants in the random
condition were equally likely to revise the AA-BB belief
regardless of prior experience with the relationship.
Thus, the presence of a randomly alternating element
within a system of conditionals reduced participants’
certainty in the AA-BB belief, and increased the likelihood
of revising that belief when faced with a contradictory
observation. These results indicate that belief certainty,
prior experience, and systemic variability all influence the
likelihood of revision following contradictory evidence.
These features of the initial belief, or the context of that
belief, reveal some conditions under which beliefs change.

Individuals often revise their belief in conditional relations
when faced with contradictory evidence. However,
individuals’ beliefs about the reliability of particular sources
may influence their acceptance of such evidence. In three
experiments, we examined effects of source credibility on
belief revision. Participants were presented with a description
of a mechanical system comprised of conditional relations
with either uniform or randomly alternating components.
Next, participants received a contradictory observation from a
reliable, unreliable, or neutral source. When evidence came
from an unreliable source, participants often failed to revise
the conditional belief, regardless of the design of the system.
Keywords: Belief revision; reasoning; source credibility

Influences on Belief Revision
What causes people to change what they know to reflect
newly learned information inconsistent with their prior
beliefs? Extant research in cognitive science suggests that
individuals often revise their beliefs in conditional
relationships (e.g., If A, then B) when presented with new
information that contradicts those existing beliefs (Elio &
Pelletier, 1997). Subsequent research building from this
tradition has investigated factors that influence the
likelihood of belief revision following contradictory or
anomalous observations (Chinn & Brewer, 1993).
For example, Markovits and Schmeltzer (2007) examined
the likelihood of revising a belief in a conditional
relationship when that relationship was embedded in a set of
other conditionals. They presented participants with an
electronic device consisting of a set of conditionals; when
participants clicked a button in the top row, it would light up
a corresponding button in the bottom row (e.g., clicking on
a button labeled ‘AA’ would light up a box labeled ‘BB’).
The project assessed the effects of variability within the
system of conditionals, and the experience participants had
with the initial belief, on belief revision. Participants were
presented with a contradictory observation, such as:
John is a student who used this program last night. He
clicked on AA, but he says that BB did not light up.
Participants were asked to endorse one of two statements.
Participants were considered to have revised their belief in
the AA-BB relationship if they agreed that, “It is not always
true that if one clicks on AA, then BB will light up.” This

The Quality of Contradictory Evidence
In everyday experiences, however, a number of more
pragmatic factors can potentially affect belief revision. For
example, the degree to which contradictory evidence is
perceived as reliable, honest, and trustworthy might affect
the likelihood of belief change. Chinn and Brewer (1993)
note that the likelihood of belief revision in the event of
anomalous data may depend on the credibility of the source
of those data. Individuals may be more willing to accept
contradictory observations from sources they know to be
reliable, relative to sources they deem untrustworthy.
Contradictory evidence provided by untrustworthy sources,
therefore, may be much easier to discount or reject.
A large body of research from social psychology has
evaluated the impact of source credibility on beliefs and
attitude change. These studies have demonstrated that, on

741

average, credible sources are persuasive, influencing beliefs
and attitudes more so than non-credible sources (see
Pornpitakpan, 2004 for a review). People are more likely to
agree with messages provided by trustworthy sources and to
disagree with messages provided by untrustworthy sources.
The current study employed a theoretical perspective
from persuasion research to determine whether credibility
influences beliefs about conditional relationships. In three
experiments, we used an existing research paradigm
(Markovits & Schmeltzer, 2007) to investigate whether the
likelihood of revision following experiences with
contradictory evidence could be influenced by whether that
evidence was provided by a trustworthy, untrustworthy, or
neutral source. If source credibility influences belief
change, we would expect a greater likelihood of revision
when contradictory evidence is provided by a trustworthy
source, relative to both neutral and untrustworthy sources.
Individuals should be more likely to accept a
contradictory observation from a trustworthy source,
potentially revising their initial beliefs in order to resolve
the inconsistency between the belief and the observation.
An untrustworthy source should lead to minimal revision;
individuals may discount the observation provided by an
untrustworthy source, making initial belief retention more
likely. In addition, we investigated whether any effects of
source might interact with effects of systemic variability.
Recall that the presence of randomness within a system of
conditional relationships should lead to an increased
likelihood of belief revision, relative to a uniform system.

Figure 1: Image of mechanical device, Experiments 1-3.

Method
Participants. 124 Northwestern University undergraduates
participated for either course credit or cash payment.
Materials and design. The materials used by Markovits
and Schmeltzer (2007; Exp.2), were modified and compiled
into a two-page booklet. The booklet first provided a
general description of the device. This text description
stated that some students had tested the device for an entire
day. A graphical representation of the device followed (see
Figure 1). The device featured two rows of five containers.
Directly beneath the bottom row of containers, a description
of the testing results for each top-row container was printed.
The first four containers all operated in the same way: A
marble placed in the top container would fall into the
container directly below it (e.g., “Each time a marble was
put into AA, it always fell into BB.”). The result for
container 4, the right-most container, was covered by a Postit sticker. Container 4 had one of two possible results. In
the uniform condition, the result below container 4 stated,
“Each time a marble was put into 4, it always fell into 4B.”
In the random alternation condition, the result stated that
“Each time a marble was put into 4, it sometimes fell into
4B, and sometimes into BB, in a totally unpredictable
manner.” Thus, in the uniform condition all of the
containers operated identically, while the random device
contained a single, randomly alternating element.
On page two of the booklet, participants were asked,
“Suppose that you try the device and you put a marble into
AA. According to you, is it true that the marble will fall
into BB?” Respondents circled either “YES” or “NO” and
then rated the certainty of their response (0% to 100%).
Next, statements constituting the report of an observation
that contradicted the previously described AA-BB
relationship were provided by a source varying in reliability.
In the neutral source condition, these statements read: “John
is a student who used the device last night. He claims that
he put a marble into AA, but that the marble did not fall into
BB.” This description was identical to that used in prior
work. In the reliable source condition, John was also
described as a trustworthy honors student:
John is an honors student who used the device last night.
He is hard working and consistently earns top grades. He
wants experience working in a laboratory, so he has
volunteered to help test this and several other devices
during evening sessions. He claims that he put a marble

Experiment 1
Participants were presented with a conditional belief
embedded within a mechanical system containing a set of
conditional relationships; the device had either uniform
operation or contained a randomly operating element. An
observation contradicting the conditional belief was then
provided by a trustworthy, untrustworthy, or neutral source.
We predicted that participants would be more likely to
engage in belief revision when the device contained a
randomly operating element than when it operated
uniformly. We also generated hypotheses with respect to
the effect of source credibility on the likelihood of revision.
A source dependence hypothesis predicts that individuals’
acceptance or rejection of a contradictory observation will
be influenced by the reliability of the source of that
observation. In contrast, a source independence hypothesis
suggests that the quality of the source may have little effect
on an individual’s belief in a conditional relation. This view
is not a straw argument: Source credibility may be less
influential when participants focus on the contents of the
message that a source provides (i.e., the contradictory
observation; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). If participants
ignore information about source credibility and attend solely
to the contradictory observation and the device, we would
expect revision to be equivalent across sources.

742

into AA, but that the marble did not fall into BB.
In contrast, in the unreliable source condition, John was
described as being irresponsible and inattentive:
John is an undergrad who used the device last night. He
rarely takes his responsibilities seriously and is often
careless in his assignments. Although he has volunteered
to test devices in the lab, he doesn’t complete tasks
carefully because he thinks he isn’t being paid enough.
He claims that he put a marble into AA, but that the
marble did not fall into BB.
These statements were followed by the critical belief
revision question. Participants selected which of two
statements they considered most believable. The revise
statement read, “It is not always true that if one puts a
marble into AA, then it will fall into BB.” The reject
statement read, “It is not true that John put a marble into
AA.” Statement order was counterbalanced across the
versions of the booklet. Throughout all experiments
presented here, participants who selected the revise
statement were counted as having revised their belief in the
AA-BB relationship, while participants who selected the
reject statement were considered to have retained this belief.

We examined the degree to which participants engaged in
belief revision as a function of the experimental conditions
using logistic regression analyses with revision (or not) of
the AA-BB belief as the dependent variable. Model 1
included Device, and Trustworthy and Untrustworthy
sources (with Neutral source as reference category) as
predictors. This analysis indicated only that the probability
of belief revision was less likely when the contradictory
observation was provided by an untrustworthy source, in
contrast to a neutral source (β = -1.61, Wald χ2 = 9.46, Odds
Ratio = 0.20, p < 0.01). Model 2 added two interaction
terms, Trustworthy by Device and Untrustworthy by
Device, as predictors; neither of these predictors
significantly influenced the likelihood of revision. There
was no effect of Device on revision. There was also no
difference in the likelihood of revision between Trustworthy
and Neutral sources.
These analyses suggest that when an unreliable source
offers anomalous data, individuals are more likely to reject
that contradictory observation and less likely to revise their
initial beliefs, in contrast to when information is provided
by either trustworthy or neutral sources. Individuals appear
to readily reject the unreliable source’s observation,
retaining their initial belief. The findings of Experiment 1
demonstrate initial evidence that source credibility
influences conditional belief revision.
In contrast to previous work, however, we obtained no
effect of systemic variability on the likelihood of revision.
Participants were equally likely to revise the AA-BB belief
regardless of whether the device was uniform or random.
One potential explanation for this is that participants may
not have fully attended to the device’s design. While we
recreated the methods used in previous experiments on
belief revision as closely as possible, participants’ attention
to the device in the initial phase of the experiment may have
been insufficient. Recall that participants were asked to
both read and listen to a verbal description of the device
while learning about its operation. This design may have
incurred a substantial processing load, perhaps by requiring
participants to attend to multiple modalities simultaneously
(Mayer & Moreno, 2003), or by setting a pace for
understanding that did not allow for careful consideration of
the system. Experiment 2 was designed to reduce these
potential limitations and to encourage participants’ attention
to the device’s operation.

Procedure. Participants were assigned to one of twelve
experimental booklets constructed by fully crossing the
Source, Device, and Statement Order factors.
The
experimenter read aloud the text description of the device
and read the first four container results (i.e., 1, 2, AA, 3)
while the participant followed along. The participant was
then instructed to remove the Post-it note in order to learn
the results for container 4. The experimenter read aloud the
result, and the participant was instructed to answer the
questions on page 2 of the booklet without further
instruction from the experimenter.

Results and Discussion
Four participants were excluded for failure to follow
directions; analyses reported below were conducted on the
remaining 120 participants.
All participants expected that a marble placed into
container 4 would fall into 4B, indicating that they expected
the same uniform pattern of results that had been observed
for all other containers. Table 1 presents the mean
proportion of participants who agreed that rejecting the
initial belief was the most believable option, as a function of
device condition and source.

Experiment 2

Table 1. Mean proportion of belief revisions, Experiment 1.
Source
Trustworthy
Untrustworthy
Neutral
Mean

Uniform
0.47
0.15
0.50
0.37

Random
0.65
0.20
0.52
0.46

To address the issues outlined above, we drew on theories
and principles derived from research on multimedia learning
and how individuals learn from a multimodal combination
of words and images. In Experiment 1, participants learned
about the device through text, narration, and an image. The
modality principle of multimedia learning suggests that
presenting verbal information in the form of auditory
narration, thereby allowing learners to rely on multiple

Mean
0.56
0.18
0.51

743

sense modalities to process information, can reduce
cognitive load (e.g., Mayer & Moreno, 2003). Accordingly,
we eliminated the printed descriptive text on the
experimental booklet, hoping to facilitate participants’
understanding of the device’s operation.
We also provided additional guidance with respect to the
device’s operation, to help make the random or uniform
mechanism particularly salient. The experimenter now
provided pointing gestures, coupled with verbal narration, to
introduce the device to participants. Pointing gestures are
commonly used in conversation to encourage joint attention
and facilitate communication about objects and pictures
(Clark & Marshall, 1981). We hoped the gestures would
help increase attention to the device’s operation, and in turn,
uncover any effects of device condition on revision.
Our predictions were identical to Experiment 1. In
addition, we predicted that our modifications to the
experiment would enhance participants’ attention to the
design of the device, and thus increase the likelihood of
observing an effect of systemic variability. However, if our
modifications failed to encourage adequate attention to the
device, we would expect little effect of device condition on
revision, as in Experiment 1.

Table 2. Mean proportion of belief revisions, Experiment 2.
Source
Trustworthy
Untrustworthy
Neutral
Mean

Uniform
0.61
0.09
0.21
0.30

Random
0.68
0.21
0.48
0.46

Mean
0.65
0.15
0.34

source as reference category) as predictors. Because
preliminary chi-square tests of independence revealed a
significant effect for Statement Order on revision [χ2 (1,
N=138) = 3.90, p < 0.05], this variable was also included as
a factor in the regression analyses.
As in Experiment 1, the likelihood of revision was
reduced when the contradictory observation was provided
by an untrustworthy compared to a neutral source (β = 1.12, Wald χ2 = 4.49, Odds Ratio = .33, p < 0.05). Revision
of the AA-BB belief was more likely when the observation
was provided by a trustworthy source, compared to a neutral
source (β = 1.33, Wald χ2 = 8.50, Odds Ratio = 3.80, p <
0.01). Additionally, the probability of belief revision was
significantly higher when the device contained a randomly
operating element rather than a uniform operation (β = 0.82,
Wald χ2 = 4.07, Odds Ratio = 2.27, p < 0.05). Finally, we
observed a marginally significant effect of question order (β
= 0.76, Wald χ2 = 3.60, Odds Ratio = 2.15, p = 0.058), such
that participants were more likely to engage in belief
revision if the “revise” option appeared before the “reject”
option in the experimental booklet than if they appeared in
the opposite order. Model 2 added Trustworthy by Device
and Untrustworthy by Device interaction terms as
predictors, and neither of these predictors significantly
influenced the likelihood of revision. That is, the impact of
device on the likelihood of belief revision did not vary
between trustworthy and neutral sources, or between
untrustworthy and neutral sources.
These results suggest that the modifications to the
experiment encouraged participants to attend to the device’s
condition, as the likelihood of revision was influenced by
the design of the device. As predicted, participants were
more likely to revise their belief in the AA-BB relationship
when the device contained a randomly alternating element
rather than a uniform operation, which is consistent with the
effect of systemic variability observed in prior work
(Markovits & Schmeltzer, 2007). Examination of the mean
proportion of belief revision suggests that this effect was
primarily driven by the neutral source condition. The
likelihood of revision in the random condition was 27
percentage points higher than in the uniform condition for
these participants; in contrast, the revision differences
between the random and uniform devices for the other
source conditions were considerably smaller.
Regarding credibility effects, we replicated the findings of
Experiment 1. Participants were less likely to revise their

Method
Participants. 144 Northwestern University undergraduates
participated for either course credit or cash payment.
Materials and design. The materials were identical to
those in Experiment 1, with the exception that the
descriptive text was omitted from the experimental booklet.
Procedure. The procedure was modified from Experiment
1 in the following ways. The experimenter read aloud the
verbal description of the device, and used pointing gestures
to accompany their verbal description of the device’s
operation. The experimenter pointed at each container as it
was mentioned in the testing results (e.g., in the random
alternation condition, where a marble placed into 4 could
fall out of either 4B or BB, the experimenter pointed at
container 4, then to 4B, then back up to 4, then to BB, as she
explained this result).

Results and Discussion
Data from three participants were excluded for failure to
follow directions. In addition, three participants did not
predict that a marble dropped in 4 would fall into 4B, and
were thus excluded. Analyses reported below were
conducted on the remaining 138 participants.
Table 2 presents the mean proportion of participants who
revised their belief in the AA-BB relationship, by condition.
As in Experiment 1, logistic regression analyses with
revision (or not) of the AA-BB belief as the dependent
variable were conducted. Model 1 included Device, and
Trustworthy and Untrustworthy sources (with Neutral

744

belief in the AA-BB relationship when contradictory
evidence was provided by an untrustworthy source, relative
to both neutral and trustworthy sources. In addition,
participants were more likely to revise their belief in the
conditional when that same contradictory observation was
provided by a trustworthy source compared to a neutral
source.
The addition of instructions that focused
participants’ attention on the device enhanced the effects of
the device’s design, defining additional conditions that
potentially influence belief revision.
Experiments 1 and 2 provide evidence for the source
dependence hypothesis, but the presence of conflicting
effects of device condition on revision across these
experiments begs further investigation. Experiment 3
provides an additional analysis of the role of the device’s
operation in participants’ revision decisions.

Table 3. Mean proportion of belief revisions, Experiment 3.
Source
Trustworthy
Untrustworthy
Neutral
Mean

Uniform
0.33
0.05
0.08
0.15

Materials and design.
those in Experiment 2.

Random
0.48
0.04
0.43
0.32

Mean
0.40
0.04
0.26

The materials were identical to

Procedure. The procedure was identical to Experiment 2,
with the addition of extra detail about the device’s uniform
or random operation.
In the random condition, the
experimenter told participants that container 4 operated in a
totally random way, such that “we cannot predict at all
whether a marble placed in 4 will come out of 4 or out of
4B. The outcome will happen completely by chance.” In
the uniform condition, the experimenter stated that “If a
marble is placed into 4, it will always come out of 4B. This
outcome will happen each time we use the device.” Thus,
the uniform device was described as behaving completely
predictably, while the random device was described as
having a component with unpredictable behavior.

Experiment 3
One potential explanation for the mixed findings of the
device’s operation on participants’ beliefs might be due to
difficulties in understanding what it means for a device to
operate
randomly.
People
often
demonstrate
misunderstandings of chance and randomness. Thankfully,
while people’s intuitive notions of what “randomness”
means can be quite inconsistent with how the laws of
chance truly operate, training on principles such as the law
of large numbers can improve their ability to employ
statistical reasoning to solve problems (Fong, Krantz, &
Nisbett, 1986). Thus, it may be possible to enhance
participants’ ability to distinguish between devices with
uniform and random operation by providing them with a
clear definition of what it means for a component to operate
randomly.
Accordingly, we incorporated additional
clarification of the operation of the system in terms of what
was meant by operating in a random or uniform fashion.
The goal was to ensure that participants understood what
was meant by a randomly operating system.
If this additional detail regarding the device’s operation
improved individuals’ understanding of the device, we
expected to observe greater differentiation between the
likelihood of belief revision for uniform and for random
devices, as compared to the pattern obtained in Experiment
2. Specifically, participants should be less likely to revise in
the uniform condition, and the difference in proportion of
revisions between random and uniform device conditions
should be larger, in contrast to Experiment 2. However, if
these instructions provided no added benefit to participants’
understanding, or the rest of the experimental manipulation
obviated any impact of systematic variability of the device,
we would expect the effects obtained for device condition to
be identical to those obtained in the previous experiment.

Results and Discussion
Data from nine participants were excluded for failure to
endorse the AA-BB relationship. Analyses reported below
were conducted on the remaining 135 participants.
Table 3 presents the mean proportion of participants who
revised their belief in the AA-BB relationship by condition.
Logistic regression analyses were conducted. Model 1
included Device, and Trustworthy and Untrustworthy
sources (Neutral as reference category) as predictors.
The odds of belief revision were significantly reduced
when an untrustworthy source provided the contradictory
observation, compared to a neutral source (β = -2.04, Wald
χ2 = 6.31, Odds Ratio = .13, p < 0.05). The odds of revision
did not differ between trustworthy and neutral sources (β =
.77, Wald χ2 = 2.60, Odds Ratio = 2.16, p = 0.11). In
addition, revision of the AA-BB belief was also more likely
to occur when the device contained a randomly operating
element, in contrast to a uniform operation (β = 1.07, Wald
χ2 = 5.46, Odds Ratio = 2.91, p < 0.05). The interaction
terms added in Model 2 were not significant, but a linear
probability model analysis revealed a significant interaction,
such that the effect of device condition was significant in
the neutral source condition, but not in the untrustworthy
source condition (β = -0.35, t = -2.12, p < 0.05). Those in
the untrustworthy source condition were not influenced by
the condition of the device.
These results are consistent with those of the previous
studies: When a contradictory observation is provided by an
untrustworthy source, participants are less likely to revise

Method
Participants. 144 Northwestern University undergraduates
participated for either course credit or cash payment.

745

their belief to accommodate that observation, relative to
both trustworthy and neutral sources. In addition, this
experiment replicated the effects of systemic variability
obtained in Experiment 2 and prior work. Further, while
additional detail about the device’s operation reduced the
overall likelihood of revision, the difference between
random and uniform devices in the neutral source condition
was 35 percentage points, as compared to 27 in Experiment
2, suggesting that our manipulations effectively enhanced
understanding of the operation of the device.

consideration as to how the pragmatics of these logical
scenarios, and people’s familiarity with such pragmatics,
might instill expectations for probabilities, reliabilities, and
the nature of conditional relationships. In previous work,
the underlying logic offered by particular premises and
observations could be reinforced or mitigated by prior
knowledge people had about the world (e.g., Griggs & Cox,
1982; Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, & Legrenzi, 1972). In fact,
the results of the systemic variability of the device may have
arisen in part from everyday expectations (i.e., using items
that break randomly; slot machines; etc.). But additionally,
the current findings suggest that beliefs about the sources
who provide information about conditional relationships can
similarly inform people’s expectations about causal (and
other types of) relationships in the world. A more complete
account of the conditions under which revision occurs
necessitates consideration of such social and pragmatic
influences on cognition.

General Discussion
In these three experiments, we examined whether the
credibility of a source might influence the likelihood of
belief revision. Consistent with a source dependence
hypothesis, participants were less likely to revise their belief
about a conditional relationship when evidence
contradicting that relationship was provided by an
untrustworthy source, as compared to when it was provided
by a trustworthy or neutral source. Neutral and trustworthy
sources, across the experiments, encouraged similar levels
of revision. In addition, devices with randomly alternating
components were more likely to encourage belief revision
than uniform devices, except under conditions of relative
cognitive load, as in Experiment 1; when participants’
ability to process the components of the system was
hindered, the likelihood of revision was only influenced by
source credibility, while both factors had an impact on
revision with a multimodal presentation of the device
description. We also observed little in the way of an
interaction between credibility and systemic variability,
except in Experiment 3.
When participants clearly
understood the unpredictable nature of the system’s
operation, the tendency to revise was greater with the
presence of a random element, while the presence of an
untrustworthy source eliminated any effects of randomness
on the odds of revision.
One potential concern with this project is the possibility
of task demands. Making participants aware of source
descriptions may have incurred decisions about not just the
device itself, but also assumptions about whether they might
be expected to reject an unreliable source’s contribution.
We note the data did not reveal wholesale shifts in beliefs as
a function of source, which one might expect if task
demands were particularly influential. Nevertheless, further
methodological refinements permitting a subtler test of
source credibility might help alleviate concerns about task
demands in future extensions of this work.
These
extensions are important, as demonstrations of the effects of
credibility on belief revision have remained understudied.
Instead, most accounts of belief revision have focused on
the nature of conditional relationships, examining how
understandings of different premises can change the ease
with which people encode, update, or modify what they
know about the world. Those projects have provided little

Acknowledgments
Jesse R. Sparks’ contribution to this work was supported by
IES Training Grant R305B080027.

References
Chinn, C.A., & Brewer, W.F. (1993). The role of anomalous
data in knowledge acquisition: A theoretical framework
and implications for science instruction. Review of
Educational Research, 63, 1-49.
Clark, H.H., & Marshall, C.R. (1981). Definite reference
and mutual knowledge. In A.K. Joshi, B.L. Webber, &
I.A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Elio, R., & Pelletier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 21, 419-460.
Fong, G.T., Krantz, D.H., & Nisbett, R.E. (1986). The
effects of statistical training on thinking about everyday
problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253-292.
Griggs, R.A., & Cox, J.R. (1982). The elusive thematicmaterials effect in Wason’s selection task. British Journal
of Psychology, 73, 407-420.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., Legrenzi, M. (1972).
Reasoning and a sense of reality.British Journal of
Psychology, 63, 395-400.
Markovits, H., & Schmeltzer, C. (2007). What makes
people revise their beliefs following contradictory
anecdotal evidence?: The role of systemic variability and
direct experience. Cognitive Science, 31, 535-547.
Mayer, R.E., & Moreno, R. (2003). Nine ways to reduce
cognitive load in multimedia learning. Educational
Psychologist, 38, 43-52.
Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). Communication and
persuasion: Central and peripheral routes to persuasion.
New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source
credibility: A critical review of five decades’ evidence.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 243–281.

746

