UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Use of Complementary Actions Decreases with Expertise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44k7g3vm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Destefano, Marc
Lindstedt, John K.
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Use of Complementary Actions Decreases with Expertise
Marc Destefano, John K. Lindstedt, Wayne D. Gray
Cognitive Science Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
[destem; lindsj3; grayw] @rpi.edu
Abstract

time cost of mental operations can be presumed to be
decreasing appears to suggest a preference for embodied
actions that runs contrary to what has been found in other
circumstances. In those studies we (Gray & Fu, 2004; Gray,
Sims, Fu, & Schoelles, 2006) and others (Bourne,
Raymond, & Healy, 2010; Morgan, Patrick, Waldron, King,
& Patrick, 2009; Morgan, Waldron, King, & Patrick, 2007;
Waldron, Patrick, Duggan, Banbury, & Howes, 2008;
Waldron, Patrick, Morgan, & King, 2007) have found a
more neutral cost-accounting which has led us to maintain
that systems for cognitive control make, “no functional
distinction between knowledge in-the-head versus in-theworld or the means of acquiring that information (such as
eye movement, mouse movement and click, or retrieval
from memory)” (Gray & Veksler, 2005).

Based on data collected during play of the fast-paced video
game of Tetris, it has long been claimed that complementary
(or epistemic) actions increase with expertise (Kirsh, 1995;
Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; Maglio & Kirsh, 1996).
Complementary actions use the environment to provide
information that would otherwise require mental processing.
They stand in contrast to pragmatic actions, which operate to
bring the current state closer to the goal state. Although
complementary actions undoubtedly exist, we question the
conclusion that they increase with expertise. First, classifying
actions made in a fast-paced video game can be very difficult.
Second, the range of expertise considered in prior studies has
been very small. We sample a wide range of Tetris expertise
and define complementary actions across multiple criterion of
varying strictness. Contrary to prior work, our data suggest
that complementary actions decrease with expertise,
regardless of the criterion used.

Complementary Actions and Expertise

Keywords: epistemic action, complementary action,
pragmatic action, expertise, games, Tetris, soft constraints
hypothesis, embodied cognition

Substituting Actions in-the-world for Processes
in-the-head
Complementary actions (originally called epistemic actions
in Kirsh & Maglio, 1994; renamed in Kirsh, 1995) are
external acts that provide information about a task
environment faster than could be achieved by internal
mental processes. Such actions stand in contrast to
pragmatic actions, which are external actions that bring the
current state closer to the goal state. The classic example of
a complementary action in Tetris is physically versus
mentally rotating a piece to determine which orientation
produces the best fit to the board below. Hence,
complementary actions substitute actions in-the-world for
processes in-the-head.
Complementary actions are a powerful argument for
embodied cognition (Clark, 2008), contrasting greatly with
the notion that people perform all computation in the head.
Although complementary actions undoubtedly exist, we
question the claim that they increase in prevalence with
expertise (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994). As mental processing
times generally transition from slower controlled to faster
automatic processing with experience (Schneider & Shiffrin,
1977; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977) we would have expected
the incidence of complementary actions to decrease with
experience as internal processes became more competitive
with external actions.
The suggestion that complementary actions increase
under circumstances (i.e., increases in practice) in which the

Obviously the claim that complementary actions increase
with expertise requires strong criterion for identifying
complementary actions when they occur and also requires
sampling across a wide range of expertise.
As we have no access to an individual’s intentions,
observations of behavior may yield ambiguous data. We
must instead algorithmically define and computationally
extract behaviors from log files made during performance so
that our classification of behavior is free from observer bias.
In this paper we will discuss five criteria that we selected for
classifying complementary actions in the video game Tetris,
and the implications of each. Data for all classifying
algorithms are presented.
To determine whether complementary actions increase
with expertise we need to ensure that we sample across a
wide range of player expertise. We find the level of
expertise of the players in Kirsh and Maglio’s reports to be
extremely limited. In contrast, we present data from 59
players whose Tetris performance spans the range from
what would be expected of beginners (but not novices) to
extreme expertise. To preview our conclusions, except by
our most lenient criteria, we find nearly no evidence of
complementary actions. Our two most lenient criteria
suggest that complementary actions increase with skill early
on but then decrease as skill rises to expert levels. All of our
criteria suggest that complementary actions do not play a
role in expertise. Intriguingly, our most lenient criteria
suggest that complementary actions have a role in acquiring
expertise.

Why Tetris?
Tetris is a responsive and fast-paced game that requires high
concentration. These features make it an excellent

2709

environment to study time-stressed decision-making. As
people generally enjoy playing it, Tetris experts are easy to
find.
Kirsh and Maglio describe two complementary uses for
the two main actions in Tetris: translating the shape
(moving it towards the left or right) and rotating it. In
regards to translation, in order to save the mental effort of
perceptually verifying that the current piece (called a
Tetrazoid, which we will henceforth refer to as a zoid) is
lined up with the target area within the accumulation at the
bottom of the display, the player may translate the shape all
the way to the wall nearest the target area and then count
keypresses to determine, for example, that the zoid is above
the 3rd rather than the 2nd column from the left.
Rotating the shape is a more complex scenario. Kirsh and
Maglio describe the following five uses:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Unearthing new information very early in the episode1
Saving mental rotation effort
Facilitating retrieval of zoids from memory
Making it easier to identify a zoid’s type
Simplifying the process of matching zoid and contour

formulate a pragmatic plan, up to 600 milliseconds of
planning and action time would be lost (depending on the
current level of play). A good pragmatic action plan, then,
would include the discovery of the zoid type as quickly as
possible as a step toward efficiently placing the piece in its
final position. Thus, although this type of action provides
information gains for the player, it cannot be replaced by a
mental process and is primarily pragmatic in function.
In the version of Tetris we use there is no phase in which
early rotations can occur as the pieces initially appear along
the topmost edge of the screen in their entirety. Because
these “early rotations” do not fit the definition of
complementary actions, omission of this phase allows us to
more easily extract those actions that should be classified as
complementary as well as stay in line with the rules of the
game of Tetris in its original form.

Complementary actions are difficult to classify

The first item in this list, the action of early rotation, refers
to the moment the zoid first appears on the screen. In the
version of Tetris used by Kirsh and Maglio, only the
bottommost segment of the piece is initially visible, the rest
of the zoid remaining hidden above the field of view. At this
stage the piece is likely to be ambiguous, as only one or two
of the four segments of the zoid are visible. When players
rotate the piece at this stage, Kirsh and Maglio (1994) argue
that it is a complementary action (p. 527), as it serves the
epistemic function of uncovering more information about
the piece and is not directly involved in placing the piece in
its final position. However, this action does not fall in line
with the definition of complementary actions put forth
earlier in the same paper (p. 514):

It is not the case that every single action taken in a Tetris
episode is either pragmatic or complementary; there are
many situations in which a player will input a command into
the game that neither moves the zoid closer to where it
eventually ends up, nor makes cognition easier by
substituting physical effort for mental effort. Certainly even
expert players make errors, but even errors do not account
for all the possible actions a player may take.

[W]e use the term epistemic [or complementary] action to
designate a physical action whose primary function is to
improve cognition by:
1. Reducing the memory involved in mental
computation, that is, space complexity;
2. Reducing the number of steps involved in mental
computation, that is, time complexity;
3. Reducing the probability of error of mental
computation, that is, unreliability.

The act of early rotation of a zoid uncovers information
that was previously unavailable to the player. Prior to
performing this action, it would have been impossible for
the player to properly plan where the current zoid should
finally be placed. So, while the act of early rotation would
be considered exploration of the environment (Kirsh, 1996)
in the context of the game, this information is prerequisite to
the overall pragmatic action plan of the episode. It does not
merely reduce space complexity, time complexity, or
unreliability of mental computation; it enables mental
computation at this early stage. If a player were to wait for
the zoid to be completely displayed before beginning to
1

Where an episode is defined as the time from the appearance to
the placement of a zoid.

Figure 1: Goal switching
What is the most sensible way to classify the actions
taken in Figure 1? The light gray pieces represent the
progression of one piece’s position from the top of the
display through time, during the course of one episode.
Here, a T-shaped zoid appears at the top of the display, is
translated right three spaces, then is translated all the way to
the left side of the screen while being rotated three times.
The first three actions of this placement routine cannot be
pragmatic, for they move the zoid away from its final
position on the board. Surely, however, these actions also
cannot be complementary, for there is no extra knowledge
gained from the routine – moving the shape all the way to
the right does not make moving the shape all the way to the
left any easier, and does not help in determining where the

2710

best place to position the piece would be. Since the three
actions in question are consecutive, it is unlikely, although
possible, that the actions are due to error.
What is more likely is that the player simply decided to
place the zoid in a different location. Instead of performing
a full analysis of the state of the gameworld when the zoid
appears, perhaps the player chose the first solution that
passes an individual threshold of fitness.
One metric for assessing the fitness of a zoid is to count
the number of edges that will fit flush with the other zoids in
the accumulation when placed (Kirsh & Maglio, 1994). In
the case of this example, the player translates the shape into
a sensible position, matching five contours on the shape to
the accumulation, but then sees a better option – by
translating the zoid all the way to the left and rotating it
three times, the end result is that only four contours are
matched, but two lines are cleared2, which results in
lowering the accumulation of pieces by two rows and a
score increase of 100 points.
This type of scenario is common in Tetris; players will
often see a better position for their zoid after they have
made a decision about where to place it and have already
begun to carry out a motor plan to rotate and translate it into
the proper position. They must then decide whether the
benefit of placing the piece in the newly discovered location
is worth the cost of all the extra actions necessary to get the
piece into the superior position.

Figure 2: Complementary action or goal switching?
Unfortunately, the line that distinguishes genuine
complementary actions from goal-switches is very fuzzy
and difficult to measure. In Figure 2, the accumulation is the
same as it is in Figure 1, but in this example the piece is
rotated first and translated all the way to the right wall of the
gameworld, then translated three spaces to the left. Did the
player do this as a complementary action intended to save
the perceptual effort of verifying whether the rotated piece
was lined up with the appropriate place in the accumulation,
2

or did the player first decide to place the piece in the
rightmost position and then change the plan upon realizing
that there was a better place for the piece to go? This kind of
situation, also very common in Tetris, is difficult to classify.

Classifying Complementary Actions
Complementary actions in Tetris may take the form of either
rotations or translations. A complementary translation may
be one in which the player utilizes the wall to verify the
vertical position of a piece. A complementary rotation may
be one in which the player rotates the piece freely in order
to directly compare its contours to the accumulation below.
Neither of these actions contributes to the pragmatic plan of
getting the piece from its start position to its destination, but
both do potentially aid the player by lightening their
cognitive load or increasing their accuracy.
Given that there is some debate as to where to draw the
line between complementary actions and goal-switching or
errors, we have devised criteria for determining if
translation and rotation actions are complementary. The
three criteria of translation actions differ in their strictness.
In contrast, the two criteriq for rotations classify different
categories of rotation actions.
Translation Criteria: We call a translation action
complementary if:
• Lenient translation criterion: Both a left translation
and a right translation occur during any single
episode.
• Medium translation criterion: A zoid has been
translated all the way to one wall and then changes
direction.
• Strict translation criterion: A zoid is translated all the
way to one wall and subsequently moved no more
than 3 spaces away from that wall.
The lenient criterion operates under the assumption that
a pragmatic action plan would never include more than one
direction of translation. This criterion will include a large
number of small slips and indecisiveness of the player along
with some number of genuine complementary actions.
The medium criterion assumes that the player is in fact
using the wall for counting purposes, as they have not
placed the piece along that wall. This criterion avoids the
inclusion of simple slips and indecisiveness by the player,
but will still include strategy changes such as those in
Figure 1.
The strict criterion carries the same assumptions as the
medium criterion, but also attempts to exclude strategy
changes on the premise that translating to the wall on the
side of the field opposite of the zoid’s final destination is
unlikely to be epistemically useful, and more likely to be a
mid-episode change of strategy.
Rotation Criteria: Rotations are complementary if the zoid
has been in any unique orientation more than once during an
episode. There are two categories of rotation:

Points are gained in Tetris by eliminating lines. A line is eliminated when
all 10 of its spaces are filled by zoids. Eliminating multiple lines at one
time results in bonus points with the largest bonus being given for a Tetris,
which is the elimination of 4 lines at once.

2711

- Category 1 – Both-Rotations: During any episode, the
zoid rotates both clockwise and counter-clockwise

- Category 2 – Over-Rotation: During any episode, a zoid
rotates in one direction more than 3 times (for a J, L, or
T zoid), more than 1 time (for a Z, S, or I zoid), or at all
(a square zoid).
The both-rotations criterion assumes that a player using
both rotation directions in a single episode cannot be
adhering to a purely pragmatic plan, as the piece has
surpassed and subsequently backtracked to its final
orientation. The over-rotation criterion is based on the idea
that there is no pragmatic use in continuing to rotate a zoid
past the number of unique orientations of that zoid type, as
the orientation needed for its final placement would have
certainly been surpassed. It seems likely that both rotational
criterion will include errors, indecisiveness, strategychanges, as well as instances of complementary actions.
Any rotation of the square zoid is futile, given that it
only has one unique orientation. Such a rotation action
would appear to be neither pragmatic nor complementary in
nature, and almost certainly an error. However, given the
definition of complementary actions used here and the
relative infrequency of any instances of square rotations, we
have included them in the analysis.

The Study
We held two Tetris Tournaments for cash prizes in two
successive years at a local convention for fans of science

fiction, fantasy literature, Japanese anime, and video games.
The rules of the tournament were as follows: Anyone who
wished to enter would first compete through a qualifying
round. Every entrant played two games of Tetris, keeping
the higher of the two scores earned (approximately 60% of
participants scored higher in their second game). When the
qualifiers closed, the top eight competitors then had to
compete in a single-round elimination match (#1 vs. #8, #2
vs. #7, etc.). Each match featured the two competitors
playing side by side, the higher scorer winning the match
and proceeding to the next round. After the tournament, as a
condition of entry, the top 3 winners came to our laboratory
to play as many games of Tetris as they could in one hour
while an eye-tracking system recorded their eye movements
for use in further research.
The version of Tetris that we used is a custom port,
written in Flash, that emulates the graphics, sound, controls,
and scoring system of the 1989 Nintendo Entertainment
System™ version of the game, with the added feature of
logging the state of the gameworld every frame. This allows
for detailed analysis and perfect playback of each game
recorded. In total, we have collected data for 173 complete
games from 59 different players.

Player Expertise and Counting Complementary
Actions
As all 59 players played the two games of the qualifying

Figure 3: Use of Complementary Actions Decreases with Expertise. Each of the 59 players is classified into a halflogarithm score bin based on the highest game played during the tournament qualification round of two games.
For each player each criterion in each of the two sets of criterion (translations and rotations) is calculated based on
episodes collected across all games played. Error bars show +/- 1 standard deviation.

2712

round under the same conditions, we used their top score
from that round as a measure of expertise. These 59 top
scores ranged from a low of 867 to a high of 236,305. As
the distribution of scores seemed approximately logarithmic
we created five ½ log bins ranging (all logs to base ten)
from < 3½ (under 3162 points), 3½-4 (up to 10,000 pts), 44½ (up to 31,622 pts), 4½-5 (up to 100,000 pt), and 5-5½
(up to 316,228 pts). As show by the abscissa labels in
Figure 3, the distribution of players to these bins was
uneven with the greatest concentration of players in the
middle three bins.
The criteria used for Tetris expertise in the Kirsh and
Maglio papers is seldom mentioned. In Maglio and Kirsh
(1996) they report data from two players who played for 20
hours each. Although our inference is indirect, we conclude
from this source that even after 20 hours of practice, Maglio
and Kirsh’s players were at the approximate skill level of
our first and second bin of players and well below the skill
level of our other bins of players. Our best player’s best
game was over 1 million points and for 25 (out of 173) of
the games we collected the score was over 100,000 points.
For each of our players, we calculated the probability
that one of their episodes would contain a complementary
action according to each criterion in our two sets of criteria.
In counting the rate of complementary actions, we included
episodes from all games played by each player. As the best
8 players each year were involved in the single-round
elimination matches, and the best three players from each
year played an hour’s worth of Tetris in our laboratory, this
means that we have the most data, and therefore the most
stable estimate of complementary actions, from our most
expert players.

Results
Our results are shown in Figure 3. The plot represents
episode data obtained from 173 games of Tetris – 118 of
which were captured during the two qualification games for
the tournaments and 55 during the playoffs or at the
subsequent laboratory sessions for the top three tournament
players (six players across two years of tournaments).
Players were assigned to bins based on the best score out
of two games played in their qualifying round. These halflog bins and the scores that they encompass are represented
along the abscissa. The total number of players in each bin
is shown in parentheses next to each bin’s label. The
ordinate shows the probability that a complementary action
occurred in any given episode according to the five criteria
we considered: lenient, medium, and strict translation
criteria (the solid bars in Figure 3); and over-rotations and
both-rotations criteria (the striped bars in Figure 3).
The most lenient translation criterion, being whenever a
player made both a left and right translation, is satisfied the
most frequently. Unfortunately, this criterion also captures
much suboptimal behavior on the part of the player,
including slips, indecisiveness, or changing of strategy midepisode. Note the inverted-U shape to the occurrences of
these actions. Initially, as player skill (total score) increases,

these complementary actions rise in frequency, but quickly
show marked drop-off as intermediate skill levels are
approached. Even according to this very lenient
interpretation of what constitutes a complementary action,
their frequency is minimal in our most highly skilled
players.
The medium and strict translation criteria, met when a
piece is translated to one wall and back, are satisfied
altogether much less frequently. The actions captured by
these criteria are less likely to include slips, indecisiveness,
or strategy change than does the lenient criteria. According
to these more realistic classification criteria, no player
scoring over 100,000 points used complementary translation
actions in more than 2% of all episodes.
Over-rotation actions are classified as any rotation beyond
what was necessary to place the piece in its final location.
The inverted-U shape seen in the lenient complementary
translation scores holds here as well, with over-rotation
actions first increasing, and then becoming less and less
frequent with increased overall score. Both-rotations actions
were exceedingly rare, but also show this pattern.
One player scored 1,023,941 points in a single game
(scoring 108,508 points in his qualifying round), a highly
uncommon event. On this game, the player exhibited the
lowest number of lenient criterion translational
complementary actions (probability 0.08) of any other
player, with no instances of medium or strict translational
actions. He scored 1 over-rotation and 5 both-rotations out
of 1,281 episodes (probabilities of 0.0008 and 0.0039
respectively).
These criteria for classifying when a complementary
action may have occurred do not indicate that such an
action, in fact, has occurred. What they do provide is a
narrowing down of episodes to only those in which a
complementary action was possible. Our strict translation
and both-rotation criteria would seem to damage the claim
that complementary actions increase with expertise.
The lenient translation criteria and the over-rotation
category show the same inverted-U function. Although both
of these seem likely to include motor slips, indecisiveness,
or changes in strategy, they might suggest that
complementary actions might be a stage that players pass
through on their road to expertise. However, regardless of
how we look at our data they do not suggest that
complementary actions are an integral part of expertise..

Conclusions
In Tetris, scores accumulate with game play: the better the
player, the longer the game, the higher the score. Our best
players played the most games and played each game
longer. These factors assure that the rate of complementary
actions extracted from the data of our best players is also the
most reliable. As even by our most lenient criteria we find
that the use of complementary actions all but disappears as
expertise increases, we believe that our claim that expert
Tetris players engage in very few complementary actions is
rock solid.

2713

In contrast to our data are the various studies by Kirsh and
Maglio in which people with very little or no prior
experience in Tetris were recruited. In some of these studies
the players were given up to 20 hours of practice.
Although it is impossible to estimate precisely from the
published reports, we believe that after 20 hours of practice
Kirsh and Maglio’s players would score comparably with
our second bin (up to 10,000 points per game). This
expropriation would make their data compatible to ours and
would seem to support conclusions drawn from our lenient
transposition criterion and our over-rotation category that
complementary actions exhibit an inverted-U shaped
function that starts low, peaks at moderate levels of skill
development, and rapidly declines as expertise is
approached. This function would be consistent with work by
Neth (2004), which shows that as expertise increases
complementary actions provide diminishing returns.
The inverted-U also would be compatible with
expectations from the soft constraints hypothesis (Gray &
Fu, 2004; Gray, et al., 2006), which leads us to expect a type
of embodied cognition that is neutral to the source of
information (actions in-the-world or processes in-the-head),
choosing among alternative sources on a cognitive costaccounting basis.
Unfortunately for the complementary action hypothesis,
the number of goal-switches might also show an inverted-U
function. Beginners are often focused on the mechanics of
game play, not the strategies. As the mechanics are
mastered, each episode of play becomes more goal-directed
but better goals may be discovered during an episode and, if
so, goal-switches should increase. Our future reports will
attempt to use eye data to distinguish goal-switch induced
actions from true complementary actions and slips.
These questions of interpretation may yield to criteria that
distinguish complementary actions from slips and changes
in player intentions. With better criteria in hand, we can
then ask questions such as (a) what an inverted-U function
tells us about the role of complementary action in learning
to play and maximizing performance and (b) do
complementary actions interfere with the acquisition of
expertise or do they help make one an expert more quickly
than if they were not used?

Author Notes
The work on this project was supported, in part, by grant
N00014-09-1-0402 to Wayne Gray from the Office of Naval
Research, Dr. Ray Perez, Project Officer.

References
Bourne, L. E., Raymond, W. D., & Healy, A. F. (2010).
Strategy Selection and Use During Classification Skill
Acquisition. Journal of Experimental PsychologyLearning Memory and Cognition, 36(2), 500-514.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment,
action, and cognitive extension. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-T. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge inthe-head. Cognitive Science, 28(3), 359-382.
Gray, W. D., Sims, C. R., Fu, W.-T., & Schoelles, M. J.
(2006). The soft constraints hypothesis: A rational
analysis approach to resource allocation for interactive
behavior. Psychological Review, 113(3), 461-482.
Gray, W. D., & Veksler, V. D. (2005). The acquisition and
asymmetric transfer of interactive routines. In B. G.
Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.), 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, CogSci2005
(pp. 809-814). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kirsh, D. (1995). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hands when we think. In J. D. Moore & J. F.
Lehman (Eds.), 17th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 212-217). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4(3-4), 415-452.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18(4), 513–
549.
Maglio, P., & Kirsh, D. (1996). Epistemic action increases
with skill. 18th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 391-396): Cognitive Science
Society.
Morgan, P. L., Patrick, J., Waldron, S. M., King, S. L., &
Patrick, T. (2009). Improving memory after
interruption:
Exploiting
soft
constraints
and
manipulating information access cost. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 15(4), 291-306.
Morgan, P. L., Waldron, S. M., King, S. L., & Patrick, J.
(2007, Jul 22-27). Harder to access, better
performance? The effects of information access cost on
strategy and performance, Beijing, PEOPLES R
CHINA.
Neth, H. (2004). Thinking by doing: Interactive problem
solving with internal and external representations (No.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation): School of
Psychology, Cardiff University.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
Automatic
Human
Information-Processing
.1.
Detection, Search, and Attention. Psychological
Review, 84(1), 1-66.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
Automatic
Human
Information-Processing
.2.
Perceptual Learning, Automatic Attending, and a
General Theory. Psychological Review, 84(2), 127-190.
Waldron, S. M., Patrick, J., Duggan, G. B., Banbury, S., &
Howes, A. (2008). Designing information fusion for the
encoding of visual-spatial information. Ergonomics,
51(6), 775-797.
Waldron, S. M., Patrick, J., Morgan, P. L., & King, S. L.
(2007). Influencing cognitive strategy by manipulating
information access. Computer Journal, 50(6), 694-702.

2714

