UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Attention and Change Detection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kf3t1f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Boyer, Ty W.
Smith, Thomas G.
Yu, Chen
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Attention and Change Detection
Ty W. Boyer (tywboyer@indiana.edu)
Thomas G. Smith (thgsmith@indiana.edu)
Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Bennett I. Bertenthal (bbertent@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract
Studies suggest that visual attention, guided in part by
features’ visual salience, is necessary for change detection.
An image processing algorithm was used for measuring the
visual salience of the features of scenes, and participants’
ability to detect changes made to high and low salience
features was measured with a flicker paradigm while their eye
movements were recorded. Changes to high salience features
were fixated sooner, for shorter durations, and were detected
faster and with higher accuracy than those made to low
salience features. The implications of these results for visual
attention and change detection research are discussed.
Keywords: change detection; visual salience; eye tracking

Introduction
Attention is the process of allocating perceptual and
cognitive resources to select which information in the
environment will enter consciousness. Finding a person in a
crowd, locating one’s car in a parking garage, identifying
features that distinguish predator from prey, or finding a red
circle amongst red and blue squares in a laboratory
experiment all require control of visual attention (Kahneman
& Henik, 1981; Triesman & Gelade, 1980; Wolfe, 2003).
Attention contributes to an ability to make sense of our rich
visual world and learn from experience.
The degree to which attention is guided by the features
of the viewed stimulus versus the viewer’s goals,
expectations, and subjective evaluations are of paramount
importance to researchers who study visual attention (Egeth
& Yantis, 1997; Torralba, Oliva, Castelhano, & Henderson,
2006; Treue, 2003). Recently, computational saliency
models have been developed to analyze visual scenes in
terms of their stimulus properties (Itti, Koch, & Niebur,
1998; Koch & Ullman, 1985; Parkhurst, Law, & Niebur,
2002). These models have been used to predict viewers’
fixation patterns as they view images, providing support for
the suggestion that bottom-up visual saliency contributes to
the guidance of visual attention (Itti & Koch, 2001;
Foulsham & Underwood, 2008).
Other research shows that in the absence of visual
attention we are particularly poor at detecting changes made
to the features of scenes, a phenomenon known as change
blindness (Hollingworth, 2006; Rensink, 2000a; 2000b;
Rensink, O’Regan, & Clark, 1997; Simons & Levin, 1997).
Changes that occur during saccades, eye-blinks, interleaved
frames, cuts, and pans largely escape perceptual awareness.

In experimental change detection tasks, visual salience is
one factor guiding the direction of attention to features in
the scene, and thus it is conjectured that salience contributes
to whether and how quickly the changing feature will be
detected (Kelley, Chun, & Chua, 2003; Simons &
Ambinder, 2005). This is suggested under the assumption
that viewers must direct visual attention to the feature that is
changing, and are unlikely to do so if it is less salient than
other features competing for visual attention.
Yet, contrary to this prediction, two recent studies, Stirk
and Underwood (2007) and Wright (2005), report that the
visual salience of stimulus image features, determined with
formal salience algorithms, does not predict response times
in a change detection task. By contrast, both of these
studies found that the higher level semantic characteristics
of changing features influenced their detection speeds (i.e.,
the changing feature’s congruence with the theme of the
scene, or whether it had been subjectively rated as high or
low salience by independent viewers). Neither of these
studies directly measured visual attention (i.e., eye
movements), however, so it is uncertain how salience may
have affected visual attention. As such, why these previous
studies failed to find a relation between salience and change
detection in requires closer scrutiny.
In the current research, eye movements are used to
systematically assess the distribution of attention across
each change detection trial. The primary goals of the
current study are to examine: 1) whether stimulus feature
salience predicts visual attention in a change detection
paradigm, and 2) whether change detection requires overt
visual attention, or whether covert attention suffices.
Computational saliency maps were used to identify the
visual salience of the features within a set of images (Itti et
al., 1998). Changes were applied to features identified as
either high or low salience, and participants viewed these
modified images interleaved with the originals in a flicker
paradigm (Rensink et al., 1997). Visual attention was
measured with a remote eye-tracking system that enabled
examination of the fixation sequences that index overt
visual attention, as well as the fixation durations that index
the amount of cognitive processing of features during the
search process. In Experiment 1 participants viewed scenes
until they executed a manual response indicating change
detection. Since the amount of time they had to view the
scenes was open-ended, this experiment is limited in its
ability to determine whether overt attention is necessary or

1735

w
whether covertt attention is sufficient
s
for change
c
detectio
on.
IIn Experiment 2, participantss viewed the sccenes for a fix
xed
ppercentage of the
t time that participants
p
too
ok to identify the
t
cchange in Expeeriment 1, and their
t
accuracy in localizing and
a
iddentifying the change was measured.
m
By
y limiting searrch
tiime, there willl be more trialss in which subjjects never fixaate
thhe change location, and it will
w be possiblee to test wheth
her
cchanges are deetected even if
i they are no
ot fixated, whiich
w
would suggest that
t
covert attention to the ch
hanged featuree is
ssufficient for deetecting the ch
hange.

Experriment 1
Meethod
P
Participants Thirty-five
T
volu
unteers particip
pated. They had
h
nnormal or corrrected to norm
mal vision and
d were award
ded
ccourse credit fo
or participating
g.
S
Stimuli and Apparatus
A
The stimuli were 28
2 digital bitm
map
pphotographs off outdoor scen
nes. The Itti, Koch,
K
and Nieb
ber
((1998) saliency
y map algoritthm was used
d to identify the
t
rrelative visual salience of thee features of eaach image. Th
his
aalgorithm makees center-surro
ound comparissons at numero
ous
sscales on colo
or, intensity, and
a orientation
n channels. See
S
F
Figure 1 for th
he model and mathematical formula for the
t
ssaliency maps, which were used to identify one high and
a
oone low saliencce feature in each image (seee Figure 2 for an
eexample of the composite saliiency map outp
put that was ussed
too visually gu
uide selection of features). Two modifiied
vversions of eacch image were produced in Adobe
A
Photosh
hop
bby changing thee color of or reemoving and baackground filliing
thhe identified high
h
and low salience featurees. Figure 2 allso
sshows the high
h and low saliience modified
d versions of the
t
im
mage. Areass of change were
w
defined with rectangles
ooutlining the feeatures that were modified. The
T saliency map
m
aalgorithm has pixel
p
level reso
olution, and on
n average 66.4
4%
oof the pixels in
n the high salieence areas reg
gistered as salieent
oon at least one of the channels, compared with
w an average of
33.6% of the pix
xels in the low
w salience areaas, although hiigh
ssalience areas (138
(
x 154 pix
xels) were on average spatiaally
sslightly smalleer than the lo
ow salience arreas (208 x 133
ppixels). The ex
xperiment was conducted on a Tobii 2150 eye
e
trracking system
m, with gaze saampled at 50 Hz.
H The imag
ges
w
were presented
d in 1024 x 76
68 resolutions on a 21.3” (54
4.1
ccm) screen, fro
om an averagee distance of 73cm. E-Prim
me
ssoftware (Psychology Softwaare Tools, Pittssburgh, PA) was
w
uused for presen
ntation and dataa collection.
D
Design and Prrocedure Particcipants compleeted 56 trials;
oone low and on
ne high saliencee feature chang
ge trial with eaach
im
mage. Each trrial began with a cross at centter screen, for a
11-sec fixation. Next, the original image wass presented forr
3300 ms, followed by a blank gray
g
screen forr 100 ms, then
thhe modified im
mage for 300 ms,
m then the blaank screen for
1100 ms. This original-blank-m
o
modified- blan
nk cycle repeateed
uuntil the particiipant indicated detection of th
he change, or a
m
maximum of 60
0 repetitions. The
T participantt then typed a
rresponse to desscribe the chang
ge.

Figure 1. The salienccy map algoritthm used to identify high
and low
w salience featuures in each off the stimulus images.

Ressults & Disccussion
where particippants were unaable to detect tthe change
Trials w
(3.77%
% of all trials)) or misidentiified what haad changed
(0.87%
% of all trials) w
were excluded ffrom all analysses.
Respon
nse Times Figgure 3 summaarizes the response times
per conndition. A 2 x 2 repeated measures AN
NOVA with
responsse time as the dependennt measure rrevealed a
significcant main effecct for saliencee (high vs. low
w), F(1, 34)
= 106. 39, p < .00011, p2 = .76, a marginally significant
effect ffor change typee (color vs. preesence/absencee), F(1, 34)
= 3.79,, p = .06, p2 = .10, and a salience x chhange type
interacttion, F(1, 34) = 20.32, p < ..001, p2 =.37. Changes
made tto high saliennce features w
were detected ffaster than
those m
made to low sallience featuress, and color chaanges were
detecteed faster than ppresence/absencce changes.
Coontinuous salieence scores w
were computedd for each
area off change of eaach image, ass above, in terrms of the
proporttion of pixels w
within the area identified ass salient by
the salliency map alggorithm. Theese salience sccores were
significcantly correlateed with mean rresponse times, r = -0.28,
p = .044, further indiccating that respponse times deecreased as
the saliience of the rregion of channge increased. A partial
correlattion controllinng for the surrface area of tthe change
revealeed an even morre significant rrelation betweeen salience
and ressponse time, r = -0.34, p = .011.

1736

A.

B.
Figure 33. Mean RTs (w
with SEMs).

C.

D.

F
Figure 2. Ex
xample images: A) original; B) compossite
ssaliency map used
u
to identify
y regions of hig
gh and low visu
ual
ssalience, with red
r indicating color saliencee, green intensity
ssalience, and blue
b
orientatio
on salience; C)
C high salien
nce
ffeature changee; D) low sallience feature change. No
ote:
C
Changed featurre areas are illu
ustratively outlined in C and D.
D

Eye Trracking Measu
ures Figure 4 illustrates thhe median
fixationn sequence forr the high andd low salience version of
one im
mage. The highh salience proffile shows relaatively few
fixationns (4) and a raapid convergennce on the higgh salience
changee, whereas thee low saliencee profile show
ws a large
numberr of fixationss (38), distributed across numerous
featuress before fixatioon on the channge, and terminnation with
responsse. Figure 5 shows the meedian distancess from the
currentt fixation to the area of change over time, and
illustrattes that particiipants convergged more quickkly on high
than loow salience areeas of change,, and, moreoveer, that the
distribuutions were m
much more skeewed for low than high
saliencee changes. W
We quantified thhe eye trackingg measures
two waays: 1) Time tto Fixation waas calculated aas the time
from thhe beginning of the trials until the first fixaation on the
changee area. 2) Fixxation Duratioon was the ccumulative
duratioon in the changge area before a response, as a proxy for
the relaative difficulty of detecting thhe change.
A 2 x 2 repeaated measures ANOVA witth time to
fixationn as the dependdent measure rrevealed signifficant main
effects of salience, F((1, 34) = 20.766, p < .001, p2 = .38, and
changee type, F(1, 344) = 18.42, p < .001, p2 = .35, and a
saliencee x change tyype interactionn, F(1, 34) = 16.35, p <
.001,  p2 = .33. P
Participants shhifted gaze too the high
saliencee change regiions (M = 42273 ms) fasterr than low
saliencee change regioons (M = 59188). Time to fixxation was
significcantly correlatted with respoonse time, r = 0.88, p <
.0001, and the continnuous salience measure of thee change, r
= -0.255, p = .06, also when controllling for surfacee area with
partial correlation, r = -0.36, p < .01. A secoond 2 x 2
repeateed measures A
ANOVA with fixation durattion as the
dependdent measure revealed signnificant main effects of
saliencee, F(1, 34) = 13.52, p = .0001, p2 = .29, aand change
type, F
F(1, 34) = 13.92, p = .001, p2 = .29, aand a nonsignificcant salience x change type iinteraction, F = 2.61, ns.
Fixatioon durations weere lower for hhigh salience cchanges (M
ms) than low saalience changees (M = 805).
= 674 m

1737

A.

B.

The eyye movement measures indiicate that visual salience
guided where particippants directed attention. Thhis, in turn,
raises the question of whether changes were covertly
detecteed (i.e., withoout direct fixaation), or wheether overt
visual aattention is neccessary, and w
whether this is aaffected by
feature salience. Altthough the strrong correlatioon between
time too fixation andd response tim
mes suggests that overt
visual aattention may bbe necessary, tthis remains ann empirical
questioon, because parrticipants had aan open-ended timeframe
to scann the scene, andd even if they hhad covertly ddetected the
changee they may havve hesitated too respond untiil they had
overtlyy verified it. Experiment 2 follows up oon this by
limitingg the inspectioon times to a ppercentage of tthe median
time neeeded by partiicipants to idenntify the channges in this
first exxperiment. T
This will reduuce the likeliihood that
particippants will fixaate the changinng features, annd if covert
attentioon is sufficiennt for change detection, theen even in
these impoverished conditions tthey will identify the
changees.

Experimen
nt 2
Method
with normal orr corrected
Particiipants Twentyy volunteers, w
to norm
mal vision, partticipated for coourse credit.
F
Figure 4. Fixaation path for the
t participant with the mediian
nnumber of fix
xations prior to change deetection for the
t
ooutlined high (A
A) and the low
w salience change (B).

Stimulli and Apparaatus All stimulii and equipmennt were the
same ass in Experimennt 1.
Design
n and Proced
dure Participannts completedd 56 trials;
one low
w and one highh salience featuure change triall with each
image. A flicker paraadigm with thee same within ttrial timing
parameeters as Experiiment 1 was ussed; however, rather than
terminaate the trial witth a response, eeach stimulus w
was shown
for a fi
fixed amount oof time. One half of the saample was
shown the stimuli foor 70% of the median times needed to
detect the changes iin Experimentt 1, the otherr half was
shown the stimuli foor 90% the m
median times. Once the
flicker cycle ended, participants localized thee changed
feature by mouse cclicking on a blank gray sscreen and
identifiied the change by typing a response.

Ressults & Disccussion

F
Figure 5. The solid
s
blue and dotted orange lines are mediian
ddistances from
m high and lo
ow salience areas
a
of chang
ge.
S
Shading indicaates the 25th and
a 75th percen
ntiles (light bllue
aand yellow for high and low salience,
s
green
n for the overlap
p).

Participantts were fasterr to fixate an
nd required leess
ffixation time to
o identify chan
nges made to feeatures identifiied
aas highly salieent by the saaliency map algorithm.
a
Th
his
inndicates that th
he relative visu
ual salience of changed featurres
innfluenced the speed with wh
hich they were attended, as well
w
aas the cognitiv
ve load that was
w necessary to
t process theem.

Figure 6 summarizees the localizzation and ideentification
accuraccy data. Locaalization and identification rates were
highly correlated, r = .89, p < .00001, and thee statistical
comparrisons for eachh mirrored the other; therefore we only
report aanalyses of thhe localization data here. A 2 x 2 x 2
mixed model ANOV
VA with locallization accuraacy as the
dependdent measure revealed signnificant main effects of
saliencee, F(1, 18) = 221.19, p < .00001, p2 = .54, w
with higher
accuraccy in the high than low salience trials (M
M = .66 and
.54), annd condition, F
F(1,18) = 7.69, p = .01, p2 = .30, with
higher accuracy in thhe 90% than 770% conditionn (M = .67
and .533). The effect oof change typee and all interacctions were
non-siggnificant, all F < 2.19, all p > .15.

1738

Coonsistent withh Experimentt 1, stimuluss salience
influennced visual atttention and chhange detectionn. This is
notewoorthy since the design effectivvely controlledd for visual
saliencee, as participannts had even lless time to ideentify high
saliencee feature changes because paarticipants in E
Experiment
1 tookk less time too identify those changes. It is also
especiaally noteworthyy that participaants were able to localize
the chaange on a fair pproportion of ttrials where thhey had not
fixated it (12.1%), w
which providees tentative suupport that
covert attention may be sufficient ffor change dettection (the
changee areas, on aveerage, occupieed only 3% off the entire
image, suggesting a llocalization-wiithout-fixation rate about
four tim
mes what mighht be expectedd purely by chaance). The
correlattion between change fixatioon and localizzation, and
the co nsistency betw
ween the twoo (76.4% conntingency),
howeveer, suggests thhat, even if nnot absolutely necessary,
overt v isual attention plays a major role in changee detection.

Geeneral Discu
ussion

Figu
ure 6. Proportion correct (SE
EMs).

Participantts fixated the changing featu
ure on 59.6% of
trrials. Localizzation accuracy was significcantly correlatted
w
with whether th
he area of chan
nge had been fixated,
f
r = .51, p
= .001 and r = .56, p < .001, for the 70% and 90
0%
cconditions, resp
pectively. Taable 1 summarrizes the relatiion
bbetween chang
ged feature fixaations and locaalization succeess.
T
Two mixed model
m
ANOV
VA were run,, one with the
t
pproportion of trials
t
participan
nts fixated thee change and the
t
oother with the time to fixatiion as the dep
pendent measu
ure.
T
The proportion
n of trials wheere the change was fixated did
d
nnot differ with salience, F = .03, ns, althou
ugh high salien
nce
cchanges were fixated fasterr than low saalience changes,
F
F(1,18) = 11.18
8, p < .01, p2 = .38 (M = 25
518 and 3302 ms,
m
rrespectively). Participants were
w
more likelly to fixate color
thhan presence/aabsence changees, F(1,18) = 10.72, p < .01, p2
= .37 (M = .6
64 and .56 of trials, respectiively), and weere
ffaster to do so, F(1,18) = 6.76
6, p = .02, p2 = .27 (M = 28
807
aand 3165 ms, respectively). The fixation proportions and
a
tiimes did not differ
d
with wh
hether participants were in the
t
770% or 90% co
ondition, both F < 2.8, ns, altthough conditiion
innteracted with
h salience for fixation
f
proporrtions, F(1, 18)) =
55.54, p = .03, p2 = .24, duee to a conditio
on difference for
f
hhigh but not low
w salience trialls, suggesting presentation
p
tim
me
m
modulated visu
ual search.
T
Table 1: Chang
ged feature fixaations and locaalization accuraacy

Fixated Chang
ge

No
Yes

Localizzed Change
Yes
No
28.3%
12.1%
%
11.5%
48.1%
%

wo experimentts suggest thatt the visual
Thhe results of tw
saliencee of features, vviewers’ visuall attention, andd the ability
to detecct changes to tthose features aare related. Thhe findings
suggestt that the salieence of featurres within a sccene guide
attentioon (measured with fixation patterns), as w
well as the
cognitivve processes rrequired to ideentify changes (measured
with fixxation durationns). Participaants fixated higgh salience
featuress faster than loow salience feeatures, particuularly when
those ffeatures changged through m
manipulation off presence/
absencee, most likely bbecause the chhanging featurees were not
visible half of the tim
me in this conddition. Also, pparticipants
requireed shorter fixattion durations for high saliennce feature
changees, particularly color changes, perhaps beccause color
changees involved less global featture transform
mation (i.e.,
spatial properties arre maintainedd, requiring m
more overt
attentioon to notice the change). Thhus, the data suuggest that
visual salience guiddes eye movvements, affeccting how
quicklyy changed featuures are fixatedd, and that overt attention
on featuures is maintaiined to verify cchanges.
Thhe systematic rrelation betweeen fixation paatterns and
feature salience is pproof positive that low-leveel features
contribbute to the searrch for changees in visual sccenes. The
relationns between vvisual saliencee and fixation patterns
suggestt that features were pre-attenntively selectedd, and lowlevel vvisual propertiees guided visuual search. T
The results
from E
Experiment 2, iin particular, ssuggest that chhanges may
be dettected before confidence iss sufficient fo
for explicit
changee detection, butt that responses are delayed w
while overt
visual attention is hheld to confirm
m the change.. That is,
particippants in Experriment 2 were given only a fraction of
the tim
me participants in Experimentt 1 required too detect the
changee, and yet theyy were able to localize and identify the
changee with reasonabble accuracy.
Soome previous research has also found tthat visual
saliencee predicts chaange detectionn speed (e.g., R
Rensink et
al., 19 97; Simons & Ambinder, 2005); howevver, visual
saliencee was not preccisely defined in any of thesee accounts.
By conntrast, Stirk and Underwoood (2007) annd Wright

1739

(2005) examined whether visual saliency predicts
performance on a change detection task using a formal
approach similar to that of the current study. They found,
however, that visual salience failed to predict change
detection response times. These null effects are inconsistent
with our findings. There were, however, a number of
differences between studies. Most notably, Stirk and
Underwood (2007) manipulated the semantic role of the
changed object in the scene, revealing that participants were
faster to detect changes made to scene incongruent than
congruent features. Similarly, Wright (2005) found that,
although formally defined visual salience failed to predict
response times, independent participants’ subjective
evaluations of feature salience predicted change detection.
Relatedly, some theorists caution against overemphasizing the role of salience at the expense of higherlevel subjective processes that affect visual guidance
(Neider & Zelinsky, 2006; Oliva & Torralba, 2007; Torralba
et al., 2006). We do not disagree with this assertion, and
indeed our data showed that visual salience was by no
means a perfect predictor of eye movements or response
times. We assume that the viewers’ interpretation of the
scenes and the features that changed varied across images,
but that these effects were randomly distributed across
conditions. As such, in the very least, our results indicate
that feature salience plays a role in the guidance of visual
attention in change detection. Perhaps more importantly,
our analysis of eye movements suggests that low-level
visual saliency plays dual roles in change detection tasks,
affecting both the rapidity of directing visual attention to the
changing features and the amount of overt visual attention
necessary before confidence is sufficient for response.
In conclusion, the current study showed that stimulus
salience contributes to the detection of changes in visual
scenes. Participant’s eye movements revealed that feature
salience influenced visual attention, which in turn affected
change detection. The results of Experiment 2 provide
additional support that low-level visual salience guided
visual attention and participants’ ability to accurately
identify changes, even with an impoverished time limit on
the presentation of the stimulus. These results thus suggest
that change detection typically involves pre-attentive as well
as attentional processes that are systematically related to
stimulus salience.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF BCS 0924248.

References
Egeth, H. E. & Yantis, S. (1997). Visual attention: Control,
representation, and time course. Annual Review of
Psychology, 48, 269-297.
Foulsham, T. & Underwood, G. (2008). What can salience
models predict about eye movements? Spatial and
sequential aspects of fixations during encoding and
recognition. Journal of Vision, 8, 1-17.

Hollingworth, A. (2006). Visual memory for natural scenes:
Evidence from change detection and natural search.
Visual Cognition, 14, 781-807.
Itti, L. & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modeling of
visual attention. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 1-11.
Itti, L., Koch, C., & Niebur, E. (1998). A model of saliencebased visual attention for rapid scene analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 20, 1254-1259.
Kahneman, D. & Henik, A. (1981). Perceptual organization
and attention. In M. Kubovy & J. R. Pomerantz (Eds.)
Perceptual Organization (pp. 181-211). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kelley, T. A., Chun, M. M., & Chua, K-P. (2003). Effects of
scene inversion on change detection of targets matched
for visual salience. Journal of Vision, 2, 1-5.
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: Towards the underlying neural circuitry.
Human Neurobiology, 4, 219–227.
Neider, M. B. & Zelinski, G. J. (2006). Scene context
guides eye movements during visual search. Vision
Research, 46, 614–621.
Oliva, A. & Torralba, A. (2007). The role of context in
object recognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 520527.
Parkhurst, D., Law, K., & Niebur, E. (2002). Modeling the
role of salience in the allocation of overt visual attention.
Vision Research, 42, 107-123.
Rensink, R. A. (2000a). The dynamic representation of
scenes. Visual Cognition, 7, 17-42.
Rensink, R. A. (2000b). Seeing, sensing, and scrutinizing.
Visual Research, 40, 1469-1487.
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see
or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes
in scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368-373.
Simons, D. J. & Ambinder, M. S. (2005). Change blindness:
Theories and consequences. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 14, 44-48.
Simons D. J. & Levin, D. T. (1997). Change blindness.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 261-267.
Stirk, J. A. & Underwood, G. (2007). Low-level visual
salience does not predict change detection in natural
scenes. Journal of Vision, 7, 1-10.
Torralba, A., Oliva, A., Castelhano, M. S., & Henderson, J.
M. (2006). Contextual guidance of eye movements and
attention in real-world scenes: The role of global features
in object search. Psychological Review, 113, 766-786.
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Treue, S. (2003). Visual attention: The where, what, how
and why of saliency. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
13, 428-432.
Wright, M. J. (2005). Salience predicts change detection in
pictures of natural scenes. Spatial Vision, 18, 413-430.

1740

