UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visualizing thought: Mapping category and continuum

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2940f3gr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Tversky, Barbara
Corter, James
Yu, Lixiu
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visualizing thought: Mapping category and continuum
Barbara Tversky

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

James E. Corter

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Lixiu Yu
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson
Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

David L. Mason

Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 W. 120th Street
New York, NY 10027 USA

Jeffrey V. Nickerson
Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson
Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA

Abstract
Abstract thought has roots in the spatial world. Abstractions
are expressed in the ways things are arranged in the world as
well as the ways people talk and gesture. Mappings to the
page should be better when they are congruent, that is, when
the abstract concept matches the spatial one. Congruent
mappings can be revealed in people’s performance and
preferences. Congruence is supported here for visual
representations of continuum and category. Congruently
mapping a continuous concept, frequency, to a continuous
visual variable and mapping a categorical concept, class
inclusion, to a categorical visual variable were preferred and
lead to better performance than the reverse mappings.
Keywords: Diagrammatic reasoning; spatial metaphors;
design; networks; information systems

Introduction
Abstract thought has roots in the spatial world (e. g.,
Boroditsky, 2002; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Shepard, 2001;
Talmy, 1983; Tversky, Kugelmass, & Winter, 1991). These
abstractions are expressed in the ways people organize
space as well as in the ways they speak, gesture, and put
things on the page (Tversky, 2011, in press). External visual
expressions of thought, from cave paintings to computer
bits, go back tens of thousands of years, though expressions
of abstract thought have become common only with the
widespread use of paper. Visualizations of thought are
especially apt for conveying information that is intrinsically
spatial, like environments, organisms, and objects, where
elements and relations in real space can be mapped onto
elements and relations on the page. Yet they are also
effective for conveying concepts and relations that are
metaphorically spatial, including temporal, social,
quantitative, and more, in part because such concepts have

“natural” mappings to space (e. g., Landy & Goldstone,
2007; Tversky et al., 1991). These natural mappings seem to
come from the ways that we arrange space to suit our needs
and the ways that space governs our behavior (Tversky, in
press). They are also evident in language, in common
expressions and metaphors (e. g., Cooper & Ross, 1975;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). For example, people, trees, and
more grow stronger as they grow taller; taller piles,
buildings, and bridges must be stronger than smaller ones.
Such associations provide a worldly foundation for the
many metaphors associating up with good, strength, and
power.
By mapping abstract concepts and relations congruently
to space and spatial relations, visualizations not only
promote comprehension but also inference (cf. Bertin, 1981;
Norman, 1993; Zhang, 2000). They allow users to apply
highly-practiced skills of spatial reasoning to abstract
reasoning (e. g., Tversky, 2001; in press).
Despite natural mappings, representing abstract relations
graphically is not always straightforward. Several
alternative means of visual expression are often available,
and, typically, each of these has several possible
interpretations. Many common and useful devices, like dots,
lines, boxes, and arrows, are ambiguous, with multiple
meanings, not unlike related spatial terms like link, frame,
field, and relationship, which also have multiple meanings
(e. g., Tversky, Zacks, Lee & Heiser, 2002). Arrows, for
example, can indicate order, direction, movement, causality,
and more (Heiser & Tversky, 2006). Yet, choosing the right
representation is essential to fast and clear communication,
and to effective reasoning with diagrams.
Selecting the right representation for an abstraction does
not have to be at the whim of a designer. The ProductionPreference-Performance program provides empirical

1577

methods for deciding (cf. Kessell & Tversky, 2011;
Tversky, Agrawala, et al., 2007). In the 3Ps program, one
group of participants produces graphic representations for a
concept or group of concepts, for example, keeping track of
a set of people as they move in time. People’s spontaneous
graphic productions for representing information reflect
their understanding of how that information is structured (e.
g., Novick & Hurley, 2001; Zacks & Tversky, 1999).
Another group is presented with a set of graphic
representations for the same information, for example, a
matrix or a graph, and asked which they prefer, that is,
which is a better or best way to convey the information. In
some cases, interpretation of the graphic device is added or
substituted for preference. A third group is asked to make
judgments or inferences from one of several graphic
representations, allowing comparison of performance under
each representation. Comparing these measures can help
select the right graphic representation and can also provide
insight into the cognition underlying the concepts. Ideally,
the mappings that are more successful in performance and
preference are more successful because they are more
congruent.
Designing direct, comprehensible visual devices to
express abstract meanings can be more challenging when
those meanings are superimposed on a system structure.
Structure, especially spatial structure, has priority for the
use of space in a diagram over time and abstract relations (e.
g., Kessell & Tversky, 2011; Nickerson, Tversky, Corter,
Yu, & Mason, 2010). Some cases are relatively
straightforward, for example, superimposing causal
relations on the structure of the circulatory system or a
bicycle pump or the water cycle by adding arrows indicating
the sequence and direction of causality (e. g., Heiser &
Tversky, 2006).
Superimposing abstract relations on structural ones is
more complicated in other cases. Consider the problem
explored here, a network diagram conveying social or
computer interrelations. Suppose that we want to show not
only the links among the nodes that represent the people or
the computers but also how frequently pairs interact or the
subgroups that they are part of, issues faced frequently in
visualizations, including those of networks (e. g., Tollis et
al., 1998).
Effectively diagramming frequency and
subgrouping are critical in the design of information
systems, where balancing efficiency, rooted in frequency,
and security, rooted in subgrouping are central issues.
Representing frequency and grouping are basic to other
network problems, and, more generally, to statistical and
information graphics. Frequency is a paradigmatic
continuous variable and grouping is a paradigmatic
categorical variable.
Spatial organization in the world suggests some
possibilities for representing frequency and grouping,
possibilities that have been produced in practice. All other
things equal, individuals who are closer in space interact
more frequently; conversely, when high interaction is
desired, individuals—and computers—are placed in close

proximity. Distance is arguably the most common way to
use space to represent abstract relations, where distance in
space indicates distance on some abstract dimension.
Individuals or components that form a subgroup are often
put in the same enclosed space; similarly, individuals in the
same enclosed space are more likely to form a subgroup.
That is, subgroups are often in the same container. Finally,
thicker pipes carry more water, and thicker cables carry
more wires. Thus, thickness of links connecting components
is a natural way to represent the intensity of interrelations,
especially among components. Each of these real-world and
diagrammatic expressions appears in talk as well. We say
we’ve grown apart or distant, we talk about bandwidth, we
say a system or a group contains so and so or such and such
as members.
Spatial organizations in the world, then, form a basis for
abstract thought. They also form a basis for congruency of
mapping from the conceptual to the spatial world of a
diagram (Tversky, Morrison & Betrancourt, 2002). Because
frequency is continuous, it is more congruently matched to a
continuous spatial variable, such as distance or thickness;
similarly, because grouping is a categorical variable, it is
more congruently matched to a categorical variable such as
containment. Some support for congruence in mapping
continuous and categorical concepts comes from prior work
on line and bar graphs, where participants understood and
produced lines for continuous variables and bars for discrete
ones (Zacks & Tversky, 1999), but this was for mapping
only those variables, not for superimposing that information
on a structure, as in the present studies.
Given that several visual expressions of frequency and
inclusion have been produced, as in the previous research,
we turn to ask whether one or some conceptual mappings to
space are more effective in performance or more compelling
in preference. To insure comparability of performance and
preference, both frequency and grouping were treated as
binary variables: high vs. low frequency and included or not
included in a subgroup. Although the more typical ways of
regarding these concepts, as categorical or continuous, is
expected to affect performance and preference,
particularities of the diagrams and the tasks may modulate
the predictions derived from congruence.

Experiment 1: Performance
Will performance with conceptually congruent mappings be
better than with less congruent mappings? That is, will
people make more inferences about frequency when actors
interacting more frequently are represented as closer in
proximity or connected by thicker lines than when contained
in a common frame? Distance and thickness are continuous,
thus more congruent with continuous concepts like
frequency, whereas frames are categorical, thus more
congruent with categorical concepts like grouping. Will
people make more accurate inferences involving grouping
when groups are contained in the same frame or connected
by thicker lines than when they are merely in closer
proximity?

1578

S needs to transmit a message to E. Along which
pathway will the message arrive first? (Please list all
nodes along the pathway.)

Method
Participants. 399 volunteers from Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk website participated, distributed fairly evenly across 6
conditions. The average age was 30, with a range from 1863. 56% were male, 45% were native English speakers, and
48% had a college degree. Collecting data on a website
increases the range of responders, making the data more
representative of a general population, but decreases control,
which may add variance to the results, decreasing the
chances of finding significance for a fixed sample size.
Design. There were six groups. Each participant saw one of
three visualizations (Figure 1) and answered one of the two
questions below (Frequency or Grouping):
Thickness

Grouping. The diagram below represents computers
that can all communicate with each other. S and F
are part of the same system. F and J are part of the
same system. J and B are part of the same system. E
and G are part of the same system. K and G are part
of the same system. Links within a system are six
times as secure as other links.
S needs to transmit a message to E. Which
pathway is the most secure? (Please list all nodes
along the pathway.)
In pilot experiments using simpler diagrams (such as
those in the preference experiment described below),
performance was at ceiling. With the more complex
diagrams used here, accuracy was about 50%, a level that
allowed detection of differences across diagrams and
inferences, but makes direct comparison to the preference
results more difficult.

Results
Containment

Distance

Figures 2 and 3 show the proportion of correct
responses to the optimal-path inference questions posed in
the frequency and grouping problems. In a log-linear
analysis, the three-way association among prompt condition
(frequency versus grouping), diagram type (container,
distance, line weight), and correctness was significant,
χ2(2)=12.16, p=.002, meaning that the effects of the diagram
types on correctness differed for frequency and grouping
scenarios. Mapping frequency to distance or thickness led
to superior performance (Figure 2) compared with mapping
frequency to containment, z = -2.99, p=.003. Distance and
thickness mappings did not differ, z = 0.83, p=.407.

Figure 1: The diagrammatic prompts
Frequency. The diagram below represents computers
that can all communicate with each other. S and F
communicate with each other six times a second. F
and J communicate with each other six times a
second. J and B communicate with each other six
times a second. E and G communicate with each
other six times a second. K and G communicate with
each other six times a second. All the other
communication links shown indicate that the nodes
communicate with each other at the rate of one time
a second.

1579

Figure 2: Mean proportions correct for each diagram type
for the Frequency problem. Error bars represent the 95%
confidence interval for the mean.
In contrast, mapping grouping to containment or
thickness led to superior performance (Figure 3) compared
with mapping grouping to distance, z=3.30, p=.001.
Thickness and containment did not differ, z=1.243, p=.214.

preferences to see if they, too, are congruent. Will people
judge the use of boxes to enclose computers belonging to
the same system a more natural way to think about grouping
and inclusion than putting them close spatially? Will people
think putting computer systems that communicate
frequently close in space a more natural way to think about
frequency than enclosing them?

Method
A total of 377 volunteers from Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk website participated. 182 participated in the frequency
condition (see below), the others in the grouping condition.
The average age was 30, with a range from 18-69. 52%
were male, 61% were native English speakers, and 70% had
a college degree.
In this experiment participants made preference
judgments. Participants compared the three diagrams in
Figure 4 in one of the two judgment tasks described below,
Frequency or Grouping.
Frequency. The diagrams below represent computers
that can all communicate with each other. K
communicates frequently with Z. H communicates
frequently T. Neither K nor Z communicates
frequently with either H or T.
Choose the diagram that best expresses the
description. Choose the second best diagram. Choose
the third best diagram.
Figure 3: Mean proportions correct for each diagram type
for the Grouping problem. Error bars represent the 95%
confidence interval for the mean.

Grouping. These diagrams represent computers that
can all communicate with each other. K and Z are
part of the same system. H and T are part of the same
system.
Choose the diagram that best expresses the
description. Choose the second best diagram. Choose
the third best diagram.

Discussion
Congruence of conceptual mapping can account for the
general pattern of results. Participants were more accurate
making inferences about frequency when it was mapped to
spatial distance or thickness than when it was mapped to
containment. Frequency is a continuous conceptual
dimension and both distance and thickness are continuous
spatial dimensions. Thus the conceptual and visual are
congruent.
Inferences about grouping, a categorical relationship, led
to a different pattern: participants were more accurate
judging groupings of computers when grouping was
mapped to containment than to distance. This, too, is a
congruent mapping, of a categorical concept, inclusion, to a
categorical visual device, a frame. Interestingly, thickness of
connection was as good as containment for grouping
judgments. In the specific diagrams used in the experiment,
thickness had only two levels, so that it could easily be
mapped to inclusion, but distance had many levels, hence
was more confusing for assessing a categorical concept like
inclusion.

Experiment 2: Preference
Congruence of concept to space accounted for the general
pattern of performance (i.e., inferences). Here, we examine

Thickness

Distance

Containment

Figure 4: The diagrams presented in the experiment.

Results
Figures 5 and 6 show the proportions of participants
choosing each diagram type as best in the Frequency and
Grouping conditions. In a log-linear analysis, the
proportions of "best" choices of the three diagram types
differed between the two conditions, χ2(2) = 83.676,
p<.001. In the Frequency condition, line thickness was
most often chosen as the best representation, by 48% of
participants. Containment was chosen as best by 34% of

1580

participants, and distance was chosen as best by only 18%.
In the Grouping condition, containment was chosen as the
best representation by 70% of participants. Line thickness
was chosen as best by only 22% of participants, and
distance by only 9%.

Figure 5: The proportion of participants in the Frequency
condition who chose each diagram type as best.

Figure 6: The proportion of participants in the Grouping
condition who chose each diagram type as best.

Discussion
The importance of the congruence of conceptual content
to the visual representation is supported by participants’
first-choice preferences.
To represent grouping, a
categorical concept, most participants chose containment, a
categorical visual variable. To represent frequency, a

continuous concept, the most common choice was
thickness, a continuous visual variable.

General Discussion
Spatial thinking is all around us, in the world, in talk, in
gesture, in diagrams. Communication through diagrams can
be fast and efficient, and is increasingly common. Mapping
spatial entities and spatial relations in the world to spatial
elements and relations on the page is fairly straightforward
(which is not to say that it is always done well).
But successfully mapping abstract concepts and relations
to marks and spatial relations to the page, a metaphoric use
of diagrams, can be more complicated. The best mappings
use space in ways that are congruent with the abstract
concept. For example, since people think of greater height,
health, power, and wealth as going upwards, mapping those
concepts upwards on a graph is bound to lead to better and
faster comprehension and inference. Congruent mappings
can be revealed indirectly in language and gesture, and more
directly in experiments eliciting production, performance,
and preference (e.g., Kessell & Tversky, 2011, Tversky,
2011, in press; Tversky et al., 1991).
Here we explored congruent mappings for a continuous
concept, frequency, and a categorical concept, grouping.
These representations were superimposed on a graphic
structure, a network, rather than appearing in isolation.
Interconnected computer systems are usually visualized as
nodes linked in a network, much like social networks. It is
often desirable to superimpose other information on the
networks, notably frequency of interaction of nodes and
subgroups of nodes. Several ways to superimpose this
information on a network have been proposed in the
literature, including distance or lengths of link, thickness of
link, and frames or containers (e.g., Bertin, 1981; Harel,
1987).
Since frequency is a continuous concept, mapping it to a
continuous spatial variable, either distance or thickness,
should be congruent. Since inclusion is a categorical
concept, mapping it to frames should be congruent.
Congruency predictions were borne out both in
performance, making inferences from the diagrams, and in
preference. Inferences involving frequency were more
accurate when frequency was mapped to the continuous
representations, distance and thickness, compared with
when it was mapped to the categorical aspect of
containment. The opposite held for making inferences
involving inclusion or group membership, where
containment (but also thickness) led to superior
performance. Thickness was actually used as a binary
variable in the present graphs, encouraging a categorical
interpretation.
For preference judgments, containment was preferred to
represent grouping; this was predicted because both
relationships are categorical. For representing frequency,
the continuous aspect of line thickness was most often
chosen as the best representation, as predicted. Distance,
though, was a distant third choice, perhaps because in the

1581

set of diagrams used in this experiment, the actual distances
used in the diagrams were quite small.
Both preference and performance suggest that congruent
mappings of concepts to space are effective. Although the
specific mappings differed between the experiments,
probably because the conditions were not strictly
comparable, the overall conclusion holds. Mapping
continuous concepts to continuous uses of space and
mapping categorical concepts to categorical uses of space
were preferred and led to superior performance. These
conclusions corroborate earlier work showing congruence of
the use of bars for categorical concepts and lines for trends
(Zacks & Tversky, 1999). These results also strengthen the
case for the general program, of selecting among graphic
means to represent abstract concepts and relations by
assessing people’s productions, preferences, and
performance. The findings have broad implications for
designing diagrams, for information systems as well as for
statistical, scientific, and information graphics in the
popular and technical media. The reasoning and the
techniques provide a model for empirical methods to reveal
design principles. In turn, the findings have implications for
the many arenas of life where understanding diagrams is
crucial, including navigation in the world, research in
science and engineering, and learning in and out of
classrooms, Spatial thinking is pervasive and powerful;
visualizations can successfully express a range of abstract
concepts, as long as the mappings are congruent.

Acknowledgments
Portions of this research were supported by grants from
National Science Foundation IIS-0725223, IIS-0855995,
and REC-0440103, the Stanford Regional Visualization and
Analysis Center, and Office of Naval Research NOOO14PP-1-O649, N000140110717, and N000140210534.

References
Bertin, J. (1981). Graphics and graphic-informationprocessing. N. Y.: Walter de Gruyter.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition
(75:1), 1-28.
Cooper, W. E. & Ross, J. R. (1975). World Order. (1975).In
R. E. Grossman, L. J. San, and T. J. Vances (Eds.) Papers
from the parasession on functionalism. Pp. 63-111.
Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Harel, D. (1987). Statecharts: A visual formalism for
complex systems. Science of Computer Programming, 8,
231-274.
Kessell, A. M. & Tversky, B. (2011).Visualizing space,
time, and agents: Production, performance, and preference.
Cognitive Processing, 12, 43-52. DOI: 10.1007/s10339010-0379-3
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Landy, D., & Goldstone, R. L. (2007). How abstract is
symbolic thought? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 33, 720-733.
Nickerson, J. V., Tversky, B., Corter, J.E., Yu, L. & Mason,
D. (2010). Thinking with networks, Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Novick, L. R., & Hurley, S. M. (2001). To matrix, network,
or hierarchy: That is the question. Cognitive Psychology
42, 158–216.
Shepard, R. N. (2001). Perceptual-cognitive universals as
reflections of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 581-601.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L.
Pick, Jr. & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation:
Theory, research and application. Pp. 225-282. N. Y.:
Plenum.
Tollis, I. G., Di Battista, G., Eades, P., & Tamasssia, R.
(1998). Graph drawing: Algorithms for the visualization
of graphs. NY: Prentice Hall.
Tversky, B. (2001). Spatial schemas in depictions. In M.
Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas and abstract thought Pp.
79–111. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tversky, B. (2011). Tools for thought. In B. Benedetti and
V. Cook (Editors), Language and bilingual cognition. Pp.
131-139. NY: Psychology Press.
Tversky, B. (In press). Visualizing thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science.
Tversky, B., Agrawala, M., Heiser, J., Lee, P. U., Hanrahan,
P., Phan, D., Stolte, C., & Daniel, M.-P. (2007).
Cognitive design principles for generating visualizations.
In G. Allen (Editor). Applied spatial cognition: From
research to cognitive technology. Pp. 53-73. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Tversky, B., Kugelmass, S., & Winter, A. (1991). Crosscultural and developmental trends in graphic productions.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 515-557.
Tversky, B., Morrison, J. B. & Betrancourt, M (2002).
Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human Computer Studies. International Journal of
Human Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Tversky, B, Zacks, J., Lee, P. U., & Heiser, J. (2000). Lines,
blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic communication
with schematic figures. In M. Anderson, P. Cheng, and
V. Haarslev (Editors). Theory and application of
diagrams. Pp. 221-230. Berlin: Springer.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Bars and lines: A study of
graphic communication. Memory and Cognition, 27,
1073-1079.
Zhang, J. (2000). External representations in complex
information processing tasks. In A. Kent (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of library and information science (Vol. 68,
pp. 164-180). New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.

1582

