UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Wayfinding and description strategies in an unfamiliar complex building

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38h9p6jn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Tenbrink, Thora
Bergmann, Evelyn
Konieczny, Lars

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Wayfinding and description strategies in an unfamiliar complex building
Thora Tenbrink (tenbrink@uni-bremen.de)
SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, Universität Bremen, Germany

Evelyn Bergmann (e.bergmann@uni-bremen.de)
SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, Universität Bremen, Germany

Lars Konieczny (lars.konieczny@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, Universität Freiburg, Germany

and in part distorted (Canter, 1977; Tversky, 1981). In order
to deal with this limitation, people consult maps or verbal
descriptions (with equal benefit, cf. Meilinger & Knauff,
2008), or they draw upon cognitive strategies of wayfinding
(Golledge, 1999), with different implications for outdoor
(Wiener et al., 2004) versus indoor (Hölscher et al., 2006)
environments. In this paper, we will address indoor
environments (complex buildings) with a particular focus on
the verbalization of routes as well as wayfinding strategies.

Abstract
Describing routes is an easy everyday task for people who
know the environment well. However, strategies exist also for
situations where only incomplete knowledge is available. We
present a study eliciting verbalized route plans and thinkaloud data from novices and experts who were asked to find
and describe routes in a complex building. The spatial
descriptions were analyzed relating the level of knowledge to
route efficiency, and to occurrences of particular linguistic
elements. Results reveal a diversity of wayfinding and
description strategies, ranging from generic methods via
building specific strategies to classic turn-by-turn directions.
Experience with the building predicted the performance in
finding efficient paths as well as the extent to which concrete
spatial elements and uncertainty or orientation markers
occurred in the descriptions. These findings open up the
possibility of predicting the expertise of a speaker from the
form as well as the contents of a route description.

Wayfinding and description strategies

Keywords: route descriptions; cognitive map; incomplete
knowledge; wayfinding strategies.

Introduction
Imagine asking someone for the way, and hearing in
response "uhm, well, you could just try walking to the right
here, look out for the signs, best search for the main staircase, it must be there somewhere". You would recognize
that this person is no expert of the environment – yet this is
far from a denial to respond. On the contrary, you might
even follow this advice, even though it is just a vague hint.
But what exactly is it in this utterance that reveals the
speaker's cognitive status? And what is the nature of those
hints that speakers with limited spatial knowledge can
possibly convey?
Route descriptions can be viewed as a way of accessing
speakers’ current spatial representation of an environment.
Research in this area has mostly centered on typical turn-byturn directions (Denis, 1997; Lovelace & Montello, 1999).
This kind of detailed instruction presupposes a considerable
degree of familiarity with the environment. Often, research
focuses on pre-defined paths, aiming to elicit those elements
that are most crucial for conveying a route efficiently.
However, clearly this research only captures description, not
planning or wayfinding strategies in relation to variable
knowledge. Yet the underlying assumption of (reasonably)
complete knowledge represents the exception rather than the
rule. Human knowledge of environments is typically limited

Knowledge about a building determines not only how
people navigate and find their way around, but also how
comfortable they feel in it without the risk of losing
orientation (Carlson et al., 2010), and how they will talk
about it when describing the setting and guiding others
along their way. In spite of the fact that all of these issues
belong to everyday experience, surprisingly little is known
about how humans actually deal with incomplete knowledge
when finding their way around in complex buildings.
Much research has proved the crucial impact of
landmarks on human understanding of spatial environments
– particularly outside of buildings (e.g., Presson &
Montello, 1988; Caduff & Timpf, 2008). Humans use
landmarks to orient and locate their own position, to retrace
a route, to find the correct direction towards a destination, to
describe routes to others, and so on. However, the extent to
which such findings can be transferred to indoor scenarios
remains unclear, except for findings highlighting the
particular role of central points (well-known parts of a
building) for orientation (Gärling et al., 1983) as well as
wayfinding strategies (Hölscher et al., 2006).
Similar observations can be made concerning other route
elements, such as hallways or other types of paths within
buildings, their names or features, directions or angles,
distances, and so on. Some of the available results so far
point to systematic effects of particular spatial tasks, goals,
or configurational features leading to a difference in the
conceived salience of spatial entities of various types
(Peponis et al., 1990; Weisman, 1981). However, the role of
knowledge of the environment in question remains unclear.
Wayfinding strategies may be based either on rational
reasoning processes in relation to a given goal, or on
contextual factors that may influence the wayfinders'

1262

decisions even without their conscious awareness. Studies
have investigated variations in the spatial situation, such as
the length of the line of sight or other factors that may
impact path selection (Golledge, 1997; Hochmair & Frank,
2002), as well as various kinds of tasks involving more
global navigation decisions and strategies (Wiener et al.,
2004). Furthermore, a number of studies address speakers’
strategies in describing spatial environments, such as
mentally following a continuous route through the building
(Linde & Labov, 1975), and switching perspectives
throughout a discourse (e.g., Tversky, 1999).
Taken together, there is much evidence that spatial
knowledge, behavior, and description are intricately interrelated in the application of high-level cognitive strategies.
It is therefore promising to pursue the investigation of
navigation behavior together with language production.
Previous work has profited considerably from a close
analysis of natural language produced along with spatial
tasks (e.g., Soh & Smith-Jackson, 2004; Spiers & Maguire,
2008). Nevertheless, the question of how speakers react
when asked to produce descriptions towards a particular
spatial goal in an unfamiliar environment remains open so
far. To our knowledge, there is no study directly addressing
speakers' wayfinding and description strategies in such a
task, neither in indoor nor in outdoor scenarios. Therefore,
our work presented in the following is predominantly
explorative. We elicited verbal descriptions with the
expectation that already the content of a verbalization
should be informative as it reveals conscious thought.
Speakers may provide explicit reasons, strategies, and
generalizations; and their language may reveal both global
strategies and local spatial choices that can be interpreted
relative to their level of spatial knowledge. Additionally, we
were interested in the particular linguistic structures that
might further reflect cognitive patterns, for example via the
use of lexical choices (e.g. route elements), deixis, and
presuppositions reflecting speakers' expectations.

Wayfinding and Description: Empirical study
Since classic turn-by-turn route directions presuppose a
considerable amount of environment-specific spatial
knowledge on the part of the speaker, our empirical setup
was designed to elicit any type of description that
participants might produce spontaneously.
Two groups of participants (30 experts and 60 novices
with respect to the building, namely employees with offices
in the building, and students in their orientation week; all
native speakers of German) described the shortest way to a)
the nearest exit and b) the Cafeteria from 5 different starting
points distributed on four different levels of the "GW2"
building of the University of Bremen (see Figure 1 for an
impression of the building's complexity). The order of these
two destinations was balanced. A subset of participants (13
experts and 53 novices) additionally walked to the second
one of their two goals while thinking aloud. The
verbalizations were analyzed linguistically and related to
behavioral data (route choice) as well as level of knowledge.

Figure 1: Three floor levels of GW2 (floor plans available
at www.fb10.uni-bremen.de, retrieved in 2009).

Procedure
Participation was on a voluntary basis without
compensation. The participants were approached by the
experimenter either a) in their office (employees) or b) in or
in front of a lecture room (students). They were then asked
if they agreed to take part in a short wayfinding experiment,
which was very simple and would take only about five
minutes. The experimenter wrote down the gender and
approximate age of the participant, and their current
location. Participants were informed that the experiment
was recorded. If they consented, they were asked to name
their native language and to self-rate their familiarity with
the building on a scale between 1 (very well) and 6 (not at
all). The experimenter then asked the two experimental
questions (in randomized order; all questions and examples
are here translated from the German original):
1. Imagine you have to leave this building as quickly as
possible. Please explain to me as well as you can how
you would do that.
2. Imagine you want to go to the Cafeteria in this building. How do you get there using the shortest route?
After having answered these questions, the participants
were further asked if they agreed to take part in the second
part of this study. They were informed that this would take a
few minutes and that they would be rewarded with candy.
Consenting participants were given the following instruction
(using the latter one of their previous goals):
"Please walk now to [the nearest exit / the Cafeteria]
using the shortest route. It is not important to us whether
you walk the same route that you just described or take a
route that is even shorter. However, it is important to us that
you think aloud while you are walking. Please say
everything that crosses your mind."
The experimenter followed the participant and plotted
their route on a map of the building while walking. If the
participant fell silent, they were reminded to think aloud.

Research hypotheses
On the behavioral level, we expected that novices would
orient towards salient entities and central points rather than
choosing a direct route. Such a strategy would lead to less
efficient routes than those found by experts in wayfinding
and description. Since there was no operationalizable a
priori measure for saliency as perceived by individual
wayfinders, reasons for choosing particular routes were

1263

identified via quantitative and qualitative linguistic analysis.
We also expected participants to be able to assess their own
level of knowledge reasonably well, leading to a correlation
between self-assessment of expertise with route efficiency.
On the linguistic level, we started out with the main aim
of exploring the types of language produced in the case of
incomplete knowledge (in contrast to expert knowledge),
reflecting underlying wayfinding and description strategies
via particular linguistic markers. Gradually, operationalizable criteria were developed for a systematic comparison of
linguistic features. In particular, we expected that novices
should use fewer concrete spatial elements than experts, but
more orientation indicators and uncertainty markers
(definitions are given below). Additionally we expected
situated (think aloud) descriptions to reflect similar patterns
as in-advance descriptions generally. However, because of
available visual information, think aloud data during
situated navigation should lead to the use of more
orientation indicators and less uncertainty markers than inadvance descriptions, and possibly less concrete spatial
elements because visible objects do not require explicit
naming.

Analysis
In order to address the research hypotheses just summarized,
we judged the efficiency of the chosen routes in relation to
the shortest route. This was done by way of a 4-point scale
with the following values: 1=shortest route, 2=minimal
detour, 3=large detour, 4=goal not reached. After examining
the number of turns and approximate length in meters in
comparison to the shortest path, routes were categorized
intuitively by two independent coders, who agreed with
each other in 90% of the cases. Next, we annotated spatial
linguistic categories that are well-known to be crucial for
wayfinding (Denis, 1997; Tversky & Lee, 1999), and a
variety of linguistic markers of orientation and uncertainty.
These markers were identified post-hoc on the basis of the
data, as they appeared to be potential indicators of
underlying cognitive strategies or prerequisites. Our
annotation categories were defined as follows.
Concrete spatial elements
Start & endpoint. Landmark or region presented as start
or endpoint; including deixis in obvious linguistic contexts:
"von hier aus; und dann wären wir schon da" (from here,
and then we'd already be there).
Segment. Progression along a leg of the route. Typical
segment markers include durch (through) [with the
exception of doors], entlang (along), runter (down), hoch
(up), bis zum Ende (to the end).
(Change) of direction. Projective terms and spatial
prepositions that signal direction, such as links (left), rechts
(right), nach oben / rauf (upwards), nach unten / runter
(downwards), geradeaus (straight on), zurück (back), rein
(into), raus (out of).
Landmark. Point-like spatial entities used for orientation
that could be seen or heard; these often appear in the context
of the prepositions an (at) and (bis) zu (till / to / up to).

Region. Areas with boundaries; linguistic context: hinein
(into), in (in), heraus (out of), aus (out); also: oben, unten
(up, down if not used as direction), vorne (front).
Distance. Qualitative or quantitative expressions that
signal duration (time, spatial distance).
Orientation indicators
References to public orientation aids. These include
predominantly the information signs in the building, and
emergency maps on the walls.
Deixis: demonstratives such as dies/e (this), and hier
(here), da (there), dort (over there) (except in their use to
refer to the start or destination). A frequent use of deixis can
be taken to signal a main orientation towards the (deictic)
"here and now", i.e., to information that is currently
perceptually available, rather than spatial memory.
Process of orientation. Verbs that mark the process of
orientation, such as sich an etw. orientieren (orient towards
something), Ausschau halten nach / nach etw. gucken (look
out for), etw. suchen (search something), auf etw. achten
(pay attention to something).
Perception. Full verbs of perception, such as gucken /
schauen / sehen (see / look / watch).
Exploration particles are utterances using the German
construction [PRON VERB (einfach) mal], e.g., wir gehen
einfach mal los; here translated as "let's just…".
Uncertainty markers
Vagueness markers start with irgend-: -wie (somehow), was (something), -wo (somewhere), -wann (sometime).
Restarts. The word or sentence is left incomplete and a
fresh start is attempted, as in ich gehe nach li- links (I now
go to the le- left); ich würde jetzt rechts – ich gehe nach
rechts (I would now right – I go to the right).
Referential problems. Reference is made by dies(e)
together with a noun, and followed by an attribute, such as
in diesem Hauptgebäude wo auch die Asta und so was ist
(in this main building where also the Asta and all that is).
Modals: könn(t)en (could), dürfen (may), müss(t)en
(might), soll(t)en (should), wollen / mögen (would like),
würden (would).
Hedges. One of the following adverbs is used that signal
uncertainty about the truth of the proposition: eigentlich (in
a sense), wahrscheinlich
(probably), möglicherweise
(possibly), vielleicht / eventuell (maybe), quasi (quasi).
Stance. One of the following verbs is used that signals the
speaker’s degree of certainty concerning the truth of the
proposition: glauben (believe), denken (think), wissen
(know), meinen (mean).
Annotations were carried out by two independent coders
who agreed with each other about the categorization of any
linguistic unit in 85% of the cases.
Finally, we analyzed the descriptions and verbal protocols
qualitatively in order to gain an intuitive understanding of
the wayfinding and description strategies available in the
case of incomplete knowledge. Along with this analysis, we
established the relation between our qualitative discoveries
and the quantitive analysis measures just listed.

1264

Concrete

Orientation

Uncertainty
planning
thinking aloud
-1.0

planning
thinking aloud

1.5

-1.5

-1.5

2.0

-1.0

2.5

planning
thinking aloud

0.5

-2.0

-2.0

1.0

Behavioral performance
Experts found more efficient paths than novices, expert
mean: 1.08, novices mean: 1.55, Wilcoxon rank sum test: W
= 208.5, p<.05). In particular, in contrast to the direct paths
chosen by experts, novices' paths typically passed a prominent main staircase (see Figure 2 for an example). Experts
assessed their own knowledge to be higher than novices did
(Wilcoxon rank sum test: W = 379.5, p<.001). However, the
correlation between their self-assessed knowledge and the
efficiency of their chosen routes failed to reach significance
(Kendall’s rank correlation tau: z = 1.3721, p= .17).

to the models (replacing expertise), such that a better self
assessment lead to the production of more concrete elements
(std.err=.095, z=-3.51, p<.001), but fewer orientation
indicators (std.err=.069, z=2.78, p<.01) and uncertainty
markers (std.err=.068, z=2.904, p<.01).

occurence (log-odds)

Results

expert

novice

expert

novice

expert

novice

Figure 3: Occurrence (estimates) of concrete spatial
elements, orientation indicators, and uncertainty markers as
a function of expertise and task.

Figure 2: Example for paths chosen by novices and
experts. The path chosen by the novice leads to the main
entrance via the main staircase as a prominent landmark,
while the expert's path leads to a minor entrance via the
shortest possible path.
Quantitative analysis of verbal data
Our quantitative linguistic feature analysis using the
operationalizable criteria described above revealed the
following patterns. We fitted mixed-effects logistic
regression models (Pinheiro & Bates, 2000) with the fixed
factors expertise and task (planning vs. thinking-aloud), and
participants as random factor, using the statistical software
package R (R Development Core Team, 2011). The results
(Fig. 3) revealed that novices produced fewer concrete spatial elements than experts (std.err=.265, z=-3.79, p<.001),
but more orientation indicators (std.err=.173, z=5.65,
p<.001) and more uncertainty markers (std.err=.177,
z=3.13, p<.01). Moreover, more concrete spatial elements
and more uncertainty markers were produced when the task
was to explain the route in advance (planning) rather than
thinking aloud (concrete: std.err=.127, z=-5.534, p<.001;
uncertainty: std.err=.132, z=-3.82, p<.001). However, fewer
orientation indicators were produced in planning, even
though the effect was only marginally reliable (std.err=.125,
z=1.943, p<.052). Experts produced particularly many
concrete spatial elements when they were planning,
resulting in a reliably better model fit when the interaction
was kept in the model (Chi2=8.01, p<0.01).
Despite the lack of a significant correlation between (selfassessed) spatial knowledge and expertise, self-assessment
had a reliable effect on the utterances produced when added

Qualitative analysis of verbal data
To illustrate the linguistic results of our study, we first
provide typical examples of route descriptions given by an
expert (example 1) and by a novice (example 2).
1. From my office door to the left and uh at the end of the
hallway to the right, and then there is already the exit.
2. Uhm, I would, yes, in principle go back again to the
main staircase and then, yes, one must, I think, then
there is, you know, the bakery on one side, then one
needs to go past it and straight on and then, also in this
café, as far as I know, and then there is an exit.
Here are think-aloud protocols elicited from an expert
(example 3) and from a novice (example 4):
3. So we go now to the staircase, tower A. But I always
walk the stairs. Well, this building is a building to get
lost in, really. Only to the exit. Just down the tower A.
4. So, we will now go in here, and let's press the Two.
Hm (lift stops). Maybe one further down after all.
Uhm, okay, let's go straight on. Okay, let's just go
downstairs. And [we] need to get over there. Exactly,
down here. Hm, office. Ha, to the left here. Along
there. Here are we.
Clearly both of these description types (in-advance route
descriptions and think-aloud data) differ between experts
and novices with respect to the linguistic features listed
above, such as uncertainty markers and orientation
indicators. In the following, we focus on the differences
concerning spatial knowledge rather than differences in text
types. Our qualitative analysis of the verbal data revealed
that participants had the following range of options at their
disposal. The elicited verbalizations range from general
strategies via building specific and central point–oriented
strategies to specific turn-by-turn directions using the
shortest path. In particular, we can characterize the range of
options emerging from our data as follows. Note that the
given examples are chosen to illustrate how the quantitative

1265

linguistic feature analysis maps with the range of strategies
proposed here. However, as the examples also illustrate, the
linguistic features need to be appreciated as superficial
indicators which, if analyzed without context, may appear
misleading, as there is no simple one-to-one correspondence
between linguistic form and underlying cognitive strategy.
Basic generic strategy
Even without any previous knowledge, people can ask
other people, look out for signs, retrace their earlier paths, or
use any other generally available strategy that enables them
to find the intended destination. Characteristic verbal
descriptions of this kind from our data include: "No idea, I
search for an info sign and then I continue looking
[laughs]"; "Well, either [look] for signs or just ask others
who are running around here"; "Well, then I would, uh, take
the path that I also used to come in, even if this is not the,
maybe not the shortest one, but I already know it, then I
would also retrace it". These descriptions contain no
concrete spatial elements such as segments, directions,
landmarks, and distances. Typical orientation markers for
this strategy concern mostly searching (for generically
expected items that might or might not be there), references
to orientation aids, and modals (I would). Apart from that,
this basic strategy type may be considered as unfailing, so
as to involve relatively little uncertainty (i.e., people do not
even try to find their way independently).
Environment specific strategy
With only very little knowledge of the specific building in
which people are navigating, they can orient towards
particular features of this environment. The building used in
our study has the specific features of signs displaying room
numbers and other destinations (departments, central
points), as well as staircase towers (semi-detached from the
building itself). Relevant utterances include "Follow the
signs, which are hanging above the doors"; "and then I
would hope that I walk directly in the direction of the
tower"; "uh, I would search for the nearest staircase down".
These utterances contain presuppositions as signaled by the
definite articles in the signs, the tower, the nearest staircase.
Such indicators either reflect rudimentary knowledge about
the environment, or specific expectations about it (i.e., there
must be a staircase that can be used to get down).
Central point oriented strategy
Previous experience with an environment leads to the
memory of landmarks as a first step in acquiring a cognitive
map (Siegel & White, 1975). In this building, prominent
landmarks included a large hall together with a main
staircase, both adjacent to the cafeteria as well as to a main
entrance. Novices with some knowledge of this building
regularly chose a path via these prominent central points,
even if it was not the shortest one (see Figure 2 above).
Relevant utterances include "This hall, where the main
staircase is as well"; "I would always first go to the main
staircase here, and then from there downwards". These
utterances contain orientation and uncertainty markers, but
also a number of concrete spatial elements, as speakers start
to orient towards specific locations within the building.

Specific turn-by-turn directions
With elaborate knowledge of the building, speakers can
not only describe a concrete route, but also decide about the
shortest path to the destination (cf. behavioral results).
Furthermore, they can describe the location of the
destination directly. All of this reflects the extent to which
speakers can draw on an integrated cognitive map. Relevant
utterances of this kind include "When I walk out of my
office to the right, then directly left again, keep straight on,
uhm, then you would already go directly towards the
Cafeteria and there down the stairs. Then onto the first
level"; "The shortest path up here to the exit is down tower
A". Utterances such as these are characterized heavily by
the concrete spatial elements known for route descriptions
from the literature as listed above. They contain few
orientation or uncertainty markers.

Discussion
We set out in this study to investigate the strategies of
wayfinding and description in a complex building in the
case of incomplete knowledge. Our study compared the
solutions found by experts familiar with the building to
those put forward by novices, in our case new students at
the university. Results showed that, as expected, routes
found by experts were reliably more efficient than those by
novices. The degree of expertise was also reflected in the
linguistic features of the verbalizations, both with respect to
in-advance route descriptions and in the task-concurrent
think-aloud protocols. These two discourse types differed
with respect to mention of concrete spatial elements and
uncertainty markers, which were most characteristic for
planning ahead, as well as orientation indicators, which
were most characteristic for thinking aloud while
navigating. These linguistic features also systematically
reflected the range of strategies of dealing with uncertainty
in a wayfinding situation, independent of discourse type.
Novices used fewer concrete spatial elements than experts,
but more orientation indicators and uncertainty markers.
This reflects their tendency towards using generic (search)
strategies rather than describing specific routes typically
described by experts in answer to a route request.
Confronted with a spatial task that they could not solve
directly, novices could rely on unfailing procedures such as
asking passers-by, looking out for orientation aids, and
retracing the previous route. Between these two extremes of
complete knowledge and complete ignorance, the
participants made use of specific features of the
environment that they had already encountered, ranging
from general building features (towers, type of signs) to
individual central points (specific landmarks such as the
main hall and staircase). These environmental features
supported navigation (i.e., routes were designed to lead via
prominent locations) and were reflected prominently in the
verbalizations.
These results are in line with previous findings
highlighting the prominent role of previously learned central
points within complex buildings (Gärling et al., 1983;

1266

Hölscher et al., 2006). Moreover, they provide a novel
context for the investigation of (concrete, turn-by-turn)
route descriptions, namely in terms of being situated at one
end along a cline of familiarity with the environment in
question. Moving towards the other end of the cline, route
descriptions gradually become less concrete, although they
may still serve as useful wayfinding support as they orient
towards prominent locations.
Linguistic markers such as vagueness particles, hedges,
modals, and perception and orientation verbs to some extent
indicate a lack of expertise on the part of the speaker,
whereas references to concrete spatial entities convey spatial
certainty. This extends previous, more general findings on
speakers' display of their cognitive status, which their
dialogue partners can detect and react to (Brennan &
Williams, 1995). Presuppositions such as the use of definite
articles along with items not directly encountered reveal the
wayfinder's expectations about the current environment.
Findings such as these can be useful across a range of
practical applications. For instance, an automatic dialogue
system (e.g., Cuayáhuitl et al., 2010) may be enabled to
react to a speaker's uncertainty and expectations, of which
they may not be aware, in a supportive way. Furthermore, a
well-founded assessment of spatial knowledge, expectations, and wayfinding confidence can be used to improve
the compatibility between the spatial environment and the
strategies and abilities of its users (Carlson et al., 2010).

Acknowledgments
Funding by the DFG, SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, Strategic
Project [NavTalk], is gratefully acknowledged. We thank
Christoph Hölscher and Julia Frankenstein for discussions
on the topic of this paper, and our student assistants for
support in carrying out and analyzing the reported study.

References
Brennan, S.E., & Williams, M. (1995). The feeling of
another's knowing: prosody and filled pauses as cues to
listeners about the metacognitive states of speakers.
Journal of Memory and Language 34, 383-398.
Canter, D. (1977). The Psychology of Place. London: The
Architectural Press Ltd.
Carlson, L.A., Hölscher, C., Shipley, T.F., & Conroy
Dalton, R. (2010). Getting lost in buildings. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 19(5), 284-289.
Cuayáhuitl, H., Dethlefs, N., Richter, K.F.R., Tenbrink, T.,
& Bateman, J. (2010). A dialogue system for indoor
wayfinding using text-based natural language.
International Journal of Computational Linguistics and
Applications 1 (1-2), 285–304.
Denis, M. (1997). The description of routes: A cognitive
approach to the production of spatial discourse. Cahiers
de Psychologie Cognitive, 16(4):409-458.
Gärling, T., Lindberg, E., & Mäntylä, T. (1983). Orientation
in buildings: effects of familiarity, visual access, and
orientation aids. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(1),
177–186.

Golledge, R.G. (1997). Defining the Criteria Used in Path
Selection. In D.F. Ettema & H.J.P. Timmermans (Eds.),
Activity-Based Approaches to Travel Analysis. Elsevier.
Golledge, R.G. (ed.) (1999). Wayfinding Behavior:
Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial Processes. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Hochmair, H.H. & Frank, A.U. (2002). Influence of
estimation errors on wayfinding-decisions in unknown
street networks - analyzing the least-angle strategy.
Spatial Cognition and Computation 2 (4): 283-313.
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachliotis, G., Brösamle, M.,
& Knauff, M. (2006). Up the Down Staircase:
Wayfinding Strategies and Multi-Level Buildings.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 26(4), 284-299.
Linde, C. & Labov, W. (1975). Spatial networks as a site for
the study of language and thought. Language 51,924-939.
Lovelace, K., Hegarty, M., & Montello, D.R. (1999).
Elements of Good Route Directions in Familiar and
Unfamiliar Environments. In C. Freksa & D.M. Mark
(Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. Berlin: Springer.
Meilinger, T. & Knauff, M. 2008. Ask for your way or use a
map: a field experiment on spatial orientation and wayfinding in an urban environment. Spatial Science 53:2,13-24.
Peponis, J., Zimring, C., & Choi, Y. K. (1990). Finding the
building in wayfinding. Environment and Behavior,
22(5), 555–590.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed-effects models
in S and S-PLUS. New York: Springer.
R Development Core Team. (2011). R: A language and
environment for statistical computing [Computer software
manual]. Vienna, Austria.
Siegel, A.W., & White, S.H. (1975). The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In
H.W. Reese (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behavior. New York: Academic Press.
Soh, B.K. & Smith-Jackson, T.L. (2004). Influence of map
design, individual differences, and environmental cues on
way finding performance. Spatial Cognition and
Computation, 4, 137-166.
Spiers, H.J. & Maguire, E.A. (2008). The dynamic nature of
cognition during wayfinding. Journal of Environmental
Psychology 28:3, 232-249.
Tversky, B. (1981). Distortions in memory for maps.
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 407-433.
Tversky, B. (1999). Spatial Perspective in Descriptions. In
P. Bloom, M.A. Peterson, L. Nadel & M.F. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and Space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tversky, B. & Lee, P. (1999). Pictorial and Verbal Tools for
Conveying Routes. In C. Freksa & D.M. Mark (Eds.),
Spatial information theory (COSIT '99). Berlin: Springer.
Weisman, J. (1981). Evaluating architectural legibility:
Way-finding in the built environment. Environment and
Behavior, 13(2), 189–204.
Wiener, J. M., Schnee, A., & Mallot, H. A. (2004). Use and
Interaction of Navigation Strategies in Regionalized
Environments. Journal of Environmental Psychology,
24(4), 475 – 493.

1267

