UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Should we Be Realist about in Cognitive Science?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3zx9m1hk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Hasselman, Fred
Dale, Rick
Holden, John
et al.

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Should we Be Realist about in Cognitive Science?
Fred Hasselman (f.hasselman@psych.ru.nl)
Symposium organizer (with M.P. Seevinck & R.F.A Cox)
Behavioural Science Institute, Learning and Plasticity Program,
School of Psychology and Artificial Intelligence, Radboud University Nijmegen,
PO Box 9104 6500 HE Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)
Cognition and Integrated Action Lab,
Department of Psychology and Institute for Intelligent Systems
The University of Memphis, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis, TN, USA, 38152

John Holden (holdenjn@ucmail.uc.edu)
CAP Center for Cognition, Action, and Perception
Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
PO Box 210376, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376

Tony Chemero (tony.chemero@fandm.edu)
Scientific and Philosophical Studies of Mind Program,
Psychology Department, Franklin and Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17794-3003
these foundations. Though some share a theoretical background, the result is anything but a tidy accounting of cognitive ontology: Four very different answers to the realist
question will be explored.

Abstract
The fundamental question that is the title of this symposium
elicits answers that are not just philosophical in nature, directly pertain to measurement, interpretation of empirical results,
modeling, as well as the daily practice and general philosophy
of the science that studies cognitive phenomena. Four different perspectives on the realist question will be provided by
the speakers in this symposium: Ecological Realism, Measurement Contextuality, Explanatory Pluralism and Structural
Realism. The participants address differences and similarities
between these perspectives and examine whether unification
or consensus perspectives can be achieved.

Structural realism
The realist commitment in Structural Realism (SR; Worrall,
1989) is towards uncovering the unobservable structure of
the world by means of ontology that is considered dispensable: A temporary vehicle we need to make sense of the
world. The idea is that we should believe what scientific
theories tell us about this structure (that is retained across
theory change), but not what they tell us about the proposed
constituents of reality.
Fred Hasselman (with Michael Seevinck and Ralf Cox)
will propose to adopt an SR approach to the study cognitive
phenomena observed in cognitive systems (cf. Hasselman,
Seevinck & Cox, submitted). A program of rigorous commitment to ontology is endorsed, but only with the realization that this is a temporary tunnel vision. Ontology should
be crash-tested with reality in order to find out where and
when it breaks down, which parts may be recycled, or
whether a new design is needed. Hasselman et al. suggest
cognitive science can benefit from setting the expiration
date of its ontology to “as soon as possible”, rather than “not
in my lifetime”
Being realist about what our best scientific theories propose as the furniture of the world, may lead to adoption of
theoretical constructs by analogy. The danger in doing so
without examining whether there is a shared structure between the phenomena in question will be discussed. As an

Keywords: ontology; epistemology; scientific realism;
complexity science; measurement contextuality; holism

Constituents of Mental Reality
Age-old philosophical questions continue to be posed in
cognitive science and usually come in the form of what it is
that makes up mental reality: What are the constructs of our
various theories that we can say are real. While some may
argue that visualization of brain activity while performing
cognitive tasks has provided a new window into identifying
such cognitive ontologies (e.g. Albright, Jessell, Kandel, &
Posner, 2000), others may argue that the same puzzling
questions of cognitive reality still remain (e.g. Van Orden,
Pennington, & Stone, 2001). The prospect of a resolution
appears to be remote and that is perhaps the best justification to re-examine the philosophical foundations that guide
and focus empirical inquiries in the cognitive and behavioral
sciences.
The speakers in this symposium will critically examine

170

Discussion

example, it will be argued that the current mathematical
structure used to describe classical dynamical systems, cannot serve as the arena for constructs like holism (cf.
Seevinck, 2004) and strong emergence, adopted by the
complexity science approach to study cognitive phenomena.

Several presented perspectives share a concern about falling
prey to ontological fundamentalism by adopting any kind of
realism. Solutions presented to deal with such fears will be
discussed and compared. Also, speakers have different opinions towards adopting concepts from physical theories by
analogy to describe cognitive phenomena or measurement
outcomes. Cautions, warnings and successes will be debated. Finally, the symposium participants will evaluate to
what extent they share the position that the dominant information processing ontology of computation and representation in cognitive science is inappropriate to adequately describe the behavior of agent-environment systems.

Explanatory pluralism
Rick Dale (with Eric Dietrich) will argue for explanatory
pluralism (see Dale, 2008 for a review), in which different
emergent ontologies are posited to exist as a consequence of
assuming the animal-environment system to be a complex
dynamical system. From Marr’s well-known levels, and
before (e.g., Simon, 1962), cognitive scientists have often
recognized the importance of identifying levels of analysis
(in goals, and across scales of space and time) to understand
the operation and ontological status of various theoretical
constructs.
Dale and Dietrich will argue that this issue of levels puts
cognitive science on the horns of an ontological dilemma.
The dilemma can be phrased as two simple answers to the
question that entitles this symposium. Given a (limited) set
of theories being used to explain phenomena in cognitive
science’s many (partially overlapping) domains of inquiry -what is real? Lots of it, or none of it. They will argue for the
former answer, and advocate for integrating the various ontologies of cognitive theory, and briefly review research
programs already carrying this out.

References
Albright, T. D., Jessell, T. M., Kandel, E. R., & Posner, M.
I. (2000). Neural science: a century of progress and the
mysteries that remain. Neuron, 25 Suppl, S1-55.
doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80912-5
Chemero, A. (2009). Radical embodied cognitive science.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Dale, R. (2008). The possibility of a pluralist cognitive science. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial
Intelligence,
20(3),
155-179.
doi:10.1080/09528130802319078
Hasselman, F., Seevinck, M.P., & Cox, R.F.A. (submitted
manuscript). Caught in the Undertow: There is structure
beneath
the
ontic
stream.
Retrieved
from
http://fredhasselman.com/pubs/MAN_CaugthintheUnder
tow.pdf
Holden, J. G., Choi, I., Amazeen, P. G., & Van Orden, G. C.
(2010). Fractal 1/f dynamics suggest entanglement of
measurement and human performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance. doi: 10.1037/a0020991
Seevinck, M. P. (2004). Holism, physical theories and quantum mechanics. Studies In History and Philosophy of
Science Part B: Studies In History and Philosophy of
Modern
Physics,
35(4),
693-712.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsb.2004.08.001
Simon, H. A. (1962). The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 106(6),
467–482.
Retrieved
from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/985254
Van Orden, G. C., Pennington, B. F., & Stone, G. O. (2001).
What do double dissociations prove? Cognitive Science,
25(1), 111-172. doi :10.1016/S0364-0213(00)00036-7
Worrall, J. (1989). Structural Realism: The Best of Both
Worlds?
Dialectica,
43(1-2),
99-124.
doi:10.1111/j.1746-8361.1989.tb00933.x.

Measurement contextuality
Jay Holden will talk about the place of measurement in theories of situated behavior: What is the ontological status of
measurement outcomes in cognitive science?
Historically, cognitive science relied on a largely mechanistic, materialist and rationalist ontology. An alternative
ontology will be presented that is rooted in lessons learned
from the physics of self-organization and quantum observations. While within reach, this alternative ontology has implications for the nature of knowledge and explanation for
cognitive science.
The resolution of measurement problems inspired by
quantum phenomena such as entanglement and complementarity will be discussed (cf. Holden, Choi, Amazeen, & Van
Orden, 2010). Implications relating to modeling cognitive
phenomena will be also be discussed.

Ecological Situated realism
Tony Chemero will describe a Radical Embodied Cognitive
Science (cf. Chemero, 2009), in which behavior is explained
in terms of animal-environment dynamics without invoking
the concepts of computation and representation.
This implies an ecological realism, which is above all a
kind of realism about meaning or significance. Meaning, on
this view, is not a projection of information stored in
memory onto stimuli in the brain; instead, animals discover
meaning in the world. Methodological and philosophical
consequences of ecological realism will be discussed.

171

