UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Which Parts of Scientific Explanations are Most Important?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0977w0bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Authors
Rottman, Benjamin
Keil, Frank

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Which Parts of Scientific Explanations are Most Important?
Benjamin M. Rottman (benjamin.rottman@yale.edu)
Frank C. Keil (frank.keil@yale.edu)

Department of Psychology, Yale U., 2 Hillhouse Ave
New Haven, CT 06520
Abstract

more essential to the writer's purpose and is comprehensible
independently of the first half, making it more important. In
fact, Marcu found that his algorithm based on which
components rely upon others for comprehension predicts
peoples' judgments of which components are important for
including in a summary.
Extrapolating Marcu's (1999) hypothesis about text to
explanations, it seems likely that people view components
of explanations that are independently comprehensible to be
more important than components that are incomprehensible
without first knowing the independent component. For
example, one must understand the basic concept of global
warming (the average temperature of the earth is increasing)
before understanding how greenhouse gasses contribute to
global warming. Here we say that a component of an
explanation, Y, “elaborates” on X when Y provides
additional details about X and X must be understood first in
order to understand Y. In our studies, we assess whether
people identify important components of explanations as
those that have the most elaboration – i.e., the most
components that depend upon it in order to be understood.
The current experiments investigated which components
of large scientific explanations people think are most
important. Instead of judging importance based on a textual
explanation of the sort one might read in an encyclopedia,
we were interested in situations when a person learns many
facts and develops an explanation by combining the
different pieces of knowledge. For example, a person might
accumulate bits of related knowledge over time from
multiple sources including testimony, direct experience, or
even through induction and deduction. When devising an
explanation, a person must sort through all this information
and decide what is most important. Such a process may
occur constantly in our daily experiences as we update our
explanatory interpretations of the world, discarding
unimportant information and retaining central concepts.
Investigating how people identify important information
in unstructured explanations is essential for two reasons.
First, much of the previous work on importance has focused
on intact text which contains many cues to importance (e.g,,
topic sentences and conclusions and how sentences are
ordered within paragraphs). Studying unstructured
explanations can help us isolate structural and content
factors that people use to identify import components from
purely textual factors. Second, much of the previous
research has focused on how people identify important parts
of stories. However, narrative stories often follow one
individual character on a temporal journey, and much of the
work has focused on “story grammar” categories such as

Given the depth and breadth of available information,
determining which components of an explanation are most
important is a crucial process for simplifying learning. Two
experiments tested whether people believe that components of
an explanation with more elaboration are more important. In
Experiment 1, participants gave higher importance scores for
components that they judged to be elaborated upon by many
other components. In Experiment 2, the amount and type of
elaboration was experimentally manipulated. Experiment 2
demonstrated that elaboration increases the importance of the
elaborated information by providing insight into
understanding the elaborated information; information that
was too technical to provide insight into the elaborated
component did not increase the importance of the elaborated
component. While learning an explanation, people piece
together the structure of elaboration relationships between
components and use the insight provided by elaboration to
identify important components.
Keywords: Explanation; Science Education; Summarization

Introduction
A hallmark of modern culture is dramatically increased
access to information. People are often confronted with an
overwhelming depth and breadth of information for a given
explanation. For example, consider how many pieces of
information you have amassed from different sources about
global warming. Is it most important to focus on carbon
dioxide emissions from humans, sun spots, the ice-albedo
positive feedback loop, methane release from peat bogs, or
deforestation, etc? In order to limit our search for useful
information and decide which information to try to
understand and remember, we must focus on the most
important components of explanations. Indeed, when
learning a textual passage, people focus on the information
they judge to be important, which leads to selectively better
recall (e.g., Brown & Smiley, 1978; Johnson, 1970).
What determines which components people think are
most important? One common theoretical position is that
information high up in a hierarchical structure of a text
represents the most important information (e.g., Thorndyke,
1977). One modern approach from computational linguistics
(Marcu, 1999) suggests that important components of a text
can be identified by the discourse structure and the
rhetorical relations in the text. For example, consider a text
about Mars presented by Marcu; "With its distant orbit …
and slim atmospheric blanket, Mars experiences frigid
weather conditions." Marcu argues that the first half of the
sentence "with... blanket" is subordinate to the second half
"Mars ... conditions." The second half expresses what is

378

settings, goals, and internal responses (e.g., Omanson, 1982;
van den Broek, 1988), making it unclear how importance in
stories would translate to explanations. In contrast,
explanations have richer, more interconnected, and less
linear structures compared to stories (Keil, 2006).
In the present experiments, we ask whether people use
elaboration relationships to determine the important parts of
an explanation, even when presented in fragments. In
Experiment 1, we examined whether elaboration relations
between components predict which components people
think are important. In Experiments 2, we experimentally
manipulated the amount and type of elaboration to examine
why elaboration influences perceived importance.

until they felt satisfied that they understood the explanation
inherent in the cards. Participants were told that the order of
the cards was random, that they might need to read the cards
repeatedly for the cards to make sense, and that they were
allowed to spread out the cards on a desk to read
simultaneously. In fact, the cards were randomly sorted like
shuffling a deck of cards for each participant.
After reading the first set of cards, participants answered
the following question: “How important for understanding
how the phenomenon works is this card compared to the
other cards?” Participants rated each card on a scale from
one (not important) to nine (extremely important).
Participants then performed the same tasks on a second set
of cards pertaining to another phenomenon. The order in
which they worked with the two explanations was
counterbalanced between participants.
After rating the importance of the cards in both
explanations, participants read the following instructions
explaining how to draw graphs (e.g., Figure 1) depicting
which cards elaborated on which other cards: “In general,
some cards are elaborated by many other cards. Cards with
lots of elaboration go at the top. The cards that elaborate
upon them go underneath them with arrows pointing
downwards to the cards that elaborate upon the cards above.
Cards that are elaborated less, or not at all, get placed near
the bottom….” Elaboration was left undefined so that
participants would use their intuitive notion of elaboration.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 was to investigate whether
components of an explanation that are elaborated by many
other components are generally judged to be more
important. To this end, participants rated the importance of
components and drew graphs showing which components
they thought elaborated upon which other components.

Method
Participants Sixteen Yale students participated either for
course credit or pay at a rate of $10 per hour.
Materials Four explanations (Diabetes, GPS, Fiber Optics,
and the Circadian Rhythm) were written to meet the
following criteria. No indicator phrases (e.g., “the main
point,” "it is critical to know that") were included. Thus,
participants could not rely upon surface features of the text
to determine which pieces of information were most
important but instead had to understand the content.
Furthermore, the explanations were broken up into
components (between 17 and 26 per explanation) and
presented to participants on individual cards (M=26 words
per card, SD=12; see Figure 1). Breaking up the text
simulated how people learn in the real world by aggregating
and combining information from multiple different sources
to develop a unified explanation. This method also
eliminated cues to importance present in intact texts such as
topic sentences and conclusions and the order of sentences.
The text on each card was constructed so that it could be
understood individually; however, textual components
naturally refer to concepts introduced on other cards. Thus,
some cards are not understandable without first
understanding another card. In these cases the dependent
card adds more information that is relevant to the
independent card. We call this "elaborating." The cards used
for the Circadian Rhythm explanation appear in Figure 1.
Procedure Due to time limitations, half of the participants
worked with the Diabetes and GPS explanations, and the
other half worked with the Circadian Rhythm and Fiber
Optics Explanations. Participants were first given a set of
cards and told that the cards together comprise an
explanation for how a scientific phenomenon (e.g., diabetes)
works. Participants were asked to read the cards thoroughly

Results
Consensus Graphs Figure 1 presents the consensus
elaboration graph produced by participants for Fiber Optics
as well as the average importance rating for each card.
Consensus elaboration graphs were created for visualization
purposes to understand the stimuli and task and display the
elaboration relationships between cards that participants
most frequently endorsed. The consensus graphs were not
involved in the formal analyses. A given elaboration
relationship between two cards (an arrow) was included in
the consensus graph if at least 3 out of 8 participants
endorsed the particular relationship. At this cutoff, almost
all the cards were linked with at least one other card. These
graphs informally confirm the hypothesis that cards with
more elaboration are more important. Cards near the top of
Figure 1 with many elaborating cards generally have higher
importance ratings than cards near the bottom of the graph
with fewer elaborating cards.
Formal Analyses The purpose of Experiment 1 was to
determine whether elaboration predicts importance ratings.
We first accomplished this goal by comparing all the pairs
of cards for which a participant said that one card directly
elaborated upon the other. For example, in Figure 1, the top
card “A circadian rhythm is a roughly-24-hour cycle…” is
directly elaborated upon by “Circadian Rhythms are
important for….” On average, elaborated cards were
significantly more important than elaborating cards
(Mdifference=.88, SD=.53), t(15)=6.56, p<.01.

379

(8.5) A circadian rhythm is a
roughly-24-hour cycle of
the physiological
processes of living beings
including plants, animals,
fungi and cyanobacteria.

(7.3) The phase, start time of a
cycle, and period, length of one
cycle of a circadian rhythm, can
be altered by exposure to
environmental cues.

(6.8) Circadian rhythms
persist in the absence of
external cues (for example
constant darkness) with a
period close to 24 hours.
(5.8) Animals kept in total darkness
for extended periods eventually
function with a 'free-running'
rhythm, where each 'day' their
sleep cycle is pushed back or
forward (depending on whether
their circadian rhythm is longer
or shorter than 24 hours).
(4.8) Free running organisms still
have a sleep-wake cycle when
in an environment shielded
from external cues, but this
cycle may become out of sync
with other cycles such as body
temperature and digestion.

(5.4) Circadian rhythms developed to
protect replicating DNA from
ultraviolet radiation during the
daytime by relegating replication
to occur during darkness.

(6.1) Depending on the
phase of sleep, light can
advance or delay the
circadian rhythm.

(7.3) Several environmental
stimuli have also been
shown to affect circadian
rhythms other than light.
They include ambient
temperature, food
availability, physical
activity, and social contact.

(7.8) Circadian rhythms are
important for determining
sleeping and feeding patterns,
body temperature, brain wave
activity, hormone production,
cell regeneration, and other
biological activities of animals
including human beings.

(6.5) The suprachiasmatic
nucleus receives
information about light
from the retina, and thus
can keep the circadian
rhythm consistent with the
cycle of day and night.

(6.2) Although circadian
periods can be affected
by environmental factors,
the standard period is
genetically determined.

(5.1) Different species tend to
have different circadian
periods. Additionally, single
gene mutations that affect
circadian period have been
described in various species.

(7.0) The circadian 'clock' in
mammals is located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, a
distinct group of cells located
in a region of the brain called
the hypothalamus.

(3.3) Wavelength (or color) of
light is an important factor
in the degree to which the
circadian rhythm is shifted,
because melanopsin (a
photopigment found in the
retina) is most efficiently
excited by blue light.

(3.8) Much lower light levels
are required to reset
circadian clocks in
nocturnal rodents
compared with humans.

(4.3) Circadian rhythms are
found in many cells in the
body outside the
suprachiasmatic nucleus
'master clock.' Liver cells, for
example, appear to respond
to feeding rather than to light.

(6.4) Destruction of the
suprachiasmatic nucleus
results in the complete
absence of a regular
sleep/wake rhythm.

X
Y

(5.9) If cells from the
suprachiasmatic nucleus are
removed and cultured, they
maintain their own rhythm in
the absence of external cues.

Y elaborates
on X.

Figure 1: Consensus Elaboration Graph for the Circadian Rhythm Explanation in Experiment 1.
Note: Numbers represent average importance rating for a given card.
We also examined whether elaboration relations predicted
the overall importance of a card. We compared two different
metrics that capture different aspects of the elaboration
relationships. The “amount of elaboration” metric was
defined as the number of cards that could be reached by
traversing down the elaboration graph, including the card
itself. For example, the card at the bottom of Figure 1
starting with “Much lower light…” gets an elaboration score
of 1, the card on the left starting with “Circadian rhythms
persist…” gets a score of 3, and the card at the top starting
with “A circadian rhythm is a roughly…” gets a score of 18
because all the cards elaborate upon it. This metric reflects
the idea that a component of an explanation is important to
the extent that many other cards directly or indirectly
depend on it to be comprehendible. We compared this
metric to another metric that just captures the number of
direct relationships or associations with other cards. For
example, the card starting with “Much lower light levels…”
participates in two elaboration relationships whereas
“Circadian rhythms persist…” participates in three and “A
circadian rhythm is …” participates in 5.
For each of the two explanations that a participant worked
with, we computed Spearman Rank Order correlations
between the participant’s importance scores and the scores
of the two metrics, producing four correlations per
participant. We then averaged the two correlations that
involved the same metric by Fisher-transforming the
correlation coefficients, producing two correlation
coefficients per participant. (The means below represent
these average correlation coefficients that were inversely
transformed to lie on a scale of 0-1.) On average, the “total

amount of elaboration” metric predicted participants’
responses fairly well (M=.42, SD=.07), and significantly
above chance, t(15)=6.74, p<.01. Though the “number of
relations” metric (M=.26, SD=.05) was also above chance,
t(15)=5.00, p<.01, it was significantly worse at predicting
participants’ importance ratings, t(15)=5.68, p<.01.
In sum, this experiment demonstrated that people piece
together components of explanations to understand the
structure of the elaboration relationships between
components. Furthermore, the more elaboration a
component has, the more important people consider it to be
for understanding the entire explanation.

Experiment 2
We sought to answer two remaining questions with
Experiment 2. First, so far we have argued that people use
elaboration to identify important components in an
explanation. However, because there was not any
experimental manipulation of elaboration in Experiment 1, a
third factor could conceivably cause both increased
elaboration as well as importance. For example, it is
possible that the cards that were elaborated on were also
inherently important independent of elaborations.
Additionally, some have argued that people can identify
important sentences merely based on sentential features
such as sentence length and number of pronouns used and
that identifying such sentences does not depend upon the
sentences’ relationships to other sentences (McCarthy et al.,
2008). In Experiment 2, we manipulated whether a card was
elaborated or not to determine whether, in fact, elaboration
influences which components people judge to be important,

380

Table 1: One Circadian Rhythm Key Card and Elaborations in Experiment 2.
Key Card: The circadian “clock” in mammals is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, a distinct group of cells located in a
region of the brain called the hypothalamus.
Mechanistic Elaborating Cards:
Historical Elaborating Cards:
Too Technical Elaborating Cards:
The suprachiasmatic nucleus
The discovery that the suprachiasmatic The suprachiasmatic nucleus is situated in the
receives information about light
nucleus represents a major circadian
anterior part of the hypothalamus,
from the retina, and thus can keep
pacemaker occurred simultaneously
immediately dorsal and superior to the
the circadian rhythm consistent
in two laboratories, one headed by
optic chiasm and bilateral to the third
with the cycle of day and night.
Robert Y. Moore (then at the
ventricle. The suprachiasmatic nucleus
The process of aligning the cycle
University of Chicago) and the other
sends information to other hypothalamic
of the suprachiasmatic nucleus
headed by Irving Zucker at the
nuclei and the pineal gland to regulate body
with the cycle of day and night is
University of California, Berkeley.
temperature and production of cortisol and
called “entrainment.”
melatonin.
If cells from the suprachiasmatic
To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Neurons in the ventrolateral suprachiasmatic
nucleus are removed from the
discovery of the suprachiasmatic
nucleus have the ability for light-induced
brain and cultured, they maintain
nucleus as the circadian clock,
gene expression. Melanopsintheir own rhythm in the absence of
Charles A. Czeisler and Steven M.
containing ganglion cells in the retina have
external cues. This shows that the
Reppert organized a meeting at
a direct connection to the ventrolateral
suprachiasmatic nucleus can serve
Harvard Medical School in 1997.
suprachiasmatic nucleus via the
as an autonomous clock.
retinohypothalamic tract.
Destruction of the suprachiasmatic
Though Irving Zucker contributed to
The surachiasmatic nucleus is composed of
nucleus results in the complete
the discovery of the suprachiasmatic
densely packed, parvocellular neurons and
absence of a regular sleep/wake
nucleus, his advisor Robert Moore,
is nearly always identifiable by
rhythm.
suggested that Zucker leave graduate
cytoarchitectonic criteria.
school. Moore later recanted.
Circadian rhythms are found in
One of the first major papers on the role One division of the suprachiasmatic nucleus
many cells in the body outside of
of the suprachiasmatic nucleus was
has a large population of vasoactive
the suprachiasmatic nucleus
submitted to the journal Science, but
intestinal polypeptide-containing neurons.
“master clock.” Liver cells, for
rejected, and later published in a
The second division is characterized by a
example, appear to respond to
lower-tier journal.
population of vasopressin-containing
feeding rather than light.
neurons.

above and beyond any third factors.
A second question is why elaboration affects the
importance of elaborated information. Normally, an
explainer would elaborate on a component to provide
insight into or clarity about the elaborated component. For
example, “The circadian “clock” in mammals is located in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus…” is elaborated by “The
suprachiasmatic nucleus receives information about light
from the retina, and thus can keep the circadian rhythm
consistent with the cycle of day and night.” The elaborating
card explains a critical function of the suprachiasmatic
nucleus. Thus, it makes sense that the elaborating card
would make the elaborated card more important.
In order to test whether elaboration increases the
importance of the elaborated information by providing
insight into the elaborated information, we manipulated the
content of the elaboration (see Table 1). “Mechanistic”
elaborations explained details of how the elaborated
information works and thus provide insight into the
elaborated information. (By “mechanistic” we do not intend
to exclude other causal information such as a function or
non-causal information such as temporal sequences, parts of
a whole, subtypes, or mathematical algorithms. All of these
can further explain how something works.) “Too technical”
elaborations referred to concepts in the elaborating cards,

but used terminology that was likely far beyond the
comprehension level of a non-specialist and would not
actually provide the novice reader with any better
understanding of how the phenomenon works. Thus, the too
technical elaborations test whether information needs to
personally add to the comprehension of the phenomenon, in
order to affect the importance of the elaborated component.
Finally, people might use a simple pragmatic rule that
“important components of explanations are more frequently
elaborated than unimportant components.” In order to test
this possibility, we tested “historical” or sociological
elaborations that did not provide insight or clarity into how
these biological and technological phenomena work. In sum,
if providing insight into the elaborated component is
necessary for elaboration to increase the importance of the
elaborated component, then only the mechanistic
elaboration would suffice.
It is important to note that this elaboration manipulation
was fairly subtle. As demonstrated in Experiment 1, all or
almost all of the components in an explanation engage in
elaboration relationships, and the cards that were added to
provide additional elaboration in this experiment and the
cards that were elaborated upon were simply part of this
larger structure of elaboration relationships between
components. The elaborated and elaborating cards were

381

treated exactly the same as all the other cards and were not
in any way identified as being the subject of investigation.

elaborations. To assess this, we looked at the separate group
of participants' elaboration graphs. For each explanation
with which a participant worked, there were four cards of
each of the three elaboration types. From participants'
elaboration graphs, we took the average of the number of
elaboration cards that participants thought directly or
indirectly elaborated upon the intended key card per
elaboration type and per explanation (4 is the maximum).
Participants thought that most of the elaborating cards did
elaborate on the intended key cards; (M=3.13, SD=0.71) for
mechanistic elaborations, (M=3.19, SD=1.24) for historical
explanations, and (M=3.28, SD=0.69) for too technical
elaborations. A one-way repeated-measures ANOVA did
not find a main effect of explanation type, F(2,30)<1. This
ensures that any differences between the elaborated cards
due to the type of elaboration are not the product of
participants' failing to recognize the elaboration
relationships for these cards.
We also analyzed the importance of the elaborating cards
per se. As a baseline, the mechanistic elaborations were
generally viewed as somewhat important (M=5.78, SD=1.2).
The historical elaborations were intended to not actually
facilitate understand how the phenomena work. As
expected, these cards were rated as fairly unimportant
(M=2.00, SD=0.78), and significantly less important than
the mechanistic cards t(35)=18.37, p<.01. We were not
entirely sure whether the too technical cards would be
viewed as important or not. If participants had extensive
knowledge of the phenomena and could understand these
cards, they would be viewed as important, but even if
participants did not understand these cards, they still might
be viewed as potentially important. That is, it is obvious that
they do explain the science behind the phenomena, but they
likely would not contribute to the average readers'
comprehension. The too technical cards were viewed as
somewhat important (M=4.29, SD=1.08), less important
than the mechanistic cards, t(35)=6.36, p<.01, but more
important than the historical cards, t(35)=11.63, p<.01.
Elaborated Cards The main question was whether the
different types of elaborations increased the importance of
the elaborated key cards. Each participant worked with four
explanations, and within each explanation there was one key
card elaborated by each of the four types of elaboration.
Within a participant, we collapsed across the four
explanations. The key cards with mechanistic elaborations
were rated as more important (M=6.97. SD=1.29) than those
with historical elaborations (M=6.37, SD=1.31), t(35)=3.22,
p<.01, too technical elaborations (M=6.52, SD=1.32),
t(35)=2.82, p<.01, and no elaboration (M=6.49, SD=1.39),
t(35)=2.61, p=.01. Furthermore, the key cards with
historical elaborations, and too technical elaborations, were
not judged to be any more important than the key cards with
no elaboration, ts(35)<1.
Relationship Between Elaborated and Elaborating
Cards Did the degree to which participants viewed the
elaborating cards to be important per se predict the degree to
which they judged the key cards to be important? For each

Method
Participants There were 36 participants from the same
population.
Materials The explanations were similar to those in
Experiments 1, but were modified in one critical way. In
each explanation, four “key” cards were chosen, each of
which could be elaborated upon. For each of these four key
cards, 12 elaborating cards were created, four elaborating
cards of each of the three types (mechanistic, historical, and
too technical). Sample stimuli for one circadian rhythm key
card and its elaborating cards appear in Table 1. (Note that
the circadian rhythm explanation contained three other key
cards and associated elaborations, as well and other cards
presented to all participants like the cards in Figure 1.) For a
given key card, the three types of elaborating cards had the
same total word length. For example in Table 1, each of the
three sets of elaborating cards has a total word length of
125. This insured that no type of elaboration was generally
longer than another across participants.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions. Participants worked with all four
explanations in one of four counterbalanced orders such that
each explanation was first for some participants. For each
explanation, participants thoroughly read the cards until
they felt that they understood the explanation, and then rated
all the cards for importance (same as in Experiment 1). For
a given participant and a particular explanation, one key
card was elaborated upon by four mechanistic cards, a
second key card was elaborated by four historical cards, a
third by four too technical cards, and the fourth was not
elaborated upon. The pairing of a key card with the types of
elaboration was counter-balanced between subjects. The
elaborating cards and the key cards were treated just like all
the other cards and were not identified as the subject of
investigation in any way.
To ensure that participants actually thought that the
elaborating cards elaborated upon the key cards as intended,
a separate groups of 16 participants read the same
explanations as the main group of participants and drew
elaboration graphs of all the cards including the key cards
and elaborating cards (see Experiment 1 for the instructions
for drawing the elaboration graphs).

Results
The main results were that only the mechanistic elaborations
increased the importance of the key cards. Additionally,
degree of importance of the mechanistic elaborations per se
strongly predicted the importance of their key cards, but this
relationship was much weaker for the other elaborations.
Manipulation Checks We performed a manipulation check
to ensure that participants actually thought that the
elaborating cards elaborated on the key cards as intended,
and that this was true for the historical and too technical
elaborations to the same degree as the mechanistic

382

of the four explanations, and each of the three types of
elaborations, we computed correlations between the average
importance score of the four elaborating cards and the
importance score of the elaborated key card. Averaged
across the four explanations, the importance scores of the
mechanistic elaborations strongly predicted the importance
of their key cards (r=.61, p<.01). The importance of the
historical elaborations did not predict the importance of
their key cards (r=.14, p=.21), and those of the too technical
elaborations weakly predicted the importance of their key
cards (r=.28, p=.05). Furthermore, the correlations were
significantly stronger for the mechanistic cards than the
historical cards, Z=2.30, p=.02, and marginally stronger for
the mechanistic cards than the too complex cards, Z=1.71,
p=.08, non-directional. It should be noted, however, that
these findings do not necessarily imply that the importance
of the elaboration causes the importance of the key cards to
increase. It is possible that when a key card is viewed as
important, its elaborations are also viewed as important. The
findings do suggest a tight connection between the
importance of the key cards and mechanistic elaborations.

and nationalism). This explanation is different from those in
the experiments because 1) it deals with historical events
which were irrelevant in the current experiments and 2) it
focuses on a specific target, why World War I occurred, not
just a general understanding of how something works. Still,
parts of the explanation with the more elaboration will likely
be viewed as more important (e.g., if nationalism was
elaborated upon, one might view it as more important).
Experiment 2 suggests that in order for elaboration on
nationalism to increase the perceived importance of
nationalism, the elaboration would actually have to facilitate
the reasoner’s understanding. Merely using political jargon
about nationalism would not be sufficient. In sum, even
though there are many different types of explanations and
different goals, these findings may still apply.
In conclusion, the current experiments present novel
methods to examine how people determine which
components are most important in an explanation. The
results demonstrate that people piece together the structure
of elaboration relationships between components and use
the structure and insight provided by elaboration to identify
important components. These processes may be essential
and continuous in everyday cognition and may play a
critical role in helping us prune down an overwhelming
thicket of information into a more digestible form.

General Discussion
Two experiments demonstrated that the amount of
elaboration of a component of an explanation predicts its
importance. Experiment 1 found that components tended to
be rated as more important to the extent that they had more
elaboration. Experiment 2 suggested that elaboration
increases importance by providing insight into the
elaborated component. Too technical information, which
was viewed as moderately important, but was too technical
to contribute insight to the elaborated information, failed to
increase the importance of the elaborated information.
These findings raise a number of questions for future
research. Components of stories (van den Broek, 1988) and
features of concepts (Sloman, Love, & Ahn; 1998) with
causal relationships have been found to be particularly
important. What role do causal relationships play in
scientific explanations? In other research, we have found
that the causal relationships do not predict importance as
well as elaboration relationships. Still, the underlying web
of causal relationships that constitute phenomena like
diabetes and the circadian rhythm likely influence what
information people view as mechanistically important. For
example, a statement like “there are three types of Diabetes”
is not a cause or effect, but it does convey mechanistic
information about biological pathways, which likely
contributes to its importance.
Additionally, explanations are extremely diverse both in
terms of the phenomena they describe and the goals of the
explainer and reasoner. For example, someone might desire
to know about GPS so that he or she can use a handheld
GPS instead of understanding more generally how GPS
works. In the real world, people approach explanations from
many different perspectives and with different goals. Still,
elaboration may play a role. Consider an explanation of why
World War I occurred (e.g., mutual alliances, imperialism,

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship (Rottman) and NIH grant R37HD023922 (Keil).

References
Brown, A. L., & Smiley, S. S. (1978). The development of
strategies for studying texts. Child Development, 49(4),
1076–1088.
Johnson, R. E. (1970). Recall of prose as a function of the
structural importance of the linguistic units. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9(1), 12-20.
Keil, F. C. (2006). Explanation and understanding. Annual
Review of Psychology, 57, 227-54.
Marcu, D. (1999). Discourse trees are good indicators of
importance in text. Advances in Automatic Text
Summarization, 123-136.
McCarthy, P. M., et al. (2008). Identifying topic
sentencehood. Behavior Research Methods, 40(3), 647664.
Omanson, R. C. (1982). The relation between centrality and
story category variation. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 21(3), 326-337.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science,
22(2), 189-228.
Thorndyke, P.W. (1977) Cognitive structures in
comprehension and memory of narrative discourse.
Cognitive Psychology, 9, 77-110.
Van Den Broek, P. A. (1988). The effects of causal relations
and hierarchical position on the importance of story
statements. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 1-22.

383

