UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why Radicals Win the Newsday?: Ratcheting-up of Cultural Counterintuitiveness in Rumors
and NRM Doctrine

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0w40j555

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)

Author
Upal, M. Afzal

Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why Radicals Win the Newsday: Ratcheting-up of Cultural Counterintuitiveness in
Rumors and NRM Doctrine
M. Afzal Upal (Afzal.Upal@drdc-rdc.gc.ca)
Defence Research & Development Canada
1133 Shepherd Ave W, Toronto, ON,
M3M 3B9 Canada

Abstract
Culturally counterintuitive concepts are ideas that violate a
small number of justifiable expectations raised by
shared beliefs of a group of people. Previous studies
have shown that ideas that violate a small number of
expectations are better remembered by people than
ideas that conform to their expectations or ideas that
violate a large number of people’s expectations.
However, as counterintuitive ideas become embedded
in a group’s belief-system they lose their memorability
advantages and must change to regain those
advantages. This article presents two case studies
conducted to better understand the dynamics of the
diffusion of information. It outlines how a cognition
and culture approach can help us understand cultural
dynamics and offers new insights into rumor diffusion
and new religious movement splits.
Keywords: counterintuitive concepts, rumor diffusion, new
religious movements.

Introduction
The Windigo monster was a superhuman giant about
thirty feet tall, who lived in the forest and preyed on
human beings. The algonkians believed many spirits
inhabited the forest but only this was a cannibal. He
was described as having a heart of ice, no lips, huge
jagged teeth, and protuberant eyes rolling in blood.
His feet were a yard long with pointed heels and only
one toe. His hands were like claws. He hissed and
made a long-drawn-out thundering sounds,
accompanied by gruesome howls.”
(Page 109)
(Ezzo, 2008)
This crocodile was found in New Orleans swimming
down the street. 21 FT long, 4500 lbs, around 80
years old minimum.
Specialists said that he was looking to eat human
because he was too old to catch animals. This
crocodile was killed by the army last Sunday at 3:00
pm, currently he is in the freezer at the Azur hotel.
The contents of it’s stomach will be analyzed this
Friday at 2:30 pm.
(Snopes.com/katrina/photos/crocodile.asp)
Why and how do counterintuitive ideas such as above
spread in a society? Why are counterintuitive ideas so
prevalent in rumors and religious beliefs of people around
the globe?
Cognition and culture researchers have

suggested that a fruitful way to answer such questions is to
study mental structure of different types of concepts
focusing on their fit with people’s cognitive machinery to
understand which ideas are preferentially processed by
people (Boyer, 1994; Sperber, 1996).
All else being equal, ideas that are easier to comprehend,
memorize and communicate to others are more likely to
become widespread and hence stand a good chance of
becoming part of a group’s shared belief-system. Much of
the cognition and culture work has focused on cognitive
processes connected to memory to identify ideas that are
more memorable for people. One of the most significant
achievements of this approach is the so called minimal
counterintuitiveness (MC) hypothesis (Boyer, 1994, 2001;
Boyer & Ramble, 2001) which suggests that minimally
counterintuitive (MCI) concepts that violate a small number
of intuitive expectations (such as, a tree that talks, a rock
that eats, and an invisible cow) are more memorable than
either intuitive concepts (such as, a green tree, a brown rock,
and a good person) or maximally counterintuitive concepts
that violate a larger number of intuitive expectations (such
as, an invisible talking tree that does not occupy any space
and a sad illuminant rock swimming to cross a river). A
number of subsequent empirical studies (J. Barrett & Nyhof,
2001; Boyer & Ramble, 2001; Gonce, Upal, Slone, &
Tweney, 2006; Upal, 2005; Upal, Gonce, Tweney, & Slone,
2007) have found some support for better memory for the
MCI concepts.
Traditionally, the MC hypothesis has been used to explain
the fact that widespread religious concepts around the globe
tend to be minimally counterintuitive (J. L. Barrett, 2008;
Boyer, 2001). Traditionally, some cognitive scientists of
religion have argued that the MC hypothesis only applies to
those concepts that are counterintuitive to all human beings
regardless of their age, gender, cultural knowledge, or
mental beliefs (J. L. Barrett, 2008). Upal (2010; 2011) has
argued that counterintuitiveness is inherently dependent on
the expectations of an agent which are generated by the
agent’s mental beliefs at the time. Thus counterintuitive
ideas are counterintuitive in a given context.
A
counterintuitive idea can eventually become intuitive once
people get used to it.
The notion of counterintuitiveness as context-dependent
violation of people’s expectations, also allows us to apply
the MC hypothesis to a much larger class of concepts. In
particular, Upal (2010; 2011) has argued that ideas that
violate a small number of expectations raised by shared

1324

beliefs of a group of people should also be more memorable
than ideas that conform to people’s cultural beliefs. Upal
calls such ideas culturally counterintuitive and suggests that
the memory advantages afforded to the culturally
unorthodox ideas should give such ideas transmission
advantages over culturally familiar ideas.
The dynamic model proposed by Upal (2010; 2011) also
suggests that once a culturally counterintuitive idea becomes
widely embedded in shared belief-system of a group of
people and no longer violates their shared beliefs, it loses its
memorability advantages. In order to violate people’s
expectations in the new environment, an idea has to either
add more counterintuitiveness features (the so called
ratcheting up of counterintuitiveness, Upal 2010) or remove
the counterintuitive features that people now expect to find
in relationship with this concept. One result of the
ratcheting-up is that the ratcheted-up-concept, which would
have seemed maximally counterintuitive in the original
context, will only be seen as minimally counterintuitive to
the group that was able to build cultural scaffolding to
embed the original counterintuitiveness in their shared
belief-system. Thus a history of gradual change can lead to
the spread of maximally counterintuitive concepts. Upal
(2010; 2011) suggests that this may be how maximally
counterintuitive religious concepts such as the Abrahamic
God and ghosts have become widespread. Upal (2011)
further argued that:
The ratcheting-up of counterintuitiveness also predicts a
continuous transmission advantage for unorthodox ideas
that violate cultural expectations over traditional ideas
that do not. This explains the continuing evolution of
cultural beliefs among groups ranging from post-modern
artists to new religious movements. Cultural historians
often resort to using the analogy with waves on a beach
to explain the waves of innovation that seem to
continually change the landscape of culture. Art
historians for instance see the last few centuries of
Western Art history as waves of impressionism,
expressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, and
surrealism etc. Any two historically contiguous waves
have an interesting paradoxical relationship with each
other. The new trend is both defined in opposition to the
old one and also as a continuation and improvement of
the old trend. At the core of each trend is a minimally
counterintuitive idea that is advocated by a group of
innovators and becomes widespread because it is
culturally counterintuitive for the population of interest.
However, once it becomes widely accepted and
integrated into the cultural beliefs of the group of
individuals, it loses its memorability advantages making
room for yet another wave of innovation. (Page 13)
While the arguments sound plausible, confirming claims
about dynamics of people’s shared beliefs is not an easy
task (Paluck & Green, 2009). Social and cognitive
psychologists studying people’s identity beliefs using
empirical in-lab studies have been accused of ignoring
factors that affect people’s identity beliefs in the real world.

Anthropologists and sociologists studying shared beliefs of
cultural groups in the real world through qualitative
techniques are accused of abandoning scientific controls
needed for hypothesis confirmation and testing. We believe
that both techniques are useful for cognition and culture
research and complement each other. A number of previous
studies (Gonce, et al., 2006; Upal, 2005, 2007; Upal, et al.,
2007) have focused on testing various aspects of the
context-based model of the MC effect through empirical inlab studies. This paper presents the results of two
qualitative studies conducted to see if changes to people’s
shared beliefs in the real world exhibit the patterns
hypothesized by the cultural counterintuitiveness model.

Case Studies
The first-case studies the rumors that spread in the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans in 2005. The secondcase studies the doctrinal arguments that led to the split of
the Ahmadiyya Movement in Islam (Friedman, 2003;
Lavan, 1974; Walter, 1918) into two rival groups: Lahori
and Qadiani (B. M. Ahmad, 2007). We chose the two
studies because they represent two seemingly diverse
instances of cultural change. The Hurricane Katrina rumors
were primarily spread in a 21st century western population
through modern media while the Ahmadiyya Movement
split happened about a century ago in a rural part of India
with little or no media attention.

Case 1: Hurricane Katrina Rumors
As the centre of category-3 storm, called Hurricane
Katrina, passed over New Orleans on August 29, 2005, over
50 levees designed to protect the city were breached by
surging water. By August 31, over 80% of the city was
flooded with some parts more than 15 feet under water.
While over 90% of the city’s residents were evacuated,
thousands of the poor and elderly remained behind. Some
of those who remained in their houses had to swim to safety
or had to be evacuated on boats. Thousands of evacuees
were brought (or made their own way) to the Louisiana
Superdome and the New Orleans Convention Center. At its
peak, the number of people in the two buildings is thought
to have reached 40,000. The situation did not get better
with passing of the eye of the storm because of the flood
waters that remained. On August 31, governor Kathleen
Blanco declared a public health emergency for the entire
Gulf Coast and ordered a mandatory evacuation of all those
remaining in New Orleans. However, evacuating such a
large number of people remained a challenge and took
several days to organize.
The events leading up the arrival of the hurricane in New
Orleans and its aftermath were extensively covered by the
worldwide media. The major US TV networks, newspapers,
and various global media outlets had numerous reporters
assigned to around-the-clock coverage of the storm and its
aftermath. People in the US and around the world were
shocked to see the extent of the damage shown on their
television screens. The storm winds and the water had

1325

damaged thousands of homes and killed hundreds of people.
The situation of the survivors at the Superdome and the
Convention Center was not much better. With no electricity
or city services and most of the highways damaged, it was a
challenge to provide water and food to the survivors. The
Superdome roof itself suffered damage from the storm. The
roof developed holes and water leaked in. The lower level
of the dome was flooded. Without any power and water or
supplies, sanitary conditions at the two evacuation centers
deteriorated rapidly. Heat, humidity, and confinement of
thousands of people in closed space with no obvious
resolution in sight also made the situation worse. People in
the US and around the world were shocked to see thirdworld-like living conditions of the evacuees. They were
surprised by how slow and how ineffective the response of
the one of the richest and most powerful governments on the
globe had been in face of the suffering of its own people.
It was in this environment that a number of rumors began
to spread. These rumors implied that the situation in New
Orleans was even worse. There were reports of gangs
running amok at the Superdome. It was said that babies
were being raped and people were being murdered.
Apparently fears of being shot down had prevented rescue
helicopters from landing on the roof of the dome. There
were reports of bodies of murder victims piling up inside the
convention center and the Superdome. Many of these
reports were picked up by major news networks and
broadcast around the world. New Orleans Police Chief
Eddie Compass was broadcast as saying: “We have
individuals who are getting raped; we have individuals who
are getting beaten.” He also told Oprah Winfrey that babies
were being raped at the Superdome. On the same show,
Mayor Ray Nagin warned: ``They have people standing out
there, have been in that frickin' Superdome for five days
watching dead bodies, watching hooligans killing people,
raping people.” Days later, when people had been moved
out of the two centers, it became clear that most of these
reports had been either outright false or at least exaggerated.
Hurricane Katrina rumors were not the only ones to
follow this pattern as they spread. Rumor psychologists
have seen this pattern often enough that they have a name
for it. In fact, they have several names according to rumor
psychologists Difonzo and Bordia (2007):
adding has been referred to as “snowballing” (Rosnow
1991), invention and elaboration (G. W. Allport &
Postman, 1947b), “compounding” (Peterson & Gist,
1951), “embroidering” (G. W. Allport & Postman
1947v), and “fabrication” (Sinha, 1952). (Page 135)
Rumor snowballing appears to be an instance of
ratcheting-up of cultural counterintuitiveness. While social
factors such as political uncertainty and lack of a credible
official narrative (Allport & Postman, 1947) clearly have an
impact on rumor generation and growth, rumors, that violate
people’s expectations but can be made sense of, catch
people’s attention the way expectation conformant pieces of
information simply cannot.
As Clark (2008) states,
surprisingness is one of 8 ½ laws of rumor propagation:

you're probably familiar with at least one notorious
malapropism from President George W. Bush: "The
problem with the French is that they don't have a word
for 'entrepreneur.'" Or this embarrassing gem from
the pop starlet Mariah Carey: "When I watch TV and
see those poor starving kids all over the world, I can't
help but cry. I mean, I'd love to be skinny like that, but
not with all those flies and death and stuff." Can you
believe they actually said these things?
Well, don't. Both quips were made up by pranksters.
Even so, they enjoyed viral spread for the simple
reason that both are juicy enough to be shocking—yet
not so far-fetched that we doubt the two parties could
have uttered them.
(Page 2) (Clark, 2008)
Schank (1999) argued that stories such as surprising
rumors catch people’s attention because they violate their
expectations. This indicates a gap in their world knowledge
and presents an opportunity to learn. Such ‘learning
opportunities’ (Schank, 1999) cause people to update their
beliefs. Once people have heard enough rumors that
reinforce a similar point, and have revised their world model
accordingly, the thesis of such rumors becomes
conventional wisdom. Once this happens rumors lose their
interestingness and start to die. In order to catch people’s
interest in the new environment, a rumor must change by
either building on this counterintuitiveness or by removing
it. Hurricane Katrina rumors clearly exhibit this pattern.
The first reports from New Orleans about thousands of poor
people unable to evacuate from the city and being housed in
poor conditions without water and food were initially
shocking but soon they became conventional wisdom and
lost their shock value. Later news reports added lawlessness
to the mix to keep the interests of their viewers. Once theft
and looting in New Orleans became conventional wisdom
and were no longer news-worthy, reports of rapes and
murders began to emerge. Initially reports talked about a
small number of isolated incidents but later reports added to
the numbers as well as intensity of the incidents. It was no
longer the adult women who were getting raped, now it was
underage girls, and once that lost its shock-value, babies!
The cultural counterintuitiveness model suggests that this
snowballing is not a pathological condition but a necessary
consequence of how people comprehend, remember, and
communicate information. As a wave of rumors advocating
a particular point becomes widespread, it changes the
informational context in which new rumors must operate.
In the new environment, rumors must change or die. This is
essentially what rumor pschologist report finding in the real
world, as Kapferer (1990) concludes:
Snowballing is the only way for a rumor to last. It
is a necessary condition of rumor persistence.
Indeed identical repitition kills the news value of
all information. Were a rumor to be repeated word
for word, without any modification whatsoever,
throughout its diffusion process, its death would be
thereby accelerated. (Page 108)

1326

While ratcheting-up of counterintuitiveness is one
prediction of the cultural counterintuitivness model, another
prediction is that once a counterintuitive entity or event
becomes mundane, removing counterintuitiveness can
become just as surprising and interesting for people. The
“rumor-debunking” news stories that replaced the initial
“doom and gloom” news stories of the first week of
coverage can be considered to be messages of this type.
The following brief of the salon.com story from October 20,
2005 is typical of these stories:
The reports coming out of New Orleans in the
immediate aftermath of Hurricane Katrina were
shocking. Stories of murder, rape, and relief
helicopters being fired upon raced around the world
in the form of breathless headlines. Problem is, most
of them were wrong.

This suggests that rumor propagating pranksters are
not the only ones who can employ counterintuitiveness
to achieve their objective of achieving maximum
distribution for their viewpoint, those who are
interested in debunking rumors can also use surprise to
gain people’s attention and unpeel layers of
counterintuitiveness that have been carefully weaved
by rumor-mongers.
Case 2: The Ahmadiyya Jamaat Split into Qadiani
and Lahore Factions
The Ahmadiyya Movement (Atkinston, 2002; Friedman,
2003; Lavan, 1974; Walter, 1918) was founded by Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad (Dard, 1948) in the late nineteenth century
in Northwest India. The son of a minor feudal lord, with
claims to Turko-Persian pedigree, Ahmad gained early fame
in Amritsar District as a defender of orthodox Islam against
Christian missionaries and Hindu revivalist movements that
were aggressively seeking to convert local Muslims. His
early efforts at engaging Christian missionaries and Hindu
Arya leaders in public debates were appreciated by the local
ulema-religious leaders. Starting in the 1880s, however, he
claimed that he was receiving revelation from God. He
further claimed that that he had been divinely appointed as a
reformer of Islam.
Islamic tradition describes a hierarchy of reformers
ranging from saint-like figures called mujaddid to prophets
called nabi or rasul. A mujaddid introduces reforms in
religious doctrine but a failure to pledge one’s allegiance (or
bayah) to him does not throw one out of the circle of Islam.
Prophets on the other hand, bring new laws and scriptures
from God and have to be followed to achieve salvation.
Claimants to the offices of mujaddid and nabi/rasul have
been treated very differently in the history of Islam. Most
claimants to the office of mujaddid (e.g., Shah Wali Ullah of
Delhi) were tolerated by most other Muslims and even
revered by some. All of those who claimed to be prophets,
however, were vehemently opposed and their murder was
religiously sanctioned by a majority of ulema. These
include a series of tribal chiefs who declared themselves

prophets following the death of the Prophet Muhammad in
632 AD. They were militarily attacked, defeated and killed
under the commands of the first successor (or Khalifa) to
the Prophet Muhammad.
In 1882, Ahmad claimed that God had appointed him a
mujaddid of the 14th Islamic century. His claim was not
accepted by most Muslims or even his own wife and
children. He was, however, able to convince some Muslims
that Islam was under threat and the only way to save it was
to reform it. By 1889 he had converged on the first great
reform that he felt was urgently needed to save Islam from
Christian missionaries. He wrote:
Through His blessings, His kindness, and His
forgiveness He has proved to me that Jesus, may peace
be on him, neither died on the cross nor was raised to
the heaven but instead was saved and came to Kashmir
and died there. These are not just stories, they have been
fully proved through a number of arguments as I have
written in my book, ‘Jesus in India’ so I say to you with
full force that I have been given the knowledge to break
the cross as promised in Hadith.”
(Page 168)
This claim ran counter to the traditional beliefs of most
Indian Muslims. Just a few years ago, Ahmad himself had
declared that he believed that Jesus had been physically
raised to the heavens by God to save him the disgrace of
dying on the cross and that Jesus will physically descend
from heaven towards the end of times to lead the final
victory of Islam over infidels. His new claim of Jesus
having died a natural death in old age violated expectations
raised by shared beliefs of Indian Muslims. The cultural
counterintuitiveness model suggests that people remember a
counterintuitive idea only if they can justify its
counterintuitiveness,
Ahmad presented a number of
arguments to justify his culturally counterintuitive claim
about Jesus’ death (M. G. Ahmad, 1909).
(I) Argument from necessity: Jesus’ death is needed to
blunt the Christian missionary argument that Jesus
is a superior prophet to Muhammad because while
Muhammad lies buried six-feet under ground,
Jesus is sitting on the right hand of God.
(II) Argument from rationality: Lifting people
physically to the heaven and descending them back
to earth is against sunnatullah i.e., the law of
nature as laid out by God.
(III) Argument from tradition: The prophet Muhammad
and his companions had believed that Jesus had
lived a full life and died a normal death but that
these beliefs have been lost as Islamic doctrine had
became corrupted over time. The process of
knowledge-corruption was similar to the one
through which Muslims believe that doctrines of
the people of the book (Christian and Jews)
became corrupted over time.
Since old Jesus had died and was not going to descend
from heaven, the traditional Islamic prophecies regarding
Jesus’ second coming had to be fulfilled by the birth of a
new Muslim prophet who was similar in spirit to Jesus.

1327

Ahmad claimed that God has told him that he was the
Promised Messiah: Jesus returned in spirit.
“The Messiah, son of Mary, prophet of Allah, had died
and in his attribute thou hast come in accordance with
the promise. And the promise of Allah was bound to be
fulfilled”
(M. G. Ahmad, 1897)
He also announced that he would be establishing a formal
community and accepting bayah.
Those who were
convinced by these arguments and justifications became part
of the Ahmadiyya Jamaat.
Studying what followed
illustrates what happens when counterintuitive concepts
become enmeshed in group processes.
Counterintuitive ideas become part and parcel of the
identity of the group and its members. This happens, first
and foremost, because a close association is created between
the counterintuitive claims and the group especially in the
minds of group members but also to a lesser extent in the
minds of out-group members who are repeatedly exposed to
the group’s ideology and have to defend why they are not
converting to it. Thus any mention of Jesus’ natural death
reminds Ahmadiyyas of their identity as members of the
Ahmadiyya community. Once this association is firmly
established, the group authority figures and high identifiers
in the group have to express their devotion to the
counterintuitive ideas in positive terms. The next generation
following these role-models learns that believing in reality
of these claims is an important part of group membership.
Thus counterintuitive claims become institutionalized and
even though they are no longer seem counterintuitive to
most group members, they can persist because of this
institutional support.
Conventionalization and institutionalization does not
mean that cultural innovation stops. New ideas that violate
people’s cultural expectations have memorability
advantages but now the memorability advantages must
overcome the institutional forces of orthodoxy trying to
prevent further innovation. This struggle can sometimes
lead to lead to a schism in the group eventually leading to a
group splitting up into two or more smaller subgroups. This
is what happened about six years after the death of Mirza
Ghulam Ahmad when the Ahmadiyya comunity split into
two factions: Lahori and Qadiani (B. M. Ahmad, 2007).
Following the death of the universally respected but
administratively
ineffective
Moulavi
Nur-ud-Din,
conservative members of the movement declared Ahmad’s
eldest son Bashir-ud-Din as a Caliph. Progressive members
of the community rejected his selection and argued that
since Ahmad was not a ‘full prophet’ he was not to be
followed by Caliphs as Prophet Muhammad had been. The
progressives moved their headquarters to the metropolis of
Lahore and became known as Lahoris. Those who
remained in the village of Qadian and pledged allegiance to
Ahmad’s son as a Caliph are sometimes called Qadianis.
Over the next few decades Qadianis and Lahoris fought
with each other to recruit more members and gain more
resources. At the start, both communities possessed
relatively comparable resources and seemed to be well

matched for the fight. The Lahoris were generally better
educated, wealthier, and better connected than Qadianis.
Furthermore, the Lahori leadership was experienced in
running the Jamaat’s organizations and publications. For
instance, the leading Lahori leader Moulana Muhammad Ali
was Sadr Anjuman’s founding Secretary and the founding
editor of the Review of Religions, the Ahmadiyya Jamaat’s
primary mouthpiece to the world. He had a graduate degree
in English while Bashir-ud-Din the Qadiani Caliph had
barely finished high school. The Qadiani group however,
was composed of a larger number of more traditionallooking, less educated, and more devoted members. The
biggest success of the Qadiani group came early as they
were able to force the Lahori group to abandon Qadian and
the Sadr Anjuman offices even though the Lahoris may have
taken some of Sadr Anjuman’s money with them (Shahid,
2007).
Two related points of debate and disagreement emerged
among the Lahori and Qadiani group: the prophethood of
Ahmad, and necessity of believing in Ahmad as a
precondition for one’s salvation. On both issues, Qadiani
Caliph Bashir-ud-Din raised the stakes and declared that
Ahmad had been a full prophet in every sense of the word
and one could not be saved without a formal bayah on his or
his Caliph’s hands. This made all non-Ahmadi (and nonQadiani) Muslims infidels, which meant that Qadianis could
no longer pray with non-Qadianis, marry them, or take part
in their marriage or death ceremonies. On all these issues
the Qadiani position represented a clear departure from the
position taken by Ahmad himself who when questioned
about his claim to prophecy in light of the orthodox Muslim
belief in finality of Muhammad’s prophethood, denied that
he had ever claimed to be a prophet. He said:
"Can a wretched imposter who claims messengership
and prophethood for himself have any belief in the Holy
Quran? And can a man who believes in the Holy
Quran, and believes the verse `He is the Messenger of
Allah and the Khatam an-nabiyyin' to be the word of
God, say that he is a messenger and prophet after the
Holy Prophet Muhammad?"
(Page 27)
Ahmadis had also been free to marry Muslims and take
part in their social activities during Ahmad’s lifetime. In
fact, Ahmad himself had proposed to marry Muhammadi
Begum, even though she was a non-Ahmadi at the time.
Despite the advantages offered by doctrinal continuity, after
passing of a century since the split, it is clear that the
subgroup that ratcheted-up the counterintuitiveness won the
day in terms of gaining resources. While millions of
Qadianis are found around the globe, only a few thousand
Lahoris remain. Qadianis today are also wealthier, better
educated and no less urbane than Lahoris.
As Friedmann (2003) argues the Ahmadiyya split was a
messy affair involving a number of issues besides doctrinal
differences, our analysis suggests, however, that part of the
reason for the Qadiani success lies in building up on the
culturally counterintuitive claims of Ahmad.
Once
Ahmad’s original claims became intuitive and well

1328

integrated into the Ahmadiyya belief-system, further
innovations were needed to keep the flock’s attention. The
ratcheting up of counterintuitiveness allowed Qadianis to
gain more attention and win more recruits than their Lahori
cousins who had decided to tone down some of Ahmad’s
most controversial claims.

Conclusions
This article has presented two case studies of the spread
of culturally counterintuitive ideas in two very different
cultural groups. We believe that such cross-cultural case
studies are essential for further development of cognition
and culture research which has hitherto almost exclusively
focused on in-lab quantitative studies. They not only allow
us to validate our theoretical models and fully explore their
consequences in the context of a real world phenomenon but
they also offer new insights into the social phenomenon of
interest. Qualitative studies are not suggested as a
replacement for quantitative studies. The cultural
counterintuitiveness model that provided the theoretical
framework for the present studies has been developed and
validated using quantitative empirical experiments. In lab
empirical experiments are also in the works to better
understand the issues of the interaction of the spread of
counterintuitive ideas with development of group identity.
The theoretical lens of social counterintuitiveness that we
bring to the study of the Ahmadiyya split also suggests that
it is the Qadiani doctrine that represents a departure from
the traditional Ahmadiyya beliefs and not the Lahori
doctrine as has been traditionally assumed by scholars of the
Ahmadiyya Movement (Friedman, 2003; Lavan, 1974).

References
Ahmad, B. M. (2007). The Truth About the Split (4th ed.).
Tilford, UK: Islam International.
Ahmad, M. G. (1897). Anjam Atham. Amritsar, India: Riaze-Hind Press.
Ahmad, M. G. (1900). Azala Aouham. Amritsar, India:
Riaz-e-Hind Press.
Ahmad, M. G. (1909). Maseeh Hindustan Mein. Amritsar,
India: Riaz-e-Hind Press.
Allport, G., & Postman, L. (1947). The Psychology of
Rumor. New York, NY: H. Holt and Company.
Atkinston, B. (2002). Ahmadiyat: A brief introduction to
Ahmadiyat. Review of Religions, 97(3), 24-28.
Barrett, J., & Nyhof, M. (2001). Spreading non-natural
concepts: The role of intuitive conceptual
structures in memory and transmission of cultural
materials. Cognition and Culture, 1, 69-100.
Barrett, J. L. (2008). Coding and Quantifying
Counterintuitiveness in religious concepts:
Theoretical and methodological reflections.
Method and Theory in the Study of Religion, 20,
308-338.

Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion Explained: The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Boyer, P., & Ramble, C. (2001). Cognitive templates for
religious concepts. Cognitive Science, 25, 535-564.
Clark, T. (2008). The 8 1/2 laws of Rumor Spread.
Psychology Today, 10.
Dard, A. R. (1948). Life of Ahmad : founder of the
Ahmadiyya movement Lahore: Tabshir Publication.
Difonzo, N., & Bordia, P. (2007). Rumor Psychology:
Social
and
Organizational
Approaches.
Washington, DC: APA Press.
Ezzo, D. A. (2008). Cannibalism in Cross Cultural
Perspective. Indianapolis, IN: Dog Ear Publishing.
Friedman, Y. (2003). Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of
Ahmadi Religious Thought and Its Medieval
Background. New Dehli: Oxford University Press.
Gonce, L., Upal, M. A., Slone, D. J., & Tweney, R. (2006).
Role of Context in the Recall of Counterintuitive
Concepts. Cognition and Culture, 6(3-4), 521-547.
Kapferer, J. N. (1990). Rumors: Uses, Interpretations, and
Uses. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Lavan, S. (1974). The Ahmadiyya Movement: A History and
Perspective. New Dehli: Manohar Book Service.
Paluck, E. L., & Green, D. P. (2009). Prejudice Reduction:
What works? A Review and Assessmet of
Research Practice. Annual Review of Psychology,
60, 339-367.
Schank, R. C. (1999). Dynamic Memory Revisited. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Shahid, D. M. (2007). Tareekh-e-Ahmadiyyat Jild 3 (2nd
ed.). Qadian, India.
Sperber, D. (1996). Explaining culture: A naturalistic
approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Upal, M. A. (2005). Role of Context in Memorability of
Intuitive and Counterintuitive Concepts. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, LEA.
Upal, M. A. (2007). What is More Memorable
Counterintuitive
Concepts
Interpreted
Metaphorically or Literally? Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Nashville, TN.
Upal, M. A. (2011). From Individual to Social
Counterintuitiveness: How layers of innovation
weave together to form multilayered tapestries of
human cultures. Mind and Society, 10.
Upal, M. A., Gonce, L., Tweney, R., & Slone, D. J. (2007).
Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context
affects comprehension and memorability of
counterintuitive concepts. Cognitive Science, 31(3),
415-439.
Walter, H. A. (1918). The Ahmadiya Movement. London,
UK: Oxford University Press.

1329

