UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Young Toddlers' Understanding of Graded Preferences
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vb7m6zz
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 33(33)
Authors
Hu, Jane
Lucas, Christopher
Griffiths, Thomas
et al.
Publication Date
2011-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

               Young Toddlers’ Understanding of Graded Preferences
                                                      Jane Hu
                                           University of California, Berkeley
                                                Christopher Lucas
                                              Carnegie Mellon University
                                                Thomas Griffiths
                                           University of California, Berkeley
                                                       Fei Xu
                                           University of California, Berkeley
Abstract: Infants must infer others’ preferences to decipher the social world. Past research has suggested that
infants use statistical information to infer others’ preferences (Kushnir, Xu & Wellman, 2010), but the nature of
children’s understanding of preferences has been somewhat underspecified. The current experiment explores how
statistical information helps infants decipher the strength (Experiment 1) and hierarchy of preferences (Experiment
2). In Experiment 1, infants observed an actor choosing object A over either three different toys (A vs. many
condition) or just one toy (A vs. one condition). Infants in the A vs. many condition inferred a stronger preference
for A than infants in the A vs. one condition. In Experiment 2, infants who observed an actor choosing object A
consistently over object C and object B inconsistently over C inferred the actor’s preference for object A over B.
Results were compared to predictions made by the mixed multinomial logit model.
                                                          1957

