UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Bayesian Model of How People Search Online Consumer Reviews

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/48j832nk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Lelis, Stelios
Howes, Andrew

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Bayesian Model of How People Search Online Consumer Reviews
Stelios Lelis (stelios.lelis@gmail.com)
Manchester Business School, Booth Street West
Manchester, M15 6PB UK

Andrew Howes (andrew.howes@mbs.ac.uk)
Manchester Business School, Booth Street West
Manchester, M15 6PB UK
Abstract

Literature Review

In this paper we describe a model of how people search online
consumer reviews in service of purchasing decisions. The
model is similar to other recent models of information seeking
in that it updates estimates of products’ utilities using
Bayesian inference. It is different, in that it stops seeking
further information when the confidence that one of the
alternatives is the best exceeds a threshold. Findings from a
controlled experiment support the model by suggesting that
high variance in review ratings causes people to seek more
information.

Online Opinions and Decision Making
Most research in the effects of online opinions on decision
making concentrate on their influence on attitudes towards
products and product choices, and on the mediators of
opinions’ persuasive power (Huang & Chen, 2006; Park &
Han, 2008; Xue & Phelps, 2004). Further, limited evidence
suggests that consumers consult online opinions to reduce
buying-related risks and decrease decision effort (HennigThurau & Walsh, 2004), and that the mere availability of
one opinion for a single option decreases search time
(Smith, Menon, & Sivakumar, 2005). However, these
studies do not allow us to ascertain the process of how
people consult online consumer reviews.
One possibility is that online decision-making processes
are similar to offline decision-making processes. Many
studies of traditional offline word-of-mouth suggest that
advice from family and friends facilitate consumers in
reducing buying related risks and informational
uncertainties; for example see (Lutz & Reilly, 1974). Taken
together, these studies suggest that a potential explanation
of consumers’ opinion seeking should incorporate choice
related uncertainties.

Keywords: Information search; online consumer reviews;
user modeling; threshold models.

Introduction
Online opinion forums like Epinions and c|net, and review
sections of retailer websites are used by people eager to
both share and gather views on interesting products. Using
these sites, those who have made purchases can contribute
reviews, and those who are planning to make a purchase
can find information that may assist decision making.
In recent years, consumer opinions have become an
important component of the product related information
that is available to potential buyers (Bei, Chen, &
Widdows, 2004). However, despite their apparent
importance, there is very little work exploring their impact
on how people search for information in service of
purchasing decisions. Yet, developing an understanding of
how potential buyers consult online consumer reviews
could provide insights into how consumer search processes
can be facilitated through interface design (Miles, Howes,
& Davies, 2000).
In this paper we report work towards an understanding
of why and how people consult online consumer reviews.
We propose a criterion-dependent Bayesian choice model
of online consumer reviews search and inspection. From
this model, we derive two predictions regarding the depth
of consumers’ opinion search and subsequently we report a
test of the predictions that used a controlled experiment.
To foreshadow the results, the experiment provides some
evidence to support the model but some of the findings
were inconclusive. Possible explanations are outlined.
Finally, recommendations for further investigation are
discussed.

Information Search and Stopping Rules
In cognitive science the study of information search tasks
has been strongly influenced by Pirolli and Card’s
information foraging theory (IFT) (1999), which predicts
user behavior in general search tasks. More specifically, it
predicts that a patch of information should be left, so as to
exploit another, when the rate of within patch gains
diminishes below the expected average rate of gain.
Similarly, Fu and Pirolli’s SNIF-ACT model (2007),
predicts users’ link selection on a Web page and when the
current web page will be left.
Traditional information economics puts the search for
information in a decision making context. Likewise we set
opinion seeking in a product choice situation. Furthermore,
information economics posits that people search for
information until the costs of searching for more outweigh
the potential gains of acquiring it (Stigler, 1961). Similarly
Fu and Gray (2006) assume that information seeking in a
map-navigation task stops when the estimated utility of the
information is lower than the information seeking cost. Both

553

information utility and gain are opertionalised in terms of
time. In our model, we view information collection as a
means to reduce choice related uncertainties.
Threshold models take a different view on when people
stop acquiring information (For an excellent discussion see
(Hausmann & Lage, 2008)). The core idea is that people
stop searching for information when their confidence that
one of the decision alternatives outperforms the rest reaches
or exceeds a threshold. In our model we utilize a similar
‘desired level of confidence’ criterion of stopping opinion
seeking. We assume that prospective purchasers stop
reading opinions, i.e. they stop searching for information,
when they have decided which product is best given some
desired level of confidence.
Figure 1: Graphical representation of consumer’s productspecific utility distributions.

The Model
We view and model opinion search and acquisition as a
means to reduce choice related uncertainties. In line with
proposed models of information acquisition (Hagerty &
Aaker, 1984; Moorthy, Ratchford, & Talukdar, 1997), we
assume that the consumer faces uncertainty about how the
products under consideration perform, and that opinion
acquisition reduces this uncertainty. That is, the consumer is
not sure of products’ true value. Rather he holds beliefs
about each product’s true mean value, which in the model
are represented by product-specific distributions gi, where i
stands for product. The consumer evaluates the products
using a utility function U(gi). Therefore, consumers’
uncertainty about how the products perform is represented
in utility terms with product-specific utility distributions
denoted by fi = U(gi). We assume that the utility function is
the identity one, consequently fi = gi. The consumer updates
his beliefs about product’s true mean value (and thus utility)
by acquiring reviews.
At any point during the search process the consumer faces
uncertainty about which product out-performs the rest. We
denote this uncertainty as p(t), where t stands for time step.
It is the probability that the product with the current highest
mean estimated utility will turn out not to be so. Figure 1
pictures consumer’s product-specific utility distributions in
a binary choice; p(t) is analogous to the degree of overlap
between the two distributions. As long as the uncertainty,
namely p(t), is high, the decision maker keeps acquiring
reviews, and updates his beliefs about products’ true mean
value. However, as soon as p(t) falls below a threshold
value, opinion acquisition stops and the product with the
highest mean estimated utility is selected. The stopping rule
is a variation of satisficing (Simon, 1955) in which the
aspiration level is not product value, but rather the
confidence that one of the products is better than the others1.

Model Description
The model describes information search in a binary choice.
We assume that the true value of product i follows a Normal
distribution. The decision maker does not know the mean of
that distribution, i.e. product’s mean value, but he does
know its variance2. Each individual review is a ‘signal’ of
product value and follows the above mentioned normal
distribution3. The decision maker holds beliefs about the
mean of the true product value, gi, and product’s utility, fi,
and as more opinions are acquired the beliefs are being
updated. We assume decision maker’s prior beliefs of
product’s i true mean value at time step 0 to follow a
Normal distribution with mean µi(0) and variance σi2(0).
At each time step t the consumer (i) selects a product for
which to read a review, (ii) inspects the selected product’s
next review and updates his beliefs about product’s true
mean value and utility, (iii) calculates the probability p(t),
and (iv) decides whether to stop the search process and
make a choice or to obtain more reviews. Below we
describe each action in detail.
(i) Selection of product for which to read review: At time
step t = 1 the product is randomly selected from
consumer’s consideration set. At time step t > 1 the
product for which to read a review is that of previous
time step t – 1, unless all of the product’s reviews have
been read, or a switch to another product threshold has
been reached. The switch threshold is defined in terms
of p’s difference between the two last time steps, p(tRUM’s P(i) are related. If E(Ui) < E(Uj) then p(t) = P(i), whereas,
if E(Ui) > E(Uj), p(t) = P(Ui < Uj) = 1 - P(i).
2
Off-course the assumption of known variance is a
simplification. The model can be extended to incorporate unknown
variance but on the current state of development the simplified
model proved capable of yielding testable predictions.
3
Hu et al. (2007) recently demonstrated that the distribution of
online consumer reviews is not Normal but J-shaped. However, at
the current state of model development reviews were assumed to
follow a Normal distribution.

1

The stochastic nature of utility in the model and the definition
of p(t) resembles Random Utility Models (RUM) (Baltas & Doyle,
2001). In this family of models it is assumed that products’ utilities
follow random distributions, and that the decision maker is a
rational utility maximizer. Therefore, in a binary choice between
products i and j, the decision maker will choose the product i with
probability P(i) = P(Ui > Uj). Apparently, our model’s p(t), and

554

2) – p(t-1), and the product is switched if the absolute
of the difference is below a threshold value θ.
(ii) Inspect review and update beliefs about product’s true
mean value and utility: The distribution of beliefs
about product’s true mean value (and thus utility) is
updated by incorporating review’s rating. Given that
both prior beliefs and reviews follow a Normal
distribution, the posterior distribution is still Normal
with mean and variance given by (DeGroot, 1970;
Roberts & Urban, 1988):

µ i (t ) =

τt

τt +1

σ µ2i (t ) =

⋅ µ i (t − 1) +

τt

τt +1

mean values was manipulated in five levels, namely 0.4,
0.6, 0.8, 1 and 1.2. The variance was also manipulated in
five levels, specifically 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1, and was the
same for each product within each scenario. The product
ratings with which beliefs were updated were held constant
across all scenarios and were of mean 4.4 for the product
with the higher mean of prior beliefs and 3.6 for the other.
The actual ratings were (5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 4, 4, 3, 3) and (5, 5,
4, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3), and of identical variance equal to 0.71.
Each scenario was run separately and for five times across
the following parameter space: τ = 1:1:10, k = 0.01:0.01:0.1,
θ = 0.005:0.005:0.05. By firstly averaging the number of
reviews read across the parameter space for each run, and
then across each scenario, we obtained the average number
of reviews read for each scenario and confidence intervals.
As Figure 2 indicates, the model predicts that more reviews
will be acquired when the gap between prior-belief means is
small and/or when the variance is high.

1
⋅x
τt +1

⋅ σ µ2i (t − 1)

Where x is review’s rating, and τt is the strength in
prior beliefs at time step t. τ changes with time as τt =
τt-1 + 1.
(iii) Calculate p(t): The distribution of p(t), the probability
that the product with the current highest mean
estimated utility will turn out not to be so is Normally
distributed as is the difference of two Normal
distributions. Calculating p(t) is then straightforward4.
(iv) Decision whether to stop the search process and make
a choice or not: The search process stops either if p(t)
is bellow a threshold value k, or if all the reviews of all
of the products have been obtained. In any of the two
situations the product with the highest mean estimated
utility is chosen. If it has been decided not to stop the
search process the model moves on to the next time
step.

Predictions
The model predicts the relative number of reviews that
people will read given prior beliefs and three parameter
values, k, θ, and τ0. To verify its behavior we created
different scenarios of prior beliefs of products’ true mean
value and we ran numerical simulations across a large
parameter space. The scenarios involved choices between
two products. They were built to examine whether a small
gap between the means of products’ prior beliefs will result
in more search compared to a large one, and whether high
prior beliefs’ variance will entail more reviews to be read
compared to low variance. The gap between prior beliefs’

Figure 2: Model Predictions: The average number of
reviews acquired for different values of prior belief’s gap of
means and variance.

Experiment
To test the predictions of the model we conducted a
controlled experiment in which we manipulated
participants’ prior beliefs about products and measured
search activity.

4

p(t) is exactly the same probability of selecting a product in the
binary probit choice model. For the purpose of illustration let
product i have a higher mean estimated utility value than product j.
Then p(t) is the probability of selecting product j. In the binary
probit choice model this probability is Φ[(µj - µi) / σ], where σ2 =
σµi2 + σµj2 and the covariance of the two Nomral distributions is
assumed to be zero (Louviere, Hensher, & Swait, 2000, p. 362).
Exactly the same formula is obtained by standardizing the Normal
distribution of p(t).

Design
A 2 × 2 full factorial experimental design was used. The
manipulated factors were prior beliefs’ gap of means (high,
low) and prior beliefs’ variance (high, low). The gap of
means was manipulated between subjects and the variance
within. The main task consisted of selecting a digital camera
among three alternatives in each of two categories (5 and 7

555

mega-pixels resolution)5. The manipulation of prior beliefs
was accomplished by splitting the task into two phases. In
the first phase participants were exposed to product features
and five reviewers’ ratings for each alternative. The
manipulation was introduced through these ratings. In the
second phase participants were free to read consumer
reviews for each camera. Second phase reviewer ratings
were similar across all conditions to ensure that any effect
on information search was due to the manipulation on the
first phase and only.
First Phase
Product information presented in the first phase was
carefully constructed to ensure that any effects in the 2nd
phase were due to the differentiated ratings alone. Choice
alternatives were very similar, non-dominating, each had a
fictitious name, and was accompanied by a camera picture.
Differentiated product features, cameras’ names and images,
and order of presentation were randomized for each choice.
Along with this information, each camera was described
with 5 consumer ratings. The ratings were from 1 to 5 and
their mean ranked the three alternatives as best, 2nd-best and
worst. However, average ratings were not presented. Best
camera’s ratings were different between the variance
conditions, but the same within the gap conditions. The
ratings of the 2nd-best camera were manipulated across all
conditions, while worst camera’s ratings were not
manipulated. Table 1 summarizes products’ ratings across
all conditions. The difference between best and 2nd-best
products average ratings was 0.4 in the low gap condition,
and 0.8 in the high. Best product’s variance was 0.2 in the
low variance condition and 0.8 in the high variance
condition, while 2nd-best product’s was 0.3 and 1.2
respectively. The order of the ratings was randomized for
each product and choice. Finally, all products information
was presented in a single web page, with layout very similar
to the ‘Compare Products’ pages of real web sites like
Epinions for example.

order of presentation was the same as in the 1st phase. Then,
participants could navigate through product reviews by
following ‘Next’ and ‘Previous’ links and also could at
anytime return to the first page by clicking another link.
There were 10 reviews per alternative. Each review included
the star rating, 1 to 5, the title, and the opinion. Each
camera’s review ratings were exactly the same across all
conditions and were also of average variance. The reviews
were presented in one of a small number of semi-random
sequences (sequences, for example, that had all low ratings
at the beginning were avoided). Table 2 summarizes all
products’ ratings.
Table 2: Products’ review ratings in 2nd phase.
Product
Best
2nd best
Worst

The actual reviews utilized were real ones downloaded
from amazon.co.uk, selected according to specific criteria
and slightly edited if needed6. Two sets of reviews were
constructed according to the ratings depicted in Table 2.
Consensus, in the sense that there were not two reviews in
the same set offering apparently contradicting comments for
the same product was intentionally build.
Finally, the order of reviews set, as well as choice (5 or 7
mega-pixels), and variance condition were counterbalanced
across participants.

Procedure
Eighteen participants completed the task for £5 reward, all
of them students and native English speakers. Participants
first performed a practice task to get use to the environment
and were informed that after each task they would be asked
to justify their choice and that, a £20 prize would be
awarded to the participant who would offer the best
justifications7. After that, they proceeded to the
experimental tasks.

Table 1: Products’ ratings across conditions.
Product
Best
2nd-best
Low Gap
High Gap
Worst

Low Variance
5, 5, 5, 4, 4

High Variance
5, 5, 5, 5, 3

5, 4, 4, 4, 4
4, 4, 4, 4, 3
4, 4, 3, 3, 2

5, 5, 5, 3, 3
5, 5, 3, 3, 3
4, 4, 3, 3, 2

Ratings
5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 4, 4, 3
5, 5, 5, 4, 4, 4, 4, 3, 3, 3
4, 4, 4, 4, 3, 3, 3, 3, 2, 2

6
In order for a review to be selected it should satisfy specific
criteria, either as it was presented in amazon.co.uk, or after very
slight editing usually deleting a few words. The criteria were (i) be
of length 100 to 150 words, (ii) not to mention attributes different
to the ones of our fictitious products, (iii) not to mention specific
characteristics of other reviews, (iv) not to mention amazon, (v)
not to mention that the camera comes with extras like case, camera
dock etc., (vi) not to compare the reviewed camera to competitors,
or describe the choice between two cameras, and (vii) not to
largely review the video capability. After the selection, the reviews
were slightly edited if needed. Spelling mistakes were corrected,
mentioned attribute values were changed according to the camera
category, and brand and model names were replaced by the
fictitious ones. For a full list of the reviews utilized please contact
the authors.
7
Participants were asked to justify their choice as a motive to
perform the task properly. Of course, it is reasonable to expect
people to behave differently depending on whether a justification

Second Phase
In the second phase participants could read consumer
reviews for each alternative. Firstly, they were forwarded to
a web page with alternatives’ names, pictures, and one link
per camera leading to its first consumer review. Alternatives
5

Choices between three alternatives were utilized in the
experiment although the reported model describes opinion search
in binary choices. However, one of the products was clearly
inferior and we expected participants to concentrate on the best
two products.

556

performed. An environment equally favoring within- and
between-alternatives processing might reveal an effect.
Our results further support the existing literature that
views information search as a means to discriminate
between alternatives. Harvey and Bolger (2001) describe a
study in which they examined whether people collect
information either according to a compensatory choice
process, or in order to screen out options, or to facilitate
discrimination between alternatives. The experiments
suggested that people collect information to discriminate
between alternatives. Our results provide further support.
When it was harder to discriminate between alternatives,
that is when ratings’ variance was high, participants
acquired more information.
The reported model falls in the general category of
threshold models (Bockenholt, Albert, & Aschenbrenner,
1991; Hausmann & Lage, 2008). It extents the latter ones by
applying the ‘desired level of confidence’ stopping rule on
opinion seeking in service of purchasing decisions, and by
integrating Bayesian update of products’ utility estimations.
Our model also differs from Fu and Gray’s Bayesian
satisficing model (BSM) (2006). BSM is defined in terms of
two processes; the estimation of the utility of information,
and the decision on when to stop seeking information. In the
first process, the model updates its estimation of the utility of
information through a global Bayesian learning mechanism
that combines new observations with prior knowledge of task
performance. That is, Bayesian learning occurs across
consecutive choices and not within each choice. In the second
process, the model stops seeking information when the
estimated utility of the information is lower than the
information seeking cost. In contrast to BSM, our model
utilizes a Bayesian mechanism to update the distribution of
options’ utility, and does so during the course of each choice.
Further, our stopping rule is not based on the interplay
between the utility of information and cost, but on the
confidence that one of the options outperforms the others.
In contrast to Information Foraging Theory (IFT), our
model predicts when opinion gathering ceases. Although
IFT may well explain how prospective buyers locate
products’ attribute information and consumer opinions on
the World Wide Web, it does not offer an explanation of the
effect of opinion variance on information seeking. There are
two different processes at work: (i) locate information, and
(ii) selectively acquire and integrate the information in the
internal choice representation. IFT focuses on the former,
whereas our model on the latter.
The described model has certain simplification assumptions
which need to be elaborated and refined in the future. First,
the unrealistic assumption of known true product value
variance by the decision maker (nevertheless, we do not
expect model’s predictions to change by dropping it). Second,
the assumption of constant instead of dynamic switch product
and stop opinion seeking thresholds. The thresholds may be
dynamically influenced by many factors like for example
alternatives’ attractiveness, costs of information access and
the development of relatively limited confidence that one of

Results
The dependent variables were the number of reviews read
and the time participants took to make their choice in the 2nd
phase. Both measure the extent of opinion seeking. Mixed
ANOVA tests of the dependent variables indicated a
significant effect of the variance manipulation at the alpha
level of .05. The effect was observed both on the number of
reviews read and the time taken to make the choice.
Participants read more reviews in the high variance
condition (M = 22.78, SD = 6.4) than the low variance one
(M = 19.94, SD = 8.47), F(1, 16) = 5.40, p = .034, η2 =
0.252. Similarly, participants took more time to complete
the task in the high variance condition (M = 372.4, SD =
196.7) than the low (M = 309.7, SD = 219), F(1, 16) = 6.23,
p = .024, η2 = 0.28. However, there was no effect of the gap
manipulation either on the number of reviews read or on the
time taken to indicate choice (Fs < 1). To test for practice
effects we introduced the order of the variance conditions as
a between subjects factor. Neither order, nor variance by
order effects were obtained, p > .5, ruling out any likely
practice ones.

Discussion
In this paper we presented a model of opinion seeking that
combined Bayesian update with a decision making criterion
based on a desired level of confidence. From the model we
derived two predictions regarding the amount of information
that people would seek in service of a purchasing decision.
The prediction that increased opinion variance would lead to
more information gathering was supported and suggests that
the model might explain the rational basis for information
gathering in consumer decision making. That is, people
acquire opinions to discriminate between alternatives, and
increase the certainty that one alternative outperforms the
rest until a confidence threshold has been reached and
whereupon opinion seeking ceases.
However, no evidence was found in support of the
prediction that a smaller gap of means would result in more
information seeking. There are three likely reasons behind
the failure to find evidence which upon refinement might
reveal an effect. First, the small difference of the gap of
means between the two gap conditions might be ineffective.
The difference between the two best products’ average
ratings was only 0.4. A larger difference might induce an
effect. Second, there were significant individual differences
resulting in large between subjects variance. Manipulating
gap within subjects will make an effect more likely. Finally,
the experimental environment favored within-alternatives
processing and eventually most participants processed the
information accordingly. However, note that for the gap
manipulation to have en effect on information search,
comparisons between products’ estimated utility should be

is asked or not. However, which procedure has greater validity is
an open question, and asking to or not to justify the choice is not
expected to change the results.

557

the decision alternatives outperforms the rest (Bockenholt et
al., 1991; Hausmann & Lage, 2008, p. 237; Saad & Russo,
1996). Likely context and environmental effects on thresholds
should be experimentally tested and the model updated
accordingly. Third, information utility, gain and access costs
are not considered in our model. However, they could be
incorporated by viewing the utility of information as the
amount by which it increases, or decreases, the confidence
that one of the alternatives outperforms the rest. Under this
assumption the gap between information economics and
threshold models can be bridged, and normative predictions
of optimal stopping can be generated and tested against actual
search behavior. Fourth, the model needs to be quantitative
compared to alternatives. Fifth, distributions of reviews
ratings are assumed to follow a Normal distribution. How the
model would behave with non-Normal distributions, and
particularly with realistic J-shaped ones (Hu et al., 2007),
should be examined.
To conclude, we have demonstrated that a model of
opinion seeking that combined Bayesian update with a
criterion of desired level of confidence can be applied to
predict users’ depth of opinion search. Undoubtedly, the
model needs to be further tested and elaborated, yet it
already serves as a basis for the rational explanation of
opinion seeking in consumer decision making.

Hennig-Thurau, T., & Walsh, G. (2004). Electronic Wordof-Mouth: Motives for and Consequences of Reading
Customer Articulations on the Internet. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce, 8(2), 51-74.
Hu, N., Pavlou, P., & Zhang, J. (2007). Why do Online
Product Reviews have a J-shaped Distribution?
Overcoming Biases in Online Word-of-Mouth
Communication. (Working Paper)
Huang, J.-H., & Chen, Y.-F. (2006). Herding in Online
Product Choice. Psychology & Marketing, 23(5), 413428.
Louviere, J., Hensher, D., & Swait, J. (2000). Stated Choice
Methods: Analysis and Applicaitons: Cambridge
University Press.
Lutz, R., & Reilly, P. (1974). An Exploration of the Effects
of Perceived Social and Performance Risk on Consumer
Information Acquisition. Advances in Consumer
Research, 1, 393-405.
Miles, G. E., Howes, A., & Davies, A. (2000). A framework
for understanding human factors in web-based electronic
commerce. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 52(1), 131-163.
Moorthy, S., Ratchford, B., & Talukdar, D. (1997).
Consumer Information Search Revisited: Theory and
Empirical Analysis. Journal of Consumer Research,
23(March 1997), 263-277.
Park, D.-H., & Han, I. (2008). Integrating Conflicting
Reviews: Attributional Hypotheses of Consumer Response
to Information Uncertainty Depending on Prior Brand
Attitude. Paper presented at the Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (1999). Information Foraging.
Psychological Review, 106(4), 643-675.
Roberts, J., & Urban, G. (1988). Modeling Multiattribute
Utility, Risk, and Belief Dynamics for new Consumer
Durable Brand Choice. Management Science, 34(2), 167185.
Saad, G., & Russo, J. E. (1996). Stopping Criteria in
Sequential Choice. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 67(3), 258-270.
Simon, H. (1955). A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69(February), 99-118.
Smith, D., Menon, S., & Sivakumar, K. (2005). Online Peer
and Editorial Recommendations, Trust, and Choice in
Visrual Markets. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19(3),
15-37.
Stigler, G. (1961). The Economics of Information. Journal
of Political Economy, 69(January/February), 213-225.
Xue, F., & Phelps, J. (2004). Internet-facilitated consumerto-consumer communication: the moderating role of
receiver characteristics. Int. J. Internet Marketing and
Advertising, 1(2), 121-136.

References
Baltas, G., & Doyle, P. (2001). Random utility models in
marketing research: a survey. Journal of Business
Research, 51, 115-125.
Bei, L.-T., Chen, E., & Widdows, R. (2004). Consumers’
Online Information Search Behavior and the Phenomenon
of Search vs. Experience Products. Journal of Family and
Economic Issues, 25(4), 449-467.
Bockenholt, U., Albert, D., & Aschenbrenner, M. (1991).
The Effects of Attractiveness, Dominance, and Attribute
Differences on Information Acquisition in Multiattribute
Binary Choice. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 49, 258-281.
DeGroot, M. (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions:
McGrow-Hill.
Fu, W.-T., & Gray, W. (2006). Suboptimal tradeoffs in
information seeking. Cognitive Psychology, 52, 195-242.
Fu, W.-T., & Pirolli, P. (2007). A Cognitive Model of User
Navigation on the World Wide Web. Human-Computer
Interaction, 22(4).
Hagerty, M., & Aaker, D. (1984). A Normative Model of
Consumer Information Processing. Marketing Science,
3(3), 227-246.
Harvey, N., & Bolger, F. (2001). Collecting information:
Optimizing outcomes, screening options, or fascilitating
discrimination? The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54A(1), 269-301.
Hausmann, D., & Lage, D. (2008). Sequential evidence
accumulation in decision making: The individual desired
level of confidence can explain the extent of information
search. Judgment and Decision Making, 3(3), 229-243.

558

