UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Absence Makes the Thought Grow Stronger: Reducing Structural Overlap Can Increase
Inductive Strength

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/32t0f8w4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Lee, Hee Seung
Holyoak, Keith J.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Absence Makes the Thought Grow Stronger:
Reducing Structural Overlap Can Increase Inductive Strength
Hee Seung Lee (heeseung@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
status by virtue of the fact that causes actually produce (or
sometimes prevent) their effects (e.g., Bartha, in press;
Hesse, 1966; Winston, 1980), or whether causal relations
simply operate as special cases of higher-order relations,
defined by the formal properties of predicate-argument
structures. Holyoak (1985) emphasized that causal
knowledge is the basis for pragmatic rather than just
structural constraints on analogical inference. Using
complex stories, Spellman and Holyoak (1996) showed that
when the source-target mapping was ambiguous by
structural criteria, those relations causally-relevant to the
reasoner’s goal determined the preferred mapping and
inferences about the target. Lassaline (1996) demonstrated
that people make stronger inferences on the basis of the
higher-order relation “cause” than on the basis of a noncausal relation, “temporally prior to”, which appears to have
the same formal structure. Thus the same syntactic “order”
of relations does not always yield the same degree of
inductive strength about the target property to be inferred.
There is no doubt that causal relations play an important
role in analogical inference. However, very little effort has
been devoted to incorporating basic elements of causal
models (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005; Waldmann &
Holyoak, 1992), such as the distinction between generative
and preventive causes (Cheng, 1997; Lu et al., 2007), into
models of analogy. Recently, Lee and Holyoak (2007)
examined the role of causal models in analogical inference
by testing a hypothesis proposed by Bartha (in press).
Bartha distinguished between contributing causes
(generative) and counteracting causes (preventive) in
evaluating the strength of analogical arguments. He pointed
out that eliminating from the target a counteracting cause
present in the source might actually strengthen an argument
from analogy. For example, iron deposits are still present on
earth despite the fact that humans have been extracting iron
ore in mining operations for centuries. Taking the earth as a
source analog for the moon, the fact that no mining
operations have so far been conducted on the moon (a
mismatch with a property of the source) seems to strengthen
the analogical inference that iron deposits remain to be
found on the moon.
To test this hypothesis, Lee and Holyoak examined use of
causal models by adapting a paradigm introduced by
Lassaline (1996). Participants read a description of two

Abstract
Computational models of analogy have assumed that the
strength of an inductive inference about the target is based
directly on similarity of the analogs, and in particular on
shared higher-order relations. However, in Experiment 1 we
show that reducing analogical overlap by eliminating a
higher-order causal relation (a preventive cause present in the
source) from the target increased inductive strength even
though it decreased similarity of the analogs. In Experiment 2
we extend these findings to cross-domain analogical
inferences based on correspondences between higher-order
causal relations. Analogical inference appears to be mediated
by building and then “running” a causal model. We discuss
the implications of the present findings for theories of both
analogy and causal inference.
Keywords: analogical inference; causal model; similarity;
inductive strength; preventive cause; generative cause.

Introduction
When people face uncertainty, they often make analogical
inferences about an unfamiliar target situation based on a
similar but better understood source situation. However,
people do not draw inferences from the source about all the
missing target properties. For example, consider the earth as
a source analog for inferring properties of the moon. It
seems more likely the resulting analogy will lead to the
inference that the moon may contain iron deposits than that
the moon has a system of freeways, even though the earth
contains iron deposits and also has freeways. In general,
inductive inferences seem to be guided by certain general
constraints that allow people to make analogical inferences
selectively (Holyoak, 1985).

Inductive constraints: Are causal relations special?
People are more likely to draw confident analogical
inferences when they perceive a source and target to be
similar, particularly if they overlap in their relational
structure. According to Gentner’s (1983) systematicity
principle, higher-order relations are especially important in
promoting analogical inferences. The canonical example of
a higher-order relation is “cause”; however, the “order” of a
relation is defined syntactically (a relation that takes another
relation as an argument), rather than by meaning.
A central issue in understanding constraints on analogical
inference is whether causal relations have some special
297

imaginary animals simply referred to as Animal A and
Animal B, and then evaluated either strength of an
analogical inference or similarity of the two animals. Across
arguments, presence versus absence of a generative or else
preventive relation connecting one shared property to a nonshared property was manipulated. Lee and Holyoak found
that similarity ratings increased with the inclusion of a
shared property; but whereas inductive strength judgments
increased with the inclusion of a shared generative property,
judged strength increased with the removal of a shared
preventive property. These results suggest that people
evaluate whether the causal relations in the source are
generative or preventive, and then use the resulting causal
models to infer the probability of obtaining a corresponding
effect in the target.
However, it could be argued that the particular causal
relations used in Lee and Holyoak’s (2007) study held
between simple attributes of a single entity, rather than
propositions, and hence were actually first-order relations as
defined by Gentner (1983). Also, the materials used in the
experiments all involved within-domain analogical transfer
from one animal to another animal of the same species. In
contrast, the core examples of analogical reasoning
discussed in the literature involve long-distance, crossdomain transfer between situations based on highly
dissimilar entities that nonetheless share relations. In the
present study, we examined whether dropping a shared
preventive cause would increase rather than decrease the
strength of an analogical inference when the cause was
clearly a high-order relation (Experiments 1-2) and when
the analogy required cross-domain transfer (Experiment 2).

provided inductive strength judgments, and the other half
provided similarity ratings.
Materials and Procedures Participants read a description
of a fanciful “newly discovered species of bird”, which
specified three causal relations between the relative amount
of hormone, enzyme, and neurotransmitter (causes) and an
abnormal characteristic (effect) found in the bird. The
relative amount of two substances of each of two types was
described as tending to produce the abnormal characteristic,
and the relative amount of two substances of the third type
was described as tending to prevent the abnormal
characteristic. An example of descriptions is the following:
[Hormone A > Hormone B]
tends to PRODUCE blocked oil glands.
[Neurotransmitter X > Neurotransmitter Z]
tends to PRODUCE blocked oil glands.
[Enzyme P > Enzyme Q]
tends to PREVENT blocked oil glands.

Experiment 1 was designed to investigate whether or not
people use causal models during analogical inference when
the source includes more complex systems of higher-order
relations. Adapting the paradigm from Lee and Holyoak
(2007), we developed a set of materials in which causeeffect relations held between relations connecting multiple
objects. Schematically, the form of the causal relations we
used was: [A is greater than B] causes [E]. In this example,
there are three objects A, B, and E. The objects A and B
enter into a first-order relation (i.e., greater than). This firstorder relation between the objects A and B is causally
connected to effect E. The structure of such a causal relation
clearly meets Gentner’s (1983) definition of a higher-order
relation, as it takes a proposition (e.g., A is greater than B)
as an argument. By investigating whether people use causal
models in evaluating analogical inferences based on this
more complex type of structure, it will be possible to verify
the general role of causal models as a major inductive
constraint on analogical inference.

After reading the description of findings for the first
described bird, participants studied reports about the relative
amounts of hormones, neurotransmitters, and enzymes
found in a second bird of the same species. Four different
types of argument were created: G1G2X, G1G2P, G1G2, and
G1P. G and P represent generative and preventive causes,
respectively. The factor X was constructed by switching the
order of objects in the P relation; e.g., in the above example,
X was [Enzyme Q > Enzyme P].
Eight different descriptions of birds were created, and
each argument type was assigned to each description,
creating 32 items altogether. Of the total of 32 items
available, eight items were used to create a booklet for each
participant, two of each argument type (G1G2X, G1G2P,
G1G2, and G1P). This counterbalancing generated four
different sets of materials, thereby avoiding repeated use of
the same abnormal characteristic for an individual
participant. Within each set, the order of items was
randomized for each participant.
For the group making similarity judgments, the task was
to rate how similar the two birds are, choosing a number
between 0 (totally different) and 10 (identical). For the
group making inductive strength judgments, the task was to
judge how likely a second bird would have the abnormal
characteristics described in the first bird, based on the
descriptions of the relative amounts of hormones,
neurotransmitters, and enzymes found in the two birds. In
making their judgments, participants were asked to imagine
there were 100 examples of the second bird, and to estimate
how many out of these 100 cases would have the property
stated as the conclusion, assigning a number between 0 and
100 for each item.

Method

Results and Discussion

Experiment 1

The results for both similarity ratings (left) and inductive
strength judgments (right) are shown in Figure 1. Similarity
ratings and inductive strength judgments were analyzed

Participants Sixty undergraduate students at the University
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) participated in the
experiment for course credit. Half of the participants
298

have been interpreted as a neutral property. Accordingly, the
arguments G1G2X and G1G2 were viewed as equally strong
because they involved the same shared causal relations, G1
and G2.
The findings from Experiment 1 confirm that people do
not simply focus on the number of correspondences between
a source and target; rather, they consider the meaning of
causal relations, and in particular whether causes are
generative or preventive. By using materials involving
causal relations at a higher level of formal complexity, the
results of Experiment 1 show that people use causal models
during analogical inference even when the source involves
complex higher-order relations among multiple objects.

separately. For each dependent measure, a one-way
ANOVA was performed with the four argument types
(G1G2X, G1G2P, G1G2, and G1P) as a within-subjects
variable.
The mean similarity ratings of analogies based on G1G2X,
G1G2P, G1G2, and G1P arguments were 6.35, 8.73, 7.57, and
5.03, respectively. These means were significantly different,
F(3, 87) = 24.55, MSE = 3.09, p < .001. G1G2P arguments
were rated as having the highest similarity of the four
argument types. G1G2P arguments were rated as having
higher similarity than those arguments with fewer shared
relations, either those excluding P (mean of G1G2X and
G1G2 arguments), t(29) = 3.91, p = .001, or those excluding
G (G1P arguments), t(29) = 8.50, p < .001. In addition, G1G2
was rated as having higher similarity than G1G2X (where X
was formed by reversing the relation P in the source), t(29)
= 3.84, p = .001.
The mean inductive strength judgments for G1G2X,
G1G2P, G1G2, and G1P arguments were 87.40, 69.83, 87.47,
and 43.70, respectively. The mean inductive strength
judgments differed across argument types, F(3, 87) = 75.17,
MSE = 170.53, p < .001, but showed a different pattern than
that obtained for similarity ratings. G1G2P was evaluated as
having lower inductive strength than the arguments that
dropped preventive relations (mean of G1G2X and G1G2
arguments), t(29) = 5.78, p < .001, but as having higher
inductive strength than the arguments that dropped
generative relations (G1P arguments), t(29) = 8.12, p < .001.
Unlike the pattern for similarity ratings, inductive strength
judgments did not differ for arguments G1G2X and G1G2,
t(29) = .02, p = .98.
To summarize, the results of Experiment 1 extended the
basic findings of Lee and Holyoak (2007) to more complex
causal structures in which the causal relations were higherorder, as defined by Gentner (1983). Similarity ratings
increased with the addition of shared relations, regardless of
whether the relation was generative or preventive. Also, the
argument G1G2X was rated as having lower similarity than
the argument G1G2. Even though these arguments had the
same number of shared relations (two: G1 and G2), X was
not present in the source, so this relation constituted a
difference between the source and target, reducing the
perceived similarity (Tversky, 1977).
The results for inductive strength judgments showed a
different pattern than that observed for similarity ratings.
The G1G2P arguments had higher inductive strength than the
G1P arguments (the same pattern as for similarity ratings),
but had lower inductive strength than the arguments G1G2X
and G1G2 (a pattern opposite to that obtained for similarity
ratings). Thus whereas the presence of a shared generative
relation increases inductive strength, the absence of a
preventive relation increases inductive strength.
In addition, unlike the results for similarity ratings, the
arguments G1G2X and G1G2 were evaluated as having
equally high inductive strength. In the inductive strength
task X was not related to the effect property, so that when
inferring the presence of the effect in the target, X might

Figure 1: Mean similarity ratings (left) and mean inductive
strength judgments (right) for each argument type in
Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, we manipulated features of animals in a
source and target, and assumed that participants used
analogical reasoning to infer a certain missing property in
the target based on the source information. However, it is
possible that when reasoning about new instances of the
well-known category of animals, people actually reasoned at
the level of categories, essentially assuming that all
individuals of the same animal species share the same basic
biological characteristics. Given information about the
source animal, people may have naturally projected its
properties to the category of the novel species, and then in
turn applied this categorical knowledge to make inferences
about the target animal of the same species. That is, given a
source animal with the structure G1G2P, people may infer
that these causal relations hold for all animals of that
species, in effect setting up a causal model for the species as
a whole, rather than directly modeling the causal structure
of the target individual based on the source. (See Rehder,
2007, for a review of work relating causal models to
category-based induction.)
Accordingly, Experiment 2 was performed to examine
whether dropping a higher-order relation (a preventive
cause) present in the source can increase inductive strength
when the source and target are drawn from distinct semantic
domains.
299

three stars are close to each other and no other stars
have been found in that region of the galaxy.
Following this description of the astronomer’s hypothesis,
two or three facts about these stars were listed (see Table 1).
All of these facts were structurally parallel with the
chemist’s findings. Table 1 shows the correspondences
between the two stories. The corresponding relations across
the two stories had varying degrees of semantic overlap.
The semantic similarities between relations in the two
stories (e.g., “being more turbulent” and “being subject to
more violent solar storms”) were intended to facilitate the
process of mapping the two analogs and identifying their
relational correspondences.
The experimental design included just two conditions,
G1G2P and G1G2. As in the previous experiment, G and P
represent a generative cause and a preventive cause,
respectively. In the G1G2P condition, two of the facts in the
target were semantically and structurally consistent with the
corresponding causes of the effect in the source, and one of
the target facts was semantically and structurally consistent
with the preventive relation in the source. In the G1G2
condition, there was no match in the target to the preventive
cause in the source. To prevent a blind mapping between the
source and target based on the order of listed facts, the order
of the facts was randomized for each participant.
After reading the two stories, the chemist’s liquid story
and the astronomer’s star story, two tasks were administered
to all participants. We did not collect ratings of similarity in
Experiment 2, as it is transparent that the analogs are more
similar in the G1G2P (three shared relations) than in the
G1G2 condition (two shared relations). We did, however,
assess participants’ ability to identify the relational
correspondences between the two stories. In this mapping
task (always administered first), participants were asked to
identify which of the three stars (Acruxia, Errailel or
Castoriff) corresponded most closely to each of the three
liquids (Denitrogel, Oreor, and Tetosium). This mapping
task was intended to ensure that participants read the two
stories, and to assess whether they could in fact identify
structural parallels between the source and the target (a
prerequisite for drawing sensible analogical inferences).
The second task involved drawing an analogical inference
about the astronomy problem based on the source analog
from the domain of chemistry. Participants were asked to
judge how likely it was that two of the three stars would
fuse to form a super-star. To answer this question, they were

Method
Participants Fifty-two undergraduate UCLA students
received course credit for participating in the experiment.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions, G1G2P or G1G2.
Materials and Procedures Two stories were created, one
serving as a source story and the other as a target story,
based on two different domains, chemistry and astronomy.
A chemist’s observations about three liquids and an
astronomer’s observations about three stars served as the
source and target story, respectively. To ensure that people
could not use their prior knowledge of liquids or stars to
make inferences, all the liquids and stars were novel and
imaginary.
Participants first read the source story:
A research chemist has recently discovered that if three
liquid substances, Denitrogel, Oreor, and Tetosium, are
mixed together, then a chemical change sometimes
occurs so that the molecules of Denitrogel and
Tetosium bond together. With molecules of Oreor
serving as a catalyst, the molecules of Denitrogel and
Tetosium attract each other and the mixed liquid
becomes very adhesive, finally changing into a solid
material. Through repeated experiments, the scientist
has also identified three main factors that determine
whether or not the mixed liquids change into a solid.
Following this cover story, three relational observations
about the liquids were listed, as summarized in Table 1.
Two of the relations tended to cause the effect, changing
mixed liquids into a solid, and one of the observations
tended to prevent this effect. For example, the fact that
“Denitrogel is colder than Oreor” tended to cause formation
of a solid, whereas the fact that “The volume of Tetosium is
greater than the volume of Denitrogel” tended to prevent
formation of a solid. The causal relations used in
Experiment 2, like those in Experiment 1, were formally
higher-order relations. After reading the source story,
participants read an astronomer’s observations about three
stars:
An astronomer who reads about the chemist’s findings
thinks it may be possible that three stars, Acruxia,
Errailel, and Castoriff, located in a distant galaxy,
behave in a way similar to the three liquids. The theory
is that gravitational attraction among all three stars
could make two of the stars move closer together, so
that two stars finally fuse to form a super-star. The

Table 1: Schematic structure of analogies used in Experiment 2.
Story

Source: Chemist’s observations about three liquids

Target: Astronomer’s observations about three stars

G1

Denitrogel is colder than Oreor
Oreor is stirred vigorously so it is more turbulent than
Tetosium
The volume of Tetosium is greater than the volume of
Denitrogel
Changing into a solid

Acruxia has lower temperature than Errailel
Errailel is subject to more violent solar storms than is
Castoriff
The diameter of Castoriff is wider than the diameter of
Acruxia
Forming a super-star

G2
P
Effect

300

preventive cause present in the source) from the target
increased inductive strength even though it decreased
similarity of the analogs. In Experiment 2 we extended these
findings to cross-domain analogical inferences based on
correspondences between higher-order causal relations. In
both experiments, the preventive causal relation was clearly
a higher-order relation in the formal sense defined by
Gentner (1983). Also, because in Experiment 2 crossdomain analogical transfer cannot be accounted for by
inferences based on pre-existing categories (i.e., categorybased induction; see Rehder, 2007), our overall findings
support the conclusion that analogical inference involves
using the source analog to guide construction of a causal
model of the target analog.
Even though most of the major theoretical discussions of
analogy, beginning with Winston (1980), have in one way
or another acknowledged the critical importance of causal
knowledge as a basis for analogical inference, extant
computational models are not able to explain the present
findings. The systematicity principle and its computational
implementation, SME (Falkenhainer et al., 1989), base
analogical inference solely on the logical form of
representations and not on their meaning, and hence are
committed to the prediction that shared higher-order
relations can only help and never hinder analogical
inferences. The fact that a shared higher-order relation—a
preventive cause—in fact reduces analogical transfer thus
provides a compelling demonstration that any successful
model of analogy will need to deal with the meaning of
semantic representations, not just their logical form.
Even computational models that allow for the special
importance of causal relations are in their current
implementations unable to account for our present findings.
For example, both ACME (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989) and
LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003) include mechanisms for
placing greater weight on causal relations so that these have
especially strong influences on analogical mapping and
inference. In their current implementations, ACME and
LISA would naturally mark both generative and preventive
causes as “important” and focus attention on them.
However, these models are unable to grasp that the two
types of causes are important in different ways, with very
different implications for analogical inference—a preventive
cause is indeed important, but the outcome would be more
probable without it.
The problem for all extant models of analogy is that they
lack a detailed representation of causal knowledge that
could support commonsense causal reasoning (e.g.,
generative causes make things happen, but preventive
causes stop things from happening; causes produce effects,
but effects don’t produce their causes). The “common
sense” nature of the present findings highlights the
weakness of commonsense reasoning in current models of
analogy.
More generally, the present findings add to a growing
body of work suggesting that future theoretical progress in
understanding analogical reasoning requires taking a

told to assume that everything in the descriptions was true
and to focus on analogous relations between the chemist’s
observations and the astronomer’s observations. This
inductive judgment was made using the same type of
frequency scale as used in Experiment 1. Participants were
told to imagine that the astronomer observes 100 cases, and
to estimate in how many of these cases two of the three stars
would fuse to form a super-star, giving a number between 0
and 100.

Results and Discussion
If participants failed to correctly answer all three questions
about liquid/star correspondences, we coded their mapping
performance as incorrect. Six out of the 52 participants (four
in the G1G2P condition and two in the G1G2 condition) gave
incorrect mappings. Because incorrect mappings could have
led to erroneous analogical inferences, we first report
analyses of inference data excluding these participants.
Mean inference judgments for G1G2 and G1G2P arguments
(excluding data from participants who made incorrect
mappings) were 69.20 and 52.04, respectively (see Figure
2). These data were analyzed using an independent-samples
t test, which revealed a significant effect of argument type,
t(44) = 2.59, p = .013. Even when inference data from
participants who gave incorrect mappings were included,
the effect of argument type remained reliable, t(50) = 2.20,
p = .032.
The results of Experiment 2 thus confirm and extend the
basic finding obtained in Experiment 1: When a preventive
causal relation present in the source analog is absent from
the target, the strength of an inductive inference is
correspondingly increased. By demonstrating this effect
with cross-domain analogical transfer, the results of
Experiment 2 make it clear that this beneficial effect of
reducing overlap of a higher-order relation is not solely
attributable to category-based induction; rather, the
phenomenon is observed when people must base an
inference about a target analog directly on a single source
analog.

Figure 2: Mean inductive strength judgments for each
argument type in Experiment 2.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1 we showed that reducing analogical
overlap by eliminating a higher-order causal relation (a
301

Bassok, M., Wu, L.-L., & Olseth, K. L. (1995). Judging a
book by its cover: Interpretative effects of content on
problem-solving transfer. Memory & Cognition, 23, 354367.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure mapping engine: Algorithm and examples.
Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Hesse, M. (1966). Models and analogies in science. Notre
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Holyoak, K. J. (1985). The pragmatics of analogical
transfer. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation, Vol. 19 (pp. 59-87). New York:
Academic Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Lassaline, M. E. (1996). Structural alignment in induction
and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 754-770.
Lee, H. S., & Holyoak, K. J. (2007). Causal models guide
analogical inference. In D. S. McNamara & G. Trafton
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 12051210). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lu, H., Yuille, A., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak,
K. J. (2007). Bayesian models of judgments of causal
strength: A comparison. In D. S. McNamara & G.
Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 12411246). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Rehder, B. (2007). Property generalization as causal
reasoning. In A. Feeney & E. Heith (Eds.), Inductive
reasoning:
Experimental,
developmental,
and
computational approaches (pp. 81-113). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Spellman, B. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Pragmatics in
analogical mapping. Cognitive Psychology, 31, 307-346.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Waldmann, M. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1992). Predictive and
diagnostic learning within causal models: Asymmetries in
cue competition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 121, 222-236.
Winston, P. (1980). Learning and reasoning by analogy.
Communications of the ACM, 23, 689-703.

broader view of the overall process. As pointed out by
Bassok, Wu and Olseth (1995), analogy models have
typically focused on the mechanisms by which
correspondences between predetermined representations of
a source and target can be established and then exploited to
generate candidate inferences about the target. Both the
input representations (source and target) and the output
(target inferences) are treated as static. But as Bassok et al.
argued, human analogical reasoning appears to be based on
highly dynamic representations. The initial representations
of the source and target may undergo semantic
interpretation and elaboration that affect the ease of
analogical transfer.
Similarly, the present findings call attention to the
dynamic nature of the output of analogical processing. In
current analogy models the candidate inferences, like the
analogs themselves, are represented in some static code. The
degree of belief in an inference is solely determined by
some measure of the “goodness” of the source-target
mapping from which the inference was derived. What is
lacking, given the findings reported here, is some
mechanism for dynamically updating the degree of belief in
an analogical inference based on the causal relationships
within the target itself.
Moreover, our findings suggest that the missing
theoretical mechanism for dynamic inference evaluation
cannot be simply “outsourced” to some post-analogical
module, such as “verification” based on direct knowledge
acquired about the target (as discussed, for example, by
Falkenhainer et al., 1989, p. 23). Consider the situation
confronting the reasoner in our Experiment 2: No direct
knowledge about the behavior of the imaginary star system
that forms the target domain is ever provided, beyond that
knowledge allowing computation of the analogical inference
in the first place. That is, the reasoner has no additional
basis for assessing how likely it is that two stars will fuse to
form a super-star. Rather, the causal model of the target—
constructed by analogical inference from the source domain
of chemical reactions—itself allows dynamic evaluation of
degree of belief in the candidate inference. As Bartha (in
press) argues on the basis of actual examples from the
history of science, the credibility of analogical inferences
can be assessed in part by internal criteria. In nonexperimental sciences, such as astronomy and archaeology,
analogy may at times provide the most direct source of
knowledge available for evaluating inferences about the
target.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by ONR grant
N000140810186 to KH.

References
Bartha, P. (in press). By parallel reasoning: The
construction and evaluation of analogical arguments.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

302

