UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Acquisition of Concepts with Characteristic and Defining Features

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1z17c313

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Shultz, THomas
Thivierge, Jean-Philippe
Laurin, Krisitn

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Acquisition of Concepts with Characteristic and Defining Features
Thomas R. Shultz (thomas.shultz@mcgill.ca)
Department of Psychology and School of Computer Science, McGill University, 1205 Penfield Avenue
Montreal, QC H3A 1B1 Canada

Jean-Philippe Thivierge (jthivier@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 1101 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Kristin Laurin (klaurin@artsmail.uwaterloo.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada
Such confusion would be particularly acute early in concept
acquisition when neither version of a concept is fully in place.
Another problem with the dual view is difficulty in
accounting for the developmental shift from probabilistic to
defining features. If defining and characteristic versions of
concepts reside in different systems that are represented in
incompatible formats governed by distinct principles, how do
the two systems interact and how does one eventually
overtake the other? A similar issue played out in the area of
past-tense acquisition, where a dual view could not explain
migration between regular and irregular verb classes over the
history of English, a migration that was naturally simulated
within a homogenous neural network (Hare & Elman, 1995).
In contrast to the dual-system approach, there may be a
continuum of concept crispness, perhaps covered by a more
unified theory. A concept could have many features,
including some that are defining and others that are
probabilistic. It would be parsimonious for both sorts of
features to be represented in the same fashion, with the
likelihood of a feature appearing in any exemplar varying
probabilistically. A defining feature appears in examples with
a probability of 1, whereas a characteristic feature appears
with a still substantial probability of less than 1.
It is reasonable to suppose that exemplar classification is
affected by both the isolation of concepts in a
multidimensional feature space and by the dispersion of
exemplars in this space. That is, fuzzier concepts would be
characterized by residing in a relatively crowded region of
feature space and by having more widely dispersed examples;
crisper concepts by residence in a relatively isolated region of
feature space and by limited dispersion of examples.
Exemplars of an isolated concept are unlikely to be confused
with those of other concepts, whereas exemplars of crowded
concepts could easily be misclassified, particularly if they are
loosely dispersed around their prototypes. This notion of
conceptual crowding is consistent with the idea that concepts
are not randomly distributed in a multidimensional feature
space, but rather may cluster in regions (Pinker & Prince,
1996), sometimes called consequential regions (Shepard,
1987).
A psychologically-documented case of exemplar dispersion
concerns the difference between jars and bottles (Malt,

Abstract
Concepts with defining features have sufficiently rigid
boundaries that examples of one concept are rarely confused
with another concept, whereas probabilistic concepts have
vague boundaries, producing frequent misclassifications. It has
been argued that, although neural learning might account for
probabilistic (or fuzzy) concepts, it is incapable of accounting
for acquisition of concepts with defining features. Simulations
reported here with encoder networks call this view into
question. These sibling-descendant cascade-correlation
networks account for a variety of phenomena with concepts
positioned along the probabilistic to defining-features
continuum. Classification of exemplars by our networks was
affected by both isolation of the concept in semantic feature
space and by dispersion of its examples around a prototype. The
detection of defining features cured networks from the effects
of conceptual crowding and example dispersion. Simulations
captured the developmental shift from characteristic to defining
features in a natural way.
Keywords:
Characteristic-to-defining
shift;
acquisition; defining features; neural networks.

concept

Introduction
A major dichotomy has been proposed between concepts with
characteristic versus defining features. Concepts with
defining features have such rigid boundaries that exemplars
of one are only rarely confused with another. In contrast,
probabilistic concepts have vague and overlapping
boundaries, often making exemplars difficult to classify.
It has been argued that, although neural learning might
provide an adequate account of fuzzy concepts, it cannot
account for the acquisition and representation of concepts
with defining features, such as kinship terms (Armstrong,
Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1983; Pinker, 1997). Some suggest
instead dualistic theories – a neural theory for probabilistic
concepts and a symbolic theory for defining-feature concepts
(Pinker & Prince, 1996). Moreover, there is an interesting
developmental shift from emphasis on characteristic to
defining features (Keil & Batterman, 1984).
The dual-theory approach has a number of problems that
have not been solved. One problem is that a person would not
likely know which concept to access, the defining-feature one
or the probabilistic one, for any particular example or context.

531

activations correlate most highly with network error. To
counter the natural tendency to recruit a descendant unit
(because of its extra weights), descendant correlations are
penalized by a default multiplier of 0.8.
We report three simulations with SDCC encoder networks
learning to recognize examples of crisp and fuzzy concepts.
Simulation 1 examines the effects of concept crowding and
example dispersion with probabilistic concepts, simulation 2
assesses the protective effects of defining features against
these problems, and simulation 3 focuses on the
characteristic-to-defining developmental shift.

Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang, 1999). For both Spanish and
English speakers, different jars were tightly distributed
around a jar prototype, whereas different bottles were quite
widely dispersed around a bottle prototype. For instance, pill
bottles, milk bottles, and water-cooler bottles each possess
quite different feature values, exhibiting a diversity not found
among jars.
We hypothesized that defining features could protect an
otherwise fuzzy concept from the problems posed by
conceptual crowding and example dispersion. Even if a
concept resides in a crowded neighborhood and has widely
dispersed examples, its exemplars might be categorized
correctly if defining features are discovered. The discovery of
defining features, specifying necessary and sufficient
conditions for concept membership, projects a crowded
concept into a possibly less crowded region of feature space
by providing new and useful dimensions to that space.
We report here on simulations of concept learning using a
variant of cascade-correlation (CC) encoder networks. CC
networks resemble ordinary back-propagation (BP) networks
in propagating activation from one layer to the next and
learning the values of their connection weights. But CC
networks differ from ordinary BP networks by: (a) training
weights only one layer at a time, thus avoiding the
biologically improbable back-propagation of error signals, (b)
growing as well as learning, by recruiting new hidden units as
needed, thus simulating the process of synaptogenesis, (c)
also employing cross-connections that bypass hidden-unit
layers, and (d) using curvature as well as slope information on
the error surface in order to adjust connection weights more
decisively (Fahlman & Lebiere, 1990). CC networks have
been used to simulate a variety of phenomena in
psychological development (Shultz, 2003; Shultz, Mysore, &
Quartz, 2007).
As with standard BP learning, CC can be used in encoder
mode, encoding inputs onto hidden units and then decoding
hidden-unit representations onto output units (Shultz, 2003).
This implements a kind of recognition memory that does not
require a separate teaching signal specifying target output
activations. Because encoder solutions can be trivial when
direct input-output connections are permitted, we followed
the convention of eliminating them in CC encoder networks.
Computational and mathematical details of both the BP and
CC algorithms can be found elsewhere (Shultz, 2003).
A variant of CC allows the algorithm to install a new
hidden unit either on the highest hidden-unit layer (as a
sibling) or on its own higher layer (as a descendant) (Baluja
& Fahlman, 1994). Descendant units have input weights from
all input units and previously installed hidden units. Sibling
units do not receive inputs from their siblings previously
installed on the same highest level. Sibling-descendant
cascade-correlation (SDCC) has so far yielded similar
psychological coverage to standard CC but with fewer
connection weights, shallower networks, and greater
topological variety (Shultz et al., 2007). An example of an
SDCC network topology is shown in Figure 3. Four sibling
candidates and four descendant candidates compete for being
recruited. As with CC, SDCC recruits the candidate whose

Simulation 1: Crowding and Dispersion
The purpose of this first simulation was to test the idea that
classification accuracy is disturbed by concept crowding and
example dispersion.

Concept Coding
The concepts used in these simulations are abstract and have
no particular semantic content, thus affording better
experimental control and greater generality than with
semantically-laden concepts.
For each network, we began with a random tendimensional vector of binary values, either -0.5 or 0.5. Ten is
a psychologically realistic number of features because when
people were asked to list features of common object concepts,
they produced between 6 and 15 features (Rosch, Mervis,
Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braehm, 1976). This random vector
was the prototype for a loner prototype concept occupying an
isolated region of the ten-dimensional feature space. Next we
randomly selected another ten-dimensional vector from those
that are orthogonal to the loner prototype. Orthogonality was
defined by having a normalized inner product (NIP) of 0 with
the loner concept. We created three additional prototypes in a
crowded region of the feature space by flipping either 1 or 2
values of the orthogonal vector, depending on experimental
condition. The 1 or 2 values flipped were randomly selected
without replacement. Values were flipped from -0.5 to 0.5, or
from 0.5 to -0.5. This provided four concept prototypes, one
of which was isolated and a trio which were close together in
the ten-dimensional feature space. This was our manipulation
of concept isolation vs. crowding.
For each of these four concept prototypes, we then created
ten examples by flipping 1, 2, or 3 values of the prototype,
randomly selected without replacement, depending on
condition and subject to three further constraints: (a) each
example had a unique combination of features to flip,
ensuring that each example was unique, (b) each feature was
flipped in at least one example, and (c) no feature was flipped
in every example. This ensured that no defining features were
inadvertently created and it constituted our manipulation of
exemplar dispersion.

Network Training
We trained 20 SDCC encoder networks in each of the six
experimental conditions (2 levels of prototype flips x 3 levels
of example flips), each network starting with random

532

connection weights and random concept prototypes, for 700
or fewer epochs, an epoch being a pass through all of the
training patterns. Training stopped early when a network’s
outputs were all within score-threshold of their target values
for all training patterns. We used the conventional scorethreshold value of 0.4, which provides for an uncertain range
between -0.1 and 0.1.
These encoder networks learned to recognize examples, not
to classify them into their respective prototype concepts.
There was no explicit teaching signal to enable classification
learning. This is realistic because category labels are not
always provided in human concept learning.

Figure 1: Concept crowding effects.

Results
After learning, we assessed network classification ability by
presenting all 40 training exemplars and computing the NIP
between each output vector and each of the four concept
prototypes. An exemplar was considered to be classified into
the concept yielding the highest NIP. We tallied the number
of correctly classified examples out of ten possible for each of
the four concepts. The numbers of correct classifications were
subjected to a mixed ANOVA where the between-network
factors were prototype flips (1 or 2) and example flips (1, 2,
or 3), and the within-network factor was concept (with 4
levels: loner plus the trio of close concepts). We report only
the largest significant effects.
The importance of concept isolation was revealed by main
effects of concept, F(3, 342) = 67, p < .0001, and number of
prototype flips, F(1, 114) = 39, p < .0001, and an interaction
between them, F(3, 342) = 5.8, p < .001. The means for these
main and interaction effects are shown in Figure 1.
Classification was more accurate with the loner concept than
with the three crowded concepts. Classification was also
better when the crowded concepts were relatively less
crowded (2 prototype flips versus 1 prototype flip). The
interaction reflects that fact that number of prototype flips
affected performance on crowded-concept exemplars more
than it affected performance on loner-concept exemplars. At
both levels of prototype flips, as assessed by paired-samples ttests, performance was better on the loner concept than on
each of three trio concepts, p < .0001, none of which differed
from each other. All means in Figure 1 were well above the
chance level of 2.5, computed as ¼ of the number of
examples per mean, p < .01. This is also true of all other
means throughout the paper. Comparisons of obtained means
to the theoretical mean of 2.5 were made using Dunnett’s
(1955) technique.
There was also a main effect of example flips, F(1, 114) =
256, p < .0001, and an interaction between example flips and
concept, F(6, 342) = 3.6, p < .002. The relevant means,
illustrating both crowding and dispersion effects, are shown
in Figure 2. Classification accuracy decreased with dispersion
of examples (number of example flips). The interaction
reflects a larger influence of example dispersion with the
crowded trio concepts than with the isolated loner concept. At
each level of example flips, performance was better on the
loner than on each of three trio concepts, p < .0001, none of
which differed from each other.

Figure 2: Concept crowding and example dispersion
effects.
Most of the 120 networks recruited all of their hidden units
on the same level. Five networks created more than one level
of hidden units and each of them had two layers of hidden
units. Figure 3 shows the topology of a network that recruited
three hidden units on one layer and four on a second layer.
The arrows in Figure 3 indicate full connectivity between
layers. There is also a bias input unit (always with an input of
1.0 and not shown in the figure) connected with trainable
weights to all downstream units.

10 output units

4 hidden units

3 hidden units

10 input units

Figure 3: Topology of an SDCC network in the condition
with 2 prototype flips and 1 example flip.

Discussion
This simulation documented the expected importance of both
concept crowding and example dispersion for classification of
exemplars of probabilistic concepts. Classification was more
accurate for an isolated concept than for crowded concepts

533

and more accurate for tightly dispersed examples than widely
dispersed examples. Isolated concepts were less affected by
example dispersion than more crowded concepts were.
Goldstone (1996) reported a similar example-dispersion
effect in experiments where people were trained in
classification, rather than in recognition memory as here.

Simulation 2: Effects of Defining Features
Simulation 2 was designed to test the idea that defining
features would protect otherwise probabilistic concepts
against the effects of concept crowding and example
dispersion obtained in simulation 1.

Figure 4: Defining features protect against concept
crowding, implemented by concept position.

Concept Coding and Network Training
After coding concepts as in simulation 1, we gave each
concept two additional binary features that uniquely defined
the concept. Defining features for the four concepts were
coded as (-0.5 -0.5), (-0.5 0.5), (0.5 -0.5), or (0.5 0.5),
respectively, by random assignment without replacement of
these four binary codes to the four concepts. These defining
features were present in each example, and were unaffected
by the probabilistic feature flipping used for the other ten
features. As in simulation 1, we trained 20 networks in each
of the six conditions for 700 or fewer epochs.
Figure 5: Defining features protect against concept
crowding, implemented by prototype flips.

Results
After learning, we assessed network classification ability as in
simulation 1. The numbers of correct classifications were
subjected to a mixed ANOVA that included the results of
simulation 1 and an additional between-network factor
representing the presence or absence of defining features. All
four main effects (defining features, prototype flips, example
flips, and concept) were significant, p < .0001, and defining
features interacted with each of the other three variables. As
shown in Figure 4, without defining features, the familiar
signatures of concept crowding were evident. Performance on
examples from the crowded trio concepts was worse than
performance on the isolated concept. With defining features,
performance was nearly perfect for every concept, interaction
of defining features by concept F(3, 684) = 45, p < .0001.
There was also an interaction between defining features
and prototype flips, F(1, 228) = 25, p < .0001, the means for
which are given in Figure 5. Without defining features,
performance was worse with one prototype flip than with two
prototype flips. With defining features, this effect of concept
crowding was eliminated.
Defining features also dampened the effects of example
dispersion, as revealed by the interaction between defining
features and number of example flips, F(2, 228) = 114, p <
.0001, shown in Figure 6. Without defining features,
performance deteriorated with an increase in example flips.
But with defining features, this effect of example dispersion
was diminished.

Figure 6: Defining features protect against example
dispersion.

Discussion
This simulation showed that defining features protected
otherwise probabilistic concepts against the typical effects of
concept crowding and example dispersion. Introduction of
defining features allowed the fairly precise classification that
was supposed to be impossible for neural networks. By
treating defining features in the same manner as probabilistic
features, neural networks can use defining features effectively
to produce nearly perfect classification of examples. Defining
features project concepts into new dimensions and thus lesscrowded regions of feature space.
There was not a systematic difference in perfect
performance between concepts with and without defining
features, as would presumably be predicted by dual theories.

534

Instead, there was perfect performance in isolated
probabilistic concepts with tightly dispersed examples, and
less than perfect performance in all defining-feature concepts
with more widely dispersed examples. It would be interesting
to see how well these simulations predict human results in
these respects.

Simulation 3: Developmental Shift from
Characteristic to Defining Features
Here we examine whether these networks capture the
characteristic-to-defining developmental shift. Keil and
Batterman (1984) reported that, with increasing age, children
shift from using characteristic features to defining features in
those concepts that have defining features. As far as we
know, this effect had never been computationally simulated,
although Rogers and McClelland (2004) showed that neural
networks can simulate the progressive differentiation of
concepts (Keil, 1979) and the tendency for concepts to be
organized around causal knowledge that explains correlations
of features (Keil, 1991).
On the assumption that young children have less
experience with examples than do older children, we
simulated the characteristic-to-defining shift by comparing
networks early in training to networks late in training. As in
the studies with children, this was a cross-sectional, rather
than a longitudinal, research design.

Figure 7: Characteristic-to-defining features shift for
concept crowding.
Similar results were obtained for example dispersion. There
was a main effect of example flips, F(2, 228) = 131, p <
.0001, and an interaction of that with maximum epochs, F(2,
228) = 38, p < .0001. The means are presented in Figure 8. At
100 epochs, example dispersion produced classification
errors, but there was relative protection against example
dispersion at 700 epochs due to mastery of the defining
features.

Concept Coding and Network Training
Concepts were coded as with the defining-features concepts
of simulation 2, using 10 probabilistic features and 2 defining
features. Twenty networks in each of the six conditions were
trained up to a maximum of 100 epochs. These networks
were then compared to the more fully trained networks of
simulation 2.

Figure 8. Characteristic-to-defining features shift for
example dispersion

Results

The mean number of hidden units recruited in the networks
stopped at 100 epochs was 1.95, with all but 5 of the 120
networks recruiting two hidden units. All hidden units were
installed as siblings, on a single level.

Numbers of correctly-classified examples out of 10 were
subjected to a mixed ANOVA in which maximum epochs
was added as a between-network factor. Number of defining
features was dropped from the ANOVA because all concepts
here had defining features.
The ANOVA yielded main effects of concept, F(3, 684) =
22, p < .0001, and maximum epochs, F(1, 228) = 1173, p <
.0001, and an interaction between them, F(3, 684) = 17, p <
.0001. The relevant means are shown in Figure 7. At 100
epochs, there was a crowding effect, with more accurate
classification of exemplars of the loner concept than of the
three crowded concepts. Here, as assessed by paired-samples
t-tests, performance was better on the loner concept than on
each of three trio concepts, p < .0001, none of which differed
from each other. At 700 epochs, there was good protection
against concept crowding due to eventual mastery of the
defining features.

Discussion
This simulation shows that these networks can naturally
capture the developmental shift from using characteristic to
defining features. Early in the learning of concepts with both
defining and probabilistic features, effects of concept
crowding and example dispersion are evident. Later, as the
defining features are discovered, they protect classification
performance against these probabilistic effects. This
developmental change shows that defining features cure the
earlier effects of crowding and dispersion rather than
immunize against them.
In many natural concepts, the number of defining features,
if there are any, is likely to be smaller than the number of
probabilistic features. In a sea of probabilistic features, it may
take considerable experience to eventually discover the
defining features of a concept. The hypothesis of essentialism

535

is that concepts with defining features may have an empty
place holder (Medin & Ortony, 1989). People may believe
that a concept has an essence provided by its defining
features, but they may not yet know what that essence is.
Despite using probabilistic information to classify examples
of the concept, people may remain willing to yield to more
expert opinion about defining features.
The basis for this developmental shift in networks is the
inherent tendency of neural networks to reduce as much error
as possible. This tendency, in turn, derives from a weightadjustment rule specifying that the amount of weight change
is proportional to the derivative of error with respect to
weight. Because probabilistic features are more numerous
than defining features, probabilistic features naturally capture
more initial attention from the weight-adjustment process. As
the networks learn to reduce error as much as possible from
attending to ubiquitous probabilistic features, they eventually
attend to the small number of defining features, yielding more
precise classification.

References
Armstrong, S. L., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman, H. (1983).
What some concepts might not be. Cognition, 13, 263308.
Baluja, S., & Fahlman, S. E. (1994). Reducing network depth
in the cascade-correlation learning architecture. (No.
Technical Report CMU-CS-94-209). Pittsburgh, PA:
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University.
Dunnett, C. W. (1955). A multiple comparison procedure for
comparing several treatments with a control. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 50, 1096-1121.
Fahlman, S. E., & Lebiere, C. (1990). The cascade-correlation
learning architecture. In D. S. Touretzky (Ed.), Advances
in neural information processing systems 2 (pp. 524-532).
Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Goldstone, R. L. (1996). Isolated and interrelated concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 608-628.
Hare, M., & Elman, J. L. (1995). Learning and morphological
change. Cognition, 56, 61-98.
Keil, F. C. (1979). Semantic and conceptual development: An
ontological perspective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1991). The emergence of theoretical beliefs as
constraints on concepts. In S. Carey & R. Gelman (Eds.),
The epigenesis of mind: Essays on biology and cognition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Keil, F. C., & Batterman, N. (1984). A characteristic-todefining shift in the development of word meaning.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 221236.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York: Norton.
Pinker, S., & Prince, A. (1996). The nature of human
concepts: Evidence from an unusual source.
Communication & Cognition, 29, 307-362.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic
cognition: A parallel distributed processing approach.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C., Gray, D., Johnson, D., & BoyesBraehm, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 3, 382-439.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science, 237,
1317-1323.
Shultz, T. R. (2003). Computational developmental
psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shultz, T. R., Mysore, S. P., & Quartz, S. R. (2007). Why let
networks grow? In D. Mareschal, S. Sirois, G.
Westermann
&
M.
H.
Johnson
(Eds.),
Neuroconstructivism: Perspectives and prospects (Vol. 2,
pp. 65-98). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

General Discussion
These simulations show that SDCC encoder networks can
capture sensible phenomena regarding both crisp and fuzzy
concepts. Simulation 1 revealed that classification errors
increase as concepts become crowded in multidimensional
feature space and as examples become more widely dispersed
in that space. Simulation 2 demonstrated that the eventual
discovery of defining features can protect networks against
these concept-crowding and example-dispersion effects.
Simulation 3 captured the developmental shift from
emphasizing characteristic to emphasizing defining features,
in concepts that possess defining features. Initially, networks
learning concepts with defining features showed the crowding
and dispersion effects seen with probabilistic concepts.
Continued learning allowed eventual detection of the defining
features and eliminated the earlier effects of concept
crowding and example dispersion. As with the work of
Rogers and McClelland (2004), our results suggest that
artificial neural-network models can cover and explain
important psychological findings on concept acquisition.
In current work, we are exploring whether our model can
also capture some other, well-known psychological
phenomena in the concept-acquisition literature, namely
pattern completion and prototype and exemplar effects. Also
of current interest is whether our model could account for the
conflicted literature on the relative developmental order of
exemplar and prototype effects.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant to TRS from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada, and a Doctoral Fellowship to JPT from the Fonds
Québéçois sur la Nature et les Technologies.

536

