UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Action Anticipation and Interference: A Test of Prospective Gaze

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wt4n6wf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Cannon, Erin N.
Woodward, Amanda L.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Action Anticipation and Interference: A Test of Prospective Gaze
Erin N. Cannon (ecannon@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Amanda L. Woodward (awoodward@psyc.umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA
eye tracking device pinpointed participants’ points-of-gaze
while watching each trial type. Therefore, it could be
determined whether subjects made predictive looks to the
goal, or passively tracked the moving objects. Both adults
and 12-month-olds made predictive looks toward the goal
(the bucket) when the human agent moved the objects, but
not when the objects were self-propelled. Thus, action
anticipation only occurred when participants witnessed a
goal-directed action. Age differences in the results
suggested a link to participants’ own motor abilities: Unlike
older infants, six-month-olds tested in the human agent
condition did not show any anticipatory looking, perhaps
because such an action was not in their motor repertoire.
The authors suggested six-month-olds’ lack of anticipatory
responses might reflect their lack of a motor representation
for the action of putting balls into a container.
The fact that similar anticipatory gaze patterns occur for
both self-produced and observed actions has been taken as
evidence that these two responses rest on a shared system.
Consistent with this claim, ERP research has found that
when an observed action is predictable with respect to the
endpoint or goal, motor activation occurs within the
observer just prior to the onset of the action (Kilner et al.,
2004). This finding implies that the anticipatory nature of
one’s own motor system might also influence the utilization
of shared representations, allowing one to anticipate or
predict others’ motor behaviors. Although the similarity in
patterns of anticipatory gaze for self- and other-produced
actions is suggestive of shared representations (Flanagan &
Johannsson, 2003), these findings do not specifically test
whether anticipatory gaze recruits motor representations.
In the current study, we tested this hypothesis directly by
assessing the effects of motor versus verbal concurrent tasks
on participants’ action anticipation.
If visual action
anticipation recruits motor processes, then we predict that a
concurrent motor task (finger tapping) will interfere with
action anticipation, but a working memory task (sub vocal
rehearsal) will not interfere or will interfere less strongly
with action anticipation. We used the paradigm developed
by Falck-Ytter and colleagues (2006) as a measure of action
anticipation.

Abstract
In the current study we investigate the proposal that one aspect
of social perception, action anticipation, involves the recruitment
of representations for self-produced action. An eye tracking
paradigm was implemented to measure prospective gaze to a goal
while performing either a motor or working memory task. Results
indicate an effect of the motor task, suggesting the interference of a
shared motor and action perception representation.
Keywords: Eye tracking; Action Perception; Motor
representation; Working Memory.

Introduction
Findings from both non-human primates and adult
humans suggest that some aspects of social perception
recruit representational structure from systems that guide
one’s own actions. The discovery of “mirror neurons” in
nonhuman primates (DiPelligrino, Fadiga, Fogassi, Gallese,
& Rizzolatti, 1992; Gallese et al., 1996) and mirror-like
responses in human brain imaging studies (e.g., Buccino et
al., 2001) indicate that perceiving others’ actions activates
regions associated with action control.
It has been
hypothesized that these mirror systems contribute to action
understanding and the perception of others’ intentions (e.g.,
Decety & Grezes, 2006, Gallese & Goldman, 1998). In the
current study we investigate the proposal that one aspect of
social perception, action anticipation, involves the
recruitment of representations for self-produced action.

The mirror neuron system and predictive gaze
Studies have shown that when people perform an action,
such as moving an object from one position to another, their
gaze will shift ahead towards the goal or endpoint before the
object in hand arrives (Johansson et al., 2001, Land, Mennie
& Rusted, 1999). Likewise, when observing someone else
performing an action, adults also show this prospective gaze
shift to the goal, just as when they perform the action
themselves (Flanagan & Johansson, 2003). This predictive
gaze behavior seems to be specifically elicited by the
observation of an agent who produces a well-structured
goal-directed action (Flanagan & Johansson, 2003; FalckYtter, Gredebäck, & von Hofsten, 2006).
To illustrate, Falck-Ytter et al. (2006) showed adults, 12month-olds, and six-month-old infants trials of either a
human agent moving three objects into a bucket, or selfpropelled animate-looking objects flying into a bucket. The

Method
Participants. Forty-five adults participated in this study,
29 females and 16 males. Each was assigned to one of three
981

conditions: Observation, Finger-tapping, or Working
Memory. An additional 6 adults were tested but excluded
from the analysis due to a failure to collect enough data
points, Observation (N = 0), Finger-tapping (N = 3), and
Working Memory (N = 3). See inclusion criteria in the Data
Reduction and Analysis section below. Participants were
recruited from the Psychology department’s undergraduate
subject pool and received extra credit in their Psychology
courses in exchange for their participation.

Apparatus and Stimuli. Data were collected via corneal
reflection using a Tobii 1750 (Tobii Technology). This
specialized 17” monitor contains near-infrared lights and a
camera mounted around the video-stimulus display. Head
motion tolerance of the Tobii 1750 is 30 x 16 x 20 cm from
a viewing distance of approximately 60 cm. The monitor
was attached to a movable arm, easily adjusted to an
optimum distance and angle to record each participant’s eye
movements. Two PC computers were networked with the
Tobii 1750; one recorded the gaze data collected from both
eyes at a rate of 50Hz; and a second PC ran the Clearview
2.5.1 software (Tobii Technology). This software program
recorded the calibration data and integrated the gaze data
with the images being viewed. It also allowed the researcher
to define time windows of interest and regions within those
windows, or areas of interest (AOIs) that were identified in
the time-stamped output if a fixation fell within that region.
Participants viewed a video in which an actor was shown
sitting at a table with a bucket to his right and three balls to
his left. He moved his right hand to grasp the balls and
moved them to the bucket, one at a time. The natural sound
of the rubber ball hitting the metal bucket when it dropped
in could be heard. The total duration of the movie was 12 s,
and the time it took to move the three objects until they
disappeared into the bucket was 1.08, 1.26, and 1.22 s,
respectively.

Figure 1. Define Areas of Interest (AOIs) within the scene.
Start AOI encompassed the balls, the Trajectory AOI
encompassed the region between the balls and the bucket,
and the Goal AOI was the region surrounding the bucket.

this task. Participants rested their dominant hand on a
clipboard placed on their lap. They were instructed to rest
their thumb against the board and either tap from starting
with their pinky (little finger) to the index finger, or starting
with their index finger in sequence out to the pinky.
Participants were instructed to continue repeating the
sequence during the entire length of the movie. They were
told to go at whatever pace they were comfortable with, but
to try to keep a steady rhythm. Speed was not important but
accuracy of tap order was important. Finger taps were video
taped to record the accuracy of the tap sequences.
Participants were given as much time as they wanted to
practice the two different finger tap orders prior to starting
movie presentations. Participants in the Working Memory
condition were also given instructions similar to the
Observation group, with the exception that starting on the
third trial, the experimenter would give a sequence of four
letters or numbers to repeat, then to sub-vocally rehearse it
while watching the movie. At the end the experimenter
would say “Go” and they were to repeat the rehearsed
sequence. They were told we were interested in the
accuracy between the pre- and post-movie responses.
Participants were asked to make a conscious effort to subvocally rehearse even if they did not feel it was necessary
for remembering the sequence. For each of these memory
trials a unique sequence of the letters “R” “C” “M” and “L”
were given, or the numbers “6” “9” “5” and “3.” Number or
letter sequences alternated over trials. There were a total of
nine movie presentations. The first two presentations all
participants watched, and thus served as the baseline trials.
The following seven trials participants either watched,
finger-tapped, or sub-vocally rehearsed based on the
randomly assigned condition (Observation, Finger-Tap or
Working Memory, respectively). Each movie was 12
seconds in length and followed by a four second attentiongetter: a black screen with a toy moving at the center and
making a sound. This was used to promote overall attention
and to signal to the participant the start of the movie. In the
WM condition, an additional blank screen appeared for 5s

Procedure. Participants sat approximately 60 cm from the
Tobii monitor, in a small research room with black curtains
covering the walls. Informed consent was obtained from all
participants. First, each participant was given a 9-point
calibration in which a blue dot appeared against a white
background at nine different points on the screen. There
were three between-subject conditions that each required a
slightly different instruction. In the Observation condition,
participants were told they would be observing several trials
of a movie involving a person performing an action. They
were encouraged to attend to the video and avoid thinking
about potential distractions (such as what they are doing
later, etc.) during the two-and-a-half minute presentation. In
the Finger-tapping condition, participants were given the
same instructions as above, but were told that after the
second movie presentation, the experimenter would instruct
them to tap their fingers in one of two sequences during the
next trial. The finger tap sequence was meant to be simple,
thus the cascade sequence used in previous working
memory studies (e.g., Kane & Engle, 2000) was adopted for
982

immediately following a movie presentation. This served as
the response window for the participant to repeat the
rehearsed sequence, then the experimenter to give a new
sequence to be immediately repeated aloud and sub-vocally
rehearsed during the proceeding movie. The combined
length of all trials including attention getters was
approximately 140 s in the Observation and Finger-Tap
conditions, and 175 s in the Working Memory condition.

Baseline Trials

350

Test Trials
300
250
200
150

Predictions. Based on the work previously discussed, we

100

first predicted that adults in the Observation condition
would anticipate the arrival of the balls into the bucket, just
as Falck-Ytter et al. (2006) found. If motor representations
are recruited in action anticipation, then the finger tapping
manipulation was predicted to disrupt anticipatory looking.
The working memory condition provided an initial test of
whether anticipatory looking is generally disrupted by a
concurrent cognitive load, or rather selectively vulnerable to
concurrent tasks that tax related motor systems (i.e., manual
motor tasks). However, if neither of these tasks interfered
with the anticipatory looking, then it would suggest this is a
perceptual or automatic behavior.

50
0
Observation

Finger Tap

Working Memory

Conditio

Figure 2. Mean Gaze Arrival to the Goal AOI relative to
the Ball Arrival for all trials across conditions
baseline trials was 5.13, 4.67, and 5.00 (out of 6) for
Observation, Finger-tap, and WM conditions, respectively.
For test trials, an average of 16.33, 15.27, and 13.73 (out of
21) data points were obtained in the Observation, Fingertap, and WM conditions, respectively. The data points were
averaged across events within the baseline and test trials,
resulting in one aggregated baseline data point and one test
trial data point per subject that were used in the analyses.

Data Reduction and Analysis. Three areas of interest
(AOIs) were defined in the movies, and are made visible in
Figure 1. Participants were unaware of these regions of
interest as they were not visible during viewing. The Start
AOI covered the area where the target action began. The
Trajectory AOI covered the area of space the person’s hand
moved through. Finally, the area encompassing the goal, the
bucket, made up the Goal AOI. The dependent measure of
interest was Timing of gaze arrival to the Goal AOI with
respect to the ball’s arrival to the Goal AOI. For each
instance of the target action, data was collected at the
moment the ball began to move at pick-up, until 1000ms
after its disappearance into the bucket (the Goal AOI).
During this time interval, gaze had to fall within the Start
AOI followed by a look to the Goal AOI in order for a
single data point to be included in the analysis. This
inclusion criteria window was based on that used by FalckYtter et al. (2006). The window requirement of an initial
look to the Start AOI ensured that anticipatory looks to the
Goal were in fact anticipatory of the action in question and
were not saccades launched to the goal prior to the action’s
initiation (Engel, Anderson, & Soechting, 1999).
The timing data was obtained by subtracting the time of
the gaze arrival into the Goal AOI from the time of the
ball’s arrival into the Goal AOI. Thus, predictive looking
times (in ms) resulted in positive numbers, and reactive
looking times to the goal resulted in negative numbers.
There were a total of 27 possible data points for each
participant, i.e., three iterations to the bucket in each of the 9
trials. We adopted a conservative subject inclusion criteria
of a minimum of 33% data points obtained in both the
baseline and test trials (two data points in baseline and 7 at
test). In the data presented here, the average number of data
points used to obtain each participant’s mean score for

Results
Accuracy of both the finger tapping and the working
memory tasks was very high (each averaging over 95%
accuracy), suggesting these were both easy tasks. Initial
analyses did not find any effects of sex, so this variable was
excluded from the subsequent analyses. Therefore, a Trial
Type (baseline or test) x Condition (Observation, Fingertap, WM) mixed design ANOVA was conducted on the
timing of Gaze Arrival to the Goal AOI with respect to the
ball’s arrival. The means are displayed in Figure 2. There
was a significant interaction of Trial Type x Condition F(2,
42) = 6.17, p < .01. Baseline trials remained stable across
the conditions. However, the average gaze arrival to the
Goal AOI on test trials declined in the Finger-tap condition.
We then conducted a one-way ANOVA of Condition on
Gaze Arrival to the Goal AOI on test trials only, and found
the test trials significantly varied as a function of Condition
F(2, 44) = 9.14, p < .01. Post hoc analyses (Bonferroni)
revealed the test trials in the Observation condition were
significantly different than those in the Finger-tap
condition, p < .001, but not from the test trials in the
Working Memory condition, p = .28. Critically, the gaze
arrival timing in the WM condition was also significantly
different than in the Finger-tap condition, p < .05. Both the
Observation and WM conditions yielded faster gaze arrival
timings to the Goal AOI than in the Finger-tap condition. A
one-way ANOVA of Condition on Gaze Arrival during the
baseline trials revealed no significant differences.
983

350

First Two Trial

Conclusion

Last Two Trials
300

In this study we investigated the role of a divided
attention task on anticipating the actions of another
person. The results indicate that performing a manual
motor task does interfere with the anticipation of
another’s actions, whereas a working memory task does
not. This finding is the first to systematically link the
role of one’s own motor system to one’s anticipatory
gaze of another person’s actions. These findings are
consistent with the mirror neuron literature, and thus are
supportive of their role in predictive gaze.
One caveat to these findings is the loss of usable data
points in both the Finger-Tap and Working Memory
conditions. The data loss was often due to inattention
to the actions themselves (i.e., failure to gaze at the
balls and bucket within the allotted time window,
staring at the person or solely at the bucket). Based on
participant feedback, it was often reported by those who
were inattentive to the action that they spent most of
their effort trying to concentrate on the diversion task.
Studies of working memory have suggested strong
individual differences in behavioral inhibition between
groups with high and low working memory (WM) span
(Rosen & Engle, 1998). Thus, a question for future
work is to investigate these individual differences with
respect to potential effects on prospective gaze.
Similarly, future work should also address if expertise
at motor tasks involving finger articulation, such as
playing an instrument, influences the degree of
interference on prospective gaze.
Our result of
improvement in anticipation from the first two test trials
to the final two trials was not predicted by assumptions
of the mirror neuron system. Rather, we expected
performance to remain stable over trials, as was the case
in the Observation and WM conditions. Investigating
the role of motor expertise will advance our knowledge
about the systems involved in goal or action
anticipation.
In conclusion, the mirror neuron system is a potential
candidate for the neural system’s modulation of
anticipating others’ actions, but more work is needed to
explore explicitly goal anticipation as a possible
function of this system. We take caution in making the
claim that what we investigated here was ‘goal’
anticipation. Although others suggest the MNS is
dedicated to the detection of goals and others’
intentions (e.g., Gallese & Goldman, 1998), and FalckYtter et al. (2006) claimed ‘goal’ anticipation occurred
in their paradigm, we feel more work needs to be done
to test the selectivity of anticipation to ‘goal’ objects.
We note that this paradigm conflated goals with regular
patterns of movement. Thus, the effect may be about
action anticipation rather than goal anticipation, per se.
It will be important to conduct future studies in which
this confound is eliminated.

250
200
150
100
50
0
Observation

Finger Tap

Working Memory

Condition

Figure 3. Mean Gaze Arrival to the Goal AOI relative to
the Ball Arrival for the first and last two trials across
conditions.
Single sample t-tests within each level of Trial Type and
Condition on the timing of Gaze Arrival to the Goal AOI
were tested against 0 ms to examine whether gaze behavior
was significantly predictive or reactive. A 0 ms difference
is considered a conservative measure given the typical
reactive saccade latency in adults is 200 ms (Engel et al.,
1999). Thus a gaze arrival at time 0ms would indicate the
launch of the saccade to the goal occurred approximately
150-200 ms prior to arrival. Gaze arrival to the Goal AOI
at all levels of trial types and across all conditions was
found to be significantly predictive (greater than 0), p < .001
for the Observation and WM groups and the baseline trials
of the Finger-tap group, and p < .05 for the test trials in the
Finger-tap group. Thus, while it appears the act of fingertapping did disrupt anticipation by significantly decreasing
the timing, it did not obliterate prospective gaze entirely by
resulting in reactive saccades. Participants in the Finger-tap
group did anticipate to the Goal AOI, but their timing was
significantly impaired in comparison to the other groups.
Lastly, we tested for learning across the trials. We were
interested in whether increased familiarity to the actions
(repeated trials) increased the velocity of the anticipation to
the Goal AOI. Thus, a Test Pair (first two test trials v. last
two test trials) x Condition ANOVA was conducted over
average trial scores. There was effect of Condition F(2, 34)
= 5.81, p < .01, and also a Test Pair x Condition interaction,
F(2, 34) = 3.62, p < .05. Means are displayed in Figure 3.
Follow-up one-way ANOVAs within each Condition
indicated no effects of Test Pair in the Observation and the
Working Memory conditions. However, there was a
significant effect of Test Pair within the Finger-tap
condition, F(1, 14) = 4.68, p < .05, suggesting some
improvement of anticipatory gaze over trials. This finding
reveals that the motor task might have been more taxing on
the system initially, but over the course of 7 test trials (i.e.,
with practice) the task became more automatic, thus freeing
up the shared motor resources and resulting in anticipation
improvement over trials.

984

Flanagan, J. R., & Johansson, R. S. (2003). Action plans
used in action observation. Nature, 424, 769-771.
Gallese, V., Keysers, C., & Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A
unifying view of the basis of social cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 8, 396-403.
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and
the simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends in Cognitive
Science, 2, 493-501.
Grafton, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Localization of grasp representations in humans by
PET: 2. Observation compared with imagination.
Experimental Brain Research, 112, 102-111.
Grezes, J., & Decety, J. (2001). Functional anatomy of
execution, mental simulation, observation, and verb
generation of actions: A meta-analysis. Human Brain
Mapping, 12, 1-19.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2000). Working-memory
capacity, proactive interference, and divided attention:
Limits on long-term memory retrieval. JEP: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26, 336-358.
Kilner, J. M., Vargas, C., Duval, S., Blackemore, S-J. &
Sirigu, A. (2004) Motor activation prior to observation of a
predicted movement, Nature Neuroscience, 7, 1299-1301.
Land, M., Mennie, N. & Rusted, J. (1999). The roles of
vision and eye movements in the control of activities of
daily living. Perception, 28, 1311–1328
Rosen, V. A. & Engle, R. W. (1998). Working memory
capacity and suppression. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39, 418-436.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all those who participated in this
study. We would also like to thank Michael Dougherty,
Claes von Hofsten, and Gustaf Gredebeck for their useful
advice in implementing this paradigm. The work presented
here was supported by grants to the second author (ALW)
from the National Institutes of Health (HD35707) and the
National Science Foundation (0634796).

References
Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L.,
Fogassi, L., et al. (2001). Action observation activates
premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an
fMRI study. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13, 400404.
Decety, J. & Grezes, J. (2006). The power of simulation:
Imagining one’s own and other’s behavior. Brain Research,
1079, 4-14.
DiPelligrino, G., Fadiga, L. Fogassi, V. Gallese &
Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events: A
neurophysiological study. Experimental Brain Research, 91,
176-180.
Engel, K. C., Anderson, J. H. & Soechting, J. F. (1999).
Oculomotor tracking in two dimensions. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 81, 1597-1602.
Falck-Ytter, T., Gredebäck, G. & von Hofsten (2006).
Infants predict other peoples’ action goals. Nature
Neuroscience, 9, 878-879.

985

