UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogy-Making in Children: The importance of processing constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3pj592d6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Thibaut, Jean-Pierre
French, Robert
Vezneva, Milena

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogy-Making in Children:
The Importance of Processing Constraints
Jean-Pierre Thibaut (jean-pierre.thibaut@univ-poitiers.fr)
University of Poitiers, CeRCA, CNRS UMR 6234, 99 avenue du recteur Pineau 86000 Poitiers France

Robert French (robert.french@u-bourgogne.fr)
LEAD-CNRS UMR 5022, Pôle AAFE - Esplanade Erasme BP 26513 University of Burgundy,
21065 Dijon, Cedex FRANCE

Milena Vezneva (milena.vezneva@u-bourgogne.fr)
LEAD-CNRS, University of Burgundy and CeRCA, University of Poitiers, FRANCE
that the ability to perceive and to map structures within and
across domains depends on a competition between relational
and attributional features of the domains. The outcome of
this competition depends on the degree of salience of the
competing relations and attributes. To our knowledge, the
varying salience of attributes and relations and its effect on
the types of children’s matches (relational or attributional)
has not been fully explored (see Richland, Morrison, &
Holyoak, 2006).
Various views have been advanced to account for the
developmental trend whereby as children grow older, they
seem to prefer relational matching to attributional matching.
A brief summary of these views follows.
Certain authors have emphasized the role of domain
knowledge, suggesting that increasing knowledge about
relations in one conceptual domain will increase analogymaking in the target domain (see Goswami & Brown, 1990;
Vosniadou, 1995). According to Goswami (1992),
analogical reasoning is already available in infancy. It is the
lack of knowledge in one conceptual domain that prevents
children from deriving the correct analogies.
Gentner (1988), Gentner & Rattermann (1991) and
Rattermann & Gentner (1998) suggest that a so-called
“relational shift” occurs in many domains during
development, even though this shift does not occur at the
same time for all domains. It is defined as a shift from early
attention to common perceptual features to later attention to
common relational structures. Thus, before the relational
shift occurs, children primarily attend to featural similarities
between objects. After the shift, they will primarily succeed
in analogical reasoning tasks because they are able to reason
on the basis of relational features.
Finally, Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak (2006) stresses
the importance of cognitive constraints in analogy-making.
The idea is that analogy-making generates cognitive loads
because it involves the simultaneous manipulation of several
relations. Also analogy-making, in general, requires
retrieving relations that are not immediately available in
working memory when the base situation is presented.
Limitations on cognitive resources involved in processing
mean that certain types of analogies – in particular those
involving conflicts between different types of matches – in
particular, perceptual (i.e., attributional) and relational
matches – should be harder to make. Children have more

Abstract
The aim of the present study is to investigate children’s
performance in an analogy-making task involving competing
perceptual and relational matches in terms of developmental
changes in executive functioning. We hypothesize that the
selection of the common relational structure requires the
inhibition of more salient perceptual features (such as
identical shapes or colors). Most of the results show that
children’s performance in analogy-making tasks would seem
to depend crucially on the nature of the distractors. In
addition, our results show that analogy-making performance
depends on the nature of the dimensions involved in the
relations (shape or color). Finally, in simple conditions,
performance was adversely affected by the presence of
irrelevant dimensions. These results are compatible with an
analogy-making account (Richland et al., 2006) based on
varying limitations in executive functioning at different ages.
Keywords: Analogy,
processing constraints.

analogy-making,

development;

Introduction
Analogy-making is, without question, one of the most
singularly important ways in which children gradually make
sense of their world. Certain authors (cf. Hofstadter, in
Gentner, Holyoak, & Kokinov, 2000; French, 2007) have
gone so far as to claim that it is the most important cognitive
mechanism underlying development.
However, there is extensive work suggesting that analogymaking, in the sense of understanding and/or generating
relations between objects or situations in the world, is a
cognitive ability that develops only gradually (Gentner, 1988,
etc.). It is well established that, while attribute-matching
precedes relation-mapping in children, the preference for the
latter occurs earlier or later depending on the child’s familiarity
with the domains involved (Gentner, 1988; Rattermann &
Gentner, 1998; Goswami & Brown, 1990; etc.).
One of our goals is to disentangle two possibilities –
namely, that, even in abstract domains consisting only of
shapes and colors, young children might be aware of
relational information between objects, but that, in contrast
to older children, they prefer to use perceptual, attributional
information in making their matching choices.
We do not contest the evidence that a preference for
relation mapping comes to dominate perceptual-feature
mapping as children grow older. We are simply suggesting
475

Unlike Richland et al. (2006) who used semantic relations
that require an independent assessment of children’s
understanding, we used colored geometric shapes that were
completely familiar to children. We manipulated the shapes,
colors and number of the base and target items, as well as
the number of distractors whereas Richland et al. compared
a no-distractor condition with a 1-distractor condition.
The remainder of this paper is organized around two
experiments. Experiment 1 was a forced choice task in
which the relational match was always in competition with
another potential target. We manipulated the type and
number of perceptual dimensions this potential target shared
with the standard. In experiment 2, we used perceptual
analogies of the A:B::C:? format. We manipulated the
number of distractors, their nature and the mapping
dimension (color vs. shape).

limited cognitive resources than adults and, therefore,
should find these analogies more difficult to do. In their
studies, Richland et al. used scene analogy problems
consisting of pairs of scenes illustrating relations among
objects. The authors manipulated featural distraction by
varying the identity of an object in the second scene. So, for
example, if the base scene included a running cat, they
added to the target scene an object that was either
perceptually similar (e.g., a sitting cat) or dissimilar (a
sandbox). Results revealed that stimuli with the similar
distractors elicited more errors than the stimuli with the
dissimilar ones.

Goals of the present paper
In the following paper we present results that emphasize
the underlying ideas of Richland et al., focusing on the key
notion of the competition (or interaction) between the
perceptual attributes of the stimuli being processed and the
relations between them. The issue of competition between
perceptual and relational similarity has been addressed
extensively in previous works (e.g., Gentner & Toupin,
1986; Rattermann & Gentner, 1998).In this paper, however,
we wish to stress the importance of cognitive factors in the
building and manipulation of short-term representations that
allow analogy-making to proceed. We suggest that mapping
should be seen as a process in which the structures and
attributes in the base and target domain gradually become
available to processing and, in particular, do not have a
constant salience throughout processing (Mitchell &
Hofstadter, 1990; Mitchell, 1993; French, 1995).
Our experiments attempt to show the deep contextdependent nature of analogy-making in children. In other
words, the solution to a given analogy problem is highly
dependent on the degree to which the child focuses on
particular dimensions of the stimuli. The relational shift
hypothesis suggests that young children do not perceive the
related structures in the base and the target, focusing instead
on common attributes in the base and target, whereas older
children focus on the common structure (Gentner, 1988).
We hypothesize that in many cases younger children are
able to perceive the structure but do not use it to make an
analogy. What prevents them from making the expected
analogy is the nature and salience of the distractors that are
proposed together with the expected (i.e., “relational”)
solution. So, analogies that are formally identical but based
on different mapping dimensions -- in this case, shape or
color -- do not necessarily lead to the same performance.
We also claim that within the same type of analogy,
different types of perceptual conflicts, including the absence
of such a perceptual conflict, have significantly different
effects on performance. We also posit that in the context of
forced-choice paradigms, when children chose the nonanalogical possibility (i.e., the perceptual match), this does
not necessarily mean that they have not seen, or were unable
to see, the relational match. It might be that they saw it but
did not prefer to choose it, or that they could have seen it,
had it not been for the competing presence of more salient
perceptual choices.

Experiment 1
This experiment is based on a forced-choice task similar to
the one used by Christie and Gentner (2007). Children see
an initial pair of colored geometric shapes, called the
“standard.” They must then select among a number of
“target” pairs of new colored geometric shapes, the one that
is more like the standard pair. Christie and Gentner showed
that a majority of children aged 4 chose the perceptual
match rather than the analogical match whereas children
aged 8 were at chance. Here, we manipulate the colors and
shapes of the distractors in the target domain. The desired
response is always based on the identity relation “same
shape” between the two elements of the standard. For
example, the standard might consist of two squares, one
blue, one green. There are three conditions for the target
pairs (Figure 1):
a. Competition: The two target pairs consist of a pair of
different shapes (e.g., circle/triangle) in which one of the
objects has the same color as one of the squares in the
standard and a pair of identical shapes (e.g., 2 stars). The
former is the “perceptual match” – because it shares a
color with the standard pair – and the latter constitutes the
“relational match” – because it shares the identity relation
with the standard pair. Here, there is a competition
between the perceptual and the relational matches.
b. Same color: Identical to (a), except that in the “relational”
target pair, one of the two shapes shares a color with one
of the shapes of the standard.
c. No competition: As above, the two target pairs consist of
a pair of different shapes (e.g., circle/triangle) in which
neither of the objects has the same color as either of the
squares in the standard and a pair of identical shapes. In
this case, there is no competition because there is no
perceptual match; the only intended solution is the
relational match.
The key comparison will be between the first condition (a)
in which there is a competition between the analogical
solution and a perceptual solution and the last condition (c)
in which the only solution is the analogical one. The Same
Color condition is interesting because, if children were
relying only on perceptual cues, they should answer
476

relational responses in the Competition condition (M= 2.4)
was significantly lower than in two other conditions (M =
2.8, in both cases, p < .05).
In addition, we compared the results from each group to
chance using a t-test. The value of chance was 2.0 relational
responses. At six years of age, none of the conditions
differed significantly from chance ( α = 0.05 ) even though
a trend was observed in the No Competition condition: t(22)
= 1.78, p = 0.088, η 2 = 0.13 . At eight years old, however,
the results for the Same Color and No Competition
conditions were significantly above from chance, whereas
the Competition condition did not differ significantly from
chance. Specifically, for the Same Color condition t(22) =
2.45, p = 0.023, η 2 = 0.21 . For the No Competition
condition: t(22) = 6.01, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.62 . For the adults,
all results were significantly above chance. For the Same
Color condition: t(25) = 6.46, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.65 . Finally,
for the No Competition condition: t(25) = 3.84, p < 0.001,
η 2 = 0.40 . Finally, for the Competition condition: t(25) =
3.95, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.41 (see Figure 2).

randomly, whereas in the Competition condition they would
be biased towards the perceptual match.
We used a 3 x 3 mixed design with Age (6 years-old, 8
years-old, adult) as a between factor and Match Condition
(Competition, Same Color, No competition) as a within
factor. The dependent variable was the number of analogical
matches.

Methods
Participants. A total of 23 6-year-olds (M = 78 months,
range: 72-83 months), 23 8-year-olds (M = 100 months,
range: 96-104 months), and 26 adults (university students)
participated in the experiment.
Materials. Stimuli were made of geometric shapes similar
to those used by Christie and Gentner (2007). There were 12
trials each consisting of the standard pair and two target
pairs, as described above. The positions of the target pairs
were left-right counterbalanced. There were three
conditions: Competition, Same Color, and No Competition.
There were four trials per condition. Additionally, any given
shape could be part of either the standard or the target pairs,
in order to avoid choices based on a systematic preference
for a given shape. The colors of the shapes were also
systematically varied (Figure 1).

competition
same color
no competition

3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0

6-year-olds

a. Competition

b. Same color

8-year-olds

Adults

Figure 2. Children’s and adults’ results as a function of
condition (chance level: 2)
This experiment was designed to distinguish the situation
in which a child sees the analogical match but does not
chose it from the situation where the child does not see the
analogical match. At eight-years of age it is clear that the
children do, indeed, see the analogical match, as shown by
the highly significant result (p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.62 ) in the No
Competition condition. However, in the Competition
condition (perceptual match competing with the relational
match), their performance does not differ significantly from
chance. This indicates that, while they see the analogical
match – as demonstrated by their performance in the No
Competition or the Same Color conditions – they are
equally drawn to the perceptual match.
The Same Color condition was a condition with
conflicting perceptual cues. We hypothesized that if
children had a strong bias towards perceptual dimensions,
they would answer randomly, since both target pairs share a
color with the standard. In fact, their performance did not
differ significantly from the No competition condition,
suggesting that, once the shared perceptual feature was
detected, they were able ignore it and chose a relational
solution. In other words, this condition suggests that they
can inhibit perceptual matches. However this was true for 8-

c. No competition

Figure 1. Examples of the 3 conditions: Competition, Same
Color, and No Competition.
Procedure. The first trial was used to explain the task. Each
child then saw 4 trials in each of the 3 conditions. For each
trial, the experimenter showed the child the standard and the
two target pairs on a computer screen and said, pointing to
the standard, “Look at these two items.” And then, pointing
at the two target pairs, the experimenter said, “Which one of
these two pictures is more like this one [pointing at the
standard]?” No feedback was given, except general
encouragement.

Results and discussion
A two-way mixed ANOVA revealed main effects of the
between factor Age, F(2, 69) = 4.496, p = .015, η 2 = 0.12;
and the within factor Match Condition, F(2, 138) = 5.02, p <
.01, η 2 =0.07; and no significant interaction. A posteriori
comparisons (Tukey HSD) revealed that adults (M = 3)
gave significantly more analogical choices than children
aged 6 (Mean = 2.2) (p < .05). The other comparisons were
not significant. They also revealed that the number of
477

year-old children only. At six, their answers did not differ
significantly from chance. The comparison between the
three groups reveals an interesting pattern. The younger
children had a non significant tendency to choose the
relational solution in the No Competition condition. Eightyear-olds also selected the relational solution in the Same
Color conditions, whereas adults selected it in all three
conditions. Thus, our results show a hierarchy of
performance that is consistent with a hierarchy of increasing
cognitive demands.

from the University of Poitiers, unaware of the purposes of
the experiment, also participated.
Materials. There were four conditions. The experiment was
composed of 20 trials, 4 training trials, and 16 experimental
trials. Each condition was composed of 4 trials. In the first
condition, the Two-Choice Competition condition, there
were only 2 target choices, a relational item (the correct
solution) and a perceptual distractor. In the other conditions,
we progressively increased the “perceptual noise” from the
distractor items. The second condition was a Four-Choice
No Competition, in which there was only one relational item
and three distractors that shared no obvious perceptual
feature with the C term. The third condition was a FourChoice Single-Competition condition in which there was
one relational choice and where one of the distractors was a
perceptual match and the remaining two distractors shared
no obvious perceptual feature with the C term. In the final
condition, the Four-Choice Three-Competition, there was
one relational match and three distractors, each of which
was a perceptual match, one with the A term, one with the B
term, and one with the C term.

Experiment 2
One problem with the Competition condition in Experiment
1 is that both the perceptual and the relational choices are
valid solutions to the task of choosing a single Target pair
that is “most like” the Standard. There is no pressure to
choose one solution over the other in the task. Gentner and
colleagues have shown that there is a developmental trend
from perceptually-based choices to relationally-based
choices, despite the lack of pressure towards any of the two
solutions (e.g., Christie & Gentner, 2007). However, it
remains possible that in Experiment 1, especially in the
Competition condition, children’s choices were based on
what they preferred (i.e., the perceptual match), rather than
on their ability to detect the relational target. For this reason,
we adapted the first experiment to one that more closely fits
a traditional A:B::C:? analogy-making paradigm, i.e., one in
which the “relational” choice is the more valid one. In the
four conditions of this experiment, we attempt to
progressively increase the “perceptual noise” in the
distractors, in order to increase the processing load
associated with making the analogy.
In this experiment, we again used colored geometric
shapes. We called the first pair (A:B) the Base Pair and the
(C:?) pair the Target Pair. The two stimuli in the Base Pair
are related by either having the “same shape” or the “same
color”. The third stimulus (C) had to be matched with a
fourth stimulus (D), such that the relation between C and D
was the same as the relation between A and B. (See Figure
2). We created four conditions in which we manipulated the
type of conflict and the number and type of distractors.
This experiment was a 2 x 2 x 4 mixed design with Age
(6-year-olds and 8-year-olds) as a between factor, MatchDimension (Color, Shape) as a within condition and Match
Condition (Two-Choice-Competition, Four-Choice-NoCompetition, Four-Choice-Single-Competition, and Four-

?

Figure 2: the analogy display used in Experiment 3; the two
stimuli in the bottom raw illustrate the Two-Choice
competition condition (see text)
Procedure. The children saw the stimuli on a computer
screen. They saw the A:B pair and the C term shown in an
array with the first two items grouped together to the left of
the screen. The C item was alone on the right of the screen
and next to the C item there was an empty square with a
question mark. Each of the items was drawn in a box
(Figure 3). They studied these items and, without seeing the
Target items, were asked to predict what image they would
put in the box with the question mark in order to complete
the pattern. They were then shown the Target items and
were asked to point to the one that best completed the series
of items. (This procedure was patterned after Goswami &
Brown, 1990). The first four trials were training trials.

Results and discussion

Choice-Three-Competitions) as a within factor. The
dependent variable was the number of correct relational
matches (see below for more details).

We ran a three-way mixed ANOVA on the data with Age as
a between factor and Match-Dimension and MatchCondition as within factors. We did not include the adults in
the analysis because they made no mistakes during the
experiment. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect
for each of the factors and no interaction. Children aged
eight performed significantly better than 6 year-olds, F(1,
37) = 7.87, p < .05; η 2 =0.18; shape analogies were better
understood than color analogies, F (1, 37) = 21.08, p < .001;

Methods
Participants. A total of 19 six-year-old children (M: 77
months; range: 73-84 months) and 20 eight-year-old
children (M: 102 months; range: 97-108 months)
participated in the experiment. A control group of 10 adults
478

η 2 =0.36. The effect of match condition was also significant,
F (3, 111) = 7.58, p < .01; η 2 =0.17. A posteriori analyses
(Tukey HSD), showed that the Two-Choice-Competition
condition differed significantly from the Four-ChoiceThree-Competition (M = 1.44 vs. 1.19, out of 2) and the
Four-Choice-No-Competition differed significantly from the
Four-Choice-Single-Competition and the Four-Choice
Three-Competition conditions (M= 1.53 vs. 1.25 vs 1.19,
respectively).
The experiment shows a general increase in performance
with age. Interestingly, the Four-Choice Single-Competition
and the Four-Choice-No-Competition conditions did not
differ significantly, whereas the latter differed significantly
from the Four-Choice-Three-Competition condition, which
suggests that adding common perceptual features increased
the overall difficulty of the task.
Of considerable interest was the general difference
between Shape and Color analogies. Shape was significantly
favored over color. This would presumably indicate that
shape is more salient than color for children. Since the shape
and color analogies have exactly the same formal structure,
this difference cannot be attributed to a relational shift or a
difference in terms of knowledge. In fact, children can sort
stimuli on color as efficiently as on shape.
In the Four-Choice Single-Competition, another
difference between the Color and Shape conditions is the
number of choices among distractors that share no feature or
relation with the C term. There were four such errors in the
Shape condition against eight in the color condition.
Essentially, an equivalent difference was obtained in the
Four-Choice-Three Competition condition in which children
selected more stimuli that had a perceptual match in
common with one of the stimuli of the base pair in the color
condition than in the shape condition. These two results,
though only suggestive, are compatible with the idea that
the color condition generated more “cognitive noise” than
the shape condition.
Finally, the result obtained for the Four-Choice No
Competition condition is of interest. Even though the
relational solution was also a perceptual match, children of
both age groups were far from perfect, especially for the
color analogies. One explanation is that young children also
tried to find solutions for the other stimuli. As mentioned
above, this search might have contributed to the increased
processing load of the task, which in turn gave rise to errors.

familiar. Consequently, differences between the conditions
could not be accounted for in terms of differences in
knowledge required to solve the problem.
The age hierarchy obtained in Experiment 1 (i.e., the
tendency to choose the relational match in the No
Competition condition at age 6, in the Same Color condition
at age 8, and in all three conditions for adults) is compatible
with the hypothesis of increasing development of executive
function with age. The difference between the Two-Choice
Competition and the Four-Choice Three-Competition
conditions can also be explained by the increased cognitive
cost of inhibiting a larger number of potential perceptual
choices in the latter condition.
The performance in the No Competition conditions in both
experiments is also revealing. Given that there was no other
consistent solution in the analogy, the errors likely reflect
children’s search for a solution across the target stimuli.
Their errors arguably reflect their inability, because of
excessive cognitive load, to consider all the possibilities at
the same time, keeping only the best of the lot. This does
not reflect an intrinsic ambiguity in the task itself, since in
Experiment 2, the adults made no mistakes in any of the
conditions.
Since children are able to sort and categorize stimuli
according to color before the age of six, we do not interpret
the color-shape differences above in terms either of acquired
knowledge or of the relational shift hypothesis. This
difference is compatible with the general notion of a shape
bias. Although this bias has received various interpretations,
it has been repeatedly shown that children are relying on
shape more than on other dimensions, such as color to
generalize concepts (Landau, Smith & Jones, 1998;
Diesendruck & Bloom, 2003). In many situations shape is
more “important” or relevant than color cues. This would
explain why children spontaneously focus on shape and why
they succeed more often in the shape condition than in the
color condition. Interestingly, this bias disappeared in the
adult group where performance was perfect in both
dimensions.
More generally, as mentioned above, our results are
similar to results obtained by other authors (e.g., Richland et
al., 2006, on semantic analogies; Mix, 2007, on number
equivalence). They all refer to the idea that salient irrelevant
properties interfere with the construction of the analogical
solution. Our experiments attempted to explicitly and
systematically manipulate the nature and the number of
these perceptual properties.
In general, these results are compatible with the idea of the
involvement of processing constraints: when confronted
with an analogy, we look for potential solutions or construct
these solutions by testing various hypotheses (i.e., features
and relations between features). When there is no obvious
solution, we construct and compare different possible
solutions. These comparisons between the base stimuli and
various stimuli in the solution space generate cognitive
loads associated with executive functioning. To find a good
solution, one has to inhibit other salient, but poorer
solutions. One must remain flexible enough to replace a

General Discussion
The results of our two experiments fit well with the
hypothesis that limitations in children’s processing load
capacity affect their performance in analogy-making tasks.
The results for the eight-year-olds in our study suggest that
these limitations continue at least through mid-childhood
(see Richland et al., 2006). In contrast to Richland et al.
(2006) or Mix (2007), we attempted to limit the necessity
for semantic knowledge by constructing analogy problems
based on geometric shapes and perceptual dimensions with
which even the youngest children in our study were well

479

solution that appears to be poorer compared to a newer one,
but still be prepared to return to one’s first choice later on.
During the analogy-making process, it is also necessary to
maintain in working memory previous solutions and/or the
relations. This also has a cognitive cost that is crucially
involved in the final choice of a solution. To the best of our
knowledge, current models of analogy-making in children
do not make these processing constraints explicit. Our views
regarding the role of working memory are similar to
Halford’s views (e.g., Halford, 1993). He has defined
relational complexity in terms of the number of sources of
variation that are related and must be processed in parallel.
However, we also want to stress the role of inhibition and
flexibility.
In conclusion, we have argued for the notion of a
competition between perceptual features and relational
structure in understanding analogy-making. We attribute
children’s performance on the tasks presented in this paper
to the degree of cognitive load engendered by the perceptual
features in competition with the relational information.

Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277–300.
Goswami, 1992 Analogical reasoning in children, Erlbaum,
Mahwah, NJ.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order structure
and relational reasoning: Contrasting analogical and
thematic relations. Cognition, 36, 207-226.
Goswami, U., (2001). Analogical reasoning in children. In:
In The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive
Science, D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, and B. N. Kokinov
(eds.). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press/Bradford Books.
437–470.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Hofstadter, D. R. (2001). Analogy as the Core of Cognition.
In The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive
Science, D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, and B. N. Kokinov
(eds.). Cambridge MA: The MIT Press/Bradford Books,
499-538.
Landau, B., Smith, L., & Jones, S. (1998). Object shape,
object function, and object name, Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 1-27.
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception: A
Computer Model. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Mix, K.S. (2008). Children’s equivalence judgments:
crossmapping effects. Cognitive development, 23, 191203.
Ratterman, M.J. and Gentner, D., (1998). More evidence for
a relational shift in the development of analogy: Children's
performance on a causal-mapping task, Cognitive
Development 13(4), 453–478.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J., (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Vosniadou, S. (1995). Analogical reasoning in cognitive
development. Metaphor and Symbol, 10, 297-308.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by the European
Commission grant FP6-NEST-029088.

References
Christie, S., & Gentner, D., (2007). Relational Similarity in
Identity Relation: The Role of Language. In Proceedings
of the second European Cognitive Science Conference
2007, 401-406.
Diesendruck, G. & Bloom, P. (2003). How specific is the
shape bias? Child Development, 74, 168–178
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
French, R.M. (2007). The dynamics of the computational
modeling of analogy-making. In the CRC Handbook of
Dynamic Systems Modeling. Paul Fishwick (ed.), Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC.
Gentner, D . (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping : The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59 .
Gentner, D, and Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and
the Career of Similarity. In Perspectives on Thought and
Language: Inter-relations in Development, ed. Susan A.
Gelman and James P. Brynes. London: Cambridge
University Press.

480

