UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Anticipatory Eye Movements Mediated by Word Order Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nd7f1mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Engelhardt, Paul E.
Xiang, Ming
Ferreira, Fernanda

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Anticipatory Eye Movements Mediated by Word-Order Constraints
Paul E. Engelhardt (paul@eyelab.msu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

Ming Xiang (mxiang@fas.harvard.edu)
Linguistics Department, Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Fernanda Ferreira (fernanda.ferreira@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9JZ

were asked to pick up the tall glass, the probability of
fixating the target (i.e. the tall glass) started to increase even
before the onset of the noun when the context contained a
contrasting object (i.e. a short glass). The same result was
not obtained when the context did not have a contrasting
object. Altmann and Kamide (1999) observed a similar
anticipatory effect based on thematic constraints. For
example, participants were faster to fixate an object such as
a cake when hearing the boy will eat… versus when hearing
the boy will move…. Together these studies show that the
processing system can rapidly integrate visual context and
linguistic information when resolving structural ambiguity
or establishing reference online (see also DeLong, Urback,
& Kutas, 2005).
In the current study, we attempt to determine whether
listeners can anticipate reference from a more subtle cue in
the linguistic input, namely the ordering constraint on prenominal number and color modifiers (Bierwisch, 1987;
Danks & Schwenk, 1972; Edwards & Chambers, in press;
Ferris, 1993; Martin, 1969; Siegel, 1980). For example,
upon hearing point to the orange…, the only prediction that
can be made with respect to a well-formed utterance is that
there must be a noun upcoming. However, a parser that is
sensitive to ordering constraints may be able to determine
that number information is unlikely to be relevant for
identifying the head noun.1
It is not obvious that the absence of a modifier directly
contributes to the processing of an utterance. Presumably,
when the comprehension system builds an interpretation
based on partial input, it should focus on what is likely to be
in the utterance, rather than on what was not in the
utterance. Determining whether the parser can make use of
the absence of a modifier, what we will refer to as negative
evidence, is the focus of this study.

Abstract
Previous work using the visual world paradigm has
demonstrated that listeners can rapidly combine visual and
linguistic inputs to make complex inferences about upcoming
linguistic information. In this study, we show that this
inferential capacity extends to more complex linguistic
constraints. In English, pre-nominal modifiers follow
particular ordering constraints (e.g. two red balls, vs. *red two
balls). Using a visual world task, we show that listeners are
immediately sensitive to this ordering constraint, such that
after processing the fragment point to the red…, participants
were more likely to look at a red object belonging to a
contrastive set distinguished by color compared to red objects
from a set distinguished by number. These findings support
the hypothesis that the processing system can use linear order
constraints to make predictive inferences when establishing
reference online.
Keywords: adjective ordering; linear order; referential
communication; anticipatory eye movements.

Introduction
A question of increasing importance for psycholinguistic
research is how the language system interacts with other
cognitive systems, and in the past few years there has
been a growing interest in the interaction of vision and
language (for review see Ferreira & Tanenhaus, 2007).
Much of the previous work has gone into determining
what effect visual context has on online language
processing. In a very influential study, Tanenhaus,
Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, and Sedivy (1995) proposed
that for a sentence such as put the apple on the towel in
the box, the temporary structural ambiguity of the
prepositional phrase (on the towel) can be resolved more
quickly when there are two apples in a visual display.
This suggests that people are sensitive to multiplereferents, and can immediately treat on the towel as a
modifier when provided with an appropriate context.
Along similar lines, Sedivy, Tanenhaus, Chambers, and
Carlson (1999) investigated the role of contrastive sets on
the interpretation of adjective modifiers. When participants

1

Several possibilities exist in which a number modifier can follow
a color modifier, such as point to the red group of six squares or
point to the red- uh- six squares . We assume that these
alternatives are overall less frequent than the preferred numbercolor-noun ordering.

951

value of 100. Therefore, ratings of greater than 100 are
expected for grammatical sentences. Values of less than 100
are expected for ungrammatical sentences. Analyses were
conducted with both participants (F1) and items (F2) as
random effects.

Experiment 1
To begin, we assessed the relative ordering strength between
different types of adjectives (i.e. number, size, & color),
using an offline magnitude estimation paradigm. Magnitude
estimation has been used as a tool for assessing subtle
differences between different types of sentences (Sprouse,
2007). The basic idea is that participants are given a
reference sentence that is ungrammatical, and they must
judge test sentences compared to the reference sentence.
The reference sentence for this experiment was Mary
figured out what her mother wondered whether she was
hiding. Example instructions that were compared to the
reference sentence are shown in Table 1.

Results
Results showed two significant main effects (adjective order
F1(2, 41) = 88.20, p < .01, F2(2, 23) = 12.18, p < .01, &
adjective pair F1(2, 41) = 24.44, p < .01, F2(2, 23) = 8.95, p
< .01), and a significant interaction F1(2, 82) = 10.60, p <
.01, F2(2, 29) = 6.66, p < .01 (see Figure 1). These results
show that the preferred order resulted in higher ratings than
did the reversed order. The reversed order of size and color
seems to be the primary factor driving the main effect of
adjective pair and the interaction, as this condition resulted
in significantly higher acceptability, than did the other
reversed orders. This pattern indicates more flexibility with
size and color pair. We began our investigation of the use of
negative evidence using the strongest ordering constraint
(i.e. number & color).

Table 1: Example instructions for Magnitude Estimation
(1) The boy ate the big red apple.
(2) ?The boy ate the red big apple.
(3) The boy ate the two red apples.
(4) *The boy ate the red two apples.
(5) The boy ate the two big apples.
(6) *The boy ate the big two apples.

Size-color
Color-Size
Number-color
Color-number
Number-size
Size-number

Magnitude Estimation

The often reported intuition is that size and color is more
flexible than number-color and number-size. If the ordering
constraint is equally robust, then participants should rate the
reversed orders (i.e. 2, 4, & 6) similarly across the pairings.

Preferred
Reversed

100

80

Methods
Mean ratings

60

Participants
Forty-two students from Michigan State University
participated for course credit.

40

20

Materials
0

Twenty-four sentences modified from Kremmerer et al.
(2006) were created that each contained two modifiers. For
each sentence, the normal and reversed orders were created.
These stimuli were placed into two lists. Each list contained
24 critical trials and 72 filler trials. Filler trials consisted of
half grammatical and half ungrammatical sentences. Each
critical instruction appeared once in each list, and lists were
counterbalanced so that subjects received an equal number
of trials in each condition.

Number-Size

Number-Color

Size-Color

-20

Adjective pairs

Figure 1: Results from the magnitude estimation study.

Experiment 2
In Figure 2, by the number attribute two, there are three sets
of objects that fit the description. Similarly, by the color
attribute orange, there are also three sets of compatible
objects. Therefore, when a participant hears an instruction
such as point to the orange…, the instruction would seem to
be ambiguous, since there are three orange sets in the
display. However, if participants are sensitive to the
number-color ordering asymmetry, then they should be
more likely to fixate the correct target (i.e. the orange
triangles) before hearing the noun. This is because number
information is needed to distinguish the sets of objects with
squares. In other words, beginning a noun phrase with a
color modifier should signal that the target is unlikely to be
from a set of objects discriminated by number.

Design and Procedure
The design was 2 x 3. Adjective order was either normal or
reversed, and adjective pair refers to the three possible
pairings between number, size, and color (i.e. number-size,
number-color, and size-color). Participants were required to
complete a short magnitude estimation training session, in
which they rated the lengths of several lines. After training,
participants completed three practice trials, and 96
experimental trials. For each trial, participants read both
sentences, and typed their estimate of the difference in
acceptability using the keyboard. In the instructions,
participants were told that the reference sentence had a

952

possible instructions were created. Each visual display
appeared once in each list, and instructions were rotated in a
Latin Square design. The mean duration of number
modifiers was 406 ms, and the mean length of color
modifiers was 413 ms, across all four critical conditions.
This difference was not significant t(47) = .395, p = .69.
The mean lengths of the head nouns comparing number and
color modified instructions was 749 ms and 747 ms
respectively. This difference was also not significant t(47) =
.088, p = .93.

Design and Procedure
The design had two variables: modifier type and ambiguity
(see Table 2). The participants’ task was to point to a target
as quickly as possible. Each trial began with a fixation
cross. Participants were instructed to look at the cross and to
press the space bar to start the trial. The visual display
appeared for 1000 ms before the instruction began. Primary
data analysis occurred in two time segments corresponding
to the modifier and noun. These segments were identified by
aligning utterances on a word-by-word and trial-by-trial
basis. The modifier and noun time windows were offset (for
all analyses) by 200 ms to account for the time required to
initiate a saccade.

Figure 2: Example stimulus for Experiment 1.
In contrast, for an instruction such as point to the two… ,
ordering constraints cannot be used to rule out any of the
three potential candidates because a color adjective is still
an option (e.g. the two orange triangles). Therefore, our
critical comparison is between the two types of modifiers:
We expect more looks to the correct target during the
modifier with an ambiguous color modifier compared to an
ambiguous number modifier. We also included two
unambiguous instructions (see Table 2). In these conditions,
the target can be identified at the modifier. Therefore, we
should see no difference between these two instructions.

Table 3: Modifiers and nouns tested.

Methods
Participants
Forty students from Michigan State University participated
for course credit. All were native speakers of English and
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Numbers

Colors

Heads

two
five
six

blue
gray
green
orange
pink
purple
red
white

circle
diamond
heart
moon
square
star
triangle
yellow

Materials
A total of 99 visual displays were created (three practice, 24
experimental, & 72 filler). For all displays, the number, color
and shape of objects was randomly determined (see Table 3).
A complete list of stimulus materials is available at
(http://eyelab.msu.edu/pubs/exf.pdf/). All filler trials
contained a single modifier instruction, and each uniquely
identified one quadrant of the display. For a viewing distance
of 60 cm, the visual array of objects on average subtended 22o
of visual angle horizontally and 17o vertically.

The dependent measure was the proportion of trials with a
fixation to each of the four regions of the display. The
probability of fixation was calculated by determining the
number of trials that contained a fixation in one of the
regions. The number of trials with a fixation was divided by
the total number of trials per condition (i.e. 6). (Note that we
excluded fixations that crossed either the modifier or noun
onsets.) Therefore, the dependent measure could also be
described as the proportion of trials in which a saccade was
launched to each of regions during the modifier or noun.
Hand-coding of the data was performed from the onset of
the instruction to the time at which the participant pointed to
the target. The criterion for fixations was three consecutive
frames with little to no movement of the fixation cross.

Table 2: Example instructions for Figure 1
(1) Point to the orange triangles. (color/ambiguous)
(2) Point to the two squares. (number/ambiguous)
(3) Point to the white triangles. (color/unambiguous)
(4) Point to the six squares. (number/unambiguous)

Results

Utterances were digitally recorded by a native speaker of
English, and converted to .wav format. Four lists were
created so that for each experimental display, all four

The following results are presented sequentially in three
main segments. First, we report the probability of
fixating the objects prior to the modifier word (i.e.
953

during point to the). This analysis establishes that
participants are not biased to attend to any particular
region of the display prior to the critical material. The
second time segment corresponds to the modifier, and
this is the region of most interest for our main
hypotheses. Finally, we report the results from the noun
region. The general prediction is that early in the
utterance participants should be randomly sampling the
four regions of the display. However, as the instruction
unfolds, attention will be increasing restricted to the
object named in the instruction.
During the initial region, we found a main effect of
ambiguity F1 (1, 39) = 27.52, p < .05; F2 (1, 23) =
23.22, p < .05, in which there was a higher probability
of fixating the targets of the unambiguous instructions.
Both targets are unique in terms of number and color.
Therefore, the bias to attend to these objects is likely
due to their salience. For our purposes however, the
main effect of modifier type was not significant F1 (1,
39) = .40, p > .05; F2 (1, 23) = .45, p > .05, and neither
was the interaction F1 (1, 39) = 3.97, p > .05; F2 (1, 23)
= 3.69, p > .05.
At the modifier position, there was a main effect of
ambiguity (see Figure 3). The unambiguous instructions
had a higher probability of fixation than the ambiguous
instructions F1 (1, 39) = 94.07, p < .05; F2 (1, 23) =
188.36, p < .05. There was also a main effect of
modifier type, in which the color adjectives resulted in
more fixations than did number adjectives F1 (1, 39) =
12.74, p < .05; F2 (1, 23) = 8.11, p < .05. The
interaction was not significant F1 (1, 39) = 1.06, p >
.05, F2 (1, 23) = .56, p > .05. Ordinarily, one would
stop with statistical analyses at this point. However,
because of a critical difference between the targets for
the ambiguous and unambiguous instructions, we went
ahead with simple effects tests. The reason for doing so
will be discussed in the subsequent paragraph. The pairwise comparisons showed a significant difference
between the color and number adjectives within the
ambiguous conditions t1(39) = 2.88, p < .05, t2(23) =
2.37, p < .05, and a significant difference between the
color and number adjectives within the unambiguous
conditions t1(39) = 2.38, p < .05, t2(23) = 2.16, p <
.05.2
These results show that with the ambiguous
instructions, the color modifier produced more looks to
the target than the number modifier, consistent with the
hypothesis that the processing system can make use of
word-order constraints to anticipate the target.
However, we also found a color advantage with the
unambiguous instructions. This color advantage in the
unambiguous conditions is not surprising, as a color
“pop-out” effect is well documented in the visual search
literature (Itti & Koch, 2000). In the unambiguous color

condition, the modifier directly points to the one unique
color in the display, and thus, listeners’ eye-gaze is
attracted by the highly salient color feature.

Looks to target object during modifier
1

proportion of trials with fixation

0.9

Color Adjective
Number Adjective

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Ambiguous

Unambiguous

Figure 3: Looks to the target object during the modifier.
One possibility is that there is some inherent
processing advantage of color over number. However,
with the ambiguous instructions, the ambiguous
modifier is compatible with three regions of the display.
If there is a processing advantage of color over number,
then it should lead to a higher probability of fixating the
orange objects, but it should not help listeners to
discriminate the target from the relevant distractors (i.e.
the other sets of objects that are compatible with the
ambiguous modifier). To rule out the possibility of a
general processing advantage of color over number, we
examined looks to the target versus the relevant
distractors. We defined the relevant distractors in the
following way. For the ambiguous color condition, the
six orange squares differ from the target in number, and
we refer to it as relevant distractor 1. The two orange
squares are relevant distractor 2. For the ambiguous
number condition, the two white triangles differ from
the target by color, so we refer to it as relevant
distractor 1. The two orange triangles are relevant
distractor 2.
We compared the looks to the target and the relevant
distractors using difference scores. Target advantage 1
was computed by subtracting the proportion of trials
with a fixation to relevant distractor 1 from the
proportion of trials with a fixation to the target (see
Figure 4). Target advantage 2 was computed by
subtracting relevant distractor 2 from the target. Target
advantage 1 was significantly greater for the color
adjective compared to the number adjective t1(39) =
2.36, p < .05, t2(23) = 1.56, p = .06. Target advantage 2

2

Because of the a priori hypothesis concerning ordering
restrictions, we conducted one-tailed tests for comparisons
involving the ambiguous instructions, and two-tailed tests for the
unambiguous instructions.

954

was significantly greater in the color condition than in
the number condition t1(39) = 3.63, p < .05, t2(23) =
2.02, p < .05. These results show that at the modifier,
participants are already beginning to discriminate the
target from the distractors in the ambiguous color
condition, consistent with our hypothesis that listeners
can make predictive inferences based on linear ordering
constraints. No such evidence was found for the
ambiguous number instruction.

Looks to target object during noun
1

proportion of trials with fixation

0.9

Looks to target and distractors during modifer
1

proportion of trials with fixation

0.9
0.8

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Target

Color Adjective
Number Adjective

0

Relevant Distractor 1

Ambiguous

Relevant Distractor 2

Unambiguous

0.7

Figure 5: Looks to the target object during the head noun.

0.6
0.5

General Discussion

0.4

The results from this experiment demonstrate that
participants can fixate a target object more quickly when
they hear a temporarily ambiguous color modifier when
compared to a similarly ambiguous number modifier. Our
results can only be explained by assuming that when
confronted with an ambiguous modifier, the processing
system has the ability to quickly apply knowledge of
linguistic constraints to the available visual information to
anticipate what the upcoming referent will be.
If people do employ word order constraints to make
rapid predictions, then one question that naturally arises is
under what circumstances are these predictions generated.
Do people always generate predictions whenever the
linguistic constraints and the visual displays support such
predictions, or is this anticipatory behavior bound by the
particular task or experimental situation? One potential
explanation of our results is that because all of the stimuli
(experimental and filler) contained only one modifier, it is
possible that participants learned over the course of the
experiment that a single modifier was the only information
needed to succeed in the task. Therefore, in making
maximal use of modifier information, they might have
employed more predictions, than they would in a more
varied context. To investigate this possibility we analyzed
the first half and second half of the critical trials for each
participant. The results from this analysis showed that the
effect was slightly (but not significantly) greater in the first
half of trials, which goes against a learning explanation of
our results.
For the structures and constraints tested in previous
studies (e.g. Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Delong et al., 2005;
Sedivy et al., 1999), partial linguistic information provides
evidence as to what should be upcoming in the speech
stream. In the current study however, when hearing point to
the orange…, the only necessary element is that there must

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Ambiguous Color

Ambiguous Number

Figure 4: Looks to the target and relevant distractors.
At the head-noun neither of the main effects were
significant (adjective type F1 (1, 39) = .33, p > .05; F2
(1, 23) = .13, p > .05, & ambiguity F1 (1, 39) = .29, p >
.05; F2 (1, 23) = 1.13, p > .05), but the interaction was
significant by subjects and marginal for items F1 (1, 39)
= 4.12, p < .05; F2 (1, 23) = 3.20, p > .05 (see Figure 5).
The pattern of results for the ambiguous instructions is
similar to pattern at the modifier, namely that the color
modifier resulted in a marginally higher probability of
fixation t1(39) = 1.91, p < .05, t2(31) = 1.46, p = .075.
The pattern for the unambiguous instructions was in the
opposite direction of the previous time region, and was
not significant t1(39) = -1.00, p > .05, t2(31) = -1.17, p >
.05.
In summary, we found that linear order constraints
can be used by the processing system to make
anticipatory fixations when confronted with an
ambiguous color modifier. In addition, we were able to
demonstrate that this effect is unlikely to be due to an
inherent processing advantage of color over number.
Instead, we conclude that people can make rapid
anticipatory eye movements based on the ordering
constraints on pre-nominal adjectives.

955

Bierwisch, M. (1987). The semantics of gradation. In: M.
Bierwich, & E. Lang (Eds.): Dimensional Adjectives.
Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 71-261.
Danks, J. H., & Schwenk, M. A. (1972). Prenominal
adjective order and communication contexts. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 183-187.
DeLong, K. A., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2005).
Probabilistic word pre-activation during language
comprehension inferred from electrical brain activity.
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1117-1121.
Edwards, J. D., & Chambers, C. G. (in press). It’s not what
you said, it’s how you said it: How modification
conventions influence on-line referential processing. The
Processing and Acquisition of Reference. Eds. N.
Pearlmutter, and E. Gibson. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Ferreira, F. & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2007). Introduction to the
special issue on language-vision interactions. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57, 455-459.
Ferris, C. (1993). The meaning of syntax: a study of
adjectives in English. London & New York: Longman.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2000). A saliency-based search
mechanism for overt and covert shifts of visual attention.
Vision Research, 40, 1489-1505.
Martin, J. E. (1969). Semantic determinants of preferred
adjective order. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8, 697-704.
Quirk R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985).
A Comprehensive Grammar of English Language.
London: Longman.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: Evidence for effects of
informativity expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32, 3-23.
Sedivy, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., Chambers, C. G., &
Carlson, G. N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic
interpretation through contextual interpretation.
Cognition, 71, 109-147.
Siegel, M. (1980). Capturing the Adjective. New York:
Garland.
Sprouse, J. (2007). A program for experimental syntax:
Finding the relationship between acceptability and
grammatical knowledge. Ph.D. thesis University of
Maryland.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.

be a noun at some point following the adjective. This
prediction by itself will not drive the fixation patterns we
observed. Rather what seems to be happening is that
participants are able to use the absence of a particular type
of modifier (i.e. negative evidence) to infer what
information will not follow, namely, that after a color
modifier it is unlikely that any information about number
will be included.
Turning our attention to the mechanism that allows the
processing system to successfully link the linguistic input
with the visual context, we assume that minimally three
steps are required. First, at the (ambiguous) modifier, our
participants must narrow down the referents to those that
match the description. This is possible only if the parser
builds linguistic representations incrementally. The second
step is that participants must have access to the ordering
constraints between different types of adjective modifiers. If
the modifier is a color term, the parser must be aware that
number information is unlikely to follow, whereas if the
modifier is a number term, the possibility for color
modification remains. The final step is for the parser to
apply the ordering constraint to the available visual context.
Under this analysis, all our subjects need is a detailed
linguistic representation coupled with an active mapping
between linguistic and visual representations. Going beyond
the previous literature, we have shown that people can use
more subtle and indirect linguistic cues to help them
succeed in locating an object in a visual array. It remains to
be seen whether the same type of anticipatory eye
movements would be observed in a task environment with
more varied utterances.

Author Note
The authors would like to thank Joe Jalbert, Elizabeth
Davis, Kelly Spegel, Sam Bissell, and Anne Woodruff for
the running experiments and the preparing stimuli.

References
Altmann, G. T., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247–264.
Altmann, G. T., & Kamide, Y. (2004). Now you see it, now
you don’t: Mediating the mapping between language and
the visual world. In J. M. Henderson & F. Ferreira (Eds.),
The interface of language, vision, and action (pp. 347386). New York: Psychology Press.
Altmann, G. T., & Steedman M. (1988). Interaction with
context during human sentence processing. Cognition, 30,
191-238.

956

