UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic and Voluntary Shifts of Attention in the Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6q97w6w4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Fisher, Anna V.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic and Voluntary Shifts of Attention
in the Dimensional Change Card Sorting Task
Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave, 335-I Baker Hall
Pittsburgh, 15213 USA
At the same time, it has been demonstrated that young
children can flexibly shift their attention among different
object dimensions in the context of word learning and
categorization tasks. In particular, when learning names for
animate objects, 2-year-old children are more likely to
attend to shape in conjunction with texture than to other
object properties, and when learning words for inanimate
objects children are more likely to attend to shape alone
(Booth & Waxman, 2002; Jones & Smith, 1998). Similarly,
3-year-old children are more likely to group novel rigid
objects based on shape, but novel deformable objects based
on texture (Samuelson & Smith, 2000).
Both phenomena (children’s remarkable tendency to
perseverate in card sorting tasks and children’s remarkable
flexibility in word learning and categorization tasks) have
received overwhelming amount of empirical support.
However, it remains unclear why children of the same age
can be so flexible in some contexts and yet so inflexible in
others. The goal of experiments presented in this paper is to
explore this issue by identifying conditions under which
children can flexibly shift attention among different object
dimensions.
Theoretical Approaches to Early Learning
Different theoretical approaches to early learning emphasize
importance of attentional flexibility, however they assume
different mechanisms underlying this flexibility. According
to one approach, attentional shifts in the course of word
learning and categorization are automatic in nature
(Sloutsky & Fisher, 2005; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996).
According to the alternative approach, these shifts may arise
as a result of “conscious and deliberate processing”
(Gelman & Medin, 1993).
Note, that the former (but not the latter) approach can be
reconciled with the body of evidence on perseverative errors
in the DCCS task in a straightforward manner. In particular,
in the DCCS task children are explicitly asked to shift
attention from a previously relevant to a newly relevant
dimension; therefore, successful performance in this task
requires developed ability to shift attention in a voluntary
manner. Therefore, young children’s difficulty in shifting
attention in a voluntary manner is consistent with word
learning and categorization approaches arguing that
attentional flexibility is automatic early in development, but
inconsistent with the approaches arguing that such
flexibility may be voluntary.
The argument presented above leads to a prediction that
while young children have difficulty shifting attention in a

Abstract
Different theoretical approaches to word learning and
categorization recognize importance of attentional flexibility,
however they assume different mechanisms underlying this
flexibility. According to one approach, attentional shifts in the
course of word learning and categorization are automatic in
nature. According to the alternative approach, these shifts
may arise as a result of voluntary processing. The present
study evaluated these assumptions in the context of a task
routinely used to examine attentional flexibility in young
children, a Dimension Change Card Sorting task. Two
experiments presented below examined attentional flexibility
in 3 year-old children under conditions promoting automatic
and voluntary shifts of attention.
Keywords: attentional flexibility, cognitive development,
word learning, categorization.

Introduction
Young children’s behavior has been demonstrated to be
remarkably flexible in some contexts and yet remarkably
inflexible in others. For example, 3-year-old children often
have trouble switching attention between object dimensions
such as shape and color when explicitly instructed to do so.
This phenomenon has been widely investigated using a
Dimension Change Card Sorting (DCCS) task, which is a
simplified version of the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (Berg,
1948). In the DCCS task children are presented with a set
of cards depicting familiar objects that differ on two
dimensions, such as color and shape (e.g., the cards may
depict red and blue flowers, and red and blue boats).
Children are first asked to sort cards according to one
dimension, for example shape (in this case they need to
group blue flowers with red flowers, and blue boats with red
boats). Upon completing this task, children are asked to sort
cards according to a different dimension, for example color
(in this case they need to group red boats with red flowers,
and blue boats with blue flowers).
A considerable amount of evidence suggests that despite
understanding and remembering the instructions, children
younger than four years of age often fail to shift attention
away from a previously relevant dimension, perseverating in
sorting by the original dimension (Zelazo, Frye, & Rapus,
1996; Jacques, Zelazo, Kirkham, & Semcesen, 1999). It is
important to note that children are equally likely to
perseverate if they start sorting by shape and switch to
sorting by color, and if they start sorting by color and switch
to sorting by shape.
469

manipulated. Consistent with prior research, voluntary shifts
of attention (i.e., shifting attention from a more salient to a
less salient dimension) were expected to result in
perseveration errors in young children during the postswitch phase of the task (Zelazo, et. al., 1996). At the same
time, automatic shifts of attention (i.e., shifting attention
from a less salient to a more salient dimension) were
expected to result in a decrease in perseveration errors.

voluntary manner, they should be able to shift attention
automatically. If this is the case, then children should have
little difficulty if a DCCS task requires an automatic rather
than a voluntary shift of attention to a newly relevant
dimension.
There is indirect evidence to support the above
possibility. Research indicates that certain modifications to
the DCCS task lead to marked improvement in children’s
performance. For example, 3-year-old children are more
likely to succeed on this task if previously relevant
dimension values are removed from the post-switch phase
(e.g., if children are asked to sort pictures of blue and red
objects during the pre-switch phase, and pictures of yellow
and green objects during the post-switch phase) (Mueller,
Dick, Gela, Overton, & Zelazo, 2006). Similarly,
performance improves if children are asked to sort objects
using novel dimension values (e.g., a novel shape referred to
as a “dax”) in the pre-switch phase but familiar dimension
values in the post-switch phase (Yerys & Munakata, 2006).
Finally, introducing a training phase between the pre- and
post-switch phases helps children to switch successfully
from a previously relevant to a newly relevant dimension
(Brace, Morton, & Munakata, 2006).
These results are consistent with the notion that
attentional flexibility in 3-year-old children can be
accomplished in an automatic but not in a voluntary manner.
However, modifications described above reduce the
difficulty of attention shifts by decreasing (or in some cases
eliminating) competition between a previously and a newly
relevant dimension (e.g., through training, introducing novel
dimension values, or removing the previously relevant
dimension values from the post-switch phase). At the same
time, competition between multiple sources of information
represented by familiar dimensions and dimension values is
almost always present in natural settings and needs to be
resolved in the course of word learning or categorization.
Therefore, the goal of the studies presented in this paper was
to directly examine whether automatic processes underlie
attentional flexibility early in development.

Method
Participants Participants in Experiment 1 were 26 3-yearold children (M = 3.62 years, SD = .24 years; 13 females
and 13 males) recruited from day care centers in the
Pittsburgh area. Five more participants were tested and
omitted from the sample due to low accuracy on the No
Conflict trials (see procedure below). The final sample
consisted of 13 participants in each condition.
Design, Materials and Procedure Experiment 1 used a
modified version of the DCCS task. Participants were
presented with two target pictures differing on two
dimensions (i.e., shape and color) and asked to match the
test pictures with one of the targets.
Similar to the traditional version of the task (Zelazo et.
al., 1996), there were two phases in this task, a pre-switch
and a post-switch phase. In the pre-switch phase participants
were asked to match pictures based on one dimension (e.g.,
shape), and in the post-switch phase they were asked to
match pictures based on the other dimension (e.g., color).
There were eight trials in each phase of the task.
The traditional DCCS task was modified in three ways.
First, in contrast to the traditional version of the task, half of
the trials in each phase consisted of No-Conflict trials (i.e.,
the object to be sorted matched one of the target pictures on
both dimensions) and the other half consisted of Conflict
trials (i.e., the object to be sorted matched each of the target
objects on only one dimension). This manipulation ensured
that decreased accuracy during the post-switch phase of the
task did not stem from extraneous factors (such as fatigue).
Second, the task was presented to participants on a screen
of a laptop computer (as opposed to the traditional version
of the task in which children are asked to place sorting cards
in one of two boxes). This modification made it possible to
counterbalance locations (left-right) of the target objects to
control for the possibility of perseveration errors stemming
from children forming motor location-dimension
associations (Smith & Thelen, 2003).
Third, the dimension of color in this experiment was
represented by two similar values – red and pink.
Increasing similarity of the values representing this
dimension (compared to prior research in which the
dimension of color was represented by two dissimilar
values, such as red and blue) was intended to reduce the
saliency of the color dimension relative to the shape
dimension (represented by dissimilar shapes – stars and
flowers) (see Figure 1). Differential saliency of the chosen
dimension values was confirmed in a separate calibration

Experiment 1
The overall idea behind Experiment 1 is that dimension
saliency may play a crucial role in attentional flexibility,
because salient information has been demonstrated to
automatically capture attention in children as well as adults
(Koch & Ullman, 1985; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996;
Treisman & Gelade, 1980; Trick & Enns, 1998;
Underwood, Foulsham, van Loon, Humphreys, & Bloyce,
2006). Therefore, shifting attention from a less salient
object dimension to a more salient dimension should be
performed automatically, whereas, shifting attention from a
more salient to a less salient dimension (or shifting attention
between two equally salient dimensions, as in previous
research using the DCCS task) should require voluntary
processing.
In Experiment 1 participants were presented with a DCCS
task in which dimension saliency was experimentally
470

thus exhibiting low accuracy on the Conflict trials (M = .37,
not different from chance, one-sample t (12) < 1.33, p > .2),
but high accuracy on the No Conflict trials (M = .94, above
chance, one-sample t (12) > 14.5, p < .0001), and this
difference was statistically significant (paired-sample t (12)
= 5.37, p < .0001).
In contrast to prior research, in the post-switch phase of
the Color-to-Shape condition children exhibited high
accuracy on both No Conflict trials (M = .96, above chance,
one-sample t (12) = 17.72, p < .0001) and Conflict trials (M
= .85, above chance, one-sample t (12) = 4.18, p < .005),
and this difference was not statistically significant (pairedsample t (12) 1.25, p > .23). Furthermore, children’s
performance on the post-switch Conflict trials in the Colorto-Shape condition was above that in the Shape-to-Color
condition, independent-samples t (24) > 3.69, p < .005).

experiment, in which adults were presented with the
Conflict trials and asked to sort objects by shape or by color.
Results of the calibration indicated that response latency
was shorter when participants sorted by shape than by color
(631 and 701 ms, respectively, p < .05), confirming that
shape was a more salient dimension than color in
Experiment 1.

Figure 1: Example of a No Conflict trial (Panel A) and a
Conflict trial (Panel B).
Children were randomly assigned to the Color-to-Shape
condition (in which they were asked to sort by color in the
pre-switch phase and by shape in the post-switch phase) or
to the Shape-to-Color condition (in which they were asked
to sort by shape in the pre-switch phase and by color in the
post-switch phase). Overall, it was expected that switching
from sorting by a less salient dimension to sorting by a more
salient dimension (Color-to-Shape condition) should result
in an automatic shift of attention to the relevant dimension,
thus leading to decreased perseveration compared to the
condition requiring voluntary attention shifting (Shape-toColor condition).

Results
Children who failed to correctly sort at least three out of
four No Conflict trials during either phase of the experiment
were eliminated from the final sample (two participants
were eliminated from the Color-to-Shape condition and
three participants were eliminated from the Shape-to-Color
condition). The remaining participants performed sorting
with high accuracy in both Conflict and No Conflict trials
during the pre-switch phase, averaging 98% of correct
responses across conditions (all above chance, one-sample
ps < .0001).
Proportions of correct responses in the post-switch phase
are presented in Figure 2. Participants’ accuracy scores in
the post-switch phase were submitted to a 2 (condition:
Shape-to-Color and Color-to-Shape) by 2 (trial type:
Conflict and No Conflict) mixed ANOVA, with trial type as
a repeated measure. The analysis revealed a main effect of
condition (F (1, 24) = 14.64, p < .005) and a main effect of
the trial type (F (1, 24) = 23.92, p < .0001). These main
effects were qualified by a trial type by condition
interaction, F (1, 24) =10.63, p < .005.
Planned comparisons revealed that, consistent with prior
research, in the Shape-to-Color condition children
perseverated sorting by the previously relevant dimension,

Figure 2: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment 1
by trial type and experimental condition.
Note that poor post-switch performance in the Shapeto-Color condition cannot be attributed to poor
discrimination of the specific values of the color dimension
values chosen for this experiment (i.e., red and pink),
because children had no trouble sorting by this dimension in
the pre-switch phase of the Color-to-Shape condition
(averaging 98% of correct responses).
The significance of the differences between conditions
was confirmed by non-parametric analysis of the individual
patterns of responses. In particular, in the Shape-to-Color
condition only 31% of participants (4 out of 13 children)
successfully switched to sorting by the new dimension (i.e.,
answered correctly on at least three out of four Conflict
trials), whereas 69% of participants (9 out of 13 children)
perseverated in sorting by the previously relevant dimension
(i.e., answered incorrectly on at least two out of four
Conflict trials). In contrast, in the Color-to-Shape condition
85% of participants (11 out of 13 children) switched
successfully, whereas only 15% (two out of 13 children)
471

each dimension was represented by four values (i.e., red,
blue, green, and yellow for color; star, flower, fish, and
butterfly for shape; see Figure 3 for an example).
Similar to Experiment 1, each condition consisted of a
pre-switch and a post-switch phase, and each phase included
four Conflict and four No Conflict trials. Participants were
randomly assigned to the initial sorting dimension (i.e.,
shape or color).

perseverated. This difference was statistically significant, χ²
(1) > 7.72, p < .05.
Results of Experiment 1 demonstrate that 3-year-old
children have trouble switching attention to a less salient
dimension, however they can successfully shift attention to
a more salient dimension. This finding provides direct
evidence that while voluntary shifts of attention are difficult
for young children, they can successfully shift attention in
an automatic manner.

Experiment 2
Studies of attentional flexibility in 3-year-old children have
traditionally used target objects differing on two dimensions
(e.g.,, color and shape), with each dimension represented by
two values (e.g., red and blue for color; boats and bunnies
for shape). However, learning in natural settings is rarely
narrowed down to a binary choice between two values of a
dimension. What effect would increase in the number of
dimension values have on attentional flexibility in young
children?
It has been argued that the pool of attentional resources is
finite and therefore attentional weights of different attributes
are interdependent (Sutherland & Mackintosh, 1971;
Nosofsky, 1986). In other words, an overall increase in the
number of relevant attributes should attenuate attention
allocated to each individual attribute, thus decreasing the
attentional weight of this attribute. It is possible that while
developed ability to shift attention in a voluntary manner is
required to shift attention away from attributes with high
attentional weights, shifting attention away from attributes
with lower attentional weights may be performed
automatically. If this is the case, then increase in the number
of relevant attributes in a DCCS task should result in
attenuation of attentional weights of each individual
attribute, thus leading to an increase in attentional flexibility
(i.e., decreased perseveration). This prediction was tested in
Experiment 2.

Figure 3: Example of a Conflict trial in the Low Attentional
Weights condition of Experiment 2.

Results
Children who failed to correctly sort at least three out of
four No Conflict trials during either pre- or post-switch
phase were eliminated from the final sample (two
participants were eliminated from the High Attentional
Weights condition and four participants were eliminated
from the Low Attentional Weights condition condition). The
remaining participants performed sorting with high accuracy
in both Conflict and No Conflict trials during the pre-switch
phase, averaging 97% of correct responses across conditions
(above chance, all one-sample ps < .0001).
Proportions of correct responses in the post-switch phase
are presented in Figure 4. Participants’ accuracy scores in
the post-switch phase were submitted to a 2 (condition: Low
Attentional Weights and High Attentional Weights) by 2
(trial type: Conflict and No Conflict) mixed ANOVA, with
trial type as a repeated measure. The analysis revealed a
main effect of condition (F (1, 36) = 5.66, p < .05) and a
main effect of the trial type (F (1, 36) = 44.2, p < .0001).
These main effects were qualified by a trial type by
condition interaction, F (1, 36) =4.02, p = .052.
Planned comparisons indicated that, consistent with prior
research, in the High Attentional Weights condition children
perseverated sorting by the previously relevant dimension,
exhibiting low accuracy on the Conflict trials (M = .42, not
different from chance, one-sample t (18) < 1), but high
accuracy on the No Conflict trials (M = .96, above chance,
one-sample t (18) > 21.43, p < .0001), and this difference
was statistically significant (p < .0001).
However, children were less likely to perseverate in the
post-switch phase of the Low Attentional Weights condition
exhibiting above-chance accuracy on both No Conflict trials
(M = .96, one-sample t (18) = 37, p < .0001) and Conflict
trials (M = .70, one-sample t (18) = 2.53, p < .005).
Furthermore, children’s performance on the post-switch
Conflict trials in the Low Attentional Weights condition was

Method
Participants Participants in Experiment 2 were 38 3-yearold children (M = 3.37 years, SD = .29 years; 14 females
and 24 males) recruited from day care centers in the
Pittsburgh area. Six more participants were tested and
omitted from the sample due to low accuracy on the No
Conflict trials. The final sample consisted of 19 participants
in each experimental condition.
Materials, Design, and Procedure Experiment 2 included
two between-subject conditions, a High Attentional Weights
condition and a Low Attentional Weights condition. In the
High Attentional Weights condition participants were
presented with the DCCS task in which, similar to prior
research, objects differed on two dimensions with each
dimension represented by two salient values (i.e., blue and
red for color; star and fish for shape). In the Low
Attentional Weights condition participants were presented
with objects that also differed on two dimensions, however
472

represented by more salient values than the shape
dimension. This prediction, however, remains to be
addressed in future research.
Second, when attentional weights of each dimension
value were decreased (via increasing the overall number of
dimension values and thus proportionally decreasing
amount of attention allocated to each individual dimension
value), 3-year-old children were more likely to successfully
shift attention to the newly relevant dimension.
In general, findings presented in this paper indicate that
while 3-year-old children have trouble shifting attention in a
voluntary manner, they are successful in shifting attention in
an automatic manner. It should also be noted that this paper
provided the first demonstration of young children’s ability
to successfully shift attention in the DCCS task without
training (Brace et. al., 2006) or introduction of novel
dimension values (Mueller et. al., 2006; Yerys & Munakata,
2006).

above that in the High Attentional Weights condition,
independent-samples t (36) = 22.34, p < .05).
The significance of differences between conditions was
confirmed by non-parametric analysis of the individual
patterns of responses. In particular, in the High Attentional
Weights condition only 37% of participants (7 out of 19
children) successfully switched to sorting by the new
dimension, whereas 63% of participants (12 out of 19
children) perseverated in sorting by the previously relevant
dimension. In contrast, in the Color-to-Shape condition
68% of participants (13 out of 19 children) switched
successfully, whereas only 32% (6 out of 19 children)
perseverated. This difference was statistically significant, χ²
(1) > 3.8, p < .05.

Implications for the Theories of Word Learning and
Categorization
As stated above, different theoretical approaches to word
learning and categorization hypothesize different
mechanisms underlying these processes. According to one
approach, sophisticated learning exhibited early in
development is based on representational constraints,
determining which dimensions of the environment learners
attend to in different contexts (Booth, & Waxman, 2002;
Gelman & Williams, 1998). Furthermore, it has been argued
that weighting of dimensions in different contexts and
shifting attention among dimensions in the course of word
learning and categorization may occur in a voluntary
manner even very early in development (Gelman & Medin,
1993).
In contrast, proponents of the alternative approach argue
that early learning is constrained by the regularities in the
input and general information processing rather than
representational constraints. According to this view,
weighting of dimensions and shifting attention among
dimensions occurs automatically, driven by such properties
of input as overall perceived similarity, association strength,
and saliency (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004, 2005; Fisher, 2007a; Smith, et. al., 1996).
Multiple studies on the development of executive function
suggest that 2- to 3-year-old children (who are known to be
quite proficient in word learning and categorization) are
limited in their ability to voluntarily disengage attention
from salient information, shift attention among stimulus
dimensions, and inhibit prepotent responses (Akshoomoff,
2002; Bunge, et. al., 2002; Durston, et. al., 2002; Napolitano
& Sloutsky, 2004; Zelazo, et. al., 1996). Therefore, it has
been argued that voluntary control of attention is unlikely to
be sufficiently developed in young children to support
voluntary dimension weighting and voluntary shifts of
attention in the course of world learning and categorization
(Fisher, 2007-b). However there has been no direct
evidence to suggest that children of this age can succeed on
tasks requiring automatic but not voluntary shifts of

Figure 4: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment 2
by trial type and experimental condition.
Results of Experiment 2 suggest that 3-year-old children
exhibit poor attentional flexibility when attentional weights
of presented attributes are high, however decreasing
attentional weights of presented attributes leads to
significant improvement in attentional flexibility. This
finding corroborates results of Experiment 1, providing
further evidence that attentional flexibility early in
development is more likely to arise as a result of automatic
rather than voluntary processing.

General Discussion

Two experiments presented above were designed to
assess automatic and voluntary shifts of attention in 3-yearold children using the DCCS paradigm. Overall, results
point to two novel findings. First, results of Experiment 1
suggest that 3-year-old children could successfully shift
attention in a DCCS task when they were required to shift
attention to a more salient dimension (Color-to-Shape
condition), whereas children had trouble shifting attention to
a less salient dimension (Shape-to-Color condition).
The saliency hypothesis has been explored in this paper
with regards to the situation in which the dimension of
shape is represented by more salient values than the
dimension of color. However this hypothesis predicts a
reversal of results presented above if the color dimension is
473

Jones, S. S. & Smith, L. B. (1998) How children name
objects with shoes. Cognitive Development, 13, 323-334.
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary versus automatic control over
the mind's eye's movement. In J. B. Long & A. D.
Baddeley (Eds.), Attention and performance (pp. 187203). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Koch, C. & Ullman, S. (1985). Shifts in selective visual
attention: Towards the underlying neural circuitry.
Human Neurobiology, 4, 219-227.
Mueller, U, Dick, A. S., Gela, K., Overton, W. F., & Zelazo,
P. D. (2006). The role of negative priming in the
Dimensional Change Card Sort task. Child Development,
77, 395-412.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? The flexible nature of modality
dominance in young children. Child Development, 75,
1850-1870.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Samuelson, L. & Smith, L. B.(2000-b). Children's Attention
to Rigid and Deformable Shape in Naming and NonNaming Tasks. Child Development, 71, 1555-1570.
Sloutsky, V. M. & Fisher, A. V. (2005). Similarity,
Induction, Naming, and Categorization (SINC):
Generalization or Inductive Reasoning? Response to Heit
and Hayes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 606-611.
Smith, L. B., & Thelen,E. (2003) Development as a
dynamic system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 343348.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., & Landau, B. (1996). Naming in
young children: A dumb attentional mechanism?
Cognition, 60, 143-171.
Sutherland, N. S. & Macintosh, N. J. (1971). Mechanisms of
Animal Discrimination Learning. Academic Press, New
York.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A Featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Trick, L. M. & Enns, J. T. (1998) Lifispan changes in
attention: The visual search task. Cognitive Development,
13, 369-386.
Underwood, G., Foulsham, T., van Loon, E., Humphreys,
L., & Bloyce, J. (2006). Eye movements during scene
inspection: A test of the saliency map hypothesis.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 18, 321-343.
Yerys, B. E. & Munakata, Y. (2006). When labels hurt but
novelty helps: Children's perseveration and flexibility in a
card-sorting task. Child Development, 77: 1589-1607.
Zelazo, P. D., & Frye, D. (1998). Cognitive complexity and
control: the development of executive function. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 7, 121-126.
Zelazo, P. D., Frye, D. & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development , 11, 37-63.

attention. Results reported in this paper have important
implications for the theories of early leaning because they
provide such evidence.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Berkman faculty
development award. Special thanks to the teachers, parents,
and children at the Children’s School, ABC’s for Children,
and Three Rivers Council.

References

Akshoomoff, N. (2002). Selective Attention and Active
Engagement. Developmental Neuropsychology, 22, 625642.
Berg, E. A. (1948). A simple objective technique for
measuring flexibility in thinking. Journal of General
Psychology, 39, 15-22.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
‘smart’: evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84,
B11-B22.
Brace, J. J., Morton, J. B., & Munakata, Y. (2006). When
actions speak louder than words: Improving children's
flexibility in a card-sorting task. Psychological Science,
17, 665-669.
Bunge, S. A., Dudukovic, N. M., Thomason, M. E.,
Vaidya, C. J., & Gabrieli, D. E. (2002). Immature frontal
lobe contributions to cognitive control in children:
Evidence from fMRI. Neuron, 33, 1-20.
Diamond, A. & Kirkham, N. (2005). Not quite as grown-up
as we like to think. Psychological Science, 16, 291-297.
Durston, S., Thomas, K. M., Yang, Y., Uluğ, A. M.,
Zimmerman, R. D., & Casey, B. J. (2002). A neural basis
for the development of inhibitory control. Developmental
Science, 5, 9-16.
Fisher, A. V. (2007-a). Are Developmental Theories of
Learning Paying Attention to Attention? Cognition,
Brain, & Behavior, 4, 635-646.
Fisher, A. V. (2007-b). Labels: Category Markers or Objects
Features? Or How Rocks and Stones are Different from
Bunnies and Rabbits. In Trafton, G., and McNamara, D.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the XXIX Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Gelman, S. A., & Medin, D. L. (1993). What’s so essential
about essentialism? A different perspective on the
interaction of perception, language, and concrete
knowledge. Cognitive Development, 8, p.157-167.
Gelman, R. and Williams, E. (1998). Enabling constraints
for cognitive development and learning: Domain
specificity and epigenesis. In D. Kuhn and R. Siegler,
(Eds.). Cognition, perception and language. Vol. 2.
Handbook of Child Psychology (Fifth Ed). (pp. 575-630).
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Jacques, S., Zelazo, P. D., Kirkham, N. Z., & Semcesen, T.
K. (1999). Rule selection and rule execution in
preschoolers: An error-detection approach.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 770-780.

474

