UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Status and Explanatory Goodness in Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01f925kc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Jameson, Jason
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Status and Explanatory Goodness in Categorization
Jason Jameson & Dedre Gentner
Northwestern University
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
psychology, the view that category knowledge comprises
important explanatory information is not new; and our
proposal takes off from the theory- or knowledge-based
framework of conceptual structure (e.g., Carey, 1985; Keil,
1989; Murphy & Medin, 1985). We also draw on a specific
instantiation of this view, the causal status hypothesis (Ahn,
1998; Ahn, et al., 2000). Murphy and Medin (1985) argued
persuasively that categorization can be viewed as an
inference to the best explanation (see also Rips, 1989). On
the relationship between theoretical knowledge and
centrality, Murphy and Medin defined the weight associated
with features as “[d]etermined in part by importance in the
underlying principles” (p. 298, 1985). This characterization
is best viewed as a starting point, for it leaves open the
critical question of how to define “importance.” One
prominent answer to this question is the causal status
hypothesis, according to which (1) the role that a feature
plays in a concept—either as a cause or as an effect—partly
determines its centrality; and (2) causal features are more
important than effect features for categorization judgments:
e.g., a potential category members’ possession of causal
features is more diagnostic of category membership than
possession of effect features. This hypothesis has received
support in a variety of contexts and for several cognitive
tasks (see Ahn & Kim, 2000, for a review).
Our central claim is that the causal status effect derives
from the supporting role that causal information plays in
explanation. Although this idea is a long-standing theme in
the study of categorization (e.g., Murphy & Medin, 1985;
Rips, 1989), relatively little research has directly examined
how explanatory goodness relates to categorization. In this
paper, we study the relationship between explanatory
goodness and categorization. We demonstrate that the
magnitude of the causal status effect depends on the quality
of the explanation in which the causal information is
embedded.
We first briefly review the causal status hypothesis and
present arguments that the causal status effect depends on
explanatory goodness. Then we present a study to support
this claim. Finally, we discuss the implications of this study
for categorization more broadly.

Abstract
Much research (e.g., Keil, 1989; Murphy & Medin, 1985;
Rips, 1989) has emphasized the critical role that domain
knowledge plays in categorization judgments. Recent
instantiations of this view (e.g., Ahn, et al., 2000; Rehder &
Hastie, 2001) have focused on characterizing how causal
knowledge supports categorization decisions. We suggest that
a more satisfactory account of categorization can be gained by
considering the broader role that causal information plays in
processes of explanation. An explanation-based perspective
treats categorization as an inference to the best explanation
(Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989). This suggests that a
critical source of constraints on categorization may come
from a direct investigation of explanatory goodness. We
present evidence that the causal status effect (e.g., Ahn, et al.,
2000)—i.e., the phenomenon in which causes tend to be more
heavily weighted than effects in categorization judgments—
depends on the goodness of the explanation in which the
causal information is embedded.
Keywords: Categorization,
explanatory goodness.

causal

status,

explanation,

Introduction
Categorization processes are fundamental in making
sense of the world. Not surprisingly, the study of
categorization is of central importance in cognitive science;
researchers have long sought to characterize the nature of
the conceptual structures that best support classification
decisions. There is general agreement that some parts of a
concept are more important—more conceptually central—
than others for categorization (e.g., Ahn, 1998; Ahn, et al.,
2000; Medin & Shoben, 1988; Rehder & Hastie, 2001). For
example, as Medin and Shoben (1988) demonstrated, the
property of “curvedness” is more central for the category of
boomerangs than for the category of bananas. That is,
“straight bananas” are better examples of bananas than
“straight boomerangs” are of boomerangs, because
“curvedness” plays a more central role in the theoretical
principles supporting one’s knowledge of boomerangs.
We argue here that conceptual centrality is closely related
to the goodness of an explanation: specifically, that the
centrality of a conceptual component derives from its role in
the best explanation of what holds category members
together. On this view, a good conceptual structure is one
that contains important explanatory information.
The study of explanation spans several disciplines,
ranging from philosophy and computer science (e.g.,
Thagard, 1989) to psychology (Read & Marcus-Newhall;
Lombrozo, 2006; Lombrozo & Carey, 2006; Rips, 1989). In

Conceptual centrality
Intuitively, some components of a concept do indeed
appear more important for categorization judgments. As
Medin and Shoben (1988) point out, it is much easier to
imagine a robin that is not red than it is to imagine a robin
that lacks the appropriate genetic structure of robins:
291

knowledge risks obscuring the supporting role that causal
information plays in explanatory processes. As Lombrozo
(2006) notes, explanations can’t be reduced to just the
supporting causal information, as explanations entail a set of
factors that go beyond the causal information per se (see
also Read & Marcus-Newhall, 1993). For one thing, there
are many kinds of causal structures (Forbus & Gentner,
1986; Rottmann & Gentner, 2006)—e.g., causal chains
versus feedback systems—that draw on different kinds of
domain knowledge. An additional factor is the preference
for simple or parsimonious causal explanations over those
that would invoke more assumptions (Lombrozo & Carey,
2006; Read & Marcus-Newhall, 1993; Rips, 1989).
In a recent study that illuminates the relationship
between the causal status effect and explanatory structure,
Lombrozo (2007b) has shown that the strength of the causal
status effect depends partly on the type of explanation—
mechanistic (an appeal to direct, proximate causes) or
teleological (an appeal to function)—in which the causal
knowledge is embedded. In one experiment, participants
were presented with a novel category characterized by two
features and were told that one feature (e.g., eats
blueberries) causes the other (e.g., has blue fur). Participants
were then asked to explain why the animal has the second
feature (i.e., blue fur), and to estimate the probability that an
object missing one of the features was a member of the
category. Participants who provided a mechanistic
explanation (e.g., mentioning eating blueberries as the
proximate cause) showed a larger causal status effect than
those who provided a teleological explanation (e.g., blue fur
serves as camouflage).
In addition to the type of explanation, the causal status
effect may also depend on the quality of an explanation. We
suggest that some of the puzzling results obtained in studies
of the causal status hypothesis might be best explained in
terms of explanatory goodness. In one such study
(Experiment 4), Ahn, Kim, Lassaline, and Dennis (2000)
gave participants a standard (a single sentence describing a
causal relationship between a cause and two properties
treated as effects) and two alternatives. Participants were
instructed to choose which of the two alternatives should be
categorized with the standard. One standard read: “This
object has a high-intensity light bulb and a pouch that can
contain liquid because it was designed to kill bugs.” The
first alternative shared the cause, but not the effects (i.e.,
“This object has a sweet, smelly patch and an x-ray
generator because it was designed to kill bugs.”); the other
alternative shared the effects, but not the cause (i.e., “This
object has a high-intensity light bulb and a pouch that can
contain liquid because it was designed to be used in a
photograph studio.”).
Ahn, et al. predicted that people would prefer to match an
alternative to the standard on the basis of the shared cause,
rather than the shared effects. Although the overall results
confirmed the prediction, inspection of the results reveals
that only half the items conformed to the prediction. Table 1

imagining a robin with, say, zebra DNA, would make many
other typical properties of robins implausible (Wilson &
Keil, 1998).
There is a long history of research on categorization
demonstrating that some features associated with category
members are particularly important for categorization
judgments (e.g., Ahn, et al., 2000; Medin & Shoben, 1988;
Rosch & Mervis, 1975; Tversky, 1977). One prominent
perspective on centrality is based on the theory- or
knowledge-based view of conceptual structure (e.g., Carey,
1985; Keil, 1989; Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989).
According to this framework, knowledge of a category is, in
important ways, like a scientific theory, comprising a “host
of mental explanations” (Murphy & Medin, 1985). In this
view, category knowledge is seen, not in terms of a
prototypical member or collection of exemplars, but rather
in terms of “an explanatory principle common to category
members (p. 298, Murphy & Medin, 1985). Accordingly,
categorization is typically viewed as an inference to the best
explanation. Murphy and Medin illustrate this idea with a
well-known example: a man at a party who jumps into a
pool fully clothed in a business suit would probably be
classified as intoxicated, not because he is similar to the
prototype or to instances of a “drunken behavior” category,
but because being intoxicated is the best explanation for his
behavior (see also Rips, 1989, for a clearly articulated
sketch of this idea).
Despite the importance of the theory-based view for
orienting research on categorization and centrality, the
framework leaves unspecified the specific constraints
related to background knowledge that influence
classification decisions. One important response to this
challenge is the idea that information that participates in
causal relations is of greatest centrality (Ahn, et al., 2000;
Rehder & Hastie, 2001; Rehder & Burnett, 2004). In Ahn’s
(1998) causal status hypothesis, causes are weighted more
heavily in categorization decisions than are the
corresponding effects. For example, in the simple case of a
single causal relationship between two features, such as
having wings and flying (with wings enabling flying),
having wings would be given greater weight than flying,
and would more greatly influence categorization decisions.
Why should causes play a more important role than the
corresponding effects in the underlying principles of a
category? According to Ahn, et al. (2000), causal properties
may be seen as generating other features: e.g., DNA
produces external features such as hair color. Features such
as DNA may thus be regarded psychologically as most
defining or diagnostic of category membership, because
they form part of the essence or core of a concept. It
follows, Ahn, et al. claim, that possessing the most central
features would provide better evidence for category
membership than more superficial features.
While not disputing the empirical validity of the causal
status effect, and the critical role of causal information for
many if not most knowledge-dependent categorization
decisions, we worry that the exclusive focus on causal
292

bug-killing agents typically take the form of liquid
pesticides. Second, the explanation is broad (intention to kill
bugs explains every stated effect) and deep (the intention to
kill bugs fits within a larger explanatory framework: bugs
are generally annoying).
Now, consider the worst-performing item: “This painting
has four pillars and is red because the painter intended to
draw a dog.” The causal relation between four pillars and
the intention to draw a dog is extremely weak, and there is
no clear explanatory framework that would link the
intention to paint a dog with any of the facts.
Of course, these are after-the-fact suggestions. To make
this account plausible, what is needed is a manipulation of
explanatory goodness. In the current study, we test the
hypothesis that the magnitude of the causal status effect
depends on explanatory quality: we predict that the better
the explanation in which causal information is embedded,
the stronger the causal status effect.

shows the materials used in the study and, for each item, the
percentage of choices for the matching cause.
Table 1: Experiment 4 standards, from Ahn, et al., (2000).
Standard

%

This object has a high-intensity light bulb
and a pouch that can contain liquid
because it was designed to kill bugs.

80

This sculpture is made of metal and
consists of six cubes stacked up because
the sculptor intended it to symbolize
pollution.

72

This object has a rubber platform and
vibrates smoothly because it was
designed to relax pregnant mares during
labor.

60

This plant has needle leaves, and
produces tiny pink flowers in the spring
because it has a DNA structure called
Valva.

52

This animal has a block-shaped head, is
red, and has 13 teeth because this animal
has a genetic code, XB12.

52

This painting has four pillars and is red
because the painter intended to draw a
dog.

40

Experiment
To test the hypothesis that the magnitude of the causal status
effect depends on explanatory quality, we manipulated the
quality of explanations in a two-alternative forced choice
categorization task, as in Ahn, et al.’s (2000) study. Thus,
participants had to choose which of two alternatives should
be categorized with a given standard. As a manipulation
check, we also collected judgments of explanatory quality
for fact-explanation pairs: pairs of sentences that describe
facts and a potential explanation for those facts. The
sentences were simple and clearly interpretable, patterned
after the materials used in Ahn, et al., (2000).

Method

While there is a noticeable causal status effect for three of
the items, two items exhibit chance responding, and one
even suggests a preference for the shared effect alternative.
We suggest that the item variability can best be
understood in terms of the explanatory role of the causal
property being asserted for each item. One hallmark of a
good functional explanation is that the intended function is
causally connected to the effects to be explained. Ideally,
the facts can then be understood as subsumed under a
general causal law (Lombrozo & Carey, 2006). In addition,
good explanations exhibit breadth—the extent to which an
explanation accounts for most if not all of the available facts
(Pennington & Hastie, 1988; Read & Marcus-Newhall,
1993; Thagard, 1989); and depth—the extent to which the
local explanation fits within a larger explanatory
framework, and can itself be explained (Read & MarcusNewhall, 1993; Thagard, 1989).
These considerations can shed light on why some items in
Ahn et al.’s study conformed to their prediction, while
others did not. Consider the item with the strongest causal
status effect, the first item (“This object has a high-intensity
light bulb and a pouch that can contain liquid because it was
designed to kill bugs.”). In this case, a clear, general causal
relationship links the intention with the effects: it’s
generally known that bugs are attracted to light, and that

Participants Twenty undergraduate students from
Northwestern University participated for partial credit in an
introductory psychology course.
Design, materials, and procedure The design was a 2 × 2
mixed factorial with explanatory quality (good or poor),
manipulated within-subjects and task order (categorization
task first or second), manipulated as a between-subjects
counterbalancing variable. The materials consisted of 24
stimulus sets, each based on a standard “fact-explanation”
pair, which comprised a set of facts joined with a potential
explanation for those facts. In the explanation-rating task the
facts were presented as short sentences describing a
particular situation, which participants were instructed to
assume as true; and the explanation was presented as a
separate sentence describing a potential explanatory account
of those facts. For example, one set of facts read: “This
object has a high-intensity light bulb and a pouch that can
contain liquid”; and the associated explanation read: “This
object was designed to kill bugs.”
For the categorization task, the facts and explanation
were combined into a single sentence, following Ahn, et
al. (2000)(e.g., “This object has a high-intensity light bulb
and a pouch that can contain liquid because it was
293

Results We submitted the proportion of responses for
matching on the basis of a shared cause to a 2 × 2 analysis
of variance (ANOVA) for a mixed-factorial design. There
was no reliable interaction (p = .28), nor any reliable main
effect of task order (p = .25): subsequent analyses are
collapsed over this variable.

designed to kill bugs.”). Of the 24 standards, 16 were test
items, and 8 were fillers. The fillers were constructed to
minimize the likelihood of demand characteristics in the
categorization task (and will be described in greater detail
in the context of that task). Of the 16 test items, 6
standards were taken without modification from the
materials used in the Ahn, et al. (2000) study described
above.
In addition to the six standards from Ahn et al.’s study,
we constructed an additional ten items, five of which were
designed to express good explanations; and five to express
poor explanations. The good-explanation items were
designed so that the explanation specified a general and
plausible causal relation that accounted for all of the stated
facts (as verified in the explanation-rating task described
below). (See Table 2 for sample items). These additional
ten standards were adapted from materials used in studies
of category-based inference by Sloman (1994) and by
Patalano, Chin-Parker, and Ross (2006).
The experiment consisted of two paper-and-pencil tasks,
counterbalanced for order across participants: evaluating
explanatory quality and carrying out a two-alternative
forced-choice categorization task. For the explanationrating task, participants were given all 24 standards, each
arranged on a separate page of the test booklet. The facts
were presented at the top of each page in a separate
sentence, with the candidate explanation presented
immediately below the facts. Participants were instructed
to read the facts and the explanation, and then to provide a
rating of how good or satisfying they found the
explanation to be on a scale from 1 (very poor) to 7 (very
good). They were then instructed to briefly explain their
response.
The categorization task was identical to that of
Experiment 4 in Ahn, et al. (2000) as described earlier.
Specifically, it was a forced-choice task between two
alternatives, in which participants were instructed to
choose the one alternative that should be categorized with
the target. Each triad—a standard together with both
alternatives—was presented on a separate page of the test
booklet, with the standard at the top of the page, and the
alternatives below it. For the test items, one alternative
shared the cause with the standard, but not the effects; the
other alternative shared the effects, but not the cause.
Sample items are presented in Table 2.
The eight filler items were constructed to vary the
pattern so as to minimize the possibility of task demands.
To this end, for four fillers, the alternatives both shared the
cause with the standard, but differed on the effects; and for
the remaining four fillers, both alternatives shared the
effects, but differed on the cause.
For each participant, item order was randomized in both
tasks; for the forced choice task, left-right presentation of
alternatives was also randomized. Participants completed
the tasks at their own pace: the categorization task required
roughly 15 minutes to complete; the explanation-rating
task, 25 minutes.

Table 2: Sample items from the study.
Shared Cause

Shared Effect

This person makes a
good salesperson and
persuasive public
speaker, because she
used to be a lawyer.
(GOOD)

Standard

This person has a
strong vocabulary and
several enemies,
because she used to be
a lawyer.

This person makes a
good salesperson
and persuasive
public speaker,
because she likes to
please people.

This person is
estranged from his
children and has few
close friends, because
he is a traveling
salesman.
(GOOD)

This person is
outgoing and has many
business contacts,
because he is a
traveling salesman.

This person is
estranged from his
children and has
few friends, because
he has a drinking
problem.

This man has a sixfigure income and
works out regularly,
because he was homeschooled as a child.
(POOR)

This man has been
divorced twice and is
an avid moviegoer,
because he was homeschooled as a child.

This man has a sixfigure income and
works out regularly,
because he was the
eldest of three
siblings.

This person is a
baseball fan and likes
to read political
magazines, because he
is a night watchman.
(POOR)

This person likes to
play racquetball and
watch documentaries,
because he is a night
watchman.

This person is a
baseball fan and
likes to read
political magazines,
because he is an
actor.

In support of our main claim—that the size of the causal
status effect depends on the goodness of the explanation in
which the causal information is embedded—we found a
reliable main effect of explanatory goodness, F(1, 18) =
19.68, p < .001. Planned comparisons reveal that the good
explanations (M = .77, SD = .19) indeed exhibited a stronger
causal status effect than the poor explanations (M = .52, SD
= .24), t(19) = 4.41, p < .001, d = 1.13. That is, participants
preferred to match on the basis of a shared cause to a much
greater extent if that information was part of a good
explanation.
The explanatory goodness ratings were in accord with
the intended design: When participants rated the goodness
of the explanations, the a priori “good” explanations were
given higher goodness ratings (M = 4.46, SD = .74) than
those designed to be “poor” explanations (M = 2.86, SD =
.75), F(1, 18) = 425.86, p < .001, d = 2.31. (We have since

294

direct focus on causal knowledge would be more
parsimonious and would render the problem more tractable.
For several reasons, we believe that a more direct focus on
explanatory knowledge is needed. First, and most
importantly, as Lombrozo (2006) notes, there are factors
related to explanatory goodness that cannot be reduced to
properties of causal knowledge, but which may be
psychologically relevant for categorization. Second,
although it might seem that a direct focus on causal
knowledge would render the problem of centrality more
tractable, recent theoretical and empirical work suggests that
a consideration of explanatory goodness and explanationbased processes helps to focus research on the right
questions (e.g., Lombrozo, 2006, 2007a; Lombrozo &
Carey, 2006; Thagard, 1989; Pennington & Hastie, 1988).
For example, using their influential explanation-based
model of juror decision-making, Pennington and Hastie
(1988) have shown that jurors arrive at a decision to acquit
or convict a defendant on the basis of the most coherent
explanation constructed for the evidence presented at trial.
The success of their model demonstrates how a complex
reasoning process can be profitably understood in
explanation-based terms.
A third point is that a focus on categorization as inference
to the best explanation may bring together areas of research
that have been typically treated as separate. For example, it
may be useful to think of analogy as another kind of
inference to the best explanation. An analogy typically
involves a mapping in which inferences are imported from a
well-understood domain (the base) to one that is more
poorly understood (the target)(Gentner, 1983). People
intuitively prefer mappings that yield a good explanation, as
evidenced by a tacit preference for systematicity—that is, a
preference for depth and higher-order constraining relations
in the resulting relational structure (e.g., Clement &
Gentner, 1991). Though there have been arguments for a
connection between analogy and categorization (e.g.,
Kuehne, et al., 2000; Ramscar & Pain, 1996), the
relationship between them has not received much attention.
Focusing more explicitly on the nature of explanatory
processes may help to draw out the important
commonalities, as well as meaningful differences, between
categorization and other explanatory processes.
In summary, the results of our study offer evidence that
the causal status effect depends on the quality of the
explanation in which the causal information is embedded.
These findings invite further exploration of the properties of
explanation that influence categorization. Do simpler
explanations (i.e., those that appeal to fewer causes;
Lombrozo & Carey, 2006) lead to a stronger causal status
effect than explanations that are more broad (i.e., account
for more facts), or deeper? How important is depth of
explanation in moderating the causal status effect? Do the
same properties of explanatory goodness operate across a
variety of cognitive processes (such as categorization and
analogy), or to the same extent? Finally, focusing on
explanatory structure may help to shed light on long-

confirmed this finding with a separate group of participants
who only rated the quality of the explanations).
Discussion The results of this study provide support for the
main claim of this paper: that the causal status effect derives
from the role that causal information plays in an
explanation; and specifically, that the magnitude of the
causal status effect depends on the goodness of the
supporting explanation. This finding adds support to the
position that explanatory structure is important in
categorization (e.g., Keil, 1989; Lombrozo, 2006, 2007a;
Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rips, 1989). According to this
explanation-based perspective, categorization is treated as
an inference to the best explanation. This perspective
suggests that a primary research focus should be on
investigating properties that characterize the quality of
explanations, and the role that those properties play in
cognitive tasks, such as categorization.
A possible objection to our study would be that we simply
constructed explanations that were inconsistent with
participants’ prior knowledge. Ahn et al., (2000) found that
the causal status effect can be eliminated if the stated causal
relationship contradicts background knowledge. However,
this consideration does not apply here, because we were
careful to ensure that the poor explanations in our study did
not contradict known facts. Rather, the poor explanations
were designed to lack explanatory goodness. In some cases,
there was no general causal connection between the facts
and the explanation; in others, the explanation failed to
explain all of the facts; and in others, there was more than
one available explanation for the facts.
Conclusions The explanatory approach is compatible with,
but broader than, the recent highly influential approaches
that have focused strongly on causal knowledge—such as
the causal status hypothesis (e.g., Ahn, 1998) and causal
model theory (e.g., Rehder & Hastie, 2001). Causality-based
theories tend to focus chiefly on characterizing causal
knowledge and the causal reasoning processes that operate
over it to support classification decisions. In contrast, the
explanation-based approach focuses on characterizing the
structure and quality of explanations and how they influence
category processing. The explanatory approach often
involves various kinds of causal structures, but it can also
draw on other kinds of higher-order explanatory structures
that do not rely on causality (e.g., information about
perceptual or mathematical concepts, such as symmetry or
integral domain)(Wilson & Keil, 1998). However, because
causal information is critical for many kinds of mechanistic
and functional explanations, the two approaches may turn
out to be fellow travelers for most purposes. (See Lombrozo
& Carey, 2006, for a recent proposal along these lines—the
Explanation for Export hypothesis—which assigns a critical
role to the nature of the causal relationship binding a cause
to an effect).
At this point, it is fair to ask whether our efforts to
explicate explanatory goodness are overkill. Arguably, a
295

Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S.Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 179-196). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Patalano, A. L., Chin-Parker, S., & Ross, B. H. (2006). The
importance of being coherent: Category coherence, crossclassification, and reasoning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 54, 407-424.
Pennington, N. and Hastie, R. (1988). Explanation-based
decision making: The effects of memory structure on
judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 521-533.
Ramscar, M., & Pain, H. (1996). Can a real distinction be
made between cognitive theories of analogy and
categorization? Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Read, S. J., & Marcus-Newhall, A. R. (1993). Explanatory
coherence in social explanations: A parallel distributed
processing account. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 429-447.
Rehder, B. & Burnett, R. (2005). Feature inference and the
causal structure of categories. Cognitive Psychology, 50,
264-314.
Rehder, B. & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 323-360.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 21-59). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rottman, B. M., & Gentner, D. (2006). Expertise effects on
sorting strategies of causal phenomena. Proceedings of
the 28th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Salmon, W. (1989) Four Decades of Scientific Explanation.
University of Minnesota Press
Sloman, S. A. (1994). When explanations compete: The role
of explanatory coherence on judgments of likelihood.
Cognition, 52, 1-21.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences , 12 , 435-467.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Wilson, R.A. and Keil, F.C. (1998). The shadows and
shallows of explanation. Minds and Machines, 8, 137159.

standing debates over the specific role that background
knowledge plays in categorization.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ONR Grant N00014-02-10078. We thank the Similarity and Cognition group for their
valuable input.

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for
natural kinds and artifacts? Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., & Kim, N. S. (2000). The causal status effect in
categorization: An overview. In D. L. Medin (Ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 23–65). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of featre centrality,
Cognitive Psychology, 41, 361-416.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: Plenum.
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a
selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive
Science, 15, 89-132.
Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1986). Causal reasoning
about quantities. Proceedings of the Eighth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 196-207.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Keil, F. (1989). Concepts, Kinds, and Cognitive
Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kuehne, S. E., Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Quinn, B.
(2000). SEQL - Category learning as progressive
abstraction using structure mapping. Proceedings of the
22nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Lombrozo, T. (2007a). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 232-257.
Lombrozo (2007b). The effects of mechanistic and
functional explanations on categorization. Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of
explanations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 464-470.
Lombrozo, T. & Carey, S. (2006). Functional explanation
and the function of explanation. Cognition, 99, 167-204.
Marsh, J. K., & Ahn, W. (2006). The role of causal status
versus inter-feature links in feature weighting.
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Medin, D. L. & Shoben, E. J. (1988). Context and structure
in conceptual combination. Cognitive Psychology, 20,
158-190.

296

