UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Compound Analogical Design, Or How to Make a Surfboard Disappear

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5qx6q41w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Helms, Micheal E.
Vattam, Swaroop
Goel, Ashok

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Compound Analogical Design, Or How to Make a Surfboard Disappear
Michael E. Helms, Swaroop Vattam & Ashok Goel
Design Intelligence Laboratory, School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
{mhelms3, svattam, goel}@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Biologically-inspired design uses analogous biological systems
to develop novel solutions for human needs. In this paper we
describe an in situ cognitive study of biologically inspired
engineering design. We found that biologically inspired
engineering design often involves compound analogies in which
a new design concept is generated by composing the results of
multiple cross-domain analogies. This process of compound
analogy relies on an opportunistic interaction between two
processes: problem decomposition and analogical transfer.
Based on this cognitive study, we also present an informationprocessing account of compound analogies.

Keywords: design, cognitive study, biologically inspired,
engineering, analogical design.

1. Introduction
One of the conundrums in research on creativity is that
any solution to any problem has to start from what one
already knows: so, how is it possible to create novel
solutions? One way of trying to answer this question is
to conduct in situ (or in vivo) cognitive studies of
creativity in naturalistic settings (e.g., Darden & Cook
1994; Dunbar 1995; Kurz-Milcke, Nersessian &
Newstetter 2004; Christensen & Schunn 2008). KurzMilcke, Nersessian & Newstetter (2004), for example,
describe an in situ cognitive study of scientific research
laboratories in bio-medical engineering. We have
conducted an in situ cognitive study of biologically
inspired design, and in this paper we describe one of
the (many) findings from the study.
Biologically inspired design is a growing
movement in design, driven in part by the need for
environmentally sustainable development (e.g., Benyus
1997). Although applications of biologically inspired
design can be found in many design domains such as
engineering, architecture and computing, our focus is
on biologically inspired engineering design (and in the
rest of this paper we will use the term biologically
inspired design to refer to biologically inspired
engineering design only). A recent example from
textile engineering is the design of thermally selfregulating clothing based on the design of pinecones
(Vincent & Mann 2002). By definition, biologically
inspired design is based on cross-domain analogies.

We chose this particular domain for study because of our
interest in understanding the role, process and content of
analogies in creativity.

2. Cognitive Study
Our study was conducted in the context of an
interdisciplinary course on biologically inspired design
offered by Georgia Tech’s Center for Biologically Inspired
Design in the fall of 2006. At least 32 of the 45 students in
the class had already taken a course in design and/or
participated in design projects as part of their
undergraduate education. In the rest of this paper, we will
refer to the students in the class as designers.
The instructors of the interdisciplinary course taught
biologically inspired design using a problem-based
learning approach. Design projects grouped an
interdisciplinary team of 4-5 students together, where
each team had one student from biology and the rest were
from different engineering disciplines. Each team was
responsible for identifying a problem that could be
addressed by a biologically inspired solution, exploring
solution alternatives, and developing a final solution
design based on biological design solutions. As observers,
we attended the classroom sessions, collected course
materials, documented lecture content, and observed
teacher-student and student-student interactions in the
classroom. We had no influence on the course design or
pedagogical approach. We also did in situ observations of
a few of the teams engaged in their design projects. We
minimized our intervention, only occasionally asking
clarifying questions.
Our observations focused on the cognitive practices
and products of the designers. We observed and
documented the frequently occurring problem-solving and
representational activities of designers as part of the design
process. Some of these activities were part of the design
process explicitly taught by the instructors. Others emerged
during practice. In terms of the design products, we
observed and documented the natural evolution of the
conceptual design over time. We also attended the final oral
presentations of the design teams to the class, and read the
design briefs the teams submitted with their projects.
Vattam, Helms & Goel (2007) provide details of the
cognitive study.

781

Table 1. Design projects from the cognitive study.
Project Name
Abalone
Armor
Traffic Control
Shell Phone
BioFilter
BriteView
Eye in the Sea
InvisiBoard
iFabric
RoboHawk

Design

Solution Type

Bullet-proof vest using strength, toughness and selfhealing qualities of composites.
Congestion reducing traffic regulation system.
Scratch-, Shock-, and Shatter resistant cell phone case.
Portable, stand-alone air-filtration system.
Monitor screens that remain visible in strong sunlight.
Underwater, stealth micro-robot
Surfboard that does not produce a silhouette when seen
from below to prevent shark attacks
A thermally responsive adaptive fabric for clothing,
providing thermo regulation for the wearer.
Aerial bomb detection device

3. Compound Analogical Design
Table 1 gives a high-level description of the design
projects in the interdisciplinary course on biologically
inspired design. Again, additional details about each
project are available in Vattam, Helms & Goel (2007).
One of the major finding of our cognitive study
is that a majority of the biologically inspired designs were
based on compound analogies: the final design solutions
were compositions of multiple partial solutions, where
each partial solution was based on a different analogy. In
particular, as indicated in Table 1, we found that six of the

Problem
space
1

3

Analogues

2

4
function & sub-function
solution for achieving function
analogous problem

aggregation link
retrieval & adaptation link

Figure 1. A simple case of compound solution
generation: 1) presentation of the problem, 2)
elaboration of the problem space, 3) retrieval of
the analogue, and 4) application of the analogous
solution. Repeat for each leaf in the problem
decomposition (not shown).

Source of Inspiration

Non-compound

Abalone Shell

Non-compound
Non-compound
Compound
Compound
Compound
Compound

Ants
Abalone Shell
Diatoms, Spider Silk
Hummingbirds, Butterflies
Squid, Copepod
Pony Fish, Brittle Star

Compound

Bee Hive, Artic Wolves

Compound

Seagull, Dog

nine (or 66%) of the biologically inspired designs in our
cognitive study were based on compound analogies.

4. Interplay between Problem Solving and
Analogical Reasoning
An examination of our documentation of the design process
used in the projects involving compound analogies showed a
complex interplay between the processes of problem
decomposition and analogical transfer. Of course, that a
design team decomposed a large, complex design problem into
smaller, simpler problems is unsurprising. However, a deeper
examination of the interplay between problem decomposition
and analogical transfer revealed the opportunistic process of
compound analogies.
Figure 1 illustrates our interpretation of the designers’
problem solving in generating their design solutions. In the
simplest case of compound analogical design, the designer,
once presented with a problem, decomposes the problem into
sub-problems to create a problem hierarchy. Assuming that the
problem is decomposed along functional lines (alternative
decompositions are possible) each node in this hierarchy is a
function to be achieved. Each function is used as a cue to
retrieve known solutions that achieve that function. Solutions
are transferred to the current problem, and aggregated to
generate the overall solution. For illustrative purposes, we
make the simplifying assumption that solution aggregation
does not produce new sub-problems, although this is rarely the
case. Note, in this case, the problem decomposition is known
when the problem is presented.
In other cases, where it is not obvious to the designer how
to decompose a problem, the designer can search for an
analogous solution based on the high-level problem itself. This
retrieved analogical source provides both a potential solution
and, through a more explicit understanding of the workings of
that solution (a solution decomposition), insight into the
further decomposition of the problem. This solution
782

decomposition in the source design can be brought into
the current problem space as shown in Fig. 2.

Problem
space
1

Analogues

2

3

Figure 2. Iterative analogical generation of a problem
space: 1) presentation of the problem and retrieval of
the analogue, including the solution decomposition, 2)
elaboration of problem space, and retrieval of a new
analogue, 3) continued elaboration of problem space.
Each new node from the source solution
decomposition that is integrated into the problem space
can act as an additional cue for retrieving another set of
solution analogues. This process can continue iteratively
leading to the incremental development of the problem
space. At every stage of this iterative process, the
designer can evaluate the partial solutions available and
decide to take further actions.
The iterative feedback between these two processes
accounts for the both incremental evolution of design
problems, as well as for our observed compound design
solutions. Specific examples of compound analogical
design are presented in the next section.

functions, one for slow movement, and one for rapid
movement, both of which required stealth. This new problem
decomposition was based solely on the understanding gleaned
from the copepod analogy. The knowledge of the slow,
stealthy mechanism used by the copepod, known as a
“metachronal beating pattern” was also transferred from the
copepod source.
Next, the designers had to address the second subfunction: fast, stealthy motion. They identified squid
locomotion as an inspiration for achieving this function. The
squid mechanism, jet propulsion, is both much faster and
stealthy, matching its wake with external disturbances that
naturally occur in the surrounding water. Notice the stealth
achieved here (wake matching) is different from the stealth
achieved by the copepod (wake minimizing).
Fig. 3 develops a model of the generation of this solution
using the framework of the compound analogical design. Step
1 depicts the nature of the problem space early in the design.
The main function is to move underwater stealthily, and the
copepod is identified as a solution analogue. In Step 2, based
on knowledge from the copepod analogy, the function of
moving underwater is decomposed into sub-functions. The
solution to the function of moving slowly by minimizing wake
is adapted from the copepod to generate a partial solution. But
the function of moving fast, yet stealthily remains unresolved
in Step 2. In step 3, the squid analogue is retrieved to address
this function. Its solution of using jet propulsion for movement
is transferred to the current problem to generate the remaining
solution. These two partial solutions are aggregated to achieve
the trial design.

Analogues
1

Stealthy underwater
movement

5. Illustrative Examples
In this section we will apply the conceptual framework of
compound analogical design developed in the previous
section to analyze two of the compound designs observed
in our study.

Move underwater

Stealthy underwater
movement

2

Move slow,
minimize

Move fast
stealthily

Move slow,
minimize
wake
(stealthy)

Move fast
(nonstealthy)

metachronal beating

Copepod

5.1. Eye in the Sea
The goal of this project was to design a small underwater
robot with locomotion modality that would ensure stealth.
The initial research for the underwater robot focused on
the copepod (a small crustacean, 1-2 mm in length) as a
source for understanding stealthy locomotion. In
exploring this concept, designers became aware that the
copepod used two distinct rhythms of appendage
movement for achieving motion underwater. A slow and
stealthy rhythm was used when foraging for food and a
quick but non-stealthy rhythm was used when escaping
from predators. This understanding led the designers to
decompose their original problem into two separate

Move underwater
Stealthy underwater
movement

3
Move slow,
minimize

Move fast,
match wake
jet propulsion

Move fast,
match wake

jet propulsion

Squid

Figure 3. Design Trajectory of the Eye in the Sea.

783

5.2. InvisiBoard
The goal of this project was to conceptualize a surfboard
that minimized its silhouette to prevent “hit-an-run” shark
attacks. Designers chose the pony fish, which produces
counter-illumination by producing light that is directly
proportional to the amount of ambient light, as their
source of inspiration. Using this analogy, the function of
silhouette camouflage required the sub-function of
producing a glow on the ventral side of the surfboard to
match the ambient light. Based on a more detailed
understanding of the mechanism employed by the pony
fish, function of producing ventral glow was decomposed
in the sub-functions: produce light, channel and disperse
light.
In order to produce light, a light source and a power
source onboard the surfboard was considered an inferior
solution. The search for alternate means of producing light
led them to an organism called a brittle star (a kind of a star
fish). The dorsal side of the brittle star is covered with
thousands of microscopic lenses. This suggested a design
in which the top of the surfboard would be covered with
(suitably distributed) lenses to collect the sunlight incident
upon the surfboard. Dispersion of the light would occur via
optic fibers. Additional design steps include adding a layer
of “pattern light diffusers” on the bottom of the surfboard,
which disrupts the pattern of light from the optical fibers to
mimic the wavy pattern of the ocean surface. Fig. 4
demonstrates the generation of this solution using the
framework of the compound analogical design.

6. Related Research
Of course, neither problem decomposition nor the use of
analogies in design is new. Brown & Chandrasekaran
(1986) provide an early account of problem
decomposition in design. Much of the work on use of
analogy in design has focused on case-based design (e.g.,
Zhao & Maher 1988; Wills & Kolodner 1994; Smyth et.
al., 2001). Goel & Craw (2005) provide a recent review of
this work. However, there also has been considerable
work on cross-domain analogies in design (e.g., Goel
1997; Goel & Bhatta 2004; Qian & Gero 1996).
In a different context, viz., software design, Smyth et
al. (2001) have described Déjà Vu, a system that uses
hierarchical case-based reasoning for generating design
solutions. Their model of design does combine problem
decomposition and analogy. One important difference
between our work and theirs is that, ours easily explains
cross-domain analogies, whereas they do not.
Additionally, in Déjà Vu the problem decomposition is
already compiled into the cases, whereas in our model,
the problem decomposition is generated dynamically and
incrementally, and is interleaved with the process of
analogy.
There are few cognitive accounts of biologically
inspired design available in the literature. The available
studies focus mostly on the effect of external
representations on the number and quality of generated

Problem
space

Analogues

Prevent silhouette

1

Pony
fish

Prevent silhouette

Produce
counter-illumination

Prevent silhouette

2

Produce light
Produce
counter-illumination
Bacteria-based
bioluminescence

Channel &
disperse
light

Channel & disperse
light

Reflection

Produce light

Harness
ambient
light

Prevent silhouette

3

Photo-reception using
a spread of lenses

Produce counter-illumination

Brittle
star

Produce light
Harness
ambient
light

Channel & disperse
light
Disperse light to match
wavy pattern
Channel lightUse pattern light

Photo-reception
using a spread of
lenses

diffusers
Use fiber optic
cables

Figure 4. Design trajectory for the InvisiBoard.
designs. For example, Linsey, Wood & Markman (2008) have
found that when compared with using only diagrammatic
representations of biological systems, combining diagrams
with functional descriptions increases the chances of
successful analogies. Sarkar & Chakrabarti (2008) have found
that the use of external visual representations such as
diagrams, animations and videos increases the number of
design ideas generated in biologically inspired design. In
contrast, our work provides a more descriptive account of the
process of biologically inspired design, with a focus on the use
of compound analogies.
Recently there have been a few attempts to build
computational tools for supporting biologically inspired
design. Chakrabarti et al.’s (2005) Sapphire tool represents the
structure, behaviors and functions of biological and
engineering systems in a uniform representational scheme. It
retrieves biological and engineering designs based on matches
between functional abstractions of the systems and functional
abstractions used in a problem description. Chiu and Shu
(2007) use latent semantic indexing to find a match between
functional abstractions. Insofar as we know, none of these
efforts have been extended to address the issue of compound
analogies in biologically inspired design.
784

Christensen & Schunn (2008) have conducted an in
situ cognitive study of engineering design in a different
context, viz., product design in industry. They have found
that designers make abundant use of analogies, with about
the same number of within and cross-domain analogies.
Of course, biologically inspired design is based on crossdomain analogies.

7. Conclusion
In our goal to understand the cognitive basis of
biologically inspired design, we first conducted a study of
designers engaged in design and then identified the salient
aspects of the design process. A closer look at the design
products and processes in biologically inspired design
revealed a complex interplay between solution
knowledge, analogical references and problem
understanding, leading to the incremental, iterative
development of compound solutions. In this paper we
developed a high-level conceptual framework of
compound analogical design. This framework extends the
traditional accounts of analogical design by incorporating
the interaction between two related processes, analogy
and problem decomposition. We have applied this
framework to analyze sample compound solutions from
our study of biologically inspired design.
We draw two main conclusions from our analysis.
First, successful biologically inspired design requires that
designers carry rich representations of previous solutions
during design. These rich representations are organized at
different levels of abstraction and aggregation that
facilitate the decomposition of solutions and allow
solution analogues to be retrieved with cues taken from
each level. Second, once a mapping is established
between the problem space and a target solution, transfer
can include both potential new solutions and inferences
about problem decomposition. This opportunistic
interplay between problem decomposition and the
analogy-making process is the key to the evolution of
problem space in design and the creation of successful
compound solutions.
Since the submission of the first version of this paper
to the Cognitive Science conference, we have had the
chance to analyze the results of a second cognitive study
we conducted in fall 2007. The second study used the
same classroom laboratory and the same observation
methodology as the first study in fall 2006. The second
study confirms that biologically inspired design often
involves compound analogies: about half of the designs
created by the design teams were based on compound
analogies. More importantly, the conceptual framework
for compound analogies described above appears to cover
the compound analogies found in the new study as well.

Acknowledgements
We thank Jeannette Yen and Marc Weissburg, Director
and Associate Director of Georgia Tech’s Center for
Biologically Inspired Design, respectively, for providing
us access to classroom laboratories. This research has

benefited from many discussions with them. We also thank the
instructors of ME/ISyE/MSE/PTFe/BIOL 4803 in fall 2006:
Jeannette Yen, Bert Bras, Nils Kroger, Mohan Srinivasarao,
Craig Tovey, and Marc Weissburg. This research has been
supported by an NSF IIS Grant (#0534622) on Multimodal
Case-Based Reasoning in Modeling and Design as well as an
NSF Creative IT Grant (#0632519) entitled Towards a
Computational Model of Biological Analogies in Innovative
Engineering Design. Helms is presently supported by an NSF
DUE Grant (#0737041) on Biologically-Inspired Design:
Teaching a Novel Engineering-Biology Program.

References
Benyus, J. (1997). Biomimicry: innovation inspired by nature,
William Morrow, New York.
Brown, D., & Chandrasekaran, B. (1986) Knowledge and Control
for a Mechanical Design Expert System. IEEE Computer,
19(7): 92-100.
Bhatta, S., Goel, A.K. & Prabhakar, S. (1994). Innovation in
analogical design: A model-based approach. In J. Gero, (Ed.),
A.I. in Design, Kluwer, Boston, pp. 57-74.Chakrabarti, A.,
Sarkar, P., Leelavathamma, B., and Nataraju, B. (2005). A
functional representation for aiding biomimetic and artificial
inspiration of new ideas. A.I. for Engineering Design, Analysis
& Manufacturing, 19, 113-132.
Chiu, I. and Shu, L. (2007). Using Language as Related Stimuli
for Concept Generation. A.I. for Engineering Design, Analysis
& Manufacturing, 21(2), 103–121.
Christensen, B., & Schunn, C. (2008) The relationship of
analogical distance to analogical function and pre-inventive
structure: The case pf engineering design. Memory and
Cognition; in press.
Darden, L., & Cook, M. (1994). Reasoning Strategies in
molecular biology: Abstractions, Scans and Anomalies. In
Proc. PSA-1994, v. 2, pp. 179-191.
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific
reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R.J. Sternberg, & J.
Davidson (Eds.). Mechanisms of insight. Cambridge MA: MIT
press. pp 365-395.
Goel, A.K. (1997). Design, Analogy, and Creativity. IEEE
Expert, 12(3), 62-70.
Goel, A., & Bhatta, S. (2004) Design Patterns: A Unit of
Analogical Transfer in Creative Design. Advanced Engineering
Informatics, 18(2):85-94.
Goel, A., & Craw, S. (2005) Design, Innovation and Case-Based
Reasoning. Knowledge Engineering Review, 20(3):271-276.
Kurz-Milcke, E., Nersessian, N., & Newstetter, W. (2004) What
has history got to do with cognition? Interactive methods for
studying research laboratories. Cognition and Culture, 4:663700.
Linsey, J., Wood, K., & Amarkman, A. (2008) Modality and
Representation in Analogy. AIEDAM 22(2):85-100.
Maher, M.L., Balachandran, B. & Zhang, D.M. (1995). CaseBased Reasoning in Design, Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Qian L. and J. S. Gero (1996), Function-Behavior- Structure
Paths and Their Role in Analogy-Based Design, Artificial
Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and
Manufacturing, 10(4):289-312.
785

Sarkar. P., & Chakrabarti, A. (2008) The Effect of
Representation of Triggers on Design Outcomes.
AIEDAM 22(2): 101-116.
Smyth, B., Keane, M.T. & Cunningham, P. (2001).
Hierarchical Case-Based Reasoning Integrating CaseBased and Decompositional Problem-Solving
Techniques for Plant-Control Software Design.
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
13(5), 793–812.
Wills, L.M. & Kolodner, J.L. (1994), Towards More
Creative Case-Based Design Systems. In Proc. of the
12th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
AAAI Press/The MIT Press, Menlo Park, CA, pp. 50–
55.

Vattam, S., Helms, M. and Goel, A.K. (2007). Biologically
Inspired Innovation in Engineering Design: A Cognitive
Study. Technical Report GIT-GVU-07-07, Georgia Institute
of Technology.
Vincent, J. and Mann, D. (2002). Systematic Technology
Transfer from Biology to Engineering, Philosophical Trans.
of the Royal Society: Physical Sciences, 360: 159-173.
Zhao, F. and Maher, M.L. (1988). Using analogical reasoning
to design buildings, Engineering with Computers 4(1), 107–
119.

786

