UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints for Computational Models of Reading: Evidence from learning lexical stress

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kp333sg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Monaghan, Padraic
Arciuli, Joanne
Seva, Nada

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints for Computational Models of Reading:
Evidence from learning lexical stress
Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4YF, UK

Joanne Arciuli (j.arciuli@usyd.edu.au)
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Sydney, Australia
Po Box 170, Lidcombe, 1825

Nada Seva (n.seva@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York,
York YO10 5DD, UK
the DRC dual-route model of reading, for regularly
pronounced words, the lexical route is accessed after the
grapheme-phoneme mapping system is completed. Thus,
stress assignment for regular words cannot be stored in the
lexicon for this model.
Rastle and Coltheart (2000) attempted a solution to this
difficulty by deriving a rule-based system for stress
assignment that performed a sublexical search through the
word for morphemes, and then consulted a database for
whether the morpheme carried stress or not. This model was
able to classify a large proportion of the lexicon of English,
and could generalize to nonwords when they contained
identifiable morphemes. Yet, the model performed poorly
when no morphemes were present in the nonwords (Kelly,
2004; Seva, Monaghan, & Arciuli, submitted).
In contrast, the single-route model of reading predicts that
stress position can be determined by the learning of
regularities in the mapping from orthography to stress
position. Zevin and Joanisse (2000) undertook some pilot
modeling that examined the regularities potentially available
in the orthography, morphology, and phonology of words
for determining stress assignment, and found that such cues
were highly predictive of stress position (see also
Daelemans, Gillis, & Durieux, 1994, for a word-analogy
approach to stress assignment). It is one aim of the current
study to determine the extent to which a single-route
computational model with no pre-determined structure can
effectively learn stress assignment from the regularities in
the orthography alone for reading in English.

Abstract
Models of reading have typically focused on monosyllabic
words, consequently lexical stress assignment has been
neglected in such models. Yet, determining how and when
stress is applied in naming is an important consideration in
providing a comprehensive account of reading processing. A
corpus analysis of English age-appropriate reading materials
between ages 5-12 indicated two properties: a general
tendency that bisyllabic words have initial stress; and the
orthographic endings of words increase in importance as
indicators of stress position. A behavioural study on children
aged 5 to 12 reading nonwords showed that children are
sensitive to these properties in their responses. Finally, a
developmental computational model mapping orthography
onto stress showed the same developmental trend, suggesting
that probabilistic orthographic information is used for stress
assignment, and that the child’s biases may be a consequence
of learning the statistical properties of written words.

Models of Reading and Stress Assignment
Models of reading have typically focused on processing the
mapping between the orthography and the phonology of the
word. The debate over the architecture of the reading system
has converged to the question of whether the mapping
between written and spoken forms of words is mediated by
a single route or a dual route. The single route perspective
assumes that the statistical regularities of the properties of
letters and sets of letters mapping onto phonemes and sets of
phonemes are learned by a mechanism where all these
sources of information are available in parallel (Seidenberg
& McClelland, 1989). The alternative dual-route view is
that the mapping is served by a system that maps the
regularities between graphemes and phonemes, and another,
separate system that consults a lexicon for the pronunciation
of the whole word (Coltheart et al., 2001; Perry, Ziegler, &
Zorzi, 2007).
The role of stress assignment provides a test case for
constraining the architecture of such models of reading, but
it has generally been ignored, presumably due to the
limitation of models of reading to monosyllabic words,
where stress assignment is trivial. Yet, considering how
stress assignment is applied to the word is critical in
understanding reading processes. This is because stress must
be assigned before the word can be correctly pronounced. In

Models of Reading Development
A critical aspect of the single-route, statistical regularity
approach to modeling of reading is that the mapping
between written and spoken forms of words is learned. So,
additional constraints on the architecture of the reading
system can be provided by developmental studies. A second
principal aim of this paper is to determine the patterns of
stress assignment during reading, and determine whether a
computational model can produce a similar performance
trajectory when trained on a realistic reading corpus.
Previous studies of the development of stress assignment in
children have indicated that morpheme frequency has an
influence on stress assignment. Jarmulowicz (2002) found
457

that 9 year old children were more likely to stress multimorphemic words correctly than 7 year olds, but the
advantage increased for more frequent morphemes.
Protopapas, Gerakaki, and Alexandri (2006) report that
Greek children make more errors in stress assignment for
nonwords than for words, suggesting that stress may be
lexically stored in Greek. The same study also found a
default stress assignment on the penultimate syllable in
early reading development. Similarly, Gutierrez-Palma and
Reyes (2007) found that, for Spanish children aged 7 to 8
years, sensitivity to stress predicted reading ability, and that
children with lower reading ability showed a bias toward
penultimate stress, the most common stress position in
Spanish.
However, there is no even distribution of information
across words regarding stress position. The distributions of
phonemes and letters at the very beginning and ending of
words have been found to be particularly reliable indicators
of word boundaries (Hockema, 2006) and grammatical
category (Arciuli & Monaghan, 2006), as well as stress
position (Arciuli & Cupples, 2006, 2007). In the current
study, we extend these previous analyses by combining
corpus analysis, experimental, and computational modeling
to investigate the role of stress in the reading system. In
particular, we:
1. Investigate the extent to which the start and the end of
words’ orthography can predict stress assignment in the
lexicon of English;
2. Determine whether these cues are available in the words
that children are exposed to at early stages of reading;
3. Determine the extent to which beginnings and endings of
words are utilized by children at different stages of reading;
4. Test whether a computational model instantiating a single
route that learns the statistical regularities mapping
orthography onto stress position, and without in-built
structure, is sensitive to words’ beginnings and endings in
the same way as children learning to read.

Table 1. Corpus size at each age group for the analyses.

AGE

STRESS POSITION (SYLLABLE)
2ND
1ST

5/6
7/8
9/10
11/12

3296
4171
4791
4876

447
683
903
957

was ambiguous with respect to the orthography from WFG,
then the most frequent pronunciation cited in CELEX was
used. The analyses were applied to all the bisyllabic words
extracted from the WFG. There were 6,531 such words
altogether, 5393 with first- and 1138 with second-syllable
stress. The number of words with stress on each position for
each set of age-appropriate words is shown in Table 1.
Corpus analysis
Similar to the analyses of Arciuli and Cupples (2007), we
took for each word the letters that corresponded to the
pronunciation up to and including the first vowel and vowel
cluster as a beginning cue (i.e., ‘ze’ in ‘zebra’). The ending
cue were the letters that corresponded to the rime of the
second syllable (i.e., “a’ in ‘zebra’). Each word, then, had
just one beginning and one ending cue encoded as a binary
variable. For each age-appropriate corpus, we conducted a
stepwise discriminant analysis with either the word
beginnings or endings as independent variables, and had as
dependent variable whether the word had first- or secondsyllable stress. We selected all the words with a frequency >
2/million. Each word was weighted according to its
frequency as contributing to the analyses. As a baseline, we
randomly reassigned the stress positions to words and
repeated the discriminant analyses. This enabled us to
determine the extent to which the variability of the cues
alone, when disconnected from their relationship to stress
position, could distinguish two groups.

Results and Discussion

Study 1: Corpus Analyses of Stress

For each age group, both beginnings and endings were
highly significantly effective in determining stress position.
Figure 1 shows the results for beginnings and endings for
each age group.
For each age-appropriate corpus of written words, word
endings were more accurate at predicting stress position
than were the word beginnings, F(1, 7) = 140.67, p < .001,
η2 = .95. However, the difference between beginnings and
endings in terms of how accurate they classified words
increased with each age-level, with endings remaining
highly accurate predictors, and beginnings reducing in
predictive value with age. A regression of difference
between beginnings and endings and age, was highly
significant, r2 = .97, p < .001
The corpus analyses confirmed previous studies of adult
lexica that indicated that both the beginnings and endings of
words were extremely useful in categorizing words
according to their stress position. So “ze” from zebra
provides information that the word carries first syllable

Method
Corpus preparation
The corpus was derived from Section I of the Educator’s
Word Frequency Guide (WFG, Zeno, Ivens, Hillard, &
Duvvuri, 1995). The WFG is constructed from a large
corpus of words extracted from 60,527 samples taken from
16,333 written texts. In the corpus, there are approximately
155,000 different words, and the total corpus size is over 17
million words. Each text was graded using readability
measures and its age-appropriate level was determined for
readers at 13 different grades, covering the age range 5 to 18
in the American and British schooling systems. The 19,468
words with frequency at least 1 per million were included in
Section I.
The pronunciation of each word was taken by comparing
the WFG wordlist with the CELEX database (Baayen,
Pipenbrock, & Gulikers, 1993). When the pronunciation
458

% Words Correctly Classified According
to Stress Pattern

Table 2. Nonwords used in Study 2, by predicted stress
position for beginning and ending cues.
Consistent
Inconsistent

Beginnings
Endings

100
90

Beg: 1st syll
End 1st syll
mandol
mapet
coddol
combet
mambey
condan

80
70
60
50
5-6years

7-8years

9-10 years

11-12 years

Figure 1. Discriminant analyses of first and second
syllable stressed words from age-appropriate text for either
beginnings or endings.

Beg: 2nd syll
End: 2nd syll
bedoon
bemade
apoon
abade
bedince
adact

Beg: 1st syll
End: 2nd syll
copoon
mapade
comade
madoon
mabince
codact

Beg: 2nd syll
End: 1st syll
beppet
ambol
andet
bendol
beddan
ambey

appropriate level.
Materials
Using the results of the corpus analyses we identified
beginnings that were strongly associated with first syllable
stress and endings that were strongly associated with second
syllable stress for all age-appropriate groups. So, for
instance, the beginnings ma- and co- and the endings –ol
and –et were highly associated with first syllable stress.
Whereas the beginnings be- and a- and the endings –oon
and –ade were associated with second syllable stress. We
constructed two sets of nonwords, one where the beginning
and ending cues were consistent indicators of stress patterns,
and one set where the beginnings and endings were
inconsistent. There were 12 consistent and 12 inconsistent
nonwords, though the youngest age groups (5 and 6) were
only tested on 8 of each, due to testing fatigue. The
nonwords are shown in Table 2.

stress, however, of increasing importance, the word’s
ending, “a”, indicates that stress is carried on the first
syllable. The current study provides a novel contribution by
demonstrating that this was true for all age-appropriate
groups of words. Intriguingly, the accuracy of the
discriminant analysis was greatest for the earliest ageappropriate grouping of words. These words carried more
orthographic information about stress position than the
words that children were exposed to at later stages of
reading development. However, the greater overall accuracy
of the early ages was due in part to the smaller set of ageappropriate words for these groups.
As in previous studies of adult lexica of English, the
endings carried more information about stress position than
beginnings (Arciuli & Monaghan, 2006). This is consistent
with affixes carrying information about stress position (e.g.,
Fudge, 1984) and the greater incidence of suffixes in
English, though most of the beginning and ending cues used
in the current analyses were not affixes.
However, though we have established that there is
substantial orthographic information to stress position, and
that this can be found in the very start and end of words, at
various ages, the corpus analyses cannot show whether such
information is actually utilized by children learning to read.
In the next study we constructed a set of nonwords based on
cues that were found to be reliable indicators for stress
assignment in the corpus analyses, and tested children’s
sensitivity to these cues at different ages.

Procedure
Children were tested individually in a quiet room.
Nonwords were presented on individual cards, and children
were told they were to try and read nonsense words and that
there was no right or wrong answer. Responses were coded
in terms of whether they read the nonsense word with first
syllable stress, second syllable stress, even stress or did not
respond. Children produced bisyllabic responses for most of
the nonwords, and the vast majority of responses fell into
the first two categories so we report only these in the
analyses.

Results and discussion
Figure 2 shows the results for children reading nonwords
with consistent cues, where the cues predicted either first or
second syllable stress (error bars show SE). We conducted
an ANOVA on the proportion of nonwords pronounced as
predicted by the cues, with age and 1st or 2nd syllable stress
cues as factors. There was a main effect of 1st/2nd stress
cues, F(1, 182) = 216.02, p < .001, a main effect of age, F(1,
182) = 8.04, p < .001, and a significant interaction between
stress cues and age, F(1, 182) = 10.70, p < .001.
Figure 3 illustrates the results for the nonwords when
cues were inconsistent, according to whether stress was
applied based on the predictions of the beginning or the
ending of the nonword. An ANOVA with age and type of
cues (beginning 1st a nd ending 2nd, and beginning 2nd and
ending 1st) was performed on the proportion of nonwords

Study 2: Development of Stress Assignment
Method
Participants
The participants were primary-aged children from 6 schools
in New South Wales, Australia. There were 7 children of 5
years, 31 of 6 years, 29 of 7 years, 25 of 8 years, 27 of 9
years, 28 of 10 years, 25 of 11 years, and 14 of 12 years of
age. The children had begun learning to read at school at
age 5. Parents of the participants confirmed that their
children were monolingual speakers of English without
hearing or learning problems. Classroom teachers confirmed
that each child in the study was reading at an age459

words’ endings become more predictive of stress position
than word beginnings, until by age 9 upwards, almost 70%
of stress assignments are made in accordance with the stress
position of regularities at word endings. This dominance of
ending cues reflects the relative value of endings from the
corpus analyses as being more reliable predictors of stress
position. Children, as they extend their lexicon for reading,
learn to rely more heavily on the region of the word that is
most predictive of stress position.
The third study we performed was a computational
model of learning to assign stress from written words in
English. We tested whether a computational model was
sensitive to the same statistical properties of the language
that children appear to be, and whether a similar
developmental profile in the model could also be observed.
The computational model is a statistical mechanism, but in
contrast to the discriminant analyses, it enables us to test
whether the relationship between orthographic cues and
stress position can be discovered by the model, and it also
enables us to plot a developmental trajectory – the
discriminant analysis provides the solution for the
beginnings/endings to stress position mapping, but does not
provide insight into a computational system’s approach to
this solution.

Figure 2. Classification of nonwords as first or second
syllable stress for consistent cues.

Figure 3. Classification of nonwords according to
beginnings or endings for inconsistent cues.

Study 3: Modeling Stress Assignment

pronounced according to the ending cue. There was a main
effect of type of cue, F(1, 182) = 235.22, p < .001, a main
effect of age, F(1, 182) = 13.19, p < .001, and a significant
interaction, F(1, 182) = 11.55, p < .001.
The results demonstrate two principal effects of learning
stress assignment in reading in English. First, young
children indicate a greater tendency than older children to
pronounce nonwords with first syllable stress. This suggests
an over-generalisation, consistent with the distribution of
first- and second-syllable stressed words in the language,
evident from the corpus analyses – 85% of the bisyllabic
words in the WFG database have first syllable stress. This
over-generalisation bias applied for all nonwords types. For
nonwords with consistent beginning and ending markers for
first and second syllable stress, children aged 5/6 matched
their responses closely to the actual distributions in their
age-appropriate lexicon: approximately 80% of responses to
the consistent nonwords were pronounced with first syllable
stress. Similarly, for the inconsistent words, children aged
5/6 pronounced almost 67% of the words with first syllable
stress. Yet, it would appear that as the child has more
practice with reading (corresponding to increasing age),
more words are read with second syllable stress – for the
consistent nonwords, 54% are pronounced with first syllable
stress by the 11/12 year old group, and for inconsistent
words this was 57%.
The second main property of the reading development
responses is the change in the dominance of the cues as age
increases. When reading begins, at age 5/6, stress
assignment was generally placed on the first syllable, and
neither beginning nor ending orthographic cue had a large
influence on stress assignment. As age increases, however,

The computational model was trained on all bisyllabic
words in English according to their frequency of occurrence
in age-appropriate literature for ages 5-12, and was required
to predict from the orthographic input the stress position of
the word. Critically, we wanted to determine whether the
model could: (1) learn only from orthographic cues the
stress position of the word in English; (2) demonstrate early
in learning the same bias as young children in terms of
assignment of first syllable stress to words and nonwords;
and (3) whether the model could reveal the developing
dominance of word-endings as indicators of stress position.

Method
Architecture
We constructed a supervised feedforward network that
learned to map the orthography of words onto their stress
position. There were two orthographic input layers, composed
of 14 letter slots each. The first contained a left-aligned
representation of the word and the second contained a rightaligned version of the word. Consequently, the potential
influence of beginnings and endings on the model’s
performance was balanced. In each letter slot, one of 26 units
was active to represent the letter, or for an empty slot no units
were active. The input layers were fully connected to a layer
of 100 hidden units, which in turn was fully connected to one
output stress unit (see Figure 4). The output unit was trained
to be active for second syllable stress and inactive for first
syllable stress.
Training and testing
The model was trained incrementally with age-appropriate
words taken from the WFG list. For the age 5 words, we
460

p

e

n

g

u

i

n
p

e

n

g

u

i

n

Figure 4. The computational model of stress assignment.
trained the model for 10,000 examples, for age 6 words we
trained for 20,000 examples, and this increased up to 150,000
examples of training for the age 12 words. The model was
trained with the backpropagation learning algorithm with
learning rate .005. For first-syllable stress, the stress unit’s
target activity was 0, for second syllable stress it was 1. The
model was tested at each learning stage, and the simulation
was repeated 10 times.
The model was judged to have assigned first syllable
stress if activation of the output unit was less than .5, and
second syllable stress for activity greater than .5. The model
was tested on all the words in the age-appropriate set. The
model was also tested on the age appropriate lists of
consistent and inconsistent nonwords used for the
behavioural study (shown in Table 2).

Figure 5. Model classification of nonwords as first or
second syllable stress for consistent cues.

Figure 6. Model classification of nonwords according to
beginnings or endings for inconsistent cues.
alone. In addition, early in training on realistic corpora of
age-appropriate written language, the model was sensitive to
the same biases as young children, both in terms of
assignment of first syllable stress to words and nonwords
and for the developing dominance of word-endings as
indicators of stress position.

Results and Discussion
The model learned to assign stress to words in the training
set accurately, reading 88% of words at age 5/6 correctly,
rising to 92% correct at age 11/12. Additional training
resulted in 99% accuracy, though we do not report the
model’s performance at this more advanced reading stage.
For the consistent nonwords, Figure 5 shows the models
stress assignment. An ANOVA with 1st/2nd syllable stress
cues and age as factors was performed on the proportion of
stress assignments consistent with the cues. As with the
behavioural data, there was a main effect of 1st/2nd stress
cues, F(1, 9) = 19.76, p < .001, a main effect of age, F(3,
27) = 768.23, p < .001, and an interaction, F(3, 27) = 19.76,
p < .001.
For the inconsistent nonwords, Figure 6 illustrates the
results, according to whether stress was applied based on the
predictions of the beginning or the ending cue. An ANOVA
with type of cue (beginning 1st and ending 2nd, and
beginning 2nd and ending 1st) and age on the proportion of
nonwords given 1st syllable stress by the model. As with the
behavioural study, there was a main effect of type of cue,
F(1, 9) = 1046.10, p < .001, a main effect of age, F(3, 27) =
49.25, p < .001, and an interaction between type of cue and
to rely on nonword endings at a slightly earlier stage than
age, F(1, 9) = 136.84, p <.001, though the model appeared
did the children in Study 2.
Overall, the simulation results indicated that the
computational model was able to learn the stress position
of words and nonwords in English from orthographic cues

General Discussion
We have explored the statistical properties of written
words in terms of the information they provide about the
stress position of bisyllabic words. The corpus analyses
indicate that, for age-appropriate lexica, there is substantial
information in the letters at the beginning and ending of the
word to determine with a high degree of accuracy stress
assignment. As age increases, the relative advantage of
endings compared to beginnings as determinants of stress
becomes greater. The behavioural experiments indicate that
children are sensitive to these statistical properties of
English. As children have more practice in reading, they
lose an initial bias to pronounce unfamiliar words with first
syllable stress, and become more attuned to the orthographic
properties of word endings in guiding their decisions about
pronunciation.
The corpus and behavioural results provide insights into
the potential processing involved in the reading system for
applying stress. A computational model trained to map
orthography onto stress position for bisyllabic words
indicated similar performance to children learning to read.
Initially, the first-syllable stress bias was found, but with an
461

and orthographic correlates. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59(5), 920-948.
Arciuli, J., & Monaghan, P. (2006). Hidden cues to
grammatical category in the spelling of English
disyllables. The 15th Australian Language and Speech
Conference. Australian Journal of Psychology, 58, 1-13.
Arciuli, J. & Slowiaczek, L. (2007). The where and when of
linguistic word-level prosody. Neuropsychologia, 45,
2638-2642.
Baayen, R.H., Pipenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1993). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., Ziegler, J.
(2001). DRC: Dual route cascaded model of visual word
recognition and reading aloud. Psychological Review, 108,
204-256.
Daelemans, W., Gillis, S., & Durieux, G. (1994). The
Acquisition of Stress: A Data-oriented Approach.
Computational Linguistics, 20, 421-451.
Fudge, E. (1984). English word stress. London: Allen &
Unwin.
Gutierrez-Palma, N. & Reyes, A.P. (2006). Stress sensitivity
and reading performance in Spanish: A study with
children. Journal of Research in Reading, 30, 157-168.
Hockema, S.A. (2006). Finding words in speech: An
investigation of American English. Language Learning
and Development, 2, 119-146.
Jarmulowicz, L. (2002). English derivational suffix
frequency and children’s stress judgments. Brain &
Language, 81, 192-204.
Kelly, M. (2004). Word onset patterns and lexical stress in
English. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 231-244.
Perry, C., Ziegler, J. C., & Zorzi, M. (2007). Nested
incremental modelling in the development of
computational theories: the CDP+ model of reading aloud.
Psychological Review, 114, 273-315.
Protopapas, A., Gerakaki, S., & Alexandri, S. (2006).
Lexical and default stress assignment in reading Greek.
Journal of Research in Reading, 29, 418-432.
Rastle, K. & Coltheart, M. (2000). Lexical and nonlexical
print-to-sound translation of disyllabic words and
nonwords. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 342364.
Seidenberg, M.S. & McClelland, J.L. (1989). A Distributed,
Developmental Model of Word Recognition and Naming.
Psychological Review, 96, 523-568.
Seva, N., Monaghan, P., & Arciuli, J. (submitted). Stressing
what is important: Orthographic cues and lexical stress
assignment.
Zeno, S.M., Ivens, S.H., Millard, R.T., & Duvvuri, R.
(1995). The educator’s word frequency guide. Brewster,
NY: Touchstone Applied Science Associates.
Zevin, J. & Joanisse, M. (2000). Stress assignment in
nonword reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
41B, S5.

increasing dependency on word endings in guiding
pronunciation. The model indicated that learning the
statistical properties of the lexicon resulted in effects found
in reading development.
Importantly, the computational model we have presented
does not have a lexical component for stress assignment.
The lexical level is potentially available, as all letters within
the word are inputted to the model simultaneously, yet the
accurate encoding of stress by the model is not due to access
to a specified lexicon. Furthermore, the finding that (nonmorphological) parts of the word can provide valuable
information about stress, and the fact that generalization to
novel words can take place argues against stress being
stored in the lexicon (though it is still possible that a wordanalogy approach may also be able to reflect the behavioural
data). Our model suggests instead that sublexical properties
of words drive their pronunciation.
The model, however, provides insight into only one
aspect of pronunciation of polysyllabic words – that of
stress assignment – but as such it indicates that assumptions
made for models of monosyllabic words do not generalize
adequately to the entire lexicon. A notable absence from the
current model is the mapping from orthography to
phonology, which is necessary for providing a full account
of polysyllabic word reading (e.g., Ans, Carbonnel, &
Valdois, 1998). Yet, incorporating phonology into the
model as well may improve performance further. Rastle and
Coltheart’s (2000) rule-based model of stress, for instance,
bases its decision in part on the pronunciation of the vowel
which contributes substantially to accurate performance.
Another absence is the availability of other cues that may
assist in stress assignment. The correspondence between
grammatical category and stress position is well-attested
(Arciuli, & Slowiaczek, 2007) as well as phonological and
phonotactic indicators of stress position (Kelly, 2004). A
sublexical, probabilistic approach to modeling word
reading, such as we have taken in this paper, can be
extended using the same principles to incorporate these
additional sources of information.

Author Note
All authors of this paper contributed equally. The research
was supported by a bilateral funding scheme: ESRC grant
RES-000-22-1975 and ARC grant LX0775703.

References
Ans, B., Carbonnel, S., & Valdois, S. (1998). A
connectionist multi-trace memory model of polysyllabic
word reading. Psychological Review, 105, 678-723.
Arciuli, J., & Cupples, L. (2007). Would you rather 'embert
a cudsert' or 'cudsert an embert'? How spelling patterns at
the beginning of English disyllables can cue grammatical
category. In Schalley, A. & Khlentzos, D. (Eds.), Mental
States: Language and Cognitive Structure.
Arciuli, J., & Cupples, L. (2006). The processing of lexical
stress during visual word recognition: Typicality effects

462

