UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Context Repetition Benefits Are Dependent on Context Redundancy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mb76610

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Recchia, Gabriel
Johns, Brendan T.
Jones, Micheal N.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Context Repetition Benefits are Dependent on Context Redundancy
Gabriel Recchia (grecchia@indiana.edu)

Brendan T. Johns (johns4@indiana.edu)

Cognitive Science Program, 1910 E 10th St.
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana USA

Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana USA

Michael N. Jones (jonesmn@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana USA

been used. In their analysis, Adelman et al. quantify a
word’s CD as simply a count of the number of different
documents in which the word occurs across a large text
corpus, and their results are consistent across many corpora
and LDT datasets. Words that appear in more contexts are
likely to have a higher frequency, but Adelman et al. argue
that it is CD and not WF that is the causal factor of LDT.
Similarly, Steyvers and Malmberg (2003) have
demonstrated that models based on document count
outperform models based on rank frequency in recognition
memory tasks.
Contextual diversity is based on the rational approach to
memory (Anderson & Milson, 1989; Anderson & Schooler,
1991), specifically the principle of likely need (PLN) which
states that the more contexts a word occurs in across
learning, the more likely the word will be needed in future
contexts (Adelman et al., 2006). Psychological notions of
context differ greatly, and range from the list in which a
word was encoded, to changes in time, to the room in which
learning took place (Dennis & Humphreys, 2001; Wickens,
1987). It is not directly obvious how counting documents
corresponds to classic ideas of a change in context, but it
seems fairly intuitive that if a word is repeated in the same
document, we should not consider the semantic context to
have changed.
PLN implies that a word will be processed faster if it
occurs in a greater number of unique semantic contexts.
Hence, operationalizing CD as the number of documents
that a word appears in across a corpus may be an invalid
measure of the true contextual diversity of the word. A
frequent discourse topic is likely to have many documents
dedicated to it, and so a word that is used to describe a
frequent topic is likely to appear in more documents, even
though the documents are not truly distinct contextual uses
of the word. Thus, document count risks giving a high CD
score to words that actually have very low semantic
uniqueness. Ideally, we would like a more nuanced measure.
Under PLN, one would expect that repetition of a word in
distinct contexts would increase its likely need to a greater
extent than an equal number of repetitions in redundant
contexts.
At the heart of the debate is the question of whether
repetition of a word benefits processing if context does not
change. Under strength accounts, any repetition adds
another trace to memory and, hence, increases the strength
of the trace (or the availability of traces for the word).

Abstract
What sources of statistical information do humans leverage to
organize the mental lexicon? Recently, accounts emphasizing
the importance of word frequency have been challenged by
accounts emphasizing contextual diversity (CD). The latter
suggest that words will be processed faster if they occur in a
greater number of unique semantic contexts. Previous corpus
studies have operationalized CD by counting the number of
documents that each word appears in. However, there is no
guarantee that each document corresponds to a unique
semantic context, as documents may address similar topics.
We develop a measure of CD that takes into account the
semantic similarity of documents, and show that for words
appearing in many contexts, appearing in multiple contexts is
most beneficial if the contexts are high in semantic
distinctiveness. In Experiment 2, we induce a similar effect
experimentally using an artificial-language paradigm,
demonstrating that repetition of a word does not speed
processing unless the repetition is accompanied by a change
in context.
Keywords: contextual diversity, word frequency, lexical
decision, learning models

Introduction
Classic strength accounts of learning are based on the
belief that repetition of an item aids learning, increases
memory strength for the item, and increases the probability
that the item will be later retrieved. This principle of
repetition has also been influential in theories of word
identification based on the finding that word frequency is
among the most important variables to predict lexical
decision times (LDT). A higher-frequency word is likely to
be identified as a word more quickly than is a lowfrequency word (Forster & Chambers, 1973).
This
theoretical position entails that on each occurrence, a word’s
memory trace is strengthened, resulting in the trace being
easier to retrieve on subsequent experiences of the word.
The classic repetition/frequency principle has led to the
development of serial-searched rank frequency models
(Murray & Forster, 2004), threshold activation accounts
(Coltheart, et al., 2001), and iterative-update connectionist
models (Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989).
However, recent evidence has called into question the
importance of frequency information in LDT. Adelman,
Brown, and Quesada (2006) have demonstrated that word
frequency (WF) is confounded with contextual diversity
(CD)—the number of different contexts in which a word has
267

Under a PLN account, by contrast, repetition should not
benefit processing if context does not change because
repeating an item in the same context does not increase its
likely need. To contribute to this debate, we first derive a
new measure of contextual diversity that is based on the
semantic uniqueness of the set of documents in which a
word occurs. In Experiment 1, we present a large corpus
analysis using our new measure demonstrating that
repetition of a word is most beneficial if the repetitions are
in more distinct contexts, a finding consistent with Adelman
et al.’s (2006) PLN, but not directly answerable with their
document count measure of CD.
An additional problem with document count as a measure
of CD is that it is confounded with many other variables in
addition to WF, any of which could be the causal factor
influencing LDT. For example, LDTs could be faster for
words that have been experienced more recently; words
with a greater document count or WF are also likely to have
a higher recency. Ambiguity, abstractness, and imageability
are also confounded with document count and WF, and are
difficult to tease apart. Finally, it has been suggested
(Balota; in Adelman et al. 2006) that document count from a
text corpus may actually be a better measure of real-world
WF due to the structure of the corpus. Recent corpus-based
work attempts to demonstrate the unique effects of CD
statistically by partialing out the confounding variables as
covariates. However, we take a novel approach here, and in
Experiment 2 attempt to induce the effect of CD
experimentally with an artificial language learning task
followed by a surprise pseudo-lexical decision task. To our
knowledge, the effects of CD and WF have never been
induced experimentally.

That is, document similarity is the intersection of the two
sets of words, divided by the size of the smaller document.
This gives the proportion of word overlap between two
documents. Function words (e.g. the, is, of, etc…) were
filtered out of the set of words, so they do not impact the
similarity rating. Document dissimilarity is then just 1similarity. We then define a word’s semantic distinctiveness
(SD) as the mean dissimilarity of the set of documents that
contain it:

SDword =

i

i=1

j=1

Dissim(doc i ,doc j )

n + (n 2 − n) /2

, (2)

Method
To compare the SD measurement of contextual diversity
with the straightforward document count (DC) of Adelman
et al. (2006), an SD value was computed for each of 18,494
words for which we obtained LDTs from the English
Lexicon Project database (Balota, et al., 2000). For each
word, SD, DC, and WF values were computed using 9,100
documents from a corpus containing articles from the 1994
New York Times corpus. Documents in this corpus had a
mean length of 250 words.
In order to compare SD and DC as measures of contextual
diversity, the data were divided into two groups – a high or
low SD group, and/or a high or low DC group. A word was
placed into the high-SD group if its SD value was in the
upper quartile of all the computed SD values, but into the
low-SD group if its SD value was in the lower quartile of all
the computed SD values. Likewise, a word was placed into
the high-DC group if it was in the upper quartile of the DC
data, but into the low-DC group if it was in the lower
quartile of the DC data.

Experiment 1

Semantic Distinctiveness

Results

To examine the influence of contextual uniqueness, it is
necessary to create a measure of the dissimilarity of
documents in which a word has appeared. Though there are
many existing models of semantic representation (e.g., HAL
or LSA), we did not want to approach the problem from a
specific theoretical orientation. Instead the base measure
that we use to assess the dissimilarity between two
documents is the proportion of words that the documents
have in common, or:
doc ∩doc

n

where n is the number of documents that a word appears in.
Equation (2) is the mean dissimilarity between every
document in which a word appears, and this SD value
signals how distinct the documents that a word occurs in are
from each other. A word with a high SD value tends to
occur in documents that have a low amount of word overlap
(it is more contextually distinct), and a word with a low SD
value tends to occur in documents that have a high amount
of word overlap (it is less distinct).

We conducted a large corpus analysis to assess whether
processing of a word is most likely facilitated by simple
repetition of the word (WF), number of contexts in which it
appears (document count; DC), or whether the benefit of
context or frequency was dependent on the uniqueness of
the context relative to the word’s history of contextual
occurrences. The variables computed from the corpus
analysis were used to predict LDT on a per-word basis for a
large number of observations.

1
2
Dissim(doc1, doc 2 ) = 1− min (doc
1 , doc 2 )

∑ ∑

In order to assess the impact of these two measures on each
other, a univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
conducted. The means from this analysis are depicted in
Figure 1. A main effect was observed for the DC factor,
with higher DC words having faster LDTs than lower DC
words, F(1,4232) = 177.43, p < .001. Further, a main effect
was found for SD, with more semantically unique words
having faster LDTs than less unique words, F(1,4232) =
143.78, p < .001. Substituting WF for DC produces the
same result for all analyses reported (because WF and DC
are so highly correlated), hence, we only report results from

(1)
268

must account for the semantic uniqueness of each context in
which the word appears, and this finding has important
implications for learning models.
What accounts for the fact that SD has the greatest impact
on LDT when a word appears in many documents? One
possibility is that because highly frequent words also tend to
appear in a large number of documents, the DC measure is
somewhat confounded with word frequency, while the new
measure of SD is less so. If this is the case, then the results
of Experiment 1 suggest that appearing in diverse semantic
contexts facilitates processing the most for highly frequent
words, and less so for infrequent words. We investigate this
hypothesis in Experiment 2 by manipulating CD and WF.

DC. Of particular interest, however, is the finding that SD
and DC interacted, F(1,4232) = 74.26, p < .001. As the
document count increased, words that appeared in a greater
number of semantically unique documents saw a greater
benefit on their LDTs from the additional contextual
occurrences.
It is possible that this interaction is a simple result of the
fact that sufficient occurrences are necessary for semantic
uniqueness to play its role. That is, appearing in more
documents increases chance co-occurrences with less
frequent (and hence more unique) words. On a continuous
scale, the correlation between log-SD and LDT is -.433.
When we partial out the effects of DC, the unique partial
correlation between log-SD and LDT remains at -.361 (and
drops to a lower, but still significant, -.166 by partialing out
log-DC). Hence, even when the number of documents is
controlled for, there is a clear relationship in which words
that appear in more unique contexts are identified faster,
consistent with PLN.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to experimentally test the
hypothesis that repetition of contextual occurrences
produces greater processing gains for unique contexts than
for redundant contexts, as well as to compare the effects of
contextual diversity and word frequency on lexical decision
times in a more controlled setting. The contextual diversity
effects used to support PLN over rank-frequency models
have never been induced experimentally, perhaps due to the
fact that in natural languages, CD is highly confounded with
many other sources of statistical information (McDonald &
Shillcock, 2001). Thus, we used an artificial language
paradigm to independently vary CD and WF, and to assess
the relative contribution of each on response latency.

800

750

700

Method
650

Participants. Thirty-two undergraduate students at Indiana
University participated in the experiment for partial course
credit. Of these, eight were excluded from the final analysis
due to low accuracy on the lexical decision task (85% or
lower).

Contextual Uniqueness
Low
High

600

Low

High
Document Count

Materials. Participants were trained in an artificial “alien”
language referred to as Xaelon. The Xaelon lexicon
consisted of a set of twelve one-syllable pronounceable
nonwords selected from the Elexicon database (Balota, et
al., 2002), equated for number of phonemes, number of
letters, and orthographic neighborhood size. A set of twelve
foils, to serve as negative examples during the lexical
decision task, was selected in the same way. The nonwords
comprising the lexicon and the set of foils were selected so
as to exhibit no significant differences in bigram count
averages, bigram count sums (calculated by position as well
as overall), or mean lexical decision latencies from the
Elexicon database. To account for potential unforeseen
differences in the processability of the lexicon compared
with the foils, the set of nonwords that comprised the
lexicon was swapped with the set of nonwords comprising
the foils for each participant.
For each participant, a set of 450 training slides was
created. Each training slide consisted of a three-word
“sentence” in Xaelon placed just above an image of a scene

Figure 1. Lexical decision latency as a function of the
factorial combination of number of contexts (abscissa) and
the semantic uniqueness of those contexts (separate lines).
The repetition of a context shows the greatest benefit to
processing when the contexts repeated are more unique.

Discussion
This interaction suggests that words appearing in many
contexts are processed more quickly if the contexts are
highly unique, as would be expected by PLN. However,
semantic distinctiveness causes the largest reduction in LDT
only at high levels of contextual diversity. Thus, repetition
of a word appears to be most beneficial when the context
changes (cf. Verkoeijen, Rikers, & Schmidt, 2004). It also
suggests that when attempting to measure contextual
diversity, it is not enough to simply count the number of
different documents that a word appears in. Instead, one
269

trials, divided into 10 blocks of 45 images each. Training
slides appeared in random order, and each slide was
displayed for four seconds, with a one-second intertrial
interval.
Following the training trials, participants were confronted
with a surprise pseudo-lexical decision task in which they
were told that they would be presented with several stimuli,
some of which were words from the language that they had
just learned, and some which were not. They were asked to
press one key if the stimulus was part of the language they
had just learned, and another key if it was not. Instructions
stressed both speed and accuracy. Participants then
completed 288 test trials, divided into 18 blocks of 16 trials
each. Each trial consisted of a fixation cross for 500 ms, a
blank screen for 200 ms, and finally either a foil or Xaelon
word, which remained on the screen until the participant
pressed one of the response keys. Exactly 12 examples of
each Xaelon word and 12 examples of each foil were
presented to each participant during the lexical decision
task.

described by that sentence. Of the twelve words in the
Xaelon lexicon, four were designated as subject words, four
as object words, and four as locatives. Each subject word
corresponded to a different unfamiliar image (“Fribbles”)
retrieved from Tarr’s (2006) online repository of
experimental stimuli, each object word corresponded to a
different three-dimensional geometric shape, and each
locative corresponded to a different position that the subject
could be in relative to the object (above, below, to the left,
or to the right of the object). Which words corresponded to
which semantic designations were randomized for each
participant.

Results and Discussion
Participants performed quite well at the psuedo-lexicaldecision task (PLDT), with a mean accuracy of .88 (SE =
.02) across all target and foil trials. We set a stringent
accuracy criterion of 85%, which trimmed eight
participants. The mean accuracy of the above-threshold
participants was .94 (SE = .01). Latencies greater than 2.5
standard deviations from a participant’s mean were
removed; this resulted in 2.7% of latencies to be trimmed
from the analysis. Surprisingly, response latencies did not
differ as a function of part-of-speech (subject, locative,
object), F(2,28) = 0.11, ns.
The reaction time distributions for means were positively
skewed; hence, we report results here both from means and
medians for correct responses only. Both means and
medians show the same overall pattern of results. Figure 3
plots median response latency as a function of WF and CD.
The data were analyzed using a repeated-measures ANOVA
design. For medians, there was no significant main effects
of either WF or CD, but there was a marginally significant
WF*CD interaction effect, F(1,24) = 3.02, p ~ .09. Analysis
on mean response latencies were very similar, revealing no
significant main effects for either WF or CD, but a
significant frequency-by-diversity interaction F(1,24) =
4.37, p < .05.
Post-hoc analyses (Bonferroni correction) revealed that
the difference between the levels of CD at low WF was
insignificant, t(24) = -1.54, ns, however, the difference
between the levels of CD at high WF was statistically
reliable, t(24) = 2.11, p < .05. Further, PLDT latency did not
differ significantly between the levels of WF for low CD
items, t(24) = -1.67, ns. However, the decrease in PLDT
latency over WF for high CD was statistically significant,
t(24) = 2.06, p < .05. Increasing the repetitions of the word
from 45 to 180 produced no facilitation in PLDT if the
context did not change, but large processing savings were

Figure 2. Example of a training slide seen by participants
while learning the “alien” language Xaelon.
Finally, of the twelve Xaelon words, four were randomly
selected and crossed for a factorial combination of two
levels of WF (hi/low) and two levels of CD (hi/low). LowWF words appeared 45 times each in the training slides,
while high-WF words appeared 180 times each. Also,
whenever a low-CD word appeared, it always appeared in
the same semantic context (i.e., in the same sentence and
with the same image), whereas each high-CD word
appeared in eight different semantic contexts (i.e., it could
appear in any one of eight different sentences, each
juxtaposed with its corresponding image).
We selected nonwords and novel images so that
participants could not simply translate the artificial language
into English words for the subjects or objects; however, we
did not attempt to create novel locatives.
Procedure. Participants were asked to imagine that they
were explorers charged with the task of learning an alien
language called Xaelon. They were also advised that they
would see various scenes paired with Xaelon sentences that
described them, and that they would later be tested on their
knowledge of Xaelon. Participants next viewed 450 training
270

meanings, one would expect words to be learned most easily
when their immediate lexical contexts tend to be highly
similar to each other (Mintz, Newport & Bever, 2002).
When individuals encounter a word that they have not often
encountered before (e.g. a low-frequency word) in a context
that is very different from any context that they have
previously encountered it in, they may at first have
difficulty processing the rare word in this unexpected
context. However, for words that are encountered very
frequently in a large number of different contexts—that is,
words that one could reasonably expect to see in any
situation—it is perhaps not surprising that they should be
processed the most quickly in the unfamiliar context of
participating in a lexical decision experiment.
PLN was originally formulated as an interpretation of
evidence that contextual diversity, rather than word
frequency, best accounts for lexical processing differences
(Adelman et al. 2006). Thus, at first it may seem like the
fact that word frequency interacts with contextual diversity
should be a problem for this account. However, it actually
provides stronger evidence for PLN than was previously
available. This is because PLN does not require that
contextual diversity trump word frequency in all cases, but
states only that words more likely to be needed in memory
processes are processed more quickly. Intuitively, neither
high-frequency words that appear in redundant contexts nor
low-frequency words that appear in many contexts are
nearly as likely to be needed in memory processes at any
given time as are high-frequency words that appear in many
contexts. The results of both Experiment 1 and Experiment
2 therefore suggest that lexical processing is optimized for
precisely those words that are most likely to be required in
any given situation.

seen if the increase in frequency was accompanied by a
change in context.
680
670
660
650
640
630
620

Contextual Diversity
Low

610

High

600

Low

High
Frequency

Figure 3. Psuedo-lexical-decision latency (PLDT) in the
Xaelon task as a function of token repetition frequency and
contextual diversity.
Consistent with PLN (and Experiment 1), we find that
processing is facilitated for words appearing in a large
number of contexts (High-WF) which are highly
semantically distinct (High-CD). However, appearing in a
large number of redundant contexts (High-WF, Low-CD)
produced equivalent response latencies to a much lower
number of repetitions in the redundant context (Low-WF,
Low-CD).
This finding is a nice parallel to the results of our corpus
analysis in Experiment 1, in which repetition of the word
produced greater processing savings if the repetition was in
a more semantically distinct context rather than if the
repetition occurred in redundant contexts. If each sentence
in Experiment 2 is considered to be a different “document,”
the WF variable is equivalent to the DC variable in
Experiment 1, since no word was ever repeated within a
single Xaelon sentence. Likewise, the CD variable of
Experiment 2 maps nicely on to the SD value of Experiment
1: a “low” value for each indexes the fact that the
documents/sentences in which a word appears have high
word overlap (100% overlap in the case of Experiment 2),
whereas a “high” value indexes little word overlap across
contexts, indicating that the contexts in which a word
appears are highly semantically distinct.
From the results of Experiment 2, it appears that
contextual variability benefits processing for high-frequency
words, but that for low-frequency words, variability of
contexts neither facilitates nor inhibits processing. This
result is consistent with distributional accounts of child
language learning. If children rely on distributional
information when acquiring word-classes and word

General Discussion
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 provide a nice set of
converging evidence from both a mega-study (the corpus
analysis) and a controlled micro-study (the experimentally
induced artificial language). Both the mega and micro seem
to point to the same pattern of behavioral data: repetition of
a word produces greater processing savings if the repetition
is accompanied by a change in context. In the artificial
language experiment, in fact, if the increase in repetitions
was not accompanied by a change in context, then the
increased frequency produced no processing savings
whatsoever. Granted that we did not see the same pattern of
main effects between the two experiments, but these are
likely effects that unfold over a very large scale (in the
corpus analysis) and may require much more experience to
induce with the artificial language experiment. Nonetheless,
the interaction of repetition and contextual redundancy
found in both experiments is difficult to account for with
most existing models of word learning and semantic
organization.
Our findings corroborate evidence from others who have
studied PLN (Adelman et al., 2006; McDonald & Shillcock,
271

2001; Pexman et al., 2008) that context variability is
potentially a more important variable than is frequency in
word recognition and memory access. Further, these results
point towards a role for episodic learning in the semantic
representation of words. However, our measure of semantic
distinctiveness clearly demonstrates that it is not sufficient
to simply define contextual distinctiveness as the number of
contexts in which a word appears (as in Adelman, 2006)
but, rather, it is important to consider the semantic
uniqueness of those contexts when building metrics of word
access.
The results of these experiments are difficult to account
for with current models based on repetition-based learning,
and call for learning models that are sensitive to context and
shifts in attentional allocation when encoding an episode
dependent on how unique a new context is relative to
memory of contexts in which the word has been experienced
in the past. Models such as Wagenmakers et al.’s (2004)
REM-LD model that are sensitive to contextual variability
seem promising candidates based on these findings. In
addition, we point to a new co-occurrence based learning
model that creates a semantic representation similar to
Latent Semantic Analysis (Landauer & Dumais, 1997)
which can adapt its representation for a word based on fit to
previous context episodes stored in memory (Johns & Jones,
2008).

Johns, B. T., & Jones, M. N. (2008). Predicting wordnaming and lexical decision times from a semantic space
model. In V. Sloutsky, B. Love, and K. McRae (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Jones, M. N. & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114, 1-37.
Landauer, T. K. and Dumais, S. T. (1997) A solution to
Plato's problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2), 211-240.
McDonald, S. A. & Shillcock, R. C. (2001). Rethinking the
Word Frequency Effect: The neglected role of
distributional information in lexical processing. Language
and Speech, 44, 295-323.
Mintz, T. H., Newport, E. L., & Bever, T. G. (2002). The
distributional structure of grammatical categories in
speech to young children. Cognitive Science, 26. 393425.
Murray, W. S. and Forster, K. I. (2004) Serial mechanisms
in lexical access: the Rank Hypothesis. Psychological
Review, 111(3), 721-756.
Pexman, P. M., Hargreaves, I. S., Siakaluk, P. D., Bodner,
G. E., & Pope, J. (2008) The are many ways to be rich:
Effects of three measures of semantic richness on word
recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 161167.
Steyvers, M., & Malmberg, K. (2003). The effect of
normative context variability on recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 29(5), 760-766.
Tarr, M. J. (2006). Fribbles [Data file]. Available at the Tarr
Lab website,
http://titan.cog.brown.edu:8080/TarrLab/stimuli/novelobjects/fribbles.zip/view
Verkoeijen, P. P. J. L., Rikers, R. M. J. P., & Schmidt, H. G.
(2004). Detrimental influence of contextual change on
spacing effects in free recall. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 796800.
Wagenmakers, E. J., Steyvers, M., Raaijmakers, J. G. W.,
Shiffrin, R. M., van Rijn, H., & Zeelenberg, R. (2004). A
model for evidence accumulation in the lexical decision
task. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 332-367.
Wickens, D. D. (1987). The dual meanings of context:
Implications for research, theory, and applications. In D.
S. Gorfein & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Memory and
learning: The Ebbinghaus Centennial Conference.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Jason Dawson for assisting with
data collection, and Sun Ah Kim for developing the stimuli
used for the object words in Experiment 2.

References
Adelman, J. S., Brown, G. D. A., & Quesada, J. F. (2006).
Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines
word naming and lexical decision times. Psychological
Science, 17, 814–823.
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Neely, J. H.,
Nelson, D., Simpson, G. B., et al. (2002). The English
Lexicon Project: A web-based repository of descriptive
and behavioral measures for 40,481 English words and
nonwords. Available at http://elexicon.wustl.edu/,
Washington University.
Dennis, S. & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise
model of episodic word recognition. Psychological
Review, 108(2), 452-477.
Forster, K. I., & Chambers, S. M. (1973). Lexical access
and naming time. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12, 627-635.

272

