UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Counting Sheep Is a Good Way to Get to Sleep, but the Occasional Aardvark Will Wake You
Up: How a Salient Event Improves Performance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c8147pm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Veksler, Bella Z.
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Counting Sheep is a Good Way to Get to Sleep, but the Occasional Aardvark
Will Wake You Up: How a Salient Event Improves Performance
Bella Z. Veksler (zafrib@rpi.edu)
Wayne D. Gray (grayw@rpi.edu)

Department of Cognitive Science, 110 8th St.
Troy, NY 12180 USA
Abstract

attention begins to wander. You begin thinking about the
upcoming football game or what color to paint your living
room or, worse yet, you start dozing off. Now imagine that all
of a sudden, WHAM! Something unexpected happens that
grabs your attention so that you become engaged in the
lecture once more. This external stimulus is separable (not
integral) to the semantic content of the lecture or to the
current goals of task performance. Yet, somehow this
occasional aardvark thrusts itself into your attention and by so
doing manages to increase performance long after it has
vanished.
Prior work on vigilance decrements has established the
performance decline effect but has made little progress on
countering it. The current study begins an effort to determine
how to alleviate the waning attention that results from
prolonged time on monotonous tasks. We ask whether a small
and unexpected change in a stimulus occurring far into a long
monotonous task could somehow increase attention and
thereby reduce the vigilance decrement effect.

Sustaining attention is a problem many of us face in various
settings from the workplace to school. Sustaining attention is
often crucial for good performance. Vigilance decrement refers
to a decline in task performance as time on task increases. The
current study induces a vigilance decrement across 2000 trials
of a monotonous task. In this study each trial is composed of
one target and one distracter presented to the participant and the
participant’s goal is to determine if the target is above or below
the distracter. In the control condition, both stimuli are always
presented in black font. For the experimental condition, on trial
1200 and 1900 the target is presented in red font. There are no
other differences between conditions. This minor, task
irrelevant change suffices to reduce the vigilance decrement
relative to the control condition on all subsequent trials. We dub
this phenomenon the Aardvark Effect.
Keywords: vigilance, sustained attention, alertness,
performance, stimulus salience, oddball paradigm, boredom

Introduction
Sustaining attention in monotonous tasks is crucial in many
areas of the workplace and in school. Because often times
attention is fleeting, we would want to be able to formally
quantify those instances in which attention is waning. Along
the same lines, knowing which stimuli are capable of
attracting and sustaining one’s attention and improving
performance in vigilance-type tasks is crucial in many
domains.
The vigilance decrement for perceptual-motor detection
and discrimination tasks is well established by over a half
century of research (Bakan, 1955; Jerison & Pickett, 1963;
Mackworth, 1948). It is defined as the slowing of reaction
times and/or the decrease in accuracy over time on task. This
decrement typically occurs about 30-45 minutes into the task
(Mackworth, 1948) and is aggravated when the tasks are
especially monotonous and do not require a great deal of
cognitive processing (Adams, Humes, & Stenson, 1962;
Adams, Stenson, & Humes, 1961). There have been several
theories postulating why such a decrement occurs, citing
differences between controlled and automatic processing of
information, decreases in sensitivity or criterion changes as
per signal detection theory, decrease in motivation, and
fatigue (Fisk & Schneider, 1981; Frankmann & Adams, 1962;
Jerison & Pickett, 1963; Pattyn & Soetens; Scott, 1957;
Williges, 1969).
The problem of vigilance decrement can be extended to
real world tasks that are not typically thought of as vigilance
tasks. For example, imagine you are sitting in class listening
to the lecture and after twenty-five to thirty minutes your

Background
Much of the work on vigilance began in the mid-1900’s,
driven, as much research is, by an applied military problem
(Mackworth, 1948). Radar operators often times had to
monitor radar screens for critical signals for many hours
without rest. It was found that their performance in detecting
critical signals worsened the more time they spent on task.
Researchers were called in to study the optimal time on task
that radar operators could sustain a passable level of detection
performance.
Mackworth approached this problem by manipulating the
duration any one operator spent on task. The task was simply
to monitor a clock hand that rotated 360 degrees every
minute, like a second hand typically does. The critical signal
to be detected was the movement of the hand two clicks
instead of the usual one per second. This double movement
occurred 12 times every 20 minutes. He found that operators
who did the study in half-hour spells with half hour breaks
over the 2 hour period exhibited less decrement that those
who remained on vigil the full two hours. This suggests,
perhaps not surprisingly, that injecting breaks into a
monotonous vigilance task helps maintain alertness.
Mackworth ran another condition in which participants on
a 2-hour vigil of watching the clock also had to monitor a
telephone message that would give them additional
instructions. In fact, only once did the phone ring – at the end
of the first hour of watch – and the message was to “do even
better for the rest of the test.” The finding for this group was

637

Design

that participants declined in detection performance over the
first hour but once they heard the phone message they
improved markedly. Of course it is difficult to say why this
improvement occurred. Participants may have been alerted to
attention by the phone ring or they may have become more
motivated given the instructions of the experimenter.
Regardless of the reason, it is evident that an unexpected
stimulus, one clearly separable from the goals of the task,
resulted in an improvement in performance.
Other researchers have manipulated the degree of the
vigilance decrement by adding a concurrent secondary task,
unrelated to the primary task. Not only does the secondary
task increase performance in the vigilance task but it also
results in the underestimation of the duration of the vigilance
task and the report that it was “interesting” (Smith, Lucaccini,
Groth, & Lyman, 1966). Allowing participants to engage in
non-current secondary tasks such as 5 minutes of vigorous
physical exercise, solving anagrams, or sensory deprivation
after every half hour on the vigilance task also eliminate the
vigilance decrement (Bevan, Avant, & Lankford, 1967).
Furthermore, some researchers have found gender
differences during particular types of prolonged tasks
(Dittmar, Warm, Dember, & Ricks, 1993; McIntosh, 2006;
Prinzel & Freeman, 1997), whereas others do not (Tolin &
Fisher, 1974; Waag, Halcomb, & Tyler, 1973). As an added
analysis, we will look at whether there are differences in
performance between males and females.
As this review shows, when intrinsic motivation wanes
there are many ways in countering the vigilance decrement
that are external to the task itself. Hence, adding a secondary
task, providing breaks for exercise or sensory deprivation, all
serve (somehow) to refresh participants so that performance
on the primary task increases.

There was one between-subjects independent variable
producing two conditions. The variable was whether or not
there were two oddball trials during the experiment. An
oddball trial was defined as one in which the target letter
appeared in red instead of the usual black. In all other trials,
both the target and the distracter letters appeared in black
against a white background (Figure 1).

Materials
The experiment was presented using a computer running Mac
OS X on a 17” flat-panel LCD monitor set to 1024x768
resolution. The software used for the experiment was written
in LispWorks 5.0. Each trial consisted of two letters in Arial
size 100 font presented in the middle of the screen, one above
the other such that there was a 2° separation between the two
letters. Since participants were eye tracked during this study,
the separation between letters was crucial to ensure that we
could properly assign object information to fixation data. An
LC Technologies eye tracker was used to collect eye data
during the study at a rate of 120Hz. Participants were asked to
keep their chin in a chinrest in order to ensure the eye data
collected would be accurate. Current analyses do not include
the eye data, however, future work will incorporate this data
as a possible physiological measure of sustained attention. In
particular, pupil diameter will be utilized as a measure of
surprise during the oddball trial.

Procedure
Each participant was run separately. There was considerable
effort given to counterbalancing the time of day participants
from the two conditions were run. All participants were run in
hour-long slots between the hours of 9am and 5pm. Each
condition had at least one participant in each of the eight time
slots (i.e., 9am, 10am . . . 4pm), in an attempt to control for
any circadian rhythm effects in attention. Additionally, every
effort was made to ensure that no extraneous ambient noise
was present when participants were run as any outside noise
could have served as a salient stimulus confounding the data
we collected. For the same reason, participants were asked to
turn off their cell phones for the duration of the study.
The experiment consisted of 2000 forced-response
consecutive trials. On each trial, two letters appeared on the
screen, one above the other and participants had to depress
one of two response keys (“T” or “B”) corresponding to the
location of the target letter on the screen (top or bottom).
Participants were told prior to the beginning of the task that
target letters were one of A, B, or C. One of these three letters
was present on each trial and appeared as either the top or the
bottom letter. The distracter letters were all pulled from the
first 13 letters of the alphabet. There was an 800-millisecond
delay between the response of one trial and the presentation
of the next trial during which time there appeared a blue
crosshair to sustain visual attention on the center of the
screen.
After signing informed consent forms, going through the
instructions on how to respond and being calibrated to be eye

The Aardvark Effect
The current study attempts to replicate the vigilance
decrement and to also show that attention can be incremented
by small changes to task stimuli in cases in which these
changes are irrelevant to task performance, the Aardvark
Effect. Furthermore, the stimulus we use is small and the
change is fleeting. The hypothesis is that the introduction of a
rather moderate and goal-irrelevant change in the task will
increment attention and improve performance in subsequent
trials as compared to the control condition.

Method
We used a simple monotonous task lasting about 45 minutes.
The manipulation was the introduction of oddball critical
trials that we hypothesized would draw participants’ attention
back to the task and therefore result in the maintenance of a
higher level of performance than controls.

Participants
A total of 48 undergraduates (17 females and 31 males) from
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute participated in the study. The
average age was 19.5 years (SD=1.4). Students received extra
credit for their participation.

638

tracked, each participant performed the task of responding to
each of the 2000 trials. In the control condition, participants
simply saw 2000 consecutive trials of target and distracter
letters all presented in black font. In the experimental
condition, on the 1200th and on the 1900th trials, roughly 25
and 40 minutes, respectively, into the experiment, the target
letter in the trial appeared in red rather than in the usual black.
Note that participants were not aware that one of the letters
would change color during the study. Nothing else varied
between the two conditions.

condition reported that they did not notice anything. We also
asked participants, if they did notice something, whether they
felt it affected their performance. Only two reported that they
felt the red letter made them more alert on the critical and
several subsequent trials. Other participants, especially those
in the control condition, reported feeling bored and disliking
the task.

Trend in Accuracy
Accuracy was measured by how many trials each participant
answered correctly. That is, when the target letter was the top
letter, the participant keyed in “T”, whereas when the target
letter was the bottom letter, the participant keyed in “B.” We
were most interested in how performance varied with respect
to the critical trials.
Preliminary analyses were done with respect to the general
trend of performance between the two conditions as can be
seen in Figure 2. The data has been binned by 100 trials and
the oddball critical trials occurred in trial bin 12 and trial bin
19 as indicated by the dotted lines on the graph.
Trial accuracy before and after the first critical trial was
compared between the two conditions. To have an equal
number of trials, 800 trials prior to the first critical trial were
compared to the 800 trials after the first critical trial. A twofactor independent measures ANOVA on the effects of
Condition and Trial Type (before or after the first critical
trial) revealed a significant main effect of Condition, F(1,
3196) = 109.65, p < 0.01, a significant main effect of Trial
Type, F(1, 3196) = 173.24, p < 0.01, and a significant
Condition x Trial Type interaction, F(1, 3196) = 22.00 p <
0.01.

Figure 1: Experimental Stimuli

Results
Given the delicate nature of the phenomenon we are trying to
study, care had to be taken to make sure no extraneous
sources of stimulation occurred during the experiment. One
participant was heard singing during the study, resulting in
the exclusion of her data as well as that of two other
participants who were run at the same time (in separate, but
adjacent rooms) as they may have heard her. Several other
participants had to be excluded due to a loud radiator in one
experimental room and other unforeseen circumstances
arising during the study. Consequently, only data from 36
participants (11 females and 25 males) was used for the
analysis, 18 in each condition.

Pre- and Post-Experimental Questions

Figure 2: Trend in Accuracy Binned by 100 Trials. Error bars
signify standard error.

Prior to doing the experiment, participants were asked to rate
their video game experience. We did this to rule out any
attention-based confound associated with video game
playing. However, we found that participant-reported video
game experience was not correlated with overall performance
on the task.
After completing the study, we asked all participants
whether they had noticed anything strange during the study.
All participants in the experimental condition responded that
they noticed the red letter. Participants in the control

Having done this meta-analysis, we compared accuracy
with respect to the individual critical trials. Since there was
considerable variability in performance throughout the 2000
trials and since the most number of trials after a critical trial
was 100 (the second critical trial was the 1900th), for the
present analysis we found it crucial to look at a window of
100 trials around the critical trials. In particular we ran an
analysis on the 100 trials before each critical trial versus 100
trials immediately following each critical trial (Figure 3).

639

A two-factor independent measures ANOVA on the effects
of Condition and Gender revealed a significant main effect of
Condition, F(1, 7996) = 61.10, p < 0.01, a significant main
effect of Gender, F(1, 7996) = 119.85, p < 0.01, and a
significant Condition x Gender interaction, F(1, 7996) =
70.25, p < 0.01.

Figure 3: Accuracy Comparison Between Conditions Around
the Critical Trials. Error bars signify standard error.
Trial 1200. A two-factor independent measures ANOVA
on the effects of Condition and Trial Type (100 trials before
or after the first critical trial, trial 1200) revealed a significant
main effect of Condition, F(1, 396) = 9.84, p < 0.01, no effect
of Trial Type, F(1, 396) = 0.06, p = 0.81, and no interaction,
F(1, 396) = 1.18, p = 0.28.
Planned comparisons showed that there was no significant
difference on the 100 trials before the first critical trial
between the control condition (M = 94.83, SE = 0.45) and the
experimental condition (M = 95.78, SE = 0.44), t(198)two-tail =
-1.50, p = 0.14. However, there was a significant difference
100 trials after the critical trial between the control condition
(M = 94.22, SE = 0.5) and the experimental condition (M =
96.17, SE = 0.45), t(198)two-tail = -2.89, p < 0.01.
Trial 1900. A two-factor independent measures ANOVA
on the effects of Condition and Trial Type (100 trials before
or after the second critical trial, trial 1900) revealed a
significant main effect of Condition, F(1,396) = 63.18, p <
0.01, a significant main effect of Trial Type, F(1, 396) =
11.77, p < 0.01, and the Condition x Trial Type interaction
was approaching significance, F(1, 396) = 3.82, p = 0.05.
A planned comparison of the 100 trials before the second
critical trial showed a significant difference between the
control condition (M = 89.78, SE = 0.71) and the
experimental condition (M = 93.61, SE = 0.56), t(187.93)twotail = -4.24, p < 0.01. This difference had been developing as a
result of the first critical trial. In addition, there was a
significant difference 100 trials after the second critical trial
between the control condition (M = 86.33, SE = 0.72) and the
experimental condition (M = 92.67, SE = 0.55), t(185.87)twotail = -7, p < 0.01.

Figure 4: Overall Accuracy Across all 2000 Trials By
Gender. Error bars signify standard error.
There was no significant difference for females between
the control (M = 96.07, SE = 0.17) and experimental
conditions (M = 95.97, SE = 0.20), t(3918.87)two-tail = 0.36, p
= 0.72. However, there was a significant difference for males
between the control (M = 92.76, SE = 0.17) and experimental
conditions (M = 95.53, SE = 0.13), t(3727.51)two-tail = -12.82, p
< 0.01.
A comparison of the control condition showed a significant
difference between females (M = 96.07, SE = 0.17) and males
(M = 92.76, SE = 0.17), t(3998)two-tail = 13.52, p < 0.01. A
comparison of the experimental condition showed no
significant difference between females (M = 95.97, SE =
0.20) and males (M = 95.53, SE = 0.13), t(3438.65)two-tail =
1.84, p = 0.07.

Discussion
We hypothesized that the insertion of a conspicuous, but
goal-irrelevant, stimulus during our monotonous task would
increase performance by alleviating the decrement of
sustained attention. The study we ran presented participants
with a small stimulus change that was completely irrelevant
to task performance – the color of one target on trials 1200
and 1900. We observed that although there still was a
decrement in accuracy as time on task increased, the
decrement was markedly smaller for the color-change group.
Performance after the first critical trial (trial 1200), showed
a large decline for the control group whereas, only a small
decline was observed for the experimental group. The
difference between the two conditions 100 trials after the first
critical trial is about 1.75%. What is perhaps more impressive
is that the decline in accuracy, the slope with which accuracy
falls as a function of time, becomes different after the first
critical trial (Figure 2). The slope of the accuracy curve is
considerably steeper for the control group as compared to the
experimental group.

Gender Differences
Due to the mixed results of previous research on gender
differences in prolonged tasks, we further analyzed the data
with respect to gender. Figure 4 depicts the overall accuracy
across the entire 2000 trials as a function of condition. These
analyses are preliminary as we had an unequal number of
males and females participating and future studies will
remove this confound (Control: 6 females and 12 males;
Experimental: 5 females and 13 males).

640

Performance after the second critical trial again showed a
large decline for the control group with no significant decline
for the experimental group. The difference between the two
groups by the end of the study is about 5.72%. This suggests
that our manipulation of introducing the salient stimulus did
indeed alleviate the performance decrement and resulted in
5.72% more accurate responses at the conclusion of the
vigilance task.
A further analysis with respect to gender suggested that
males benefited considerably more from the introduction of
the conspicuous stimulus, whereas females maintained the
same level of performance regardless of condition. However,
this unexpected finding needs to be replicated in a study that
includes equal numbers of participants of both genders. For
example, others have found that depending on the type of task
– spatial or temporal, there is a difference in decrement
between the two genders (Dittmar et al., 1993). Taken
together with prior research, the preliminary findings from
our study suggest that when it comes to alleviating the
vigilance decrement we may need to consider several factors
with respect to who is performing the task, what time of day,
what type of task it is, etc.

alertness is necessary for good performance but is difficult to
sustain.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported, in part, by grants from the Office of
Naval Research (N000140710033) and the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research (FA9550-06-1-0074) to Wayne Gray.

References
Adams, J. A., Humes, J. M., & Stenson, H. H. (1962).
Monitoring of complex visual displays: III. Effects of
repeated sessions on human vigilance. Human Factors,
4(3), 149.
Adams, J. A., Stenson, H. H., & Humes, J. M. (1961).
Monitoring of complex visual displays: II. Effects of
visual load and response complexity on human vigilance.
Human Factors, 3(4), 213.
Bakan, P. (1955). Discrimination decrement as a function of
time in a prolonged vigil. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50(6), 387.
Bevan, W., Avant, L. L., & Lankford, H. G. (1967). Influence
of Interpolated Periods of Activity and Inactivity Upon
the Vigilance Decrement. Journal of Applied Psychology,
51(4), 352-356.
Dittmar, M. L., Warm, J. S., Dember, W. N., & Ricks, D. F.
(1993). Sex differences in vigilance performance and
perceived workload. Journal of General Psychology,
120(3), 309.
Fisk, A. D., & Schneider, W. (1981). Control and automatic
processing during tasks requiring sustained attention: A
new approach to vigilance. Human Factors, 23(6), 737.
Frankmann, J. P., & Adams, J. A. (1962). Theories of
Vigilance. Psychological Bulletin, 59(4), 257-272.
Jerison, H. J., & Pickett, R. M. (1963). Vigilance: A review
and re-evaluation. Human Factors, 5(3), 211.
Mackworth, N. H. (1948). The breakdown of vigilance during
prolonged visual search. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 1, 6.
McIntosh, E. G. (2006). Sex differences in boredom
proneness. Psychological Reports, 98(3), 625-626.
Pattyn, N., & Soetens, E. Endogenous and Exogenous
Attention in Vigilance Tasks.
Prinzel, L. J., & Freeman, F. G. (1997). Task-specific sex
differences in vigilance performance: Subjective workload
and boredom. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85(3), 11951202.
Scott, T. H. (1957). Literature review of the intellectual
effects of perceptual isolation. Dept. Nat. Def. Rep.(66),
iii.
Smith, R. L., Lucaccini, L. F., Groth, H., & Lyman, J. (1966).
Effects of anticipatory alerting signals and a compatible
secondary task on vigilance performance. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 50(3), 240.
Tolin, P., & Fisher, P. G. (1974). Sex-Differences and Effects
of Irrelevant Auditory-Stimulation on Performance of a
Visual Vigilance Task. Perceptual and Motor Skills,
39(3), 1255-1262.

Conclusions and Future Directions
The current work represents an attempt to decrease
performance decrements often observed in prolonged, fairly
easy tasks. We achieved this effect by introducing a small
change in one of the stimuli presented to participants –
irrelevant to the actual task.
Our results showed that drastic measures such as sounding
a loud truck horn or making participants do a secondary
problem-solving task are not required to counter the
performance decrement. This fairly simple and meaningless
change, simply displaying one letter in red as opposed to the
usual black, sufficed to maintain performance 5.72% above
controls.
The key here is that the red letter served as a conspicuous
and salient cue that drew participants’ attention and alertness
to the task. Regardless of whether they themselves felt they
improved their performance after seeing the red letter, their
decline was considerably shallower than controls. The
aardvark (red letter) among sheep (black letters) alerted
participants enough to sustain performance.
Future studies will address whether the intriguing gender
differences we found are indeed real as this may indicate that
varied methods may need to be employed to counter the
vigilance decrement across the genders. Furthermore, the
current task was used because it was the simplest and most
mindless that we could think of to have our participants do.
Further studies would have to investigate other types of tasks,
perhaps using different modalities.
One final and crucial extension of the current work will be
to operationally define the degree of conspicuity or salience
required of the stimulus to sufficiently alleviate the
decrement. The applicability of this work would be
tremendous in many domains – especially educational and
many monotonous work settings where the maintenance or

641

Waag, W. L., Halcomb, C. G., & Tyler, D. M. (1973). Sex
differences in monitoring performance. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 58(2), 272.

Williges, R. C. (1969). Within-session Criterion Changes
Compared to an Ideal Observer Criterion in a Visual
Monitoring Task. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
81(1), 61-66.

642

