UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Crossed Hands Curve Saccades: Multisensory Dynamics in Saccade Trajectories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6v1636mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Emberson, Lauren L.
Weiss, Rebecca J.
Barbosa, Adriano
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Crossed Hands Curve Saccades: Multisensory Dynamics in Saccade Trajectories
Lauren L. Emberson (lle7@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
211 Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA

Rebecca J. Weiss (rjweiss@mit.edu)
Engineering Systems Division, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave. Building E40-371, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA

Adriano V. Barbosa (adriano.vilela@gmail.com)
Eric Vatikiotis-Bateson (evb@interchange.ubc.ca)
Linguistics Department, University of British Columbia
Buchanan E-270, 1866 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada

Michael J. Spivey (spivey@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University
211 Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
Abstract

reports, the crossed-hand effect has been demonstrated to be
a robust phenomenon (Shore, Spry, & Spence, 2002). In
addition to decrements of tactile processing, crossing one’s
hands has been shown to affect multisensory processing in
spatial (see Maravita, Spence, & Driver, 2003 for a review)
and non-spatial tasks (Holmes, Sanabria, Calvert, & Spence,
2006). The crossed-hand effect may be related to the
perception-action interface where perception is goaldirected and action-motivated (Hommel et al., 2001).
Consistent with this view, crossed-tool effects have been
observed where uncrossed hands yielding tools that cross
the midline result in similar performance decrements to the
crossed-hand effect (Maravita et al., 2002).
Thus, the process of moving the right hand into left space
and vice versa has a diverse and widespread effect on
perceptual processing and may be related to the perceptionaction interface. However, studies to date have not
examined on-line patterns of behavior which may provide a
dynamic view into processing differences under crossedhand conditions. The present study is the first to expand
the multisensory effects of crossed-hand phenomena into
this dynamic framework by examining the effect of crossedhand stimulation on saccade trajectories.
In the last dozen years, a variety of studies have provided
evidence that eye movements are a rich and informative
measure of continuous cognitive activity (Spivey & Dale,
2006). Patterns of eye movements have revealed the
temporal dynamics of cognitive processes in speech
perception (McMurray, Tanenhaus, & Aslin, 2002), spoken
word recognition (Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus,
1998), syntactic processing (Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton,
Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), visual search (Zelinsky &
Sheinberg, 1997), visual memory (Richardson & Spivey,
2000) and even problem solving (Grant & Spivey, 2003).
However, the majority of such studies have focused on a
small subset of eye activity. Natural eye activity is
characterized by cycles of variable fixation on specific
objects and seemingly ballistic saccades, or large

Crossing one’s hands across the midline can interfere with
multisensory processing. The current experiment examines
this effect in a dynamic framework. Participants were asked
to saccade to visual targets in the presence of a manual tactile
distraction on the same or opposite side of the target and with
hands crossed or uncrossed. Trajectories of the resulting
visual saccades were analyzed for curvature. While spatially
incongruent trials in an uncrossed position resulted in
marginal saccade curvature, the crossed hand condition
caused significant curvature when compared to control trials
regardless of spatial configuration. Thus, the current study
provides evidence that the role of sensory integration in eye
movement dynamics is modulated by relative positioning of
the hands. Moreover, the findings indicate that saccades can
deviate in the presence of crossed-hand stimulation regardless
of the spatial configuration of the trial. These results provide
an initial link between known multisensory phenomena and
saccade trajectories.
Keywords: Embodiment; Saccade trajectories; Multisensory
processing; Tactile; Body Position; Crossed hands;
Dynamical cognition.

Introduction
We are situated in a complex and multisensory world.
While vision is a key source of information, gathering
information quickly and promiscuously from our
surroundings, the selection of eye movements is mediated
by neural regions associated with multisensory integration.
Thus, one should expect that saccade trajectories to visual
targets can be influenced by information from other
modalities. The current study investigates the influence of
non-visual information on eye movements by examining the
effect of body-position and tactile information on saccade
trajectories.
In the 19th century, it was reported that crossing one’s
hands across the midline leads to decrements in temporal
processing of tactile stimuli compared to processing in an
uncrossed position (Drew, 1896). Ever since early anecdotal

369

movements, between objects (Schall, 1995). While the
above studies have focused on patterns of fixation, a variety
of recent studies have examined influences on saccade
trajectories that link these patterns of fixation. This work
has demonstrated that saccade trajectories are influenced by
the presence of information in the environment (e.g. Doyle
& Walker, 2001) as well as a result of remembered
information (Theeuwes, Olivers, & Chizk, 2005); saccades
to visual targets have also been shown to curve in the
presence of both auditory and tactile distractors (Doyle &
Walker, 2002). Saccade trajectories can deviate from
straight lines in a variety of tasks (see Van der Stigchel,
Meeter, & Theeuwes, 2006 for a review). Thus, Van der
Stigchel et al. (2006) suggest that a reasonable analogy for
saccade trajectories is not like a ballistic missile, as
previously thought, but more similar to a flight path of a
plane. In this analogy, the start and end points of the path
are fixed, however, the trajectory between these points can
experience deviations depending on the environment such as
airplane traffic or weather conditions.
This analogy
emphasizes that despite lasting less than a hundred
milliseconds saccade trajectories are dynamic and
permeable to external influences much like fixation patterns.
The current experiment applies this dynamic perspective
to the study of the crossed hand phenomenon by examining
the effect of task-irrelevant stimulation of either crossed or
uncrossed hands on saccades trajectories to visual targets.
One previous study demonstrated that saccade trajectories
could be affected by a crossed hand position. Groh and
Sparks (1996) asked participants to saccade to
somatosensory targets on their hands while in a crossed or
uncrossed position. Saccades to these manual targets
deviated towards the uncrossed position, e.g. saccades to a
right hand crossed into left space curved towards the right
despite the left location of the hand. However, in the
current experiments, participants are asked to saccade to
visual targets not to somatosensory targets as in Groh and
Sparks (1996). Thus, the tactile information is the distractor
rather than the target. Previous research has shown that
saccade trajectories deviate in the presence of tactile
distractors to uncrossed hands (Doyle & Walker, 2002).
However, given the robust effects of the crossed hand
position on processing, we predict that tactile stimulation to
crossed hands will result in more curvature to visual targets
than tactile stimulation when in the uncrossed position

Figure 1: The current trial depicts a spatially congruent,
uncrossed hand trial, where there is simultaneous
stimulation to the left, uncrossed hand while the
participant saccades to the left visual target.

Materials
Visual materials consisting of a fixation cross and visual
targets were presented on a 15 in. monitor at a resolution of
1280 by 1080 pixels. Both the fixation cross and the visual
target were white against a black background. The fixation
cross measured 1.2 cm2 and the visual target was a circle 1.2
cm in diameter. Vibro-tactile devices provided tactile
stimulation well above threshold for each participant. The
vibro-tactile devices were 2 cm in diameter. Since only one
hand received tactile stimulation for each trial, each device
was attached to foam hand-rests (consisting of three
individual layers of foam) in order to prevent any potential
conduction of vibrations to the non-stimulated hand.
Experiment Builder (SR Research Ltd., Mississauga,
Ontario, Canada) controlled the visual and vibro-tactile
stimulation. A chin rest was utilitzed for all participants.
The chin rest was 40 cm from the monitor and centered.
After participants were seated, the distance of the vibrotactile devices and their foam hand-rests were adjusted to
comfortable arm distance. While the distance of the vibrotactile devices and their rests depended on arm length of
each participant, the devices were always 50 cm apart and
centered in front of the monitor.
To cover any noise produced by the vibro-tactile
stimulation, participants wore foam earplugs and
headphones playing auditory noise. The noise consisted of
layers of several conversations in multiple languages
repeated on loop (Vatikiotis-Bateson et al., 1998).

Methods
Participants
Eight participants (6F, M = 24.4; SD = 4.7) were recruited
to participate for $10/hour at the University of British
Columbia. All participants had self-reported normal or
corrected to normal vision and no known neurological
disorders. Critical for the current study, all participants
reported right hand dominance. Ethical approval for this
study was granted by the Clinical Research Ethics Board at
the University of British Columbia.

Procedure
Eye Position Recording horizontal (x) and vertical (y)
motions as well as pupil size for the left eye were recorded
at 250Hz using the Eyelink II, a head-mounted, corneal
infrared eye tracking system
(SR Research Ltd.,
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). This eye tracking system

370

accurately measures eye position to 0.01 degrees given these
recording parameters. Eye position was calibrated using
EyeLink II software before the beginning of the experiment
and after every 16 trials. In addition, a drift correction
procedure was performed after each trial.

pixel boundary and fixation criteria. Fixations were defined
as changes of less than 10 pixels in either the Horizontal (x)
or Vertical (y) direction within 16ms.

Experimental There were two possible visual targets (left
and right). These targets were always presented in the same
locations. In addition, the hand on the left hand-rest or the
hand on the right hand-rest received stimulation for each
trial. Participants were instructed to place the vibro-tactile
device on their index and middle finger tips. Tactile
stimulation was never delivered to both hands
simultaneously during a trial. Thus, there were four possible
trial types (L/R Target x L/R Tactile Stimulation) within
each condition (crossed or uncrossed hand positions).
Twenty (20) trials of each type were presented in random
order within tactile/body position condition: hands crossed
and hands uncrossed. In the uncrossed-hands condition,
participants placed their right hand on the right hand-rest
and the left hand on the left hand-rest. In the crossed- hands
condition, participants were instructed to place their right
hand on the left hand rest and their left hand on the right
hand rest. All 80 trials were completed in one condition
(crossed or uncrossed-hands) before moving onto the other
condition with the order of conditions counter-balanced
across participants. See Figure 2 for schematic of trial types
and hand position conditions for the left target for both the
crossed and uncrossed-hands conditions.
A trial commenced with fixation of the fixation cross.
The fixation cross was presented for a variable duration
between 1,000 and 1,500ms as in Groh and Sparks (1996).
Participants were asked to maintain fixation until the
fixation cross disappeared at which time either the left or
right target appeared and tactile stimulation commenced.
Participants were instructed to move their eyes as quickly
and rapidly as possible to the visual target. The visual target
and the tactile stimulation were presented until participants
successfully fixated on the visual target within 100 pixels.
After successful fixation of the visual target, participants
completed a drift correction procedure before beginning a
new trial. After completing 16 trials, participants were
given a self-timed break.

Figure 2a: Spatially incongruent, uncrossed trial to the left
visual target.

Figure 2b: Spatially congruent, crossed hand trial, where the
right hand is in left space while the participant saccades to
the left visual target.

Analysis of Eye Movements
After recording, time points in addition to horizontal (x) and
vertical (y) positions were exported using SR Research
analysis software and converted to ASCII files using the SR
Research Toolbox (Cornelissen, Peters, & Palmer, 2002)
using MATLAB (The Mathworks Guide, M.R. Inc., Natick,
MA, 1998). The remaining analysis took place in
MATLAB.
Recorded eye positions and their time points were
separated by tactile condition first (crossed vs. uncrossed
hands) then by trial type (e.g. left visual target and left
tactile stimulation). Eye movement trajectories from the
fixation cross to the visual target were extracted using a

Figure 2c: Spatially incongruent, crossed hand trial, where
the left hand is in right space while the participant saccades
to the left visual target.

371

Figure 3: At left, all saccades for a single subject to the left target with tactile stimulation of right hand crossed into left space.
At right, all saccades for a single subject to the right target with tactile stimulation of left hand crossed into right space.
Average saccade in bold.

Figure 4: At left, deviations of distractor trials to left visual target.
At right, deviations of distractor trials to the right visual target.
In order to measure deviation in continuous saccades to
the correct target, strict criteria were used to exclude noncontinuous eye movement data. Eye movements that did
not start on the fixation cross or end on the target (within
100 pixels) were excluded from analysis. In addition, eye
movements that traveled to or began in the direction of the
incorrect target were excluded. Saccades that fit either of
these criteria were classified as “erroneous”. Eye
movements from the fixation to the target that included at
least one fixation, as defined by the category above, were
classified as “multiple saccades”. Finally, eye movements
that were missing a large number of data points were
labeled as “blinks”. The above categories of eye movements
were excluded from further analysis.
Remaining eye movements were analyzed for both the
degree of deviation or curvature as well as the direction of
curvature. In order to measure the degree of curvature, the
initial time point of the saccade (start point) and the final
fixation on the target (end point) were determined for each
saccade. A straight trajectory of 100 time points was
constructed for each pair of start and end points. For each
time point during the saccade trajectory, the Euclidean
distance to the nearest straight line co-ordinate was
computed in order to determine the magnitude of deviation

per time point. Leftward deviations were given a positive
value and rightward deviations were given a negative value.
Deviations from a straight trajectory were determined for
every time point in each saccade. Deviations were averaged
for each time point within participants and then across
participants. In addition, the maximum deviation of a single
time point was determined for each saccade. Deviations
were determined and averaged for each trial type in each
condition separately. Afterwards, these deviations were
compared to the control condition.
The control condition of uncrossed hands and spatially
congruent visual and tactile information was compared to
performance in the other distractor conditions, where either
tactile stimulation was spatially incongruent with the
position of the visual target in the uncrossed hand condition
(e.g. left visual target and stimulation to the right hand in
right space) OR in any of the crossed hand conditions (e.g
right visual target and tactile stimulation of the left hand
crossed into the right side of space). See Figure 2 for a
schematic of the distractor trials.

372

Results

Discussion

Prior to the analysis, erroneous eye movements were
excluded according to criteria described above. Application
of these criteria led to the exclusion of 35% of trials (452
out of 1280) in the following categories: erroneous, 53%;
multiple saccades, 44%; blinks, 3%. Most (57%) of the
excluded saccades were to the left target. Figure 3 presents
all analyzed saccades for a single participant in two
conditions.
The deviations of the remaining eye movements were
analyzed relative to the control trials of congruent
stimulation to uncrossed hands. Deviations of the distractor
trials were compared to the control trials for both the right
and left visual targets (Figure 4). Analyses of deviation of
distractor trials from control trials were pooled for every 7
eye position samples, segmenting the duration of the
saccades roughly into four quartiles. Thus differences in
deviation were analyzed for saccades during the following
time windows: 4ms to 28ms; 32ms to 56ms; 60ms to 84ms;
and 88ms to 112ms.
For the left visual target (Figure 4, left panel), the only
significant deviation from the control trials was in the
second time window (32ms to 56ms). In this time window,
there is significant deviation of both trials of the crossedhand condition from the control trials (left target with right
hand stimulated in left space, spatially congruent: t(8)= 2.777; p=0.027; left target with left hand stimulated in right
space: t(8)= -2.550; p=0.038). The difference between
control and distractor trials for the uncrossed-hand condition
was only marginally significant (left target with right hand
stimulated in right space: t(8)= -2.141; p=0.07).
For the right visual target (Figure 4, right panel), there
was no significant or marginally significant deviation of any
distractor condition from the control condition in any time
window (right target with left hand stimulated in left space:
t(8)= 0.297; p=0.774; right target with right hand stimulated
in left space: t(8)= 0.145; p=0.889; right target with left
hand stimulated in right space: t(8)=0.008; p=0.994).
Saccades to the left target from 32 to 56ms after saccade
onset during stimulation to the left hand crossed over into
right space yielded the maximum deviation of all saccades
with an average maximum deviation of 66.8 pixels,
21.29mm or 0.05 degrees of visual angle. Maximum
deivation in this time period was similar in the other crossed
hand condition (stimulation of right hand crossed into left
space: 58.6 pixels, 18.68mm, or 0.05 degrees of visual
angle). The maximum deviation in the control condition
was 18.6 pixels, 5.9mm, or 0.015 degrees of visual angle.
Significant curvature of less than a degree of visual angle
has be previously reported (see Theeuwes, Olivers, &
Chizk, 2005)

We provide evidence that irrelevant tactile stimulation
applied to crossed hands can result in significant saccade
curvature regardless of the relative spatial congruence of the
tactile and visual information.
Therefore, the current
results indicate that tactile stimulation to crossed hands can
have a significant effect on saccade trajectory beyond
spatial distraction. It has been well documented that
crossed-hand stimulation results in behavioral decrements in
multisensory tasks (see Maravita et al., 2003), the current
work is an initial link between this known multisensory
illusions and saccade trajectories. Further work is necessary
to more directly link deviations in saccade trajectories and
these behavioral deficits.
Consistent with previous results (Doyle & Walker, 2002),
the current study finds that spatially incongruent tactile
stimulation of the uncrossed hand results in marginally
significant curvature away from the irrelevant tactile
information. Also consistent with Doyle & Walker (2002),
we report significant curvature in leftward saccades only.
In addition to replicating previous work, the current study
expands understanding of the multisensory contribution to
saccade dynamics.
In addition to reporting saccade
curvature away from distractors in an uncrossed-hand
condition, there is significant curvature of saccades to the
left visual target in the crossed-hand condition in both
spatially congruent and incongruent trials (see Figure 4).
As seen in Figure 2, stimulation of the left hand on the right
side of space while participants saccade to a left target
created a spatially incongruent trial similar to the uncrossed
trials discussed above but these trials did not result in equal
amount of saccade curvature. Stimulation to the crossed
hand leads to significant curvature from control trials,
whereas uncrossed spatially incongruent trials resulted in
only marginal significance (see Figure 4). Thus, in trials
where there are spatially incongruent tactile distractors,
distractors applied to crossed hands lead to more curvature
than when applied to uncrossed hands.
In addition, significant curvature was reported for the left
target when tactile stimulation was applied to the right hand
crossed over into left space (see Figure 4). Unlike
previously discussed trials where tactile stimulation was
spatially incongruent to the visual target, these type of trials
were not spatially incongruent (see Figure 2c). Despite
being the same spatial configuration as control trials,
stimulation of the crossed right hand lead to significant
curvature relative to control trials. These findings
demonstrate that tactile stimulation to a crossed hand results
in significant deviation of a visual saccade to leftward
targets. This is true regardless of the spatial congruence of
the trial relative to control—a spatially congruent trial can
result in saccade curvature if the hands are crossed.
Previous studies have reported that saccades to visual
targets tend to deviate away from a tactile distractor
presented to an uncrossed hand (Doyle & Walker, 2002).
While the current results for the uncrossed-condition
replicate the direction of deviation reported by Doyle and

373

Walker (2002), this pattern of results does not easily extend
to the crossed-hand condition where a leftward pattern of
deviation is reported for all trials regardless of spatial
location of the distractor. While saccade trajectories do not
respond uniformly to all distractors (reviewed in Van der
Stigchel et al., 2006), this heterogeneity is typically seen
with studies employing different distractors and vastly
different experimental procedures and not within subjects
and experimental paradigms. However, given that it is well
documented that crossed-hand position leads to decrements
in spatial processing in multiple modalities (review
Maravita et al., 2003), it may not be surprising to find that
saccade deviations resulting from crossed-hand stimulation
do not adhere to a consistent spatial configuration. Thus,
the inconsistent direction of saccade deviation may be a
result of the decrements in spatial processing resulting from
the crossed-hand position.
We report two major findings: 1) spatial congruence
produces the same magnitude of deviation as spatial
incongruence when distraction comes from crossed hands
(at least for leftward saccades) and 2) the direction of
deviation of these saccades is not relative to the position of
the hand in space as has been previously demonstrated in an
uncrossed hand paradigm (Doyle & Walker, 2002). These
findings provide initial evidence that saccade trajectories
may be linked to the mechanisms that result in performance
decrements resulting from a crossed-hand position (e.g.
Maravita et al, 2003).

Drew, F. (1896). Attention: experimental and critical.
American Journal of Psychology, 7, 533-537.
Grant, E. R. & Spivey, M. J. (2003). Eye movements and
problem solving. Psychological Science, 14, 462-466.
Groh J. M. & Sparks, D. L. (1996). Saccades to
somatosensory targets. I. Behavioral characteristics.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 75, 412-427.
Holmes, N. P., Sanabria, D., Calvert, G. A., & Spence, C.
(2006). Multisensory interactions follow the hands across
the midline: Evidence from a non-spatial visual-tactile
congruency task. Brain Research, 1077, 108-115.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The Theory of Event Coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-937.
Krauzlis, R. J., Liston, D. , & Carello, C. D. (2004). Target
selection and the superior colliculus: goals, choices and
hypotheses. Vision Research, 44, 1445-1451.
Maravita, A., Spence, C., & Driver, J. (2003). Multisensory
integration and the body schema: close to hand and within
reach. Current Biology, 13, 531-539.
Maravita, A., Spence, C., Kennett, S. & Driver, J. (2002).
Tooluse changes multimodal spatial interactions between
vision and touch in normal humans. Cognition, 83, B25B34.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Aslin, R. N. (2002).
Gradient effects within-category phonetic variation on
lexical access. Cognition, 86, 2002.
Richardson D. C. & Spivey M. J. (2000). Representation,
space and Hollywood Squares: looking at things that
aren’t there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269-295.
Schall, J. D. (1995). Neural basis of saccade target selection.
Review of Neuroscience, 6, 63-85.
Shore, D. I., Spry, E., & Spence, C. (2002). Confusing the
mind by crossing the hands. Cognitive Brain Research,
14, 153-163.
Spivey M. J. & Dale R. (2006). Continuous dynamics in
real-time cognition. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 15, 207-211.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information during spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.
Theeuwes, J., Olivers, C. N. L., & Chizk, C. L. (2005).
Remembering a location makes the eyes curve away.
Psychological Science, 16, 196-199.
Van der Stigchel, S. Meeter, M. & Theeuwes, J. (2006). Eye
movement trajectories and what they tell us. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 666-679.
Vatikiotis-Bateson, E., Eigsti, I. M., Yano, S., & Munhall,
K. G. (1998). Eye movement of perceivers during
audiovisual speech perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 60, 926-940.
Zelinsky, G. & Sheinberg, D. L. (1997). Eye movements
during parallel-serial visual search. Eye, 23, 244-262.

Acknowledgments
This international collaboration has been sponsored by
grants to LLE from the Psychology Department and
Cognitive Science Program of Cornell University, an NSF
grant, BCS-0721297, to MJS, and NSERC and CFI funding
to EVB making this work possible in Canada.

References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Tracking the time course of spoken word
recognition using eye movements: Evidence for
continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38, 419-439.
Cornelissen, F. W., Peters, E. M., & Palmer, J. (2002). The
Eyelink Toolbox: Eye tracking with MATLAB and the
Psychophysics Toolbox. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 34, 613-617.
Doyle M. C. & Walker R. (2002). Multisensory interactions
in saccade target selection: Curved saccade trajectories.
Experimental Brain Research, 142, 116-130.
Doyle, M. C. & Walker, R. (2001). Curved saccade
trajectories: Voluntary and reflexive saccades curve away
from irrelevant distractors. Experimental Brain Research,
139, 333-344.

374

