UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Defending Extended Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2nm1b0b4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Chemero, Anthony
Silberstein, Micheal

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Defending Extended Cognition
Anthony Chemero (tony.chemero@fandm.edu)
Department of Psychology, Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA 17601 USA

Michael Silberstein (silbermd@etown.edu)
Department of Philosophy, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA
Abstract

methodologically, empirically and scientifically oriented
critiques

In this paper, we defend extended cognition against several
criticisms. We argue that extended cognition does not derive
from armchair theorizing and that it neither ignores the results
of the neural sciences, nor minimizes the importance of the
brain in the production of intelligent behavior. We also argue
that explanatory success in the cognitive sciences does not
depend on localist or reductionist methodologies; part of our
argument for this is a defense of what might be called
‘holistic science’.

Extended Cognitive Science Defined
As there are many views under the rubric of “externalist”
cognitive science it is best that we define what we mean by
‘extended cognition’ (EC). The literature makes a
distinction between embodied, situated and extended
cognition in supposedly ascending order of radicalness. The
first claim says roughly that mind exists in the entire body,
and not just in the central nervous system. The second claim
says that certain environmental or social background
conditions are necessary for certain cognitive functions.
And the third claim holds that brain-body-world are
dynamically coupled and thus mental states and cognitive
functions might be viewed as extending spatiotemporally
beyond the skin of the organism. While to be sure there are
finer distinctions to be made within each category, we
embrace all three. EC, then, is the claim that the
environment serves as more than the mere background for
and input to the cognitive system; it is a necessary part of
the cognitive system. Furthermore, EC claims that the nonlinearly related brain, body and environment are jointly
sufficient for cognition.
The claim that cognition is extended is often put in terms
of “causal spread” or “dynamical spread”. This can be
analyzed along two axis: “smallism” (Wilson, 2004, 22-23)
and what we call “localism”. Smallism says that mental
states and functions are determined by the smallist scale of
physical reality inside or intrinsic to a cognitive system.
Bickle (2005) for example, given his defense of reducing
mental states and functions to molecular and genetic
features of neural systems is a smallist. Localism says that
mental states and functions reside inside the head. The
mind/brain identity thesis is a form of localism. It should be
clear that these are distinct claims. For example, if you
believe that mental states and functions supervene
essentially on large-scale neural dynamics (Freeman 2005)
then you are a localist but not a smallist. If you believe that
brain-body-world are truly dynamically coupled as some
dynamical accounts of cognition maintain (Thompson,
2007), then you are neither a smallist nor a localist.
We wish to defend, against certain objections, the
possibility and in our view actuality, that at least for some
mental states and cognitive functions, both smallism and
localism fail. Our defense of the thesis of EC will be in

Keywords: extended cognition; dynamical systems theory;
reductionism.

Introduction
The idea that cognitive systems are spatially extended,
encompassing more than the brain and body, is not new.
For example, in the early 20th century, William James
argued that acts of perception included both the perceiver
and the perceived. For most of the 20th century, though,
extended cognition received little attention. A convergence
of results in AI and robotics (Agre and Chapman 1987, Beer
1995; Brooks 1991), perception (Solomon and Turvey 1988,
Warren 1984), developmental psychology (Thelen and
Smith 1995), and mathematical modeling (Kelso 1995;
Kugler and Turvey 1987; Port and van Gelder 1995)
changed this. Now, we have philosophical theories of
things called ‘enactive cognition’ (Noe 2004; Thompson
2007; Varela, Thompson and Rosch 1991), ‘existential
cognition’ (McClamrock 1995), ‘extended cognition—EC ’
(Clark and Chalmers 1998), ‘embodied cognition’ (Clark
1997; Shapiro 2004), ‘wide computationalism’ (Wilson
2004), ‘situated cognition’ (Clancey 1997; Hutchins 1995),
‘radical embodied cognition’ (Chemero, forthcoming) and
many other names for roughly the same thing—the view
that cognitive systems extend beyond the skin of the
cognizer. This upswing of interest has led to an inevitable
backlash, with a string of largely philosophical arguments
that this newly interesting view is somehow fatally flawed
(Adams and Aizawa 2001, 2008; Markman and Dietrich
2000; Rupert 2004; Vera and Simon 1997).
The purpose of this talk is to defend EC from some of the
charges leveled against it. We will not address all of the
critiques of EC; we feel that Andy Clark and Rob Wilson
have quite convincingly defended the view against the
metaphysical and mereological criticisms (Clark to appear;
Wilson and Clark to appear). Instead we will focus on the

129

terms of its value as a scientific hypothesis: Does extended
cognitive science have any explanatory or predictive value
or potential for such?

dynamic patterns require pattern generators, i.e., sometimes
internal causal mechanisms, and vice versa (2006, 95).
Chemero and Silberstein (2008) explicitly endorse
explanatory pluralism. There is much to be said for
pluralism about explanation. Animal behavior and animal
brains are very complex, and we can see no a priori reason
that all aspects of them or any one aspect of them, ought to
be explained in any one way, whether or not explanations
interlock or are complementary. Extended cognitive science
surely is not committed to all of cognition requiring brainbody-environment explanation.

Critiques of Extended Cognitive Science
Setting aside the abjectly metaphysical critiques, we can
find two kinds of critiques of the EC hypothesis. These are
critiques that appear in the literature and that we have heard
in person. The first of these is that the EC hypothesis
contradicts findings in contemporary cognitive science and
neuroscience. Examples of this sort of critique are found in
Adams and Aizawa 2001, Revuonso 2006 and Bickle 2003.
In its strongest form (e.g., Bickle 2003) this critique accuses
proponents of extended cognitive science of ignoring the
sciences of the brain, of being what Churchland (2002) calls
“no-brainers”. We address this sort of worry in sections 4.1
and 4.2. The second critique we will address is about the
scientific value of extended cognitive science. Those who
make this sort of critique argue that rejecting smallism and
localism will be bad for cognitive science (Markman and
Dietrich 2000; Rupert 2004, to appear).1 This concern is
dealt with in 4.3.

Extended Cognitive Science and the Brain
Churchland (2002) famously mocks those who do not
apply findings in neuroscience to philosophical problems as
“no-brainers”; Bickle (2003) mocks anyone with traditional
philosophical concerns, including “naturalistic philosophers
of mind” and other neurophilosophers. It must not be
overlooked that extended cognitive scientists can endorse
this name calling: extended cognitive science is neither nobrainerism, nor a priori philosophy of mind.
First, extended cognitive science is not a priori
philosophy of mind. Indeed, there is a substantial empirical
case to be made for EC. This has been the point of much
work in embodied cognitive science, whether by
philosophers (Varela, Thompson and Rosch 1991, Clark
1997, Thompson 2007) or psychologists (Gibson1979,
Thelen and Smith 1994, Beer 1995, Lungarella and Sporns
2006). Here we point to two recent studies specifically
aimed at supporting extended cognitive science.
Chemero and Heyser (2005) have provided evidence that
some research in neuroscience itself suffers precisely
because it is internalist. We found that researchers who use
the object exploration experimental paradigm with rodents
to study the effect of drugs, genes and neurotransmitters on
behavior fail to take into account that the affordances of the
to-be-explored objects, what actions the mice or rats can
perform on them, dramatically affect the way rodents
explore the objects. In many cases, experimentalists use
objects with different affordances, e.g., some objects are
climbable by rats, others are not. In such cases, the effects
found in the experiments are just as likely to be due to
differences among the affordances of the objects as they are
to be due to the drug, gene or neurotransmitter under study.
That is, it turns out that, at least in some cases, when
neuroscientists,
behavioral
geneticists,
and
psychopharmacologists assume that studying the brain is
studying the mind, they do flawed experiments or
misinterpret their results. (See Chemero and Heyser, 2005.)
They argue that to fix these misinterpretations, researchers
must simultaneously investigate the brains, bodies and
environments of their animals. That is, they must
acknowledge that cognition is extended.
Lungarella and Sporns (2006) use a series of robotic
experiments to show that there is a two way flow of
information between visual perception and action in the
environment. That vision provides information for action is
not news, of course. Lungarella and Sporns showed that the

Defending Extended Cognitive Science
In this part of the paper, we defend extended cognitive
science from the two critiques outlined above.

The Scope of Extended Cognitive Science
One form of argument against extended cognitive science,
canvassed above, is to point out some cognitive
phenomenon that is not plausibly extended (See Revuonso
2006.) Phenomenon X is not extended, the argument goes,
so extended cognitive science must be false. This argument
mistakes the scope of the claims made by EC proponents.
Extended cognitive scientists need not claim that all of
cognition is extended, just that some of it is. There is no a
priori reason why some phenomenon might be given wholly
brain internal explanations (e.g., dreams, certain kinds of
pain), some given embodied accounts, while others will
require explanations that span brain-body-environment
systems (e.g., motor control, long division). Indeed, we all
ought to embrace causal and explanatory pluralism about
cognition. Bechtel, for example, points out that extended
dynamical and localist mechanistic explanations are
mutually supporting in that information about the
mechanisms and their components help us to better
formulate the dynamics and insight into the dynamics can
help us discover key mechanisms (2002, 240). Similarly,
Andy Clark (1997) has argued that wide dynamical and
localist computational explanatory patterns ought to
“interlock” in a complete explanation of cognition. Even
dynamicists such as Kelso and Engstrom point out that
1

We realize that we have not said enough about these critiques.
In our defense, space is very limited here. We are not attacking
straw men. In fact, we believe that in section 4 we defend EC
against versions of the critiques that are more compelling than
those that have been published.

130

converse is also true, by decoupling visual information and
action.
In particular, they showed that providing
inappropriate information about actions leads to poor visual
search and that action actually creates information for
perception. This, of course, is one of the main EC
principles, and has been demonstrated repeatedly in studies
of haptic perception of size and weight, which is impossible
without actively hefting an object. (See Gibson 1966;
Solomon and Turvey 1988; Amazeen and Turvey 1996;
Shockley, Carello and Turvey 2004). What is unique in the
Lungarella and Sporns work is that they have developed a
quantitative technique to show just how much information
for perception is generated by action, and how much is lost
when perception and action are decoupled.
The two studies mentioned and many, many others show
that EC is not a hypothesis developed from the armchair. It
is a hypothesis that generates hypotheses that have been
tested and confirmed. So extended cognitive science is not
a priori philosophy of mind.
EC is also not no-brainerism. Churchland (2002)
mentions (though does not follow up) the possibility that
dynamical systems theory, arguably the most important
explanatory tool of EC, might be the future of neuroscience.
Dynamical systems theory is not only an appropriate
language for understanding the activity of the brain-bodyenvironment system, there is mounting evidence that it is
also the key to understanding the brain. Recent work by
Bressler and Kelso (2001), Varela and Thompson (2001),
Varela, Lachaux, Rodriguez, Martiniere (2001), Bressler
(2002), Oullier, de Guzman, Jantzen, Lagarde, & Kelso
(2005), Kelso and Engstrom (2006), and Thompson,
Cosmelli and Lachaux (2007) makes this point vividly. In
all of this cited work (and much more), dynamical systems
models are shown to work both in brain-only explanations
and in brain-body-environment ones.2
Those who accuse EC of no-brainerism come close to
attacking a straw man. They claim that: of course a
cognitive system is not extended, only embodied and
situated, because such externalist cognitive features must
piggyback on the real, intrinsic cognitive “agent.” Their
implication is clear: just try taking the brain and its
functional features out of the picture and see how much
cognition gets done by what remains! But of course EC does
not deny that understanding brains is vital to understanding
cognition, or that cognition could occur without brains.
Brains are absolutely essential to cognition, but this does not
entail either smallism or localism.3

Defending Holist Science
Extended cognitive science, which rejects both localism and
smallism as exceptionless truths, is committed to holistic
(i.e., wide dynamical or wide computational) explanation.4
Yet no small part of the accumulation of knowledge since
the scientific revolution is the result of reductionist
methodologies. The biggest advantage of methodological
individualism and methodological reductionism is they have
proven to be phenomenally successful tools for prediction,
explanation and intervention in physical, chemical and
biological systems. As Lewontin puts it, “This
[methodological reductionism] was a radical departure from
the holistic pre-Enlightenment view of natural systems as
indissoluble wholes that could not be understood by being
taken apart into bits and pieces…Over the last three hundred
years the analytic model has been immensely successful in
explaining nature in such a way as to allow us to manipulate
and predict it” (2000, 72). Indeed, it is probably fair to say
that the only reason more holistic scientific methodologies
are being developed is that methodological reductionism has
hit the wall in many scientific disciplines involving the
study of complex, non-linear, multi-leveled, nested and selforganizing systems.
Whatever the cause of their creation, holistic scientific
methodologies have been introduced with great success in
physics and biology as well as in cognitive science. The
principle worry raised about extended cognitive science here
is that too much holism makes science impossible, or at
least unnecessarily difficult. (Kitcher 2003 makes this claim
with respect to evolutionary biology.) For given enough
holism, what is thought to be a ‘system’ or sub-system is,
after all, just a convention (Rupert has raised this issue with
regard to the individual cognitive agent). Science seems to
be predicated on dividing the world objectively into the
relevant explanatory parts or systems per the explanatory
task at hand. And, indeed, this was Einstein’s worry about
quantum mechanics. Contrary to popular opinion what
really bothered Einstein about quantum mechanics was not
so much its possible indeterminism but the failure of
locality and separability:
But that which we conceive as existing (“real”)
should somehow be localized in time and space.
That is, the real in one part of space A, should (in
theory) somehow exist independently of that which
is thought of as real in another part of space,
B…However, if one renounces the assumption that
greatly exaggerated. See Uttal 2001, Hardcastle and Stewart 2005,
and Prinz 2006 for retorts.
4
“Holistic” is a fuzzy notion but as Clark says of wide
dynamical explanations, “such interactions may be highly
complex, nested and non-linear. There may be no viable means of
understanding the behavior and the potential of the extended
cognitive ensembles by piecemeal decomposition and additive
reassembly…such that the larger explanatory targets here are
[necessarily] whole processing cycles” (forthcoming, 26). The
point here is that the more coupled and non-linear body-brainworld is, the more decomposition and localization will fail to use
Bechtel’s widely accepted vocabulary.

2

Notice, though, that decades of work by Walter Freeman (e.g.,
Skarda and Freeman 1987) shows that dynamical systems theory
can also provide explanations of internal brain processes. The EC
vs. internalism (or localism) debate and the mechanism vs.
dynamicism debate are orthogonal (See Chemero and Silberstein
2008.)
3
The most common and most convincing arguments for
localism and smallism (i.e., against EC) stem from imaging
studies, mechanism hunting and lesion studies that claim to
localize cognitive functions to particular regions within the brain.
These arguments are, of course, hardly definitive and their weight

131

what is present in different parts of space has an
independent, real existence, then I do not at all see
what physics is supposed to describe. For what is
thought to be a “system” is, after all, just
conventional, and I do not see how one is supposed
to divide up the world objectively so that one can
make statements about the parts (Einstein, 1948).
Unfortunately for Einstein, it is now well known that
quantum entanglement and EPR correlations force us to
abandon either separability and/or locality5.
Einstein
thought that both these principles, but especially the latter,
were transcendental grounds for the very possibility of
science. He was wrong. Quantum systems such as electrons
are coupled in far more radical ways than is being
contemplated in the case of elements of cognitive systems.
Quantum mechanics has succeeded wildly in devising
dynamical equations to predict and explain the behavior of
such systems. While the non-linear equations involved in
extended cognitive science are in many ways more
daunting, there is no reason to abandon hope. One reason
for hope is that complexity theory and dynamical systems
theory have had a reasonable bit of success finding nonlinear equations that apply to any number of disparate
many-bodied systems with quite different elements such as
cars, ants, neurons, etc (Abrahamsen and Bechtel, 2006).
Thus a priori arguments against holistic cognitive science
should hold no water.
None of this shows that holistic methods are the best
methods for cognitive science, of course. They must
however be taken seriously. First, even if one does not truly
believe that brain-body-world constitutes a nondecomposable coupled system, there may be good reasons
to attempt extended cognitive science. There may be
pragmatic
or
practical
reasons
for
embracing
methodological holism even if you are a staunch
metaphysical individualist. As Herbert Simon put it, “in the
face of complexity, an in-principle reductionist may be at
the same time a pragmatic holist” (1969, 86). Second, the
extended cognition thesis might really be true. The holism
question is an open and empirical one—the reason to
attempt full-blooded extended cognitive science is that the
world might really be that way and such methods may
capture that. Such questions cannot be settled a priori by
any kind of essentialist arguments about what is and what is
not a cognitive system.

our discussion to just one variety of embodied cognition
explanation: coordination dynamics. Kelso and Engstrom
(2006) describe coordination dynamics as “a set of contextdependent laws or rules that describe, explain and predict
how patterns of coordination form, adapt, persist and change
in natural systems. …[C]oordination dynamics seeks to
identify the laws, principles, and mechanisms underlying
coordinated behavior among different types of components
in different kinds of systems at different levels of
description” (2006, 90). The methodology of coordination
dynamics is as follows: first, for the system as a whole,
discover the key coordination variables and the dynamical
equations of motion that best describes how coordination
patterns change over time. Second, identify the individual
coordinated elements (such as neurons, organs, clapping
hands, pendulums, cars, birds, bees, fish, etc.) and discern
their dynamics. As Kelso and Ensgtrom say, this is nontrivial because the individual coordinated elements are often
themselves quite complex, and are often dependent upon the
larger coordinated system of which they are components
(2006, 109). They put the point even more strongly, “in the
complex systems of coordination dynamics, there are no
purely context-independent parts from which to derive a
context-independent coordinative whole” (2006, 202). This
is extended cognition with a vengeance. Third, derive the
systemic dynamics from the description of the non-linear
coupling among the elements. It is this non-linear coupling
between elements that allows one to determine connections
across different levels of description. It is important to note
that, as in all dynamical explanation, discovering both the
systemic dynamics and that of their component parts
requires specifying boundary conditions that “establish the
context for particular behaviors to arise” (Kelso and
Engstrom 2006, 109). The behavior of the whole system
“emerges” from the non-linear interactions among the
elements of the system in a particular context where the
elements and the contextual features are coupled and
mutually co-dependent.
The individual coordinating
elements form a collective whole in the sense that
microscopic degrees of freedom are reduced to a much
smaller set of context-dependent coordination variables or
order parameters that greatly constrain the behavior of the
elements. Mathematical physicists often call this process
“enslavement” by the order parameters or the slaving
principle.

Extended Cognitive Science at Work

Consider, for example, an experiment by Oullier, de
Guzman, Jantzen, Lagarde, & Kelso (2005), which uses
coordination dynamics to account for spontaneous
interpersonal coordination. They asked two subjects to sit
across from one another, close their eyes and move their
fingers up and down at a comfortable rate. Each trial was
divided into three temporal segments. In one condition (CO-C), subjects kept their eyes closed in segments one and
three, and open in segment two. In another condition (O-CO), subjects kept their eyes open in segments one and three,
and closed in segment two. The same results were found in
both conditions. When the subjects have their eyes closed,

We have already argued that extended cognitive science is
coherent. In order to show that it is not unworkable, we
simply point out that it is in fact working. There are many,
many examples that we could point to. Here we will limit
5

Separability principle: any two systems A and B, regardless of
the history of their interactions, separated by a non-null spatiotemporal interval have their own independent real states such that
the joint state is completely determined by the independent states.
Locality principle: any two spacelike separated systems A and B
are such that the separate real state of A let us say, cannot be
influenced by events in the neighborhood of B.

132

Bechtel, W. (2002). Decomposing the brain: A long term
pursuit. Brain and Mind, 3, 229-242.
Beer, R. (1995). Computational and dynamical languages
for autonomous agents. In Port, R.F. and van Gelder, T.,
(Eds.), Mind as Motion. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bickle, J. (2003). Philosophy and Neuroscience: A
ruthlessly reductive account. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Bressler, S.L. and Kelso, J.A.S. (2001). Cortical
Coordination Dynamics and Cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 5, 26–36.
Brooks, R. (1991). “Intelligence Without Representation.”
Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139-159.
Chemero, A. (to appear). Radical Embodied Cognitive
Science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Chemero, A. and Heyser, C. (2005). “Object exploration
and the problem with reductionism.” Synthese, 147, 403423.
Chemero, A. and Silberstein, M. (2008). “After the
philosophy of mind: From Scholasticism to science”.
Philosophy of Science.
Churchland, P.S. (2002). Brain-wise. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Clancey, W. (1997). Situated Cognition. New York:
Cambridge U. Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (to appear). “Coupling, Constitution and the
Cognitive Kind: A Reply to Adams and Aizawa”.
Einstein, A. (1940). Science, 91, 487-492.
Gibson, J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. New Jersey: Houghton Mifflin.
Hardcastle, V. and Stewart, C.M. (2005). “Localization in
the Brain and Other Illusions.” In A. Brook and K. Akins
(Eds.), Cognition and the Brain. Cambridge University
Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Kelso, J. (1995). Dynamic Patterns. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Kelso, A. Fuchs, R. Lancaster, T. Holroyd, D. Cheyne, H.
Weinberg. (1998). Dynamic Cortical Activity in the
Human Brain Reveals Motor Equivalence. Nature, 23,
814-818.
Kelso, J. and Engstrom, D. (2006). The Complementary
Nature. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kitcher, P. (2003). In Mendel’s Mirror. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kugler, P.N., Kelso, J.A.S., & Turvey, M.T. (1980).
Coordinative structures as dissipative structures I.
Theoretical lines of convergence. In G.E. Stelmach & J.
Requin (Eds.), Tutorials in motor behavior. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Kugler, P. and Turvey, M. (1987). Information, Natural
Law, and the Self-assembly of Rhythmic Movement.
Hillsdale, NJ; Erlbaum.
Lungarella,M. and Sporns,O. (2006). Mapping information
flow in sensorimotor networks. PLoS Computational
Biology, 2, e144.

their finger movements were out of phase with one another.
When subjects have their eyes open, their finger movements
spontaneously synchronize, only to desynchronize when the
subjects are asked to close their eyes again. Earlier research
indicates that these finger movements are mirrored by ratedependent activity in sensorimotor cortex (Kelso, Fuch,
Lancaster, Holroyd, Cheyne and Weinberg 1998). So in
each subject, there is a spontaneous coordination of brain
activity and behavior with an external source (in this case
the other subject). That is, the synchronization crosses
brain, body and environment. These results are explained
using coordination dynamics.
In accounting for the
behavior of their subjects, Oullier et al need not worry about
the mechanisms by which finger movements structure light,
which impacts retinal cells, which impacts neural cells,
which impacts muscles, which move fingers, and so on.
The dynamical explanation of this interpersonal
coordination abstracts away from all this detail, simply
positing that the movements of the fingers are nonmechanically or informationally coupled (Kugler and
Turvey 1987, Schmidt, Carello and Turvey 1990, Kelso
1995, Kelso and Engstrom 2006) when, and only when, the
subjects have their eyes open. Indeed, the dynamics of the
system can be modeled by attending to just one parameter—
the state of the subjects’ eyes. This is the hallmark of a
good dynamical explanation: the change over time of a very
complex extended cognitive system, one comprising brain,
body, and environment, is modeled with a comparatively
simple set of equations.

Conclusions
Our aim in this paper is quite humble. We primarily hoped
to establish that whether or not extended cognition is true
(either metaphysically or methodologically), or at least a
useful operating assumption, is an open empirical question
and must be settled as such. The history of science tells us
this is the only safe way to progress lest our theories become
self-sealing.

References
Abrahamsen, A. and Bechtel, W. (2006). “Phenomena and
Mechanisms: Putting the Symbolic, Connectionist and
Dynamical Systems Debate in Broader Perspective” In
R.J. Stainton (Ed.). Contemporary Debates in Cognitive
Science. Blackwell publishing (159-185).
Adams, F. and Aizawa, K (to appear). “Why the Mind is
Still in the Head”. In M. Aydede and P. Robbins (eds)
Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition (Cambridge
University Press)
Adams, F. and Aizawa, K. The Bounds of Cognition.
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Adams, F. and Aizawa, K. 2001. The Bounds of Cognition.
Philosophical Psychology, 14, 43-64.
Amazeen, E.L., & Turvey, M.T. (1996). Weight perception
and the haptic size-weight illusion are functions of the
inertia tensor. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 22,213-232.

133

Solomon, H. and Turvey, M. (1988). Haptically perceiving
the distances reachable with hand-held objects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 14, 404-427.
Thelen, E. and Smith, L. (1993). A Dynamic Systems
Approach to the Development of Cognition and Action.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology,
Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, Diego Cosmelli, Jean-Philippe Lachaux (2007).
“Neurodynamics of Consciousness” Forthcoming in
Philip David Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch, and Evan
Thompson, (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of
Consciousness. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Uttal, W. (2001.) The New Phrenology. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Thompson, E.. and Varela, F.. (2001) Radical Embodiment:
Neural dynamics and Consciousness. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 5, 418 - 425.
Varela, F., Thompson, E. and Rosch, E. (1991). The
Embodied Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Vera, A.H., & Simon, H.A. (1993). Situated action: A
symbolic interpretation. Cognitive Science, 17, 7-48.
Wilson, R. (2004). Boundaries of the Mind. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, R. and Clark, A. (to appear). “How to situate
Cognition: Letting nature take its course”.

Markman, A. and Dietrich, E. (2000). In defense of
representation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 470-475.
McClamrock, R. (1995). Existential cognition. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Noe, A. (2005). Action in Perception. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Oullier, O., de Guzman, G.C., Jantzen, K.J., Lagarde, J.F.,
& Kelso, J.A.S. (2005). Spontaneous interpersonal
synchronization. In C. Peham, W.I. Schöllhorn, & W.
Verwey (Eds.). European workshop on movement
sciences: Mechanics-Physiology-Psychology.
Prinz, J. (2006). “Is the Mind Really Modular?” In R.J.
Stainton (Ed,). Contemporary Debates in Cognitive
Science. Blackwell.
Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner Presence: Consciousness as a
Biological Phenomenon. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rupert, R (to appear) Representation in Extended Cognitive
Systems: Does the Scaffolding of Language Extend the
Mind?
Rupert, R (2004). Challenges to the Hypothesis of Extended
Cognition. Journal of Philosophy, 101, 389-428
Shapiro, L. (2004). The Mind Incarnate. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Shockley, K., Carello, C., & Turvey, M. T. (2004).
Metamers in the haptic perception of heaviness and
moveableness. Perception & Psychophysics, 66, 731-742.
Simon, H. (1969). The sciences of the artificial. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Skarda, C. and Freeman, W. (1987). “How the Brain Makes
Chaos to Make Sense of the World.” Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 10, 161-195.

134

