UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dynamic Field Theory: Conceptual Foundations and Applications in the Cognitive and
Developmental Sciences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/63x3h4dp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Spencer, John P.
Schoner, Gregor

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dynamic Field Theory: Conceptual Foundations and Applications
in the Cognitive and Developmental Sciences
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Iowa Center for Developmental and Learning Sciences
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Gregor Schöner (gregor.schoener@neuroinformatik.ruhr-uni-bochum.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum
44780 Bochum, Germany
One obstacle for researchers wishing to use DFT has been
the mathematical and technical skills required to make the
ideas operational. The goal of this tutorial is to provide the
tools needed to overcome this hurdle. We will provide an
overview of the central concepts of DFT and their
grounding in both Dynamical Systems concepts and
neurophysiology. Next, we will discuss the concrete
implementation of these concepts in Dynamic Neural Field
models and provide the group with some hands-on
experience using real-time simulators in Matlab. Finally, we
will give an overview of how the basic concepts and models
have been extended to account for cognitive and
developmental phenomena and discuss how this provides a
formal framework for thinking about embodied cognition
and the integration of processes across multiple time scales.

Abstract
Dynamical Systems Theory has had a major impact on how
researchers think about sensori-motor behavior. Recently,
Dynamic Field Theory (DFT) has provided a critical bridge
from motor control and development into cognitive function.
One obstacle for researchers wishing to use DFT has been the
mathematical and technical skills required to make these ideas
operational. The DFT Tutorial will provide the tools needed
to overcome this hurdle.
Keywords: Neural networks; cognitive
embodied cognition; cognitive development.

neuroscience;

Tutorial Overview
The concepts of Dynamical Systems Theory have
impacted the way psychologists, cognitive scientists, and
neuroscientists think about sensori-motor behavior and
embodied cognition. These concepts have had a particularly
strong impact in developmental science, changing the way
questions are asked, experiments are designed, and
theoretical models are formulated.
A critical step for Dynamical Systems thinking has been
the move from its initial setting in motor behavior into
cognitive function. This move was prefaced by extensive
discussion within Cognitive Science about whether
Dynamical Systems accounts must embrace the concept of
representation. Dynamic Field Theory (DFT) provides an
answer to this question, offering a framework for thinking
about representation-in-the-moment that is firmly grounded
in both Dynamical Systems thinking and neurophysiology.
Dynamic Neural Fields are formalizations of how neural
populations represent the continuous dimensions that
characterize perceptual features, movements, and cognitive
decisions. Neural fields evolve dynamically under the
influence of sensory inputs as well as strong neural
interaction, generating elementary forms of cognition
through dynamical instabilities. The concepts of DFT
establish links between brain and behavior, helping to define
experimental paradigms in which behavioral signatures of
specific neural mechanisms can be observed. These
paradigms can be modelled with Dynamic Neural Fields,
deriving testable predictions and providing quantitative
accounts of behavior.

Tutorial Leaders
Dr. John P. Spencer
Associate Professor, Department of Psychology, University
of Iowa
Co-Director, Iowa Center for Developmental and Learning
Sciences
John P. Spencer is an Associate Professor of Psychology at
The University of Iowa and the founding Co-Director of the
Iowa Center for Developmental and Learning Sciences. He
received a Sc.B. with Honors from Brown University in
1991 and a Ph.D. in Experimental Psychology from Indiana
University in 1998. He is the recipient of the Irving J.
Saltzman and the J.R. Kantor Graduate Awards from
Indiana University, as well as the Early Research
Contributions Award from the Society for Research in Child
Development and the Robert L. Fantz Memorial Award
from the American Psychological Foundation. His research
examines the development of visuo-spatial cognition, spatial
language, working memory, and attention, with an emphasis
on dynamical systems and neural network models of
cognition and action. He has had continuous funding from
the National Institutes of Health and the National Science
Foundation since 2001.

13

Professor Dr. Gregor Schöner
Professor of Neuroinformatics
Chair for Theoretical Biology, Institut für Neuroinformatik,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany

Suggested Readings
Johnson, J.S., Spencer, J.P., & Schöner, G. (2007). Moving
to higher ground: The dynamic field theory and the
dynamics of visual cognition. In F. Garzón, A. Laakso &
T. Gomila (Eds.), Dynamics and Psychology
[special
issue].
New
Ideas
in
Psychology,
doi:10.1016/j.newideaspsych.2007.07.007.
Schöner, G. (in press). Development as Change of System
Dynamics: Stability, Instability, and Emergence. In
Spencer, J.P., Thomas, M.S., & McClelland, J.L. (Eds.)
Toward a New Grand Theory of Development?
Connectionism and Dynamic Systems Theory ReConsidered. New York: Oxford University Press.
Simmering, V.R., Schutte, A.R., & Spencer, J.P. (2008).
Generalizing the dynamic field theory of spatial working
memory across real and developmental time scales. In S.
Becker (Ed.) Computational Cognitive Neuroscience
[special issue]. Brain Research, 1202, 68-86.
Spencer, J.P. & Schöner, G. (2003). Bridging the
representational gap in the dynamic systems approach to
development. Developmental Science, 6, 392-412.
Spencer, J.P., Simmering, V.R., Schutte, A.R., & Schöner,
G. (2007). What does theoretical neuroscience have to
offer the study of behavioral development? Insights from
a dynamic field theory of spatial cognition. In J. Plumert
& J.P. Spencer (Eds) The Emerging Spatial Mind (p. 320361). New York: Oxford University Press.

Gregor Schöner is a Professor of Neuroinformatics and the
Chair for Theoretical Biology at the Institut für
Neuroinformatik at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany.
He received his PhD in 1985 in theoretical physics at the
University of Stuttgart under the supervision of Hermann
Haken, the founder of the field of synergetics. After several
years as a Visiting Scientist and Research Associate at the
University of Connecticut and the Center for Complex
Systems at Florida Atlantic University, Dr. Schöner became
a Group Leader at the Institut für Neuroinformatik. In 1994,
he became a director of Research at the CNRS in Marseille,
France, returning to Bochum, Germany in 2001 to accept
the Chair for Theoretical Biology. Dr. Schöner has
numerous grants from different agencies in Germany,
France, and the European Union. He’s published over 60
refereed journal articles, including several that have
appeared recently in Psychological Review and Behavioral
and Brain Sciences. Dr. Schöner is considered one of the
world’s experts on dynamic systems theory within the fields
of Psychology and Cognitive Science, and he is a pioneer in
the application of Dynamic Neural Fields to the study of
cognition and autonomous behavior.

14

