UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of Orthographic and Semantic Distractors on Visual Search for Single Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1gb5g5rn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Leger, Laure
Rouet, Jean-Francois
Ros, Christine
et al.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of Orthographic and Semantic Distractors on Visual Search
for Single Words
Laure Léger (laure.leger@gmail.com)
Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et l’Apprentissage, Université de Poitiers – CNRS UMR 6234, 99 avenue du Recteur
Pineau, 86000 Poitiers, France

Jean-François Rouet (jean-francois.rouet@univ-poitiers.fr)
Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et l’Apprentissage, Université de Poitiers – CNRS UMR 6234, 99 avenue du Recteur
Pineau, 86000 Poitiers, France

Christine Ros (christine.ros@univ-poitiers.fr)
Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et l’Apprentissage, Université de Poitiers – CNRS UMR 6234, 99 avenue du Recteur
Pineau, 86000 Poitiers, France

Nicolas Vibert (nicolas.vibert@univ-poitiers.fr)
Centre de Recherches sur la Cognition et l’Apprentissage, Université de Poitiers – CNRS UMR 6234, 99 avenue du Recteur
Pineau, 86000 Poitiers, France
models of visual search for non lexical material have been
designed (Wolfe, 2000).
This paradigm has only rarely been applied to visual
search for single words within lists or arrays of more or less
similar words or verbal expressions. A series of such studies
was undertaken in the 1950’s and 1960’s (Neisser & Keller,
1965), but were more focused on the cognitive processes of
word identification and learning than on the visual search
processes themselves. Very few authors have studied visual
search for words using eye movement recordings (Katayama
& Yagi, 1992; Léger, Tijus, & Baccino, 2006; Ojanpää,
Näsänen, & Kojo, 2002). However, to understand how
people perform simple search tasks within controlled verbal
material is a prerequisite to tackle more complex tasks like
information search within Web sites or forms.
Visual search for single words was mostly studied using
target words that were explicitly shown to the participants
before the search phase (“literal” condition). In that case, the
visual similarity of the target with surrounding words, the
characteristics of the writing, the way the words are lined or
arrayed within the search display strongly impact the
efficiency of the search (Léger et al., 2006; Ojanpää et al.,
2002). Bruce (1981) demonstrated that the time to find the
target word increased with its similarity to the surrounding
distractor words. However, the determinants and strength of
these effects were not precisely investigated.
More recently, some authors have modified the task by
asking participants to find target words that were not known
in advance, but defined by a semantic clue (Léger, Tijus, &
Baccino, 2005) like the super-ordinate category to which
they belonged (“categorical” condition). In that situation,
semantic factors like the level of semantic association
between the target word and distractor words should have a
stronger impact, since the meaning of distractor words must
be assessed to check whether or not they correspond to the
target. Such effects were indeed observed during rapid serial

Abstract
Two experiments of visual search for a word within a list were
designed. The goal was to assess the effects of the presence in the
list of words either visually similar or semantically related to the
target word. In experiment 1 (“literal” task), the participants were
shown the target word in advance. In experiment 2 (“semantic”
task), the target word was defined by a semantic clue. In the
“literal” task, orthographic distractors resembling the target word
strongly impacted the search, but there was also an effect of
semantic associates. In the “semantic” task, orthographic
distractors still had a stronger impact than semantic associates.
Hence, the visual appearance of words would be a strong
determinant of the efficiency of information search within
documents even when what is searched for is not known precisely.
Keywords: visual search; eye movement recordings;
semantic associates; orthographic similarity; words lists.

Introduction
Visual search for words within documents to get
information is a task that most people perform daily, for
instance when they browse a reference list in search of an
article or when they search for a particular hyperlink on a
Web page. These search tasks are complex, finalized
activities, which are not easily mastered even by adults
(Rouet, 2006). While the cognitive processes involved in
reading have been well investigated using eye movement
recordings (Rayner, Pollatsek, & Reichle, 2003), the
mechanisms of visual search for verbal information are
much less known.
Visual search for non lexical material (geometrical
shapes, isolated digits or letters) is a strong research field in
cognitive psychology. The typical experiment begins with
presentation of a visual object that must be memorized.
Then, the participant must search for this target item among
more or less similar objects called “distractors”. Several

363

determinants of the search process, but that some semantic
processing of the distractor words might also be involved.
The first hypothesis was therefore that orthographic
distractors should have the strongest impact on the search
task and induce a large increase of the time taken to find the
target word and/or the error rate. In addition, a smaller
effect of semantic distractors could not be excluded.
For experiment 2, the main hypothesis was that changing
the nature of the task performed by the participants should
lead to strong modifications of the respective impact of
orthographic and semantic distractors on the search process.
Definition of the target word by a semantic clue was
expected to induce a strong impact of semantic distractors,
and to suppress or strongly decrease the impact of
orthographic distractors.

visual presentation paradigms (Barnard, Scott, Taylor, May,
& Knightley, 2004), but the extent to which the impact of
the visual characteristics of the material is reduced
compared to the condition where the target word is given
must still be investigated.
When the target word is visually presented, the
chronometric data of Harris, Pashler, & Coburn (2004)
suggested that the distractor words were not semantically
processed because their meaning did not influence search
efficiency. However, the distractor and target words were
not semantically related in these experiments. Rayner &
Raney (1996) compared eye movements during reading
versus searching for words. During reading, the duration of
eye fixations on words depends on their frequency in the
language, with rarest or ambiguous words fixated longer
than common ones. In contrast, word frequency has no
effect on fixation duration during visual search for a word
within a paragraph. This also suggests that semantic
processing of the non-target words is minimal. But other
authors have argued for the existence of semantic priming
effects of distractor words presented concomitantly to a
priming task (Ariga & Kawahara, 2004; Mari-Beffa,
Fuentes, Catena, & Houghton, 2000), which they consider
evidence of automatic semantic processing of the distractor
words. In addition, Henderson & Chard (1978) observed
that searching for a word was faster when the target word
and distractors belonged to different semantic categories.
This study presents two experiments, which were
designed to get a better picture of the impact of visually or
semantically related distractor words on visual search for
single words within lists. The goal of these experiments was
to assess how the presence in the list of words that were
either visually similar to the target word (“orthographic”
distractors sharing their first and last letters with the target
words) or semantic associates of the target word
(“semantic” distractors) impacted the search process. Eye
movement recordings were used together with measures of
search times and error rates to assess whether the eventual
distracting effects resulted from an increase in the number
and/or the duration of eye fixation on the orthographic or
semantic distractors.
The two experiments involved the same participants and
used the same experimental material, but differed by the
nature of the search task. The idea was to check whether the
impact of orthographic and semantic distractors on visual
search for words depended on the nature of the task
performed by the participants. In experiment 1, the
participants had to perform a “literal” search task, in the
sense that the target word was directly shown to them before
the search phase. The participants knew the target word in
advance. In experiment 2, the participants did not know in
advance the target word they had to find. The target word
was defined by a semantic clue, namely the super-ordinate
category to which it belonged. Hence, the participants had to
perform a “semantic” search task.
For experiment 1, the literature suggests that the visual
characteristics of the word display would be the main

Material and Methods
Participants
Data for the two experiments were obtained from 36
undergraduate psychology students of the University of
Poitiers who participated for course credits. They were all
native French speakers and had normal or corrected-tonormal vision.

Apparatus
Experiments were performed with a TOBII 1750 eyetracker, which displayed the stimuli on a 17” monitor using
a screen resolution of 768 x 1,024 pixels. The eye tracker
was driven via a Fujitsu/Siemens laptop and provided gaze
positions at a sampling frequency of 50 Hz, with a precision
of 0.5° of visual angle. The words used as stimuli were
written in lower case letters using 14 points size Verdana
font. The screen was at a viewing distance of about 60 cm.

Experimental Material
The stimuli for the two experiments consisted of 3 sets of 24
experimental and 8 filler lists of French words, which were
built around 32 target words that were each typical
exemplars of a particular super-ordinate category. Examples
of target words include “corbeau” (raven) as an exemplar of
the super-ordinate category “oiseau” (bird), or “pétrolier”
(tanker) as an exemplar of “bateau” (boat).
Each list included 13 words, namely one target word and
12 “distractor” words displayed in a single column.
Successive words in the list were separated by a 1 cm space.
All words had 2 or 3 syllables (M = 7.2 letters, SD = 1.4
letters) and a frequency superior to 1 per million in French
according to the “Lexique” database (New, Pallier, Ferrand,
& Matos, 2001; http://www.lexique.org).
For each of the target words, three distinct lists were
built with the following characteristics:
- The first list (“orthographic list”) included 6
orthographic distractors, i.e. 6 words that shared at least
the first and two last letters with the target word, and 6
neutral distractors that were neither orthographically nor
364

-

-

Each participant was tested on only one third of the
experimental lists. In each experiment, the 12 experimental
trials presented to any given participant used 12 distinct
target words that were each inserted into either an
orthographic (4 trials), semantic (4 trials) or neutral (4 trials)
list. The 12 target words used in experiment 1 were always
different from those used in experiment 2. The position of
the target word was randomized within the bottom half of
the list (i.e. positions 7 to 13) for the experimental lists, and
within the top half (positions 1 to 6) for the filler lists. The
non-target words were then distributed randomly across the
12 other positions.

semantically related to the target word. Examples of
orthographic distractors for the target word “corbeau”
(raven) were “chameau” (camel) and “cadeau” (present).
The second list (“semantic list”) included 6 neutral and 6
semantic distractors that were semantically associated
with both the target word and its super-ordinate
category. The semantic distractors were not other
exemplars of the category. Examples of semantic
distractors for the target word “corbeau” (raven) and its
super-ordinate category “oiseau” (bird) were “forêt”
(forest) and “plumage” (feathers). The levels of semantic
association between the target word, its category and
each of the 12 distractors were assessed by 70 volunteers
who judged on a 10-points scale the semantic
association between the different pairs of words (1: no
semantic association, 10: very strong semantic
association). Within each list, the average ratings of the
semantic association between all neutral distractors and
the target word or its super-ordinate category were either
1 or 2, whereas the average ratings for the semantic
distractors were all between 5 and 10.
The third type of list (“neutral list”) included 12 neutral
distractors that were different from the neutral
distractors included in the orthographic and semantic
lists built around the same target word.

Eye Movements Recordings and Data Analysis
Eye movements were recorded during the whole procedure
and analyzed using the TOBII eye-tracker software
(ClearView 2.7.1). Eye fixations were defined as any period
where gaze stayed for 60 ms or more within a 20 pixels (0.7
cm, about 0.7°) diameter area. A fixation was attributed to a
word if it fell within the 1.5 x 6 cm box enclosing each word
of the lists. When calculating fixation durations, successive
fixations on the same word were collapsed.
All trials where errors where made, i.e. where the
participant did not select the right target word were
excluded from further analysis. Data analysis was then
performed for each experiment using the type of list as a
within-participants factor. Dependent variables were the
time taken to perform the visual search and the error rate.
Eye movement data were used to refine the analysis and
compute for each list the number and nature of the distractor
words that were fixated during the task, as well as the mean
duration of these fixations. Following logarithmic
transformations of the data, two separate analyses were
conducted.
- For the orthographic and semantic lists, t-tests were used
to compare the number and mean duration of fixations
made on neutral versus orthographic or semantic
distractors, respectively.
- In addition, the number and duration of fixations made
on neutral distractors were compared across the three
types of lists. Since there were twice more neutral
distractors in the neutral than in the orthographic or
semantic lists (i.e. 12 instead of 6), the number of
fixations was normalized with respect to the number of
neutral distractors present in each type of list, namely
the number of fixations made on the neutral distractors
of neutral lists was divided by two.

Procedure
All participants were tested individually. Each trial began
with the presentation of a cross centered on the left side of
the screen, where the participant had to position the mouse
cursor. When the participant was ready, s/he pressed the
space bar of the keyboard and a word appeared at the topleft corner of the screen.
In experiment 1 (“literal” task), the word shown to the
participant was the target word itself, for instance “corbeau”
(raven). In experiment 2 (“semantic” task), the word
shown to the participant was the super-ordinate category
prompting her/him to search within the words list for the
unique exemplar of this category, i.e. “oiseau” (bird) was
given as a clue to find the target word “corbeau” (raven).
Once the participant had memorized the word, s/he
pressed the space bar and the list to be searched appeared.
When the participant had found the target word, s/he had to
click on it using the mouse. To begin another trial, the
participant pressed the space bar again. The participants
were told that there was always only one valid target word,
were instructed to click on it as soon as they had found it,
but were also told that they should not make any error.
All participants participated in both experiments. Half of
them began with experiment 1 where the target word was
known in advance, the other half with experiment 2 where
the target word was defined by its super-ordinate category.
Each of the two experiments included 12 experimental and
12 filler trials that were presented in random order, and was
preceded by a series of ten practice trials aimed at
familiarizing the participant with the task.

Experiment 1 (“Literal” Task)
Results
Error Rates and Response Times When participants knew
in advance the target word to search for, the error rate was
very low. Only two errors of target selection were observed
over the 432 experimental trials performed by the 36
participants, i.e. less than 0.5%. No further analysis was
therefore conducted for this variable.
365

The times taken by the participants to find the target
words within each type of list are presented in Table 1.

Discussion
As expected, the presence of orthographic distractors had a
strong impact on the search process when the target word
was shown in advance to the participants. The presence of
semantic associates of the target word within the list also
impacted the search, in accordance with data obtained by
Henderson & Chard (1978) with category membership, but
to a lesser extent.
Eye movement recordings revealed that when
orthographic distractors were present, they were fixated
more often than the neutral distractors of the list. This
suggests that parafoveal vision of distractors that resemble
the target word was sufficient to draw the attention of the
participants towards them. Orthographic distractors were
also fixated for longer durations, which suggests that more
time was needed to distinguish them from the target word
than for neutral distractors. Interestingly, the neutral
distractors of orthographic lists were themselves fixated
more often, but for shorter durations than the neutral
distracters of neutral lists. Hence, the presence of several
orthographic distractors looking alike would lead to a more
thorough exploration of the list in general, but to a faster
judgment of dissimilarity for the words of the list that do not
resemble the target.
The impact of semantic distractors on the search process
was not explained by a difference in the number or duration
of fixations made on them relative to the neutral distractors
of the list. However, visual search within semantic lists was
associated with an increase in the number of fixations made
on the neutral distractors of the list compared to the neutral
distractors of neutral lists. As with orthographic distractors,
the presence of several semantic associates of the target
word would induce a more thorough examination of all the
words in the list.
Altogether, the data show that orthographic distractors
looking like the target word have a strong impact on the
search process, but also that automatic semantic processing
of the distractor words may occur to a certain extent in this
situation (Ariga & Kawahara, 2004).

Table 1: Response times (in milliseconds) obtained on each
type of list in experiment 1.
Type of list
Neutral
Semantic
Orthographic

Mean
2392
2647
3031

SD
436
657
640

Following logarithmic transformation of the data that
ensured normality and variance homogeneity, an ANOVA
demonstrated that the type of list within which the target
word was presented had a significant effect on the response
times (F(2,70) = 27.99, MSe = .094, p < .001). NewmanKeuls post-hoc tests showed that, in accordance with our
hypotheses, participants took more time to find the target
word when orthographic (p < .001) or semantic (p < .01)
distractors were present than when the list only contained
neutral distracters. The increase of the response time was
larger with orthographic than with semantic distractors
(p < .001).
Eye Movement Data When the target word was presented
within semantic lists, there was no significant difference
between the number or duration of fixations made on the 6
semantic distractors and the 6 neutral distractors (t(35) = .81
and .58, ns). Within orthographic lists in contrast,
orthographic distractors were both fixated more often
(t(35) = 3.63, p < .001) and for longer durations
(t(35) = 5.68, p < .001) than neutral distractors (Table 2).
Table 2: Mean (SD) normalized number (top) and duration
(bottom, in milliseconds) of fixations made on each type of
distractors in experiment 1.

Neutral lists
Semantic lists
Orthographic lists
Neutral lists
Semantic lists
Orthographic lists

Nature of distractors
Neutral
Semantic Orthographic
2.4 (0.7)
3.0 (1.2)
2.8 (1.1)
3.0 (1.0)
3.7 (1.3)
213 (57)
204 (54)
200 (73)
187 (42)
233 (46)

Experiment 2 (“Semantic” Task)
Results
Error Rates and Response Times When participants were
given the super-ordinate category of the target-word they
had to search for, the error rate in the identification of the
target reached an overall value of 6.5% (28 errors out of 432
trials). The error rate was 3.5% when the target word was
presented within neutral lists, 2.8% when orthographic
distractors were present and 13.2% when semantic
distractors were present. In accordance with our hypotheses,
a non-parametric Friedman ANOVA demonstrated that the
type of list had a significant effect on the error rate (Chi²
ANOVA (N = 36, df = 2) = 12.33, p < .01). Post-hoc sign
tests revealed that the error rate was higher for semantic lists
than for neutral (p < .05) and orthographic (p < .01) lists.

ANOVAs revealed a significant effect of the type of list
on both the number (F(2,70) = 5.07, MSe = .07, p < .01) and
duration (F(2,70) = 3.87, MSe = .32, p < .05) of fixations
made on neutral distractors. Post-hoc Newman-Keuls tests
demonstrated that the number of fixations on neutral
distractors was higher for both semantic (p < .05) and
orthographic (p < .05) lists than for neutral lists (Table 2). In
addition, neutral distractors were fixated for less time in
orthographic (p < .05) than neutral lists.

366

The times taken by the participants to find the target
words within each type of list are presented in Table 3.

Discussion
Experiment 2 was aimed at checking whether and how
changing the task assigned during the visual search would
modify the respective impact of orthographic and semantic
distractors on the search process. With one exception, the
data did not support our hypothesis that the nature of the
task, and not the structure of the lists per se, would be the
main determinants of the search.
The error rate was the only variable that behaved in
accordance with this idea. Indeed, the presence of semantic
associates of the target word induced a higher proportion of
errors than that of orthographic and/or neutral distractors. In
sharp contrast, semantic distractors only had a marginal
effect on the time taken to find the target word, and the eye
movements recorded during the exploration of semantic lists
were not different from those obtained for neutral lists. This
marginal effect contrasts with the results reported by Léger
et al. (2005) and Barnard et al. (2004), who found that
semantic distracters strongly disturbed visual search for
words and word identification. However, in Léger et al.
(2005)’s study, the distractors surrounding the target word
were all members of the same super-ordinate category,
whereas in the present experiment only half of the words
were semantically related to the target word. Barnard et al.
(2004) used rapid serial visual presentation paradigms
instead of visual search. In this experiment, the participants
must decide which of the words in the list best corresponds
to the categorical clue given to define the target word. The
discrepancy between the error rate and response time data
suggests that decision about the suitability of a distractor as
the target word is independent from the time spent looking
at this distractor and from eye movement data.
The strong effect of orthographic distractors on the search
time observed in experiment 1 persisted. It was associated
with an increase in the duration of fixations made on the
orthographic distractors compared to neutral distractors of
the same list. This effect was observed from the beginning
of the search on, before the first fixation on the target word,
which eliminates the possibility that orthographic distractors
may have an effect only once the target word has been seen.
Even when the target word to search for is not precisely
known, orthographic distractors resembling each other and
the target word would be evaluated with more attention than
neutral distractors.
The experimental material used in both experiments was
the same and whatever the task, the effects of orthographic
and semantic distractors on the visual search time were
quite similar. Hence, experiment 2 suggests that the
respective impact of the orthographic and semantic
distractors on the time taken to find a target word within a
list depends more on the structure of the list per se than on
the nature of the search task. In particular, the data may be
interpreted as evidence that the presence of several words
looking similar within a list will slow down the search for
any word within this list.

Table 3: Response times (in milliseconds) obtained on each
type of list in experiment 2.
Type of list
Neutral
Semantic
Orthographic

Mean
5004
5465
5670

SD
887
1477
1497

Following logarithmic transformation of the data that
ensured normality and variance homogeneity, an ANOVA
demonstrated that the type of list within which the target
word was presented had a significant effect on the response
times (F(2,70) = 3.71, MSe = .021, p < .05). Newman-Keuls
post-hoc tests showed that contrary to our hypotheses,
participants took more time to find the target word when
orthographic (p < .05) distractors were present than when
only neutral distractors were included in the list. The
presence of semantic distractors only induced a marginally
significant increase of the response time (p = .09). No
difference was found between semantic and orthographic
lists.
Eye Movement Data When the target word was presented
within semantic lists, there was no significant difference
between the number or duration of fixations made on the 6
semantic and 6 neutral distractors (t(35) = 1.25 and .82, ns).
Within orthographic lists, orthographic distractors were
fixated for longer durations (t(35) = 2.65, p < .05), but not
more often (t(35) = .29, ns) than neutral distractors
(Table 4). To check whether this effect was present from the
beginning of the search on, a separate analysis was done on
the fixations that occurred before the first fixation on the
target word. Orthographic distractors (M = 268 ms,
SD = 81) were still fixated for longer durations than neutral
distractors (M = 243 ms, SD = 62; t(35) = 2.72, p < .05).
Table 4: Mean (SD) normalized number (top) and duration
(bottom, in milliseconds) of fixations made on each type of
distractors in experiment 2.

Neutral lists
Semantic lists
Orthographic lists
Neutral lists
Semantic lists
Orthographic lists

Nature of distractors
Neutral
Semantic Orthographic
5.2 (0.9)
5.3 (1.7)
5.6 (1.6)
5.5 (1.3)
5.6 (1.2)
246 (61)
255 (71)
264 (75)
245 (60)
286 (75)

ANOVAs did not reveal any effect of the type of list on
either the number (non-parametric Chi² ANOVA (N = 36,
df = 2) = 3.62, ns) or duration (F(2,70) < 1, ns) of fixations
made on neutral distracters (Table 4).

367

Barnard, P.J., Scott, S., Taylor, J., May, J., & Knightley, W.
(2004). Paying attention to meaning. Psychological
Science, 15, 179-186.
Bruce, V. (1981). Visual and semantic effects in a serial
word classification task. Current Psychological Research,
1, 153-162.
Grainger, J., & Whitney, C. (2004). Does the huamn mnid
raed wrods as a wlohe? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8,
58-59.
Harris, C.R., Pashler, H.E., & Coburn, N. (2004). Moray
revisited: High-priority affective stimuli and visual
search. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57A, 1-31.
Henderson, L & Chard, J. (1978). Semantic effects in visual
word detection with visual similarity controlled.
Perception & Psychophysics, 23, 290-298.
Katayama, W., & Yagi, A. (1992). The effect of word
processing time on eye movements in visual search.
Psychologia, 35, 173-179.
Léger, L., Tijus, C., & Baccino, T. (2005). La
discrimination visuelle et sémantique : pour la conception
ergonomique du contenu de sites web. Revue
d'Interaction Homme-Machine, 6, 81-106.
Léger, L, Tijus, C. & Baccino, T. (2006). Disposition
spatiale et détection de mots. Le Travail Humain, 69, 349377.
Lété, B., & Pynte, J. (2003). Word-shape and word-lexicalfrequency effects in lexical-decision and naming tasks.
Visual Cognition, 10, 913-948.
Mari-Beffa, P., Fuentes, L.J., Catena, A., & Houghton, G.
(2000). Semantic priming in the prime task effect:
evidence of automatic semantic processing of distractors.
Memory & Cognition, 28, 635-647.
Neisser, U., & Keller, H.K. (1965). Searching through word
lists. British Journal of Psychology, 56, 349, 358.
New, B., Pallier, C., Ferrand, L., & Matos, R. (2001). Une
base de données lexicales du Français contemporain sur
internet : LexiqueTM. (1988). L’Année Psychologique,
101, 447-462.
Ojanpää, H., Näsänen, R., & Kojo, I. (2002). Eye
movements in the visual search of word lists. Vision
Research, 42, 1499-1512.
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., & Reichle, E.D. (2003). Eye
movements in reading: Models and data. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 26, 507-526.
Rayner, K., & Raney, G.E. (1996). Eye movement control
in reading and visual search: effects of word frequency.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 3, 245-248.
Rouet, J.-F. (2006). The skills of document use: from text
comprehension to web-based learning. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Wolfe, J.M. (2000). Moving towards solution to some
enduring controversies in visual search. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 70-76.

General Discussion
Qualitative comparison between the results of the two
experiments confirms that to find a single word within a list
of 13 words takes about twice more time in the semantic
than in the literal condition. The increase of the response
time was associated with both an increase in the number of
fixated words and in the average duration of fixations on the
words (about 250 ms in the semantic condition versus 200
ms in the literal condition). This probably reflects the fact
that when the word to find is defined by a semantic clue, a
semantic treatment of all or most words in the list is needed.
Taken together, the data presented here indicate that
whatever the task assigned to participants, the presence with
the target word of distractor words sharing the same first
and last letters provokes a strong increase of the time taken
to find the target word. This is in accordance with the work
of Grainger & Whitney (2004), who demonstrated the
particular importance of the first and last letter of a word for
its identification. Other visual characteristics of words could
have similar effects, like their global shape as defined by
Lété & Pynte (2003).
The fact that orthographic distractors had a strong impact
on the time taken to find a target word that was not precisely
known in advance was unexpected, but may be explained in
different ways. First, the mere presence of several words
looking similar within a list might slow down search for any
word within this list. This hypothesis will be tested in a near
future. Second, one cannot exclude that seeing the name of a
super-ordinate category given as a clue to define the target
word may induce an unconscious pre-activation of the most
typical exemplars of this category. In general indeed, the
target words we used were chosen as much as possible to be
among the most popular representatives of their category.
Whatever the explanation, the results of experiment 2
suggest that the visual appearance of the words used in
documents will be a strong determinant of the rapidity and
success of information search within these documents even
when what is searched for is not known with precision. The
semantic characteristics of the verbal material appear to
have a lower impact on the time taken to find the
information, but might in contrast strongly impact the
relevance of the information that is found.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the CNRS, the
University of Poitiers, the Maison des Sciences de l’Homme
et de la Société de Poitiers (MSHS, CNRS UMS 842) and
the Région Poitou-Charentes. L.L. was supported by the
University of Poitiers and the MSHS.

References
Ariga, A., & Kawahara, J. (2004). The perceptual and
cognitive distractor-previewing effect. Journal of Vision,
4, 891-903.

368

