UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
English and Spanish Speakers Remember Causal Agents Differently

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4425600t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Fausey, Caitlin M.
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

English and Spanish Speakers Remember Causal Agents Differently
Caitlin M. Fausey (cmfausey@psych.stanford.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Bldg 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract

agents in their descriptions of accidental events, are they
also less likely to remember who the agents were?
Recent research has provided evidence of cross-linguistic
differences in how people think about colors (Roberson &
Hanley, 2007; Winawer et al., 2007), space (Levinson et al.,
2002), and objects (Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003;
Imai & Gentner, 1997; Lucy, 1992), among other domains.
Research on the role of language in event cognition,
however, has provided more mixed results (e.g., Billman &
Krych, 1998; Gennari, Sloman, Malt & Fitch, 2002;
Papafragou, Massey, & Gleitman, 2002). In this paper we
examine a new aspect of events: agentivity in causal events.
The domain of causal events provides a rich testing
ground for a novel linguistic relativity hypothesis: Talking
about causal agents improves memory for causal agents.
We hypothesize that patterns in language use may guide
attention to those parts of events that are typically talked
about (Boroditsky, Ham, & Ramscar, 2002; Slobin, 1996),
so that habitually talking about a certain element of events
may strengthen memory for that element. People whose
language environments include more agentive language may
remember causal agents better than people whose language
environments include less agentive language.
Note that language use may influence cognition via
multiple mechanisms. Language may act at a “local” level
such that the immediate linguistic context of any behavior
influences the behavior. Over time, accumulations of many
instances of integrating linguistic and non-linguistic
information may sufficiently shape a cognitive system at a
“global” level such that people with different histories of
language use attend to different aspects of their world even
when not using language. In this paper we first present
evidence that there is a cross-linguistic phenomenon to
explain, then present direct evidence for a “local”
linguistic mechanism, and finally suggest follow-up
studies that will help to even better understand the nature
of the reported cross-linguistic differences in causal event
cognition.
In the studies reported in this paper, we compared
English and Spanish speakers’ descriptions and memory
for accidental and intentional events. In all studies,
participants first completed a simple control memory task.
This task was unrelated to event cognition and served as a
baseline measure of memory performance. In Experiment
1 we then showed English and Spanish speakers videos of
intentional and accidental events. After viewing the events,
participants were tested on their memory for the agents of
these events. After the memory test, participants viewed
the videos again and provided a verbal description for each
video.

Does language play a role in how people interpret and remember
causal events? One source of variation in causal event
descriptions is agentivity, such as the difference between “She
broke the vase” (agentive) vs. “The vase broke” (non-agentive).
In this paper, we examined English and Spanish speakers’
descriptions of intentional and accidental events, as well as their
memory for the causal agents of these events. While both groups
of speakers described intentional events using agentive
language, English speakers described accidents using more
agentive language than did Spanish speakers. Similarly, English
and Spanish speakers remembered intentional agents equally
well but diverged in their memory for accidental agents, with
better accidental agent memory in English than in Spanish.
Spanish-English bilingual descriptions and memory resembled
that of Spanish monolinguals, both when tested in Spanish and
in English. Further, to test the causal nature of linguistic context,
we primed English speakers with either agentive or non-agentive
language. English speakers who were exposed to agentive
language remembered causal agents better than those exposed to
non-agentive language. It appears that patterns of language use
shape how people interpret and remember causal events.

Introduction
Imagine that a guest at your cocktail party accidentally
brushes against a flower vase and the vase ends up in pieces
on the floor. When asked about what happened, it would be
natural in English to say “She broke the vase”. Agentive
expressions like these are canonical in English (Bates,
Friederici, Wulfeck, & Juarez, 1988), even when describing
accidental events. In fact, descriptions that avoid mentioning
an agent can come across as evasive, such as Reagan’s
famous “Mistakes were made”.
In this paper we investigated the extent to which this
tendency to use agentive language differs between English
and Spanish. We also examined the role that linguistic
descriptions play in shaping English and Spanish speakers’
memory for causal events. In particular, we compared
English and Spanish speakers’ descriptions of intentional
and accidental events. We find that Spanish speakers more
strongly distinguish between intentional and accidental
events in linguistic descriptions than do English speakers.
For example, though both Spanish and English speakers
describe intentional events using agentive language, Spanish
speakers are less likely than English speakers to describe
accidents agentively. These results are consistent with
suggestions from linguistic theory (Maldonado, 1992) as
well as with previous elicitation work (Martinez, 2000;
Slobin & Bocaz, 1988). Does this difference in language
lead to other cognitive differences between the two groups?
For example, if Spanish speakers are less likely to mention

205

In addition to examining language and memory
patterns of monolingual English speakers and
monolingual Spanish speakers, we also examined these
patterns in bilinguals who had a lifetime of experience
using both languages. In Experiment 2, we tested whether
local linguistic environment influences memory for
agents. We primed one group of English speakers with
agentive language, and another group with non-agentive
language. We then tested both groups on the same event
memory task used with English and Spanish speakers in
Experiment 1. This second experiment more directly tests
whether patterns in language play a causal role in shaping
attention to events.
In combination, Experiments 1 and 2 test for a novel
cross-linguistic difference in causal event cognition.

Part A: Object-orientation memory
Materials
45 color drawings were used in this task. The drawings
showed 15 different objects (e.g., chair, motorcycle,
trumpet), each in 3 different orientations: facing right,
facing left, or facing forward.
Design & Procedure
During encoding, participants were shown pictures of 15
different objects. Each object was shown in one of three
possible orientations: facing right, facing left, or facing
forward. Which objects appeared in which orientations was
counterbalanced across participants. Pictures were presented
on a computer screen one at a time, and each image
remained on the screen for two seconds. Participants were
instructed to pay attention to the images and were told that
their memory would be tested. Participants received no
information about which aspect of the stimuli would be
probed during the memory test.
After the encoding phase of the task, participants were
given a brief distracter task. They were shown an image
comprised of black and white squares and asked to count the
number of white squares. After this brief distracter task,
they were tested for their memory for the orientations of the
objects they had seen at encoding.
At test, participants were shown all three possible
orientations of each object seen at encoding. For each
object, the participants’ task was to indicate which of these
three orientations of that object they had seen at encoding.
Participants completed this test at their own pace without
feedback. One random ordering of learning and test trials
was presented to all participants.

Experiment 1:
Who did it and what happened?
Participants
63 monolingual English speakers (Stanford University),
87 monolingual Spanish speakers (Universidad de Chile),
and 38 Spanish-English bilinguals (University of California,
Merced) received course credit or were paid for their
participation. Half of the bilinguals completed the
experiment in English and half in Spanish.
Monolingual participants reported learning only their
native language before age 12. All bilinguals reported
learning both languages before age 12, with early mean ages
of first exposure (Spanish M = 2 years, English M = 4.7
years). Bilinguals reported high proficiency speaking and
understanding both languages, with mean ratings for all
measures above 4.4 on a scale in which 5 indicated nativelike proficiency. Bilinguals reported an average of 30
percent current daily language use in Spanish.

Part B: Causal agent memory
Materials
Videos. Videos of 16 unique events were prepared (see
Table 1). Three white male adults acted as agents in an
intentional version and an accidental version of each event.
The same silent videos served as stimuli for both English
speakers and Spanish speakers. The actors in the videos
were typical in appearance for both the US American and
Chilean societies.
Table 1: Events.

General study set-up
Text materials. Participants read instructions and other
text in either English or Spanish. English and Spanish texts
were developed simultaneously, and all Spanish text was
verified by a native Chilean-English bilingual.
Design and procedure. All participants did three tasks:
A. Object-orientation memory: The first task was a
control memory task that assessed participants’ memory for
object orientations. This was designed to be a baseline
measure of memory performance unrelated to causal events.
In addition to serving as a baseline memory measure, this
task also helped accustom participants to computerized
memory tests.
B. Causal agent memory: The second task presented
participants with videos of causal events and tested their
memory for the agents of those events.
C. Event descriptions: Finally, participants completed an
event description task during which they were asked to
provide verbal descriptions of causal events. Importantly,
participants did not describe any events until after the
memory task, nor was any causal language included in
other materials. Each task is described in more detail
below.

Stick sticker
Drop keys
Break pencil
Let go balloon
Pop balloon

Close drawer
Open umbrella
Rip paper
Spill water
Knock box
Close book

Knock cups
Crack egg
Crumple can
Turn off light
Open door

Design
Learning phase. During the learning phase, participants
viewed 16 videos. Each video was a unique event, in which
one of two male agents appeared. A man wearing a blue
shirt acted as the agent in eight events and a different man
wearing a yellow shirt acted as the agent in the other eight
events. Each male appeared as the agent in four intentional
events and in four accidental events.

206

Across participants, each particular event featured the
same actor as the agent (e.g., the blue-shirt man was
always the agent in the balloon popping videos), but half
of the participants viewed the intentional version of the
event while the other half viewed its accidental
counterpart.
Videos were presented in one of two pseudo-random
orders, counterbalanced across participants. These
pseudo-random orders ensured that no more than three
videos of the same agent or same intention appeared in a
row. The 16 videos in the learning phase were presented
sequentially, with a one-second pause between each
video. Participants saw each video only once.
Distracter phase. After viewing 16 videos, participants
were instructed to count to 10. Pilot testing revealed that
a longer delay period between learning and test resulted
in chance performance for agent memory in this
paradigm.
Test phase. Each trial of the recognition memory test
consisted of a probe video followed by a picture of both
agents that had appeared during the learning phase (i.e.,
blue-shirt guy and yellow-shirt guy; see Figure 1). In
each probe video, an unfamiliar man wearing a green
shirt appeared as the causal agent of the same events that
had been presented during the learning phase. For
example, if a participant had seen the “accidental balloon
popping” event during learning, s/he would see this same
event acted by the new agent in the test phase. After
viewing the probe video, participants were asked, “Who
did it the first time?” (“¿Quién lo hizo la primera vez?”)
and responded by mouse-clicking on one of the two agent
pictures (either the blue-shirt guy or the yellow-shirt
guy). Participants were only tested on the events they had
seen during the learning phase. For example, if a
participant had seen the accidental balloon popping at
learning, they would only be tested on the accidental
balloon popping and not on the intentional version of the
same event.
As in the learning phase, test videos were presented in
one of two new pseudo-random orders, counterbalanced
across participants.

Who did it the first time?

Figure 1: Example agent memory test trial.

Results
We first report the results of the event description phase of
the study, and then the results of the memory experiments.
In all studies we first compare the monolingual English
speakers to the monolingual Spanish speakers. We then
report the analyses for the Spanish-English bilinguals and
compare them to both the English monolinguals and the
Spanish monolinguals.

Results: Event Descriptions
Description coding. Each participant described eight
intentional events and eight accidental events. Descriptions
were coded as agentive if the sentence mentioned the causal
agent in a transitive sentence that described the change-ofstate event. A canonical agentive description is “He popped
the balloon”. Descriptions were coded as non-agentive if
the change-of-state event was described intransitively,
without an agent. A canonical non-agentive description is
“The balloon popped”.1 Most of the Spanish non-agentive
sentences were marked by the clitic se. Across all
participants, 4.5 percent of all descriptions did not describe
the event and were excluded from analyses.
Agentive vs. Non-agentive language use. English speakers
and Spanish speakers described intentional events similarly
but diverged in their descriptions of accidental events.
Intentional events were described agentively by both
English speakers (M = 96.9) and Spanish speakers (M =
95.0), t(148) = 1.23, p = .22. Accidental events, however,
were described more agentively in English (M = 79.2) than
in Spanish (M = 62.5), t(148) = 5.03, p < .001. The
interaction between language group and event type was
reliable, both across participants F(1,148) = 18.19, p < .001,
and across events F(1,15) = 15.27, p = .001. Table 2
presents some non-agentive accident descriptions.

Procedure
As in the object-orientation memory study, participants
were instructed to pay attention to the videos and were
told that their memory would be tested. Participants were
not given any extra clues about what aspects of the
events they should pay attention to. Participants received
no feedback during the memory test.

Part C: Causal event descriptions
Materials, Design and Procedure
Each participant described exactly the same videos s/he
had seen during the learning phase of the agent memory
study. In each description trial, participants viewed a
video and were then prompted to answer the question
“What happened?” (“¿Qué pasó?”). Participants typed
their responses to these questions and received no
feedback.

1

Some non-agentive descriptions took the form, “Someone was
doing X, and then Y happened”. These were coded as non-agentive
because the change-of-state event was linguistically separated from
the agent and described using an intransitive verb form.

207

Intentional

Accidental

Figure 3: Within-language variation in accident descriptions.

Figure 2: Event descriptions in English and Spanish.
The within-language pattern of variation in accidental
event descriptions was consistent across the two language
groups (r(14) = .94, p < .001). For example, in both
linguistic communities speakers were more likely to use
agentive language when describing the egg-breaking
event than when describing the pencil-breaking event.
This suggests that speakers in both communities were
sensitive to properties of the affected objects in the
events.
Bilingual description patterns did not vary by task
language.2 Subsequent analyses therefore considered the
bilingual sample as a whole. Like both English and
Spanish monolinguals, bilinguals described intentional
events using predominantly agentive language (M =
95.7). Bilingual accident descriptions (M = 68.1) were
most similar to those of Spanish monolinguals, differing
reliably from English speakers, t(99) = 3.37, p = .001, but
not from monolingual Spanish speakers, t(123) = 1.35, p
= .18 (see Figure 2).
Figure 3 illustrates the variation in agentive accident
descriptions within each linguistic community. The
distributions reveal a progressive shift to greater
proportions of non-agentive accident descriptions from
English monolinguals, to Spanish-English bilinguals, to
Spanish monolinguals.
To sum up, English speakers and Spanish speakers
described causal events differently. While speakers in
each monolingual and bilingual community described
intentional events using agentive language, they differed
in their descriptions of accidental events. When
describing accidents, English speakers used more
agentive language than did Spanish speakers and
Spanish-English bilinguals. Answers to the question
“What happened?” vary by linguistic community when
describing accidents.

Table 2: Example non-agentive descriptions.
Spanish
De la nada, se le partió el lápiz en dos.
(Out of nowhere, the pencil split in two on him.)
Iba a guardar algo y el cajón se cerró.
(He was going to put something away and the drawer closed.)
English
His pencil broke.
The drawer closed.

Results: Memory for object orientations
English speakers and Spanish speakers did not differ in their
memory for the orientation of objects (M = 77.9, and 75.5,
respectively), t(148) = 1.15, p = .25. It is reassuring that the two
groups are well-matched on memory performance in this
control task. Bilinguals (M = 83.5) showed better object
memory than did Spanish speakers, t(123) = 3.23, p = .002, and
English speakers, t(99) = 1.98 , p = .05. Though there is no
obvious explanation for this bilingual advantage, it suggests
that bilinguals were engaged in the experiment and mitigates
against any hypotheses about impaired memory for agents.

Results: Memory for causal agents
Mirroring the pattern of event descriptions, English and
Spanish speakers remembered intentional agents equally well but
diverged in their memory for accidental agents (see Figure 4).
Intentional agents were remembered well by both English (M =
80.4) and Spanish (M = 78.5) speakers, t(148) = .69, p = .49.
Accidental agents, however, were better remembered by English
speakers (M = 82.3) than by Spanish speakers (M = 74.1), t(148)
= 2.87, p = .005. The interaction between language group and
event type was reliable, F(1,148) = 4.29, p = .04.
Spanish-English bilinguals patterned like Spanish
monolinguals. They remembered intentional agents (M = 75.9)
as well as did English speakers t(99) = 1.32, p = .19 and Spanish
speakers, t(123) = .77, p = .45. Their memory for accidental
agents (M = 68.8) differed reliably from that of English
monolinguals, t(99) = 3.53, p = .001, but not from that of Spanish
monolinguals, t(123) = 1.47, p = .15.

2

A trend to use more agentive language when describing accidents
in English (M=73.0) than in Spanish (M=63.2), p = .07, suggests
that more data may increase power to detect an effect of local
linguistic context. Ongoing research will help to address this issue.

208

Experiment 2: Priming

Intentional

Participants and general study set-up
60 English speakers (32 agentive prime, 28 non-agentive
prime) received course credit or were paid for participation.
English speaking participants completed 3 tasks. First, all
participants were tested on the same control objectorientation memory task as used in Experiment 1. Then, all
participants completed the linguistic priming task described
below. After the linguistic priming task, participants
completed the same causal event memory task as used in
Experiment 1. All of the procedures and materials were
identical to those of Experiment 1 with the exception of the
insertion of the priming task.

Accidental

Figure 4: Causal agent memory in English and in Spanish.

Priming Task Materials
Sentences. Participants in each condition listened to 24
sentences, either all agentive (e.g., She burned the toast) or
all non-agentive (e.g., The toast burned). No verbs that
could describe actions in the agent memory task were used.
All sentences were recorded by a female native English
speaker and presented via computer speakers.
Images. While listening to each sentence, participants
viewed an image that contained two pictures: the beginning
and the end state of the affected object. For example, people
who heard She burned the toast or The toast burned viewed
a screen with a piece of bread on the left and a burned piece
of bread on the right. The end-state picture appeared on the
left in 12 images and on the right in 12 images.

Discussion
English and Spanish speakers remembered causal agents in a
pattern consistent with their causal event descriptions. Both
groups of monolingual speakers had similarly strong memory
for agents of intentional events, but English speakers
remembered accidental agents better than did Spanish speakers.
Bilinguals, who described causal events like Spanish
monolinguals, also showed a selective impairment in memory
for accidental agents. Even though the bilinguals in this study
reported high proficiency in English and are university students
who spend most of their day in English contexts, early
exposure and current use of Spanish may promote a less
agentive perspective on accidental events than English
monolinguals seem to have.
Note that it is not the case that Spanish monolinguals and
Spanish-English bilinguals had poorer memory than English
monolinguals overall. All groups of speakers showed similar
memory patterns for object-orientation as well as for
intentional agents. Only accidental events were described and
remembered differently across communities. These findings
suggest that the way people talk about causal events is related
to what people remember about these events. But what is the
nature of this relationship? Does the way people talk shape the
way they think?
An important question in all cross-linguistic research is
whether patterns in language play a causal role in shaping
thinking. While linguistic performance and memory
performance appear tightly linked in Experiment 1, these
results alone do not demonstrate that language per se shapes
people’s attentional patterns. There are many differences
between the cultural experiences of Spanish and English
speakers, and so more direct tests of a linguistic mechanism are
needed to conclude that the memory differences observed in
our first study may be attributed to language.
To test more directly whether manipulating patterns in
language can change what people remember about events, we
conducted Experiment 2. In Experiment 2, we primed English
speakers with either agentive or non-agentive language in an
unrelated task before they completed the same event memory
task as used in Experiment 1. If patterns in language bias
people’s attention in encoding events, then being exposed to
non-agentive language should lead to less sharp memory for
agents than being exposed to agentive language.

Priming Task Design and Procedure
During the priming task, participants saw 24 images, each
accompanied by a sentence that played when the image
appeared. Participants were instructed to click on the picture
that the sentence described, making the task and correct
response identical in each prime condition. Stimuli were
presented in random order. After this exposure, participants
were given a surprise recall test and asked to write down as
many sentences as they could remember. After completing
this priming task, participants continued on to complete the
same event memory task as used in Experiment 1.
It is important to note that this priming manipulation does
not distinguish between accidental and intentional events.
Either all prime sentences were agentive or all prime
sentences were non-agentive for a given participant. As
such, this manipulation is predicted to influence attention to
agents in general, not to agents of a particular kind of event.
If the patterns in one’s linguistic environment shape patterns
of attention, then directly manipulating the local linguistic
environment in this way should modulate English speakers’
memory for causal agents.
Results
Participants in each prime condition remembered object
orientation (the control task) similarly well. If anything,
people in the non-agentive condition remembered objects
marginally better (M = 78.1) than did people in the agentive
condition (M = 71.5), t(58) = 1.91, p =.06. As predicted,
participants primed with agentive language showed better
memory for agents (M = 78.3) than those primed with non-

209

References

agentive language (M = 70.9), t(58) = 1.73, p <. 05 (onetailed).3

Bates, E., Friederici, A., Wulfeck, B., & Juarez, L. A.
(1988). On the preservation of word order in aphasia.
Brain and Language, 35, 323-364.
Billman, D., & Krych, M. (1998). Path & manner verbs in
action: Effects of skipping or exiting on event memory.
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Boroditsky, L., Ham, W., & Ramscar, M. (2002). What is
universal in event perception? Comparing English and
Indonesian speakers. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
syntax, and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadow (Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the study
of Language and Cognition.
Gennari, S., Sloman, S.A., Malt, B. C., and Fitch, W.T.
(2002). Motion events in language and cognition.
Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of
early word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62(2), 169-200.
Levinson, S.C., Kita, S., Haun, D. & Rasch, B. (2002).
Returning the tables: Language affects spatial reasoning.
Cognition, 84, 155-188.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical Categories and Cognition:
A Case Study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maldonado, R. (1992). Middle voice: The Case of Spanish
se. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
California, San Diego.
Martinez, I. (2000). The effects of language on children’s
understanding of agency and causation. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Papafragou, A., Massey, C., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Shake,
rattle, ‘n’ roll: the representation of motion in language
and cognition. Cognition, 84(2), 189-219.
Roberson, D., & Hanley, J.R. (2007). Color categories vary
with language after all. Current Biology, 17, 605-606.
Slobin, D.I. (1996). From “thought and language” to
“thinking for speaking”. In J.J. Gumperz & S.C. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Slobin, D.I., & Bocaz, A. (1988). Learning to talk about
movement through time and space: The development of
narrative abilities in Spanish and English. Lenguas
Modernas, 15, 5-24.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., &
Boroditsky, L. (2007). The Russian Blues reveal effects
of language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, 104(19), 7780-7785.

Figure 5: Memory for agents following linguistic primes.

Discussion
English speakers’ memory for causal agents in an
agentive language context resembled their unprimed
memory pattern from our first experiment. When the local
linguistic environment consisted of non-agentive language,
however, they showed impaired memory for agents. These
results suggest that non-agentive language shifts attention
away from the agents of causal events.

General Discussion
How do people talk about and remember causal events?
After witnessing an intentional event, both English speakers
and Spanish speakers answered the question “What
happened?” by talking about the causal agent. By contrast,
English speakers described accidental events more
agentively than did Spanish speakers. In a recognition
memory task, English and Spanish speakers remembered
intentional agents equally well but English speakers
remembered accidental agents better than did Spanish
speakers. Spanish-English bilinguals behaved like Spanish
monolinguals, suggesting that experience with a less
agentive language than English shifts descriptions and
memory away from accidental agents. Further, English
speakers were sensitive to a direct manipulation of linguistic
context and remembered agents better after hearing agentive
language than non-agentive language. Together, these
results suggest that language use shapes our attention to and
memory for causal agents.
How people integrate linguistic and non-linguistic
information is an important piece of the puzzle of human
event cognition. The present results provide evidence that
language use shapes memory for causal agents.

Acknowledgments
We thank R. Bahamondes, A. Clare, G. Jenkins and M.P.
Zúñiga for help collecting data. This research was funded by
an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to CMF and by an
NSF CAREER award to LB.
3

There was no main effect of event type, F(1,58) = .002, p = .97,
and no interaction of prime by event type, F(1,58) = .09, p = .78.

210

