UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extending the Limits of Counting in Oceania: Adapting Tools for Numerical Cognition to
Cultural Needs

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5k54c68f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Bender, Andrea
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Extending the Limits of Counting in Oceania:
Adapting Tools for Numerical Cognition to Cultural Needs
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract

approaches. Studies addressing the first question revealed,
for instance, differences in efficiency both for notational
(Nickerson, 1988; Zhang & Norman, 1995) and for purely
linguistic numeration systems (Fuson & Kwon, 1991; Miller
et al., 1995; Pica et al., 2004). It should be noted, however,
that the assessment of whether a feature is efficient always
depends on the nature of the task and on the context of
usage, and that the efficiency of a specific numeration system
does not disclose anything about the general cognitive abilities of its users. It would therefore be rash to draw conclusions from specific properties of a numeration system to its
evolutionary status. Yet, this is exactly what happens in evolutionary approaches. In their attempt to answer the second
of the above questions regarding the emergence of specific
properties, they conclude that numeration systems are typically developed from being simpler to more sophisticated in
order to improve their efficiency on an absolute scale (Ifrah,
1985; Klix, 1993; Menninger, 1969; Nickerson, 1988).
But can one really assume that the simpler a numeration
system, the older it is? The discovery of the largely restricted
numeration system of the Amazonian Pirahã, which consists
of just two numerals (Everett, 2005; Gordon, 2004), not only
contributed to the discussion of how numerical cognition
depends on language, but also revived the question of its
evolution—both inside of academia (cf. discussion section in
Everett, 2005) and outside. A particularly strong position is
held by Premack and Premack (2005), who suppose that a
genuine digital number representation did not start before the
transition from hunter-gatherer cultures to cultures based on
agriculture, pastoralism, and trade. However, this position
not only does not do justice to the instances it refers to, but
also over-generalizes to all cultures of a certain type defined
in economic terms (e.g., Harris, 1987). We suppose, instead,
that examining cases like the Pirahã in isolation can only
yield information about how the cognitive representation of
numbers interacts with the cognitive processing of numbers.
However, if conclusions on the evolution of numerical cognition in general and of numeration systems in particular are to
be drawn, focusing on single cases is insufficient. A coherent
picture of their cognitive and evolutionary status can be
obtained only when both diachronic and synchronic data are
taken into account.
With instances from Melanesian and Polynesian languages
in which apparently «primitive» and «advanced» systems cooccurred, the present paper will highlight the cognitive efficiency of some of the allegedly primitive properties. In demonstrating that numeration systems do not necessarily evolve
in one direction only, it will also try to sensitize for the methodological risks of focusing on single cases.

Short or object-specific counting sequences in a language are
generally regarded as early steps in the evolution from premathematical conceptions to greater abstraction and often as
cognitively deficient. This paper scrutinizes the main numeration principles in some of the occasionally referenced
instances from Melanesia and Polynesia to show that neither
assumption holds categorically. The analysis of their cognitive
properties, linguistic origins, and cultural context reveals that
both the short and the object-specific counting sequences in
Oceania did not precede, but were developed out of an extensive and abstract sequence. Furthermore, the object-specific
sequences can be shown to have served as cognitively efficient
tools for calculating without notation.
Key words: Numerical Cognition; Culture; Language; Evolution; Object-Specific Counting Systems

Introduction
Numerical cognition is based on two systems: an ability to
roughly estimate numbers (analog numeracy) shared by various species and an ability to exactly assess a certain amount
(digital numeracy), which is restricted to language and thus
to humans (Feigenson, Dehaene & Spelke, 2004). Other than
the system for analog numeracy, the one for digital numeracy
offers a great opportunity to study interactions between culture and cognition. Its most basic cultural tool, the numeration system, is constituted by the number words developed in
a language (Dehaene, 1997; Wiese, 2003, 2007). Although
all numeration systems refer to the same entities, namely a
certain section of integers, each of them does so in an idiosyncratic way: The highest number that can be composed
regularly defines the extent of the system, cyclical patterns of
number word composition define its structure or dimensionality1, specific number words (such as «eleven» or «twelve»)
its regularity, and so on. Given such differences, the question
arises of whether and how these culture-specific properties
of numeration systems affect the way in which numbers are
processed. A second question is related to this: Which of
these properties are triggered by the requirements of counting and calculating in a particular cultural context?
While the former question has been extensively addressed
by cognitive science, the latter has not met similar attention
in this field, but has been largely restricted to evolutionary
1

Zhang and Norman (1995) distinguish three types of dimensionality: In 1D systems, numbers are ordered linearly; 1x1D systems are recursive and typically operate, for instance, with base
and power; and (1x1)x1D systems combine sub-base, sub-power
and main power, as was the case with the Roman numerals.

905

Characteristics of
«Primitive» Numeration Systems

Table 1: Traditional numerals for single numbers (n) and for
the powers of the base (P) in abstract counting in Adzera
(ADZ), Takia (TAK), Bauan (BAU), Tongan (TON), Mangarevan (MAN), and the general category in Ponapean (PNP)a

In evolutionary approaches, two properties are commonly
taken as indices for the simplicity of a numeration system:
One is its extent, the other is its degree of abstractness. The
two are largely independent of each other, both on theoretical grounds as well as in practice, and they differ in terms of
the attention they have attracted: While the extent of numeration systems has been extensively addressed recently (Everett, 2005; Gordon, 2004; Pica et al., 2004), the degree of
abstractness has largely been neglected so far. We will illustrate these properties with two instances for each, before
analyzing the second feature in detail. All instances are
drawn from the same linguistic cluster, namely the Oceanic
subgroup of the Austronesian language family (Figure 1).
One region where systems with limited extent abound is
Papua New Guinea. Takia, a language in Madang Province,
contains five numerals (cf. Table 1). Higher number words
may be composed by adding or multiplying numerals to the
numeral for 5, but this seems to have been done rarely and
for low numbers only (Tryon, 1995). Adzera, spoken in the
Markham River valley in Morobe Province, contains an even
more restricted system. Its number words are composed of
numerals for 1 and 2 only: bits (1), iru? (2), iru? da bits
(2+1), iru? da iru? (2+2), and so on. Due to its recursive
character, counting further with this system is in principle
possible: by simply adding more entities (i.e., bits and/or
iru?) to the number word already reached. However, with
only these two numerals available for tallying amounts, it
will soon become difficult to keep track of the amount of
addends accumulated. When in need for higher number
words nowadays, people therefore prefer to use loan words
from Tok Pisin instead (Holzknecht, 1986), the creole lingua
franca used in New Guinea.
These two numeration systems are admittedly not as simple as the case of the Pirahã system, but their low bases and

NO ADZ TAK
1 bits

n

P

a

Central-Eastern Oceanic g.

Central
Pacific lk.

North
New Guinea
Cluster
Huon
Gulf f.

Eastern
Fijian lk.

Adzera

Takia

Micronesian f.

East Central
Pacific lk.

Ngero/
Vitiaz f.

Bauan

Polynesian f.

Tongan

TON

MAN

PNP

taha

tahi

eh-

ua

rua

ria-

utol
tolu
iwaiwo va
kafe-n lima
ono
vitu
walu
ciwa

tolu
fa
nima
ono
fitu
valu
hiva

toru
ha
rima
ono
hitu
varu
iva
rogo'uru
hongofulu
takau
teau
rau

101

tini

102

drau

103

udolu afe

silupahielimaweneisuwaluduwa-ngoul
-pwiki

mano

kid

mano

makiu

nen

kilu

makiukiu

lopw

106

makore

rar

107

makorekore

dep

108

tini

sapw

109

maeaea

lik

104
105

Sources: Bender & Beller (2006a, 2006b), Churchward
(1941), Holzknecht (1986), and Tryon (1995)
Please note that in Mangarevan, from takau onwards, the
numerals refer to 2·10x (shaded).

the lack of higher powers of their base restrict both of them.
And although numerical cognition among these two Melanesian groups has not been studied experimentally, it can be
inferred by analogy that, with such restricted systems, precise numerical operations should be laborious, if not impossible, for larger numbers (e.g., Gordon, 2004; Pica et al.,
2004; Wassmann & Dasen, 1994).
The second property that is readily taken as evidence for
restricted efficiency of a numeration system is its objectspecificity. Distinguishing between «abstract» and «concrete» number sequences, Menninger (1969) assumed that
numeration systems are the more antiquated the more concrete or object-specific counting sequences are contained in a
language2. Despite its age, his works remain influential up to
the present day (e.g., Klix, 1993; Wiese, 2007), and particularly the degree of abstractness in a numeration system is
taken as a measure for its efficiency (Nickerson, 1988).

Oceanic
Western Oceanic lk.

2 iru?
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

BAU

kaik /
dua
kisaek
(u)raru rua

Manga- Ponarevan
pean

2

Figure 1: Linguistic origins and relationship of the languages analyzed in this paper according to Lynch, Ross & Crowley (2002); abbrev.: f = family, g = grouping, lk = linkage
906

Such concrete or object-specific counting sequences are linked
to numeral classifier systems—a point to be picked up below.
With a growing body of research on numeral classifiers (e.g.,
Aikhenvald, 2003; Craig, 1986), most of Menninger’s assumptions have been given up meanwhile, but the status of the objectspecific counting sequences has been largely neglected.

Table 2: Specific counting systems in Tongana
2

4

…

group 1 sugar-cane taha (ng.) ua (ng.) …
coconuts

20

40

te-tula

…

200

400

…

2,000

4,000

…

ua[ngo]tula …

te-au

ua[nge]au

…

taha afe ua afe

…

taha

ua

…

te-kau

ua[nga]kau

…

te-fua

ua-fua

…

te-au

ua[nge]au …

group 2 yam

taha

ua

…

te-kau

ua[nga]kau

…

te-fuhi

ua[ngo]fuhi

…

te-au

ua[nge]au …

fish

taha

ua

…

taha (kau) ua (kau)

…

ho[ngo]fulu uo-fulu

…

te-au

ua[nge]au …

a

Specific numerals are highlighted bold-faced at their first occurrence; the principal counting units (ng. = nga'ahoa in group 1 and kau in
group 2) are shaded. The ligature appearing in the lower ranges (-nga-/-nge-/-ngo-) is put in square brackets for easier comparison.

One of the languages referenced by Klix (1993, p. 283f.) as
having such object-specific counting sequences is Bauan
(Old High Fijian), a language in the Eastern part of Fiji:
While it glosses 10 as bola when fish are counted, for
canoes, udundu is used. In connection with canoes, bola
denotes 100 (Churchward, 1941). Similar object-specific
counting sequences can be found in the related Polynesian
and Micronesian languages. On Mangareva, for instance, a
volcanic island group in French Polynesia, tools, sugar-cane,
pandanus, breadfruit, and octopus were counted with different sequences (this case and the related Tongan instance will
be analyzed in more detail below).
From an evolutionary point of view, it may appear reasonable to regard such specific counting systems as predecessors
of an abstract mathematical comprehension and accordingly
as cognitively deficient. But surprisingly, these same systems
often also contained numerals for large powers—as far as
109 in Mangarevan—thus defining an extent not compatible
with the conception of «primitive» numeration systems.
Even more important, the languages depicted here had inherited a regular and abstract decimal numeration system with
(at least) two powers of base 10 from their common ancestor,
Proto-Oceanic (Lynch, Ross & Crowley, 2002; Tryon,
1995). Both the relative limitation of the two numeration
systems in Papua New Guinea and the specific counting
sequences in Fiji and Polynesia therefore constitute subsequent developments. While the former might count as a case
of regression in evolutionist terminology, the latter are more
complex and therefore require an elaborate analysis.

[1] Nab = [n P105] + … + [n P102] + [n P101] + [n]
with n ∈ {1, …, 9} and P = power numeral (according
to Table 1)
The specific counting sequences are depicted in Table 2. As
can be seen, each of these sequences proceeded with partly
diverging numerals (such as -tula, highlighted bold-faced in
Table 2) and in diverging steps. Old reference grammars
therefore treat each sequence distinctly. However, if we order
them not by the amount of single items but by the principal
counting units (shaded in Table 2), the differences between
the sequences collapse, revealing a polynomial for number
words in the specific sequences (Nsp) quite similar to the one
used in abstract counting:
[2] Nsp = [n P105] + … + [n P102] + [n C10] + [n][C1] + [Rest]
with n ∈ {1, …, 9}, P = power numeral analogous to the
abstract sequence (cf. Table 1), C10 ∈ {-tula, -fua, -fuhi}, and C1 ∈ {nga'ahoa, -kau}
(the Rest consists of 1 single item (matelau) in group 1,
and of n pairs and/or 1 single item in group 2)
What distinguishes the specific sequences from the general
one are the counting units to which they refer (pair or score)
and the numerals for ten of these (i.e., -tula, -fua, and -fuhi).

Numeration Systems in Mangarevan
Besides an abstract numeration system that, from 20 onwards, proceeded in pairs with P = 2·10x (cf. Table 1), traditional Mangarevan also contained three specific counting
sequences for certain objects (for more details see Beller &
Bender, 2008). Any number word in the abstract sequence
(Nab) is composed according to the following polynomial:

Numeration Principles
In order to demonstrate the efficiency of the allegedly primitive specific counting systems, two Polynesian instances will
be analyzed below: Tongan, which contains one of the most
‘regular’ specific systems, and Mangarevan containing one
of the most complex systems. To illustrate the composition,
reference will also be made to the numeral classifier systems
found in related Micronesian languages (such as Ponapean).

[3] Nab = [n P2·109] + … + [n P2·101] + [P101] + [n]
with n ∈ {1, …, 9} and P = power numeral (according
to Table 1)
The specific sequences are depicted in Table 3. Each of them
proceeded in diverging steps, some of which were no longer
decimal, and contained power numerals different from the
abstract power numerals. However, this apparent divergence
again disappears if we order them not by the amount of single items but by the principal counting units (shaded in Table

Numeration Systems in Tongan
Traditional Tongan contained an abstract numeration system
(Table 1) and four additional counting sequences for specific
objects (for a more detailed description see Bender & Beller,
2007). Any number word in the abstract sequence (Nab) is
composed according to the following polynomial (ligatures
are omitted for the sake of clarity)3:

3

907

For instance, 241 is denoted as “ua[nge]au fa[ngo]fulu ma taha”
(with the ligature -nge-/-ngo- in square brackets for easier comparison, ma = “and”, -au = P2·101, and -fulu = P2·101).

Table 3: Specific counting systems in Mangarevana
2

4

6

8

Category 1 tauga rua tauga toru tauga ha tauga

… 20

40

80

160

… paua

tataua

varu

rua varu ha varu

tataua varu

Category 2 —

tauga

—

rua tauga … rima tauga

paua

Category 3 —

—

—

tauga

rima tauga paua

a

… —

…

varu varu …

rua varu ha varu

…

varu

…

rua varu

culation time (Dehaene, 1992), and it indirectly affects base
size, which is associated with a cognitive trade-off (Zhang &
Norman, 1995): While large bases are more efficient for
encoding large numbers and may, by virtue of compact internal representations, facilitate mental operations, they also
require the memorization of larger addition and multiplication tables for calculations. Small bases, on the other hand,
are cumbersome for the representation of large numbers, but
advantageous when it comes to simple calculations. This
holds particularly for the binary system, as is well known
since the work of Leibniz.
In many Polynesian languages, a preoccupation with 2 is
apparent (Bender & Beller, 2006a), and this is particularly
true for Mangarevan. Not only do its three specific sequences
differ with regard to the value of their counting unit tauga by
factor 2, but their general decimal pattern is also modulated
with elements of a binary system. In Tongan, the pair as
counting unit was also prevalent in the lower ranges, but was
reinforced by factor 10 (yielding the score as counting unit)
in the higher ranges.
Overall, these specific sequences entailed a range of facilitation effects. One of these effects was that counting specific
objects was enhanced by counting them in larger units: in
pairs, quadruples, or eights as in Mangarevan, or in scores as
in Tongan. In addition, extracting the respective factor abbreviated higher numbers. Introducing a larger counting unit
therefore compensates the cognitive trade-off associated
with base size. It combines advantages of large and small
base sizes insofar as it facilitates encoding, internal representation, and memorizing of larger numbers (in terms of absolute amounts), and at the same time keeps base size
comfortably small for mental arithmetic. Encoding, for
instance, 48 ripe breadfruits in Mangarevan as 12 units = 1
paua + 2 tauga produces compact number representations as
in a base 40 system; at the same time, calculating ensued
with the addition and multiplication tables of the decimal
base, supported by two binary steps. Or, to illustrate the principle with a more familiar instance, consider how much easier it is to mentally calculate 6 dozens – 3 dozens + 2 dozens
than to calculate 72 – 36 + 24.
Although the analysis of their cognitive properties clarifies
the efficiency of specific counting systems, their evolutionary status still remains unresolved. Did they precede the
abstract systems, as is assumed by evolutionary accounts, or
could it also have been the other way around? And if they
were derived from the abstract ones, was this done deliberately, or did it just happen by accidental linguistic change?

[4] Nsp = … + [n P40] + [P20] + [P10] + [n · P1] + [Rest]
with n ∈ {1, …, 9}, P40 = varu, P20 = tataua, P10 =
paua, P1 = tauga, and Rest = n · tou'ara
Depending on the category of objects counted, the principal
counting unit tauga contained itself either two, four, or eight
items. The binary steps in the specific sequences (i.e., paua
and tataua) are difficult to explain—except if we regard varu
as their principal counting unit, as indicated by cultural preferences. In this case, paua and tataua would have served as
short cuts that facilitated the representation of the incomplete
units. The specific sequence would then be a «modulo 40
system» in which units of 40 tauga were counted, and the
remainder (if any occurred at all) was decomposed in 20 +
10 + n.4 In other words: Although—at first glance—the specific counting systems in Mangarevan may appear much
more irregular than those in Tongan, they still follow a
remarkably regular pattern.
Specific counting sequences like these were adopted in
nearly every language in Polynesia and even beyond, and
they all operated with counting units other than 1 (Bender &
Beller, 2006a, 2006b). With only a few (questionable) exceptions such as Mangarevan, the specific sequences regularly
accompanied a general sequence that was purely decimal
and abstract5. As this general sequence is constructed
according to simple and coherent rules, it fulfils all of the
requirements of a well-designed and efficient numeration
system. Why, then, the object-specific counting sequences?

Cognitive Properties of Specific Counting Systems
The main effect of the specific counting sequences was to
abbreviate numbers by extracting from the absolute amount
the factor inherent in the counting unit. This extraction has
implications for critical factors for mental arithmetic. It
directly affects the problem size effect in that it reduces cal-

5

640

Specific numerals are highlighted bold-faced at their first occurrence; the principal counting units (tauga and varu) are shaded.

3). The three sequences then collapse into a single syntactic
rule, according to which any number word in any of the three
specific sequences (Nsp) is composed:

4

tataua

320

This may not be the most efficient method of decomposition,
but—given the generally decimal nature of the system—it was
surely the most preferable. The next possible decomposition (20
+ 10 + 5 + n) would have arbitrarily restricted the single numerals to n ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
The switch from 10 to 20 in the general sequence in Mangarevan
is atypical in this regard. However, as many of the traditional numeration systems were replaced in colonial times before they
were documented, information on a regular system may simply
have been lost.

908

Linguistic Origins and Cultural Adaptations

increased stratification. In the highly stratified societies, certain resources were regularly allocated and redistributed by
powerful chiefs or kings (Bellwood, 1987; Kirch, 1984). In
pre-colonial times, Mangareva was one of these stratified
societies and a junction for the long-distance exchange of
goods. Accordingly, tributes and large shares for trade were
regularly due. The same holds for Tonga that from 950 AD
onwards was reigned by a powerful monarchy and where, at
certain occasions such as wars or funerals or when allocating
and redistributing tributes, certain objects were necessitated
in large amounts (Bender & Beller, 2006a, 2007). In these
cases, calculation rather than counting was required, and
when ceremonial purposes or prestige were involved, this
had to be done very carefully. Keeping track of the flow of
goods and coordinating their redistribution was an important
task, and without notation (and particularly so when large
numbers were involved), it was a difficult task. In this context, specific counting sequences with their abbreviation
function served practical reasons.
The interpretation that the specific counting sequences
were designed to facilitate mental arithmetic is further supported by indications that, during the early stage of colonialism, a range of Polynesian (and Micronesian) cultures began
to develop notational systems. Hawaiian tax gatherers, for
instance, seem to have used quipu-like knots for their records
(Barthel, 1971). Although none of these instances can clearly
be traced back to pre-colonial times, they hint at a genuine
need for facilitating the accounting process.
To sum up, our analysis reveals that the specific counting
systems in Mangarevan, Tongan, and other Polynesian languages did not precede an abstract system, but were rather
derived from it. Most likely, this was done deliberately and
for rational purposes. Regarding these systems as primitive
or cognitively deficient is therefore, despite their nonabstract nature, not justified.

We propose that the specific counting sequences were
derived from the abstract one, and that this was done on purpose. Although it is impossible to provide unquestionable
evidence for this hypothesis due to the lack of written
sources, both linguistic and cultural arguments can be mustered to support this proposition.
The first argument concerns the linguistic origin of the
specific counting sequences. While in almost all Polynesian
and Micronesian languages, specific counting systems cooccurred with abstract ones, the homogeneity among the
abstract ones is much greater than among the specific ones.
The only features the latter have in common are their objectspecificity (they apply to certain objects only) and the multiplication function (they are based on counting units larger
than 1). Apart from that they diverged considerably—even
among closely related languages—in terms of the precise
value of the counting units (ranging multifariously from 2 in
the most simple to 20 in the most extensive case), the objects
of reference (depending on ecological availability and cultural salience), and the specific lexemes used to identify distinct sequences (Bender & Beller, 2006a, 2006b). Taken
together, these idiosyncratic details in a basically similar
composition pattern indicate that each culture had inherited
the same abstract system, from which the specific systems
were derived individually and in response to cultural needs.
This inference is further corroborated by the constitutive
role that numeral classifiers play in the composition of
counting sequences (already hinted at in Footnote 2). Nearly
all specific counting systems in Polynesian languages are
based on the original abstract counting sequence modified by
specific terms for the first power of the base. Whereas in
Tongan, for instance, the term for 100 units is uniformly
teau, 10 ordinary things are glossed as hongofulu, 10 units of
sugar-cane as tetula, and 10 units of coconuts and yam as
tefua and tefuhi, respectively (cf. Table 2). These specific
lexemes, semantically referring to the object counted, are
residuals of numeral classifiers and link the Polynesian systems to the classifier systems prevailing in Micronesian languages. Numeral classifiers are obligatory components of
counting constructions in many languages (Aikhenvald,
2003; Craig, 1986) and group the associated nouns into
classes according to some sort of salient characteristics. A
close counterpart in English are words like sheet in «two
sheets of paper». The most relevant point here is that they in
themselves constitute specific counting systems, as they
affect the way in which each object is to be counted (e.g.,
paper in «sheets», cattle in «heads», etc.). But unlike the
numeral classifiers in the Micronesian languages, those used
in Polynesian numeration systems did not just classify
nouns, but also always implied a counting unit different from
one (for more details see Bender & Beller, 2006b), which
indicates a deliberate extension.
The third supportive point is provided by the cultural context of counting in Polynesia. One of the remarkable facts
about numeration systems in Polynesian languages is their
large extent. Distinct power terms reach as far as 105 (kilu) in
Tongan or even 109 (maeaea) in Mangarevan. Across
Polynesian cultures, both the extent of the number systems
and the number of counting sequences tend to increase with

Conclusion
There is no doubt that numeration systems differ with regard
to how efficient tools for cognitive arithmetic they are, and
classifying them along this dimension is a useful endeavor.
We do not challenge, either, that numeration systems change
over time. On the contrary, the numeration systems in Oceania provide ample evidence of this fact. But we do challenge that picking instances from ‘exotic’ cultures and lining
them up in one evolutionist order adequately describes the
underlying process.
Not all cultures value numbers in the same way, even if
they may be concerned with mathematical topics (Ascher,
1998). In some cultures in Melanesia, for instance, large
power numerals were given up together with decimal systems and replaced by quinary or body-counting sequences
(actually, this happened in roughly 15 % of the 80 languages
documented in the Comparative Austronesian Dictionary;
Tryon, 1995, IV, p. 50-52). In other cultures, the reverse of
this took place: Not satisfied with the restrictions posed by
their inherited numeration system, many Polynesian and
Micronesian cultures not only extended its limits of counting, but also designed efficient strategies to cope with the
cognitive difficulties of mental arithmetic.

909

Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2007). Counting in Tongan: The traditional number systems and their cognitive implications.
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 7, 213-239.
Churchward, C. M. (1941). A new Fijian grammar. Australasian Medical Publishing Company.
Craig, C. (Ed.) (1986). Noun classes and categorization.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dehaene, S. (1992). Varieties of numerical abilities. Cognition, 44, 1-42.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Everett, D. L. (2005). Cultural constraints on grammar and
cognition in Pirahã. Current Anthropology, 46, 621-646.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307-314.
Fuson, K. C., & Kwon, Y. (1991). Chinese-based regular and
European irregular systems of number words: The disadvantages for English-speaking children. In K. Durkin & B.
Shire (Eds.), Language in mathematical education. Milton
Keynes, PA: Open University Press.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words: Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Harris, J. (1987). Australian Aboriginal and Islander mathematics. Australian Aboriginal Studies, 2, 29-37.
Holzknecht, S. (1986). A morphology and grammar of Adzera (Amari dialect), Morobe Province, Papua New Guinea.
Pacific Linguistics, A-70, 77-166.
Ifrah, G. (1985). From one to zero: A universal history of
numbers. New York: Viking.
Kirch, P. V. (1984). The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klix, F. (1993). Erwachendes Denken. Heidelberg: Spektrum
Akademischer Verlag.
Lynch, J., Ross, M., & Crowley, T. (2002). The Oceanic languages. Richmond: Curzon.
Menninger, K. (1969). Number words and number symbols.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, K., Smith, C. M., Zhu, J., & Zhang, H. (1995). Preschool origins of cross-national differences in mathematical competence: The role of number-naming systems.
Psychological Science, 6, 56-60.
Nickerson, R. S. (1988). Counting, computing, and the representation of numbers. Human Factors, 30, 181-199.
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Exact
and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene
group. Science, 306, 499-503.
Premack, D., & Premack, A. (2005). Evolution versus invention. Science, 307, 673.
Tryon, D. T. (Ed.) (1995). Comparative Austronesian dictionary. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wassmann, J., & Dasen, P. R. (1994). Yupno number system
and counting. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 25,
78-94.
Wiese, H. (2003). Numbers, language, and the human mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wiese, H. (2007). The co-evolution of number concepts and
counting words. Lingua, 117, 758-772.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1995). A representational analysis of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.

Both lines of development started from the same regularly
decimal and abstract numeration system inherited from
Proto-Oceanic and therefore speak against the assumption of
a linear evolution of numerical cognition (cf., Premack &
Premack, 2005). In other words: Numeration systems do not
always evolve from simple to more complex systems.
In addition, as the case of the Polynesian languages demonstrates, they do not always evolve from concrete or objectspecific to abstract systems either. Like their Micronesian
relatives, many Polynesian languages systematically incorporated numeral classifiers into an originally abstract system
in order to obtain larger counting units that facilitated the
processing of larger numbers in the absence of a notation
system. Despite their non-abstract nature, the specific counting systems constituted innovative ways of counting and
therefore cannot count as primitives. Taken together, these
two arguments should caution researchers against considering contemporary numeration systems in Oceania—as well
as anywhere else in the world—as testifying different steps
in mathematical comprehension.
There may be no other domain in the field of cognitive sciences where it is so obvious that language (i.e., the verbal
numeration system) interacts with cognition (i.e., mental
arithmetic). One of the two «core systems of number» hinges
on language (Feigenson, Dehaene & Spelke, 2004; Wiese,
2007). Cases like those presented here therefore also illustrate—if thoroughly examined—how creative people are in
adapting their cognitive and linguistic tools to cultural needs.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Hans Spada for institutional support, to
Annelie Rothe, Manuela Sibold, and Simone Traber for
assistance with the material, and to Sarah Mannion and
Heike Wiese for discussion and valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Aikhenvald, A.Y. (2003). Classifiers: A typology of noun
classification devices. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ascher, M. (1998). Ethnomathematics: A multicultural view
of mathematical ideas. Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole Publ.
Barthel, T. S. (1971). Pre-contact writing in Oceania. In T. A.
Sebeok (Ed.), Current trends in linguistics. The Hague:
Mouton.
Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2008). The limits of counting:
Numerical cognition between evolution and culture. Science, 319, 213-215.
Bellwood, P. (1987). The Polynesians: Prehistory of an island
people. London: Thames & Hudson.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2006a). «Fanciful» or genuine?
Bases and high numerals in Polynesian number systems.
Journal of the Polynesian Society, 115, 7-46.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2006b). Numeral classifiers and
counting systems in Polynesian and Micronesian languages: Common roots and cultural adaptations. Oceanic
Linguistics, 45, 380-403.

910

