UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fluency and Psychological Distance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8075r8b5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Oppenheimer, Daniel M.
Shah, Anuj K.
Alter, Adam L.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fluency and Psychological Distance
Daniel M. Oppenheimer (doppenhe@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Anuj K. Shah (akshah@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

Adam L. Alter (aalter@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Green Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA

distance. Physically closer stimuli are easier to see and
hear. Temporally closer stimuli are easier to remember.
Newspapers disproportionately cover local news which
means that local news is more likely to be primed and
easier to process. Thus, there is likely a relationship
between fluency and objective distance, which makes it a
potentially useful cue when making judgments of
psychological distance.
In this paper, we first will demonstrate the relationship
between fluency and distance. We will show that as
stimuli become easier to process, people believe them to
be closer. We then go on to explore some of the
implications of this relationship. Specifically, we will
look at how fluency impacts abstract vs. concrete
construal of stimuli, and how it influences discount rates
in value judgments.

Abstract
This paper examines the possibility that fluency – the
subjective experience of ease or difficulty associated with
cognitive processing – has an impact on the psychological
distance of stimuli. Two studies directly examine the
relationship between fluency and psychological distance.
Five additional studies look at the implications of that
relationship.
Keywords: Fluency, Psychological Distance, Construal,
Intertemporal Choice, Discounting;

Introduction
How far is it from your current location to Washington
DC? How long is it from today until Cogsci? What are the
odds that your paper will be accepted to the conference?
All of these questions tap into the underlying
psychological construct of psychological distance;
namely, how far away does Cogsci feel?
Psychological distance is an important construct,
because it mediates a number of behaviors and cognitions.
For example, information that feels more distant is
construed in a more abstract manner (Trope & Liberman,
2003), people hyperbolically discount the value of
psychologically distant objects (Green & Myerson, 2004)
and are less likely to give to psychologically distant
charities (Small, Loewenstein, & Slovic, 2007). While
many researchers have investigated the effects of
psychological distance, there has been surprisingly little
research on what causes a stimulus to feel close or far
away.
In this paper we put forth the simple notion that things
feel more psychologically close to the extent that they are
easy to process. There are several reasons to believe that
this might be the case. First, processing fluency – the
subjective experience of ease or difficulty that
accompanies most cognitive activity – has been shown to
influence a wide array of judgments, ranging from the
value of stock prices (e.g. Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006),
to categorical induction (Oppenheimer & Frank, 2008)
and many others (for a review, see Alter and
Oppenheimer, 2008).
Second, fluency is likely an ecologically valid cue for

Fluency and Psychological Distance
In this first set of studies, we examined the relationship
between how easily stimuli are processed and how far
away they seem from the perceiver. Since stimuli become
more difficult to perceive visually as they move farther
away, and events become more difficult to remember as
they recede into the past, we expected disfluent stimuli to
seem farther away than their more fluent but otherwise
identical counterparts.
Study 1: Study 1 investigated whether reduced perceptual
fluency would lead to increased judgments of distance.
Forty volunteers from a local train station estimated the
distance (in miles) between Princeton and 24 U.S. cities.
Half the participants received surveys printed in a fluent
font (12 point, Times New Roman: sample), while half
received surveys in a disfluent font (12 point, italicized,
Haettenschweiler font: sample).
Participants judged the cities to be more distant when
they were presented in a disfluent font (M = 1331.17
miles, SD = 641.86) than in a fluent font (M = 1251.43
miles, SD = 586.58), t (23) = 3.06, p < .01, η2 = .29. As
such, decreasing fluency had a reliable impact on people’s
perceptions of distance.

1047

Study 2: Study 2 aimed to replicate the findings of Study
1, but using a different instantiation of processing
fluency: concept priming fluency. Previous research has
shown that primed concepts are easier to subsequently
retrieve from memory and process (Whittlesea, 1993).
32 Princeton University undergraduates recruited from
the university campus center filled out a survey rating six
sports stadiums on various dimensions. Half of the
participants were asked to rate stadiums in Atlanta,
Detroit, Milwaukee, St Louis, San Francisco, and
Cleveland, while half were asked to rate stadiums in
Cincinnati, Houston, Pittsburgh, Seattle, Kansas City, and
San Diego. Then, in an ostensibly unrelated task,
participants were asked to judge the distance (in miles) to
18 cities, some of which were the cities that they had
previously made ratings on, and were consequently
primed.
Participants estimated that cities were nearer after those
cities had been primed (M = 1273.02 miles, SD = 230.42)
than when the cities had not been primed (M = 1416.54
miles, SD = 284.03), t (31) = 2.32, p < .05, η2 = .13. As
such, increasing fluency through priming had a reliable
impact on people’s perceptions of distance.

B. It is abstract because it describes the higher order
concept rather than the mechanical specificities of
driving” (adapted from Trope & Liberman, 2003).
80.1% of the statements were coded consistently, and a
third blind coder resolved the inconsistencies. A nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test on the coded
descriptions revealed that participants in the disfluent
condition provided more abstract descriptions (e.g. “New
York's lights shimmering in the foggy winter sky reminds
me of outer space”, M = .26, SD = .37) than did
participants in the fluent condition (e.g. “New York City
is a large city with 5 boroughs and about 18 million
people”, M = .16, SD = .31), U = 4127.00, Z = 2.06, p <
.05, η2 = .02. Descriptions in the disfluent condition (M =
9.66 words, SD = 3.57) did not significantly differ in
length from those in the fluent condition (M = 10.39, SD
= 6.48), t (194) < 1, suggesting that the effects were not
due to participants in the disfluent condition being
unmotivated and writing less.
Study 4: We sought to replicate the results of Study 3
using a second instantiation of processing fluency:
conceptual priming. Specifically, we sought to show that
recently primed (and therefore more fluent) stimuli are
perceived more concretely than unprimed (and therefore
more disfluent) stimuli.
Two hundred and thirty six Princeton University
undergraduates completed this study as part of a larger
packet of unrelated questionnaires. The priming task was
very similar to that in Study 2. Participants were asked to
rate various ballparks. For half of the participants, one of
the stadiums was Los Angeles’s Dodger Stadium. For the
other half of the participants, Dodger Stadium was
replaced in the survey with Detroit’s Comerica Park.
Then, in an ostensibly unrelated study, participants
rated eight statements about Los Angeles that varied in
abstractness (e.g. “a tangle of freeways”) and
concreteness (“a dry, temperate city”). A manipulation
check validated that the abstract statements were indeed
perceived as more abstract than the concrete statements (t
(9) = 2.81, p < .05, η2 = .47).
Participants were classified as concrete-preferring if
they gave higher overall rankings to the concrete
descriptions, and as abstract-preferring if they gave higher
overall rankings to the abstract descriptions. Participants
preferred the concrete statements when Los Angeles had
been primed earlier in the study (53%) than when Los
Angeles had not been primed (41%), χ2 (1, N = 236) =
3.83, p = .05, φ = .13.

Fluency and Construal
In Studies 3-5, we examined one implication of our initial
finding that disfluent stimuli appear farther from the
perceiver. Construal theory (Trope & Liberman, 2003)
suggests that people process psychologically distant
stimuli more abstractly than psychologically nearer
stimuli. Thus, a person might construe the act of visiting
the dentist today quite concretely, as “the experience of
being prodded and poked by sharp metal objects,”
whereas in six months the experience might be
represented more abstractly as “an act designed to
maintain good dental hygiene.” Since Studies 1 and 2
suggest that disfluent stimuli seem farther away, we
sought to show in Studies 3-5 that disfluent stimuli are
consequently processed more abstractly.
Study 3: 196 volunteers were recruited from various
public locations around Princeton University and the
surrounding town. Participants were asked to “describe
New York City using one or two sentences”. Half of the
participants viewed the questionnaire in fluent font (12
point Times New Roman: sample), and half viewed the
questionnaire in a disfluent font (10 point, 25% grey
italicized Arial: sample).
Two research assistants blind to condition coded the
descriptions. Coders were told: “concrete statements refer
to specific, tangible objects. For example, you might
describe the act of driving as sitting in a car, pushing the
accelerator, and moving the steering wheel to point the
wheels in the direction you want to go. This is a concrete
description. An abstract description of driving a car might
say that driving is the act of getting from point A to point

Study 5: Further replicating the results in Studies 3 and 4,
we sought to show that obscure, linguistically disfluent
words are perceived to have more abstract definitions than
linguistically fluent words.
Definitions from an online Balderdash community (535
definitions of 95 words) consisting of 33 players were
collected. One hundred and forty Princeton University

1048

shown four pairs of hypothetical monetary rewards. Each
pair consisted of a SS reward and a LL reward ($50 after
1 month versus $75 after 4 months, $225 after 3 months
versus $300 after 6 months, $750 after 4 months versus
$900 after 12 months, $1000 after 6 months versus $1150
after 14 months). Participants were asked to indicate
which reward they preferred from each pair.
Half of the participants received questionnaires printed
in an easy to read, fluent font (Black 12 pt. Times New
Roman: Sample), while half of the participants received
questionnaires printed in a hard to read, disfluent font
(Grey 12 pt. Monotype Corsiva: Sample).
For the analysis, we calculated the proportion of each
participant’s choices that indicated a preference for the
LL reward. Participants in the disfluent condition chose
the LL reward significantly more often (M = .47, SD =
.37) than did participants in the fluent condition (M = .33,
SD = .33), t(158) = 2.37, p = .02, Cohen’s d = .39.
Therefore, it appears that disfluency essentially shifted the
events further away on a subjective time scale, leading
participants to more strongly prefer the LL reward as
predicted by hyperbolic discounting.
However, we would not expect disfluency to affect
perceptions of immediate events (because there is no
duration that needs to be estimated between “now” and an
immediate event). Instead, we would expect fluency
manipulations to have a different effect on choices
between two delayed rewards than on choices between
one immediate and one delayed reward. In the latter case,
we might expect disfluency to lead to a weaker preference
for the LL reward because it would be perceived as
further away while the perception of the immediate
reward would not change.
To test this hypothesis, we adopted a slightly different
approach than that in Study 6. In Study 7, participants
were asked to imagine that they had received a gift
certificate and then asked how much they would need to
be paid to wait before using the gift certificate (i.e., the
delay premium). A higher delay premium would indicate
greater preference for the sooner reward; that is, a
preference for using the gift certificate without waiting.

undergraduates rated how easily they could pronounce
each of these words. This gave us a measure of linguistic
fluency for each word in the set.
Two coders blind to the hypotheses coded each
definition using the same coder instructions that were
used in Study 3. As in Study 3, a third coder resolved any
inconsistencies.
Balderdash contestants created more abstract
definitions for the more difficult-to-pronounce words (e.g.
“Euneirophrenia: The belief that anything is possible with
the correct medication”) and more concrete definitions of
easy-to-pronounce words (e.g. “Beestings: A type of
spiced Scottish sausage”), β = -.14, t (533) = -3.18, p =
.002. Additionally, 76% of the players created more
abstract definitions for more complex words, a
significantly greater proportion than might be expected by
chance, χ2 (1, N = 33) = 8.06, p = .003.
As such, it appears that fluency has a reliable influence
on the extent to which people construe information
abstractly or concretely. Ostensibly, a lack of fluency
leads people to perceive the stimuli as more
psychologically distant, which in turn leads to more
abstract construal. Of course, this can have important
behavioral implications. For example when making
decisions (e.g. whether or not to diet) an individual may
make different choices depending on whether he focuses
on concrete (e.g. having to eat flavorless rice cakes) or
abstract (e.g. being healthier and living longer) features.

Fluency and Discounting Rates
Another domain in which psychological distance can have
a profound effect is in intertemporal choice. When
making intertemporal choices, people often discount the
value of delayed rewards. This discounting is best
modeled by hyperbolic or hyperbola-like functions (Green
& Myerson, 2004). These models of choice predict that
adding a constant delay in front of two rewards might lead
to preference reversals. For example, a person choosing
between $10 immediately versus $15 in one week might
prefer the immediate reward. However, when choosing
between $10 in ten weeks versus $15 in 11 weeks this
person might prefer the later reward, even though the
absolute time difference between the two rewards is still
one week.
If disfluency leads people to perceive events as further
away, then we might expect disfluency to act in a manner
similar to adding a constant time frame in front of delayed
options. To test this hypothesis, participants in Study 6
made choices between two hypothetical delayed rewards:
a smaller reward available at a sooner time (SS), and a
larger reward available at a later time (LL). We expected
that when participants experienced disfluency, they would
be more likely to prefer the LL reward.

Study 7: Eighty Princeton University students were
recruited from the university campus center on campus
and compensated with a piece of candy.
Participants were first asked to imagine receiving a $75
Visa gift card that had no expiration date. Half of the
participants were told that the gift card could be used
immediately, half were told that the card could only be
used after waiting for one year. They were then asked to
imagine having to wait an additional two months before
using the gift card and asked how much more they would
need to be paid in order to wait.
Half of the participants received questionnaires printed
in an easy to read, fluent font (Black 12 pt. Times New
Roman: Sample), while half of the participants received

Study 6: One hundred sixty Princeton University students
were recruited from the university campus center and
compensated with a piece of candy. Participants were

1049

questionnaires printed in a hard to read, disfluent font
For the immediate condition, we expected the delay
premium to be higher under disfluency than fluency
because the two month wait would loom larger under
disfluency. For the delay condition, we expected the delay
premium to be higher under fluency than disfluency. This
prediction is similar to the prediction for Study 6.
Disfluency would essentially be analogous to extending
delay before the availability of the gift card and so an
additional two months would not loom as large.
A 2 (delay: immediate vs. delayed) x 2 (ease of
processing: fluent vs. disfluent) factorial between-subjects
ANOVA revealed no significant main effects of delay or
ease of processing. However, as expected, there was a
significant effect of the interaction between delay and
fluency on the amount of money participants requested in
order to wait before using the gift card, F(1, 73) = 8.24, p
= .005, ηp2 = .10.
When considering the immediately available gift card,
participants in the disfluent condition asked for more
money to wait (M = $34.50, SD = 33.79) than did
participants in the fluent condition (M = $23.82, SE =
25.06), but the difference was not significant, F(1, 37) =
1.25, p = .27, ηp2 = .03. However, when considering the
delayed gift card, participants in the disfluent condition
asked for less money to wait (M = $16.25, SD = 16.69)
than did participants in the fluent condition (M = $40.00,
SD = 26.73), F(1, 36) = 11.03, p = .002, ηp2 = .24. This
suggests that changes in fluency affect choices between
delayed and immediate options differently.
These studies on intertemporal choice therefore indicate
that ease of processing can shift perceptions of temporal
distance and that changes in subjective time estimates
subsequently alter choice behavior. Admittedly, however,
Studies 6 and 7 indirectly assess the effect of fluency on
subjective time estimates. More direct measurements of
subjective time under fluency and disfluency would offer
further insight into whether fluency affects time estimates,
or whether it affects which dimension of an outcome
(delay or amount) people attend to.
The implications of intertemporal discounting are nontrivial. Decisions about how much money to save for the
future, and whether or not to engage in activities to delay
negative health outcomes (Chapman & Elstein, 1995)
have important personal and societal consequences. As
we have shown, perceptions of psychological distance can
influence intertemporal choices.

(Grey, Italicized 10 pt. Monotype Corsiva: Sample).
judged as being more valuable, Alter & Oppenheimer,
2006), these studies show an indirect impact of fluency on
judgment (c.f. Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, & Eyre, 2007;
Shah & Oppenheimer, 2007). The increase in
psychological distance of a stimulus can lead us to
construe the stimulus more abstractly, and can influence
our valuation of that stimulus over time.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Wenli Cai, Alice Cassin,
Mickheila Jasmin, Sarah Hendershot, Jeff Zemla, Spencer
Bowley, Farah Naim, Eugenia Mamikonyan, and Melissa
Miller for their assistance in collecting, coding, and
entering data, and for proofreading.

References
Alter, Adam L., & Oppenheimer, Daniel M. (2006).
Predicting short-term stock fluctuations by using
processing fluency. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 103(24). 9369-72.
Alter, A. L. & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). Effects of
fluency on psychological distance and mental construal
(or why New York is a large city, but New York is a
civilized jungle). Psychological Science, 19, 161-167.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R.
N. (2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive
difficulty activates analytic reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 569-576.
Chapman, G.B. and Elstein, A.S. (1995). Valuing the
future: Temporal discounting of health and money.
Medical Decision Making, 15, 373-386.
Green, L. &Myerson, J. (2004). A discounting framework
for choice with delayed and probabilistic rewards,
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 769–792.
Oppenheimer, D.M., & Frank, M.C. (2008). A rose in any
other font would not smell as sweet: Effects of
perceptual fluency on categorization. Cognition. 106,
1178-1194.
Shah, A.K. & Oppenheimer D.M. (2007). Easy does it:
The role of fluency in cue weighting. Judgment and
Decision Making, 2 (6): 371-379
Small, Deborah, Loewenstein, G., Slovic, P. (2007).
Sympathy and callousness: The impact of deliberative
thought on donations to identifiable and statistical
victims. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 102(2), 143-153.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal.
Pychological Review, 110, 403-421.
Whittlesea, Bruce W.A. (1993). Illusions of Familiarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 19(6), 1235–53.

Conclusions
Things that feel difficult to process also feel farther away.
This makes sense, as things that are farther away typically
are more difficult to process. However, a consequence of
this association is that simple manipulations such as font
selections, conceptual priming, or linguistic complexity
can influence the psychological distance of a stimulus.
While many studies have shown that fluency has a
direct impact on judgment (e.g. more fluent stimuli are

1050

