UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gesturing to Promote Higher-Order Thinking: Cross-Cultural Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9kd1s4qh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Author
Richland, Lindsey E.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gesturing to Promote Higher-Order Thinking: Cross-Cultural Differences
Lindsey E. Richland (l.e.richland@uci.edu)
Department of Education, University of California, Irvine
2001 Berkeley Place, Irvine, CA 92697-5500 USA
Meadow, 2002; Kendon, 1994), and there is growing
cognitive evidence that instructors' gestures impact novices'
representations of taught information (e.g., Glenburg &
Kaschak, 2000, Goldin-Meadows, 2001). In fact when
teachers' gestures differ from their instructional
explanations, students remember and use strategies only
implied by their gestures at a fairly substantial rate, in
addition to using the verbalized explanation (Singer &
Goldin-Meadow, 2005).

Abstract
Cross-cultural differences in teachers’ gestures during instructional
analogies were examined in United States, Hong Kong, and
Japanese mathematics classrooms. Teachers in all three regions
frequently made analogies, but patterns of gestures differed in
consequential ways. All teachers used gestures in a high
proportion of the analogies, but teachers in the higher achieving
regions, Hong Kong and Japan, were more likely to use gestures
that physically linked the entities being compared. They were also
more likely to tailor their gesture use to the novelty of the
comparison, using a higher quantity or more informative gestures
during comparisons that involved more novel source analogs. U.S.
teachers conversely showed less sensitivity to the challenges
inherent in higher order reasoning by novices.

Analogies as Instruction
Similarly, comparative reasoning is well established as a
basic component of mathematical thinking and learning
(e.g. English, 2004; Novick & Holyoak, 1991; Reed,
Dempster, & Ettinger, 1985). Instructional comparisons in
particular have the potential to clarify similarities and
differences between concepts or problems (Gentner &
Gunn, 2001; Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007), thereby fostering
conceptual understanding and transfer (Bransford, Brown &
Cocking, 1999; National Research Council, 2001).
Mathematics reform efforts have emphasized teaching
that involves connecting mathematics concepts (see
Research Advisory Committee for NCTM, 1996; Stigler &
Fernandez & Yoshida, 1995), as well as engaging students
in drawing comparisons between multiple solution strategies
to single problems (see Carpenter, Fennema, Franke, Levi,
& Empson, 1999). Recent empirical work supports these
assertions, demonstrating that encouraging students to make
comparisons between solution strategies can promote
student learning and understanding of early algebra topics
(Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007).

Keywords: Gesture, Analogy, Education, Cross-Cultural Research,
Mathematics Education

Analogies can be powerful tools for building flexible,
conceptual knowledge (e.g. Clement, 1993; Gentner,
Lowenstein & Thompson, 2003; Rittle-Johnson & Star,
2007). However, unless learners have appropriate expertise
or instructional support, they often fail to notice or benefit
from such relational comparisons (Bransford, Brown &
Cocking, 1999; Gentner & Rattermann, 1989; Gick &
Holyoak, 1980, 1983; Bassok & Holyoak, 1989).
Teachers' gestures are a readily available, naturally
occurring, resource for directing learners' attention to
relevant relational similarity during instructional analogies.
In addition, much recent work has revealed that gestures are
very closely tied to learning and cognition, and can provide
strong support for instruction (Singer & Goldin-Meadow,
2005). While little work has yet explored relations between
gesture use and analogical thinking, Alibali and colleagues
(see Alibali et al, 1997b, Alibali & Nathan, 2007, Hostetter
et al, 2006) have drawn attention to the related construct of
"linking gestures." These are gestures produced to draw
links between instructed representations, and may play an
important role in leading learners' attention to abstract
structure. The current analysis draws on this construct to
explore the subset of such gestures that explicitly support
relational comparisons.

Why look at Gesture in Relational Comparisons?
In spite of the key role of comparative reasoning in
mathematical proficiency, ensuring that students notice and
learn from comparisons is not a trivial task. Novices are
known to overlook, over-extend, or erroneously transfer
structure based on irrelevant appearance of similarity (e.g.
Bassok 1997; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Chi, Glaser &
Clement & Gentner, 1991; Gick & Holyoak, 1980, 1983;
Reed 1987; Richland, Morrison & Holyoak, 2006; Ross,
1987, 1989). Thus, one cannot expect that simple use of an
instructional comparison will inevitably lead to learning.
Rather, the manner in which comparative structure is
processed can be crucial to whether reasoners are swayed by
irrelevant similarity or benefit from deep structure (e.g.,
Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Clement & Genter, 1991; Pedone,
Holyoak & Hummel, 2001).

Gesture as Instruction
Empirical and observational treatments of teachers and
students' gestures during mathematics instruction have
demonstrated that these actions can be a source of powerful
insights into classroom learning (see Goldin-Meadow, 2002;
Nathan & Alibali, 2007). Gestures provide windows onto
the gesturer's thinking (see Abrahamson, 2007; Goldin893

International
Differences
Mathematics Comparisons

in

randomly sampled from the corpus of data collected as part
of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study –
Repeat (TIMSS-R; Hiebert et al., 2003). The TIMSS-R
dataset was collected as a randomized probability sample of
all lessons taught in public, private, and parochial schools
throughout the country in one year. Each selected classroom
was videotaped on one occasion during a normal class
period. Lessons were typically 50 min long, yielding
approximately twenty-five hours of videotaped data that
were examined in this project.
Ten lessons were randomly selected from classes
videotaped in each of the United States, Hong Kong, and
Japan (thirty total). Hong Kong and Japan were selected for
comparison to the United States because their students
outperform U.S. students on international tests, and because
their classroom teaching styles are quite different from each
other as identified in the primary TIMSS-R findings.

Classroom

Early interest in the role of international differences
during comparisons within mathematics instruction emerged
from cross-cultural studies that demonstrated the regular
usage of highly connected lessons in Japanese classroom
teaching (Hiebert & Stigler, 1999; Stevenson & Stigler,
1992).
These researchers documented that Japanese
teachers regularly designed instruction so that students used
and compared multiple solution strategies to the same
problem. Also, lessons were coherent, when compared to
U.S. lessons, such that each instructional activity was
clearly aligned with the prior lesson content. This had
direct implications for student learning (Stigler &
Fernandez, 1995). Paired with the recurrent finding that
Japanese children scored higher on international
mathematics tests than U.S. children, these studies
suggested that comparing solution strategies, or comparative
prior to new knowledge, might be an important component
of teaching mathematics with conceptual understanding.
In a more specific treatment of teachers' use of analogies
internationally, Richland, Zur and Holyoak (2007) used
observational frequency coding to identify differences in
mathematical comparisons within U.S. Japanese, and Hong
Kong classrooms. A subset of videotapes collected as part
of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS-R) were analyzed by identifying every instance of
comparisons and coding them for their alignment with
strategies predicted by empirical work to promote higherlevel thinking and learning. These data revealed striking
patterns that suggested both Hong Kong and Japanese
teachers spontaneously used strategies that were more
aligned with basic cognitive principles of reasoning and
learning from analogy than U.S. teachers. Most important
for the current paper, the Hong Kong and Japanese teachers
were more likely to use hand gestures that explicitly moved
between the focal objects. The current project explores this
finding in more depth by re-analyzing these data with
additional codes corresponding to teachers' gestures.
This paper's aims are twofold. First, analyses were
conducted to reveal existing cross-cultural commonalities
and differences in production of gestures during
instructional analogies. Because of the large-scale nature of
this aim, codes focused on broad-stroke differences between
gesture patterns. This is an alternate method from much of
the important work in gesture that has more closely
analyzed the details of hand and body movements within
smaller samples of interactions. Second, analyses were
conducted to better understand context and use of teachers'
use of comparative gestures that support students’
likelihood of noticing and learning from higher-order
instructional comparisons.

Observational Coding
Lessons were analyzed using a temporally linked
transcript and video. Qualitative codes were used to
generate quantitative frequency data. Lessons were first
divided into units of analysis. All identifiable instances of
relational comparisons were marked. In a series of passes,
these relational comparisons were then categorized
according to previously designed codes. At least two coders
divided the data for each pass, and reliability was calculated
for all coders on approximately 20% of the data. Reliability
was calculated as the number of agreements divided by
number of total comparison units coded. All disagreements
were resolved through discussion.
Pass 1: Identification of Relational Comparisons. Two
expert coders (researchers with relevant doctorates)
separately identified all units of relational comparisons
within every lesson. All disagreements were resolved by
discussion. The definition of a relational comparison
derived from Gentner’s (1983) structure-mapping theory.
Relational comparison was defined as a higher-order
relationship between a source (or base) object and a target
object. Based upon this definition, there were several
criteria used to mark an interaction as a relational
comparison. First, a source and a target had to have been
clearly identifiable. For example, an instance in which the
teacher stated “lets solve this problem like you used to do
them” was not marked because the precise source was not
readily apparent to us or to learners. Second, for a positive
identification there had to be some clear indication of the
intention to compare the source and target items. These
could be an explicit verbalization (e.g., “X is just like Y”) or
a less explicit verbalization signifying a same or difference
comparison (e.g., “We just finished with X, now lets do
another one (Y)”). Notification could also include serial or
parallel spatial positioning on the board or on a worksheet
or textbook page. Finally, gesture that motioned between
two or more representations could signify a comparison.
Teachers in all countries produced a high number of
relational comparisons during the ten 8th-grade mathematics

METHOD
Video Data
As described in previous analyses of these data (Richland,
Zur, Holyoak, 2007), videotaped classroom lessons were
894

coders provided supplemental information about whether a
source was a part of standard cultural knowledge for
Japanese students. Because data were not available for the
students in the specific classrooms for which lessons were
analyzed, this code measured a presumption of familiarity
based on information from the lesson rather than an
independent verification of students’ familiarity. The code
served to assess the teacher’s judgments about students’
level of familiarity with the sources the teacher initiated.
If sufficient information about source familiarity was not
provided, the comparison was excluded from analysis. Eight
units were excluded from this code. Reliability was 90%
between coders. Data analysis revealed that there was a
significant difference in the use of familiar sources by
country, X2 (2) = 6.6, p < .05. As shown in Figure 1B,
teachers in the U.S. were least likely to use familiar sources
while those in Hong Kong and Japan were more likely to
use sources familiar to the students.
As reported previously (Richland, Zur & Holyoak, 2007),
students’ presumed familiarity with the source objects
differed by country (X2 (2) = 8.8, p < .05). While most
sources in all countries were more likely to be new
information, Hong Kong and Japanese teachers were more
likely than U.S. teachers to use sources that invoked wellknown information.

lessons. As reported previously (Richland, Zur & Holyoak,
2007), a total of 195 units were identified in the U.S.
lessons, with a mean of 20 and a range of 9-30 per lesson. A
total of 185 units were identified in Hong Kong lessons,
with a mean of 18 and a range of 7-27 per lesson. A total of
139 comparisons were identified in Japanese lessons, with a
mean of 14 and a range of 9 to 25 per lesson. Thus relational
comparisons were common in all countries.
Source and Target Simultaneously Visible. Every unit of
relational comparison was then categorized in a binary code
for whether or not the source was visible to students while
the target was taught. A positive score was given if the
source was easily visible to students while they were
expected to be reasoning about the target. Generally, this
meant that the source was written or drawn on a classroom
chalkboard, on an overhead projector, or on a class
worksheet, and was left in that location while the teacher
moved their attention to the target. This code was
considered important as a strategy for supporting students’
higher order reasoning. Retrieval and working memory
demands increase when the source is not available (Cho,
Holyoak & Cannon, 2007). The reasoner must successfully
identify and retrieve the source object, as well as manipulate
the representation in working memory to determine
alignment and structural relationship to the target object.
Processing demands may be further compounded if the
source object is novel and the reasoner cannot take
advantage of expertise to chunk relations (Chi, Glaser &
Rees, 1982; Kimball & Holyoak, 2000).
Eight units were excluded from analysis due to an
inability to code the materials. Reliability between coders
was calculated as 87%.
As reported previously (Richland, Zur & Holyoak, 2007),
U.S. teachers made the source visible during discussion of
the target at the lowest rate across all three countries (X2 (2)
= 28.4%, p < .001). U.S. teachers were least likely to
provide the students with visual access to the source during
comparisons to the target. Visual representations can
highlight relational structure and reduce both retrieval and
working memory demands for representing complex
relations, so this difference may indicate that U.S. students
face higher processing loads than students in Hong Kong
and Japanese classrooms.

Comparative Gestures. Gesture has the potential to carry
information beyond verbalized content (see GoldinMeadow, 2001; Kendon, 1994), so teachers’ gestures
produced during construction of a relational comparison
were considered potential cues to draw learners’ attention to
the comparison, to aid alignment of source and target
relational structure, and to support mapping and inferences
between the analogs. Coders first marked presence or
absence of any gesture. Gestures were defined as hand and
arm movements that conveyed information that was relevant
to instruction (e.g. pointing at the board would be included,
while pointing at a student would be excluded). Gestures
that were unclear as to their intention were not included
(e.g., “beat” gestures that moved with speech).
Once gesture was identified within a unit of comparison,
all gestures during the comparison were analyzed to
determine whether any were used to compare the objects.
This generally meant one or more hand motions moving
directly between one object and the other object. If such a
gesture was identified, the comparison was marked as
containing a comparative gesture. If the gesture (s) were
deemed to only reference one or the other of the objects
being compared, the comparison was coded as NOT
containing a comparative gesture.
Twelve comparisons were excluded for an inability to see
teachers' gestures in video. Intercoder reliability was 91%.
As previously reported, the likelihood of using gestures
that explicitly linked source and target objects differed by
country X2 (2) =36.0, p < .001. Teachers in the United
States produced comparative gestures in a far smaller
percentage of comparisons than Hong Kong or Japanese

Source Familiarity. Each source analog from every
relational comparison was coded for the level of students’
presumed familiarity with the object. Coding was based
upon information explicitly provided about students’ level
of knowledge about the source. Generally, this was coded
using cues verbalized during the relational comparison (e.g.,
“yesterday we learned concept X. Today we will see how
that concept is similar to Y”). Source familiarity was coded
in a binary code as either ‘likely to be well-known’
(standard cultural knowledge and mathematics learned the
prior year or before) or ‘new information’ (information
taught in the current or immediately prior lesson). Japanese
895

teachers (U.S. = 13%, H.K. = 35%, Japan = 44%). Thus
Japanese teachers are more than three times as likely to use
comparative gestures than U.S. teachers.

students to notice and benefit from relational comparisons.
This result therefore could have important consequences for
students' higher-order thinking and learning.

Current Analyses
The current analyses build upon these cross-cultural
established differences.
Analyses examined the total
quantity of gestures produced, along with a better measure
of the frequency of comparative gestures. Specifically,
comparative gestures were examined in the subset of
analogies in which both source and target analogs were
visible simultaneously.
Finally, relationships between
gesture usage and learners' familiarity with the source
analog were assessed. These allowed for determining
whether teachers tailored their gestures to the presumed
difficulty of the comparison. Familiarity was used as a
proxy of difficulty since expertise is known to facilitate
attention to relational structure (Chi et al, 1981).

Comparative Gestures and Source Visibility. The above
analysis of comparative gestures could; however, be
reflecting differences in teachers' use of visual
representations. International variations in board use are
well documented (Stevenson & Stigler, 1992). Thus in a
stronger test of the relationship between country and use of
comparative gestures, a second analysis examined only the
comparisons in which the source and target objects were
visibly available simultaneously. This reduced confounds
between teachers' uses of visual supports and use of
comparative gestures. If the two objects were not visible
simultaneously, teachers could not use gestures to
physically link them. In this subset of all comparisons,
there remained a significant difference in rates of using
comparative gestures across countries, X2 (2) =23.5, p <
.001. As shown in Figure 1, U.S. teachers used overall
fewer analogies in which the source and target were visible
simultaneously. Then when those proportions were further
separated into comparative versus non-comparative
gestures, it is clear that U.S. teachers were least likely to use
comparative gestures, even when both source and target
analogs were clearly visible.

RESULTS
Gesture
The two levels of gesture codes were analyzed separately to
examine any international differences.
Presence or Absence of Gesture. Teachers in all three
countries used gesture in the majority of the relational
comparisons they produced, (mean percentage of all
comparisons containing gesture: U.S. = 83%, Hong Kong =
90%, Japan = 90%). Thus, gesture was a very frequent part
of instruction during the segments of the lesson we
analyzed. Accordingly, there was no statistical difference in
the rates of using gesture within instructional comparisons
across countries, X2 (2) = 4.9, p = .09. Very few
comparisons were produced without gesture (U.S. = 17%,
H.K. = 10%, Japan = 10%). Note as well that these data
under-represent the total number of gestures during
instructional comparisons, since gesture was only coded
once per comparison as present or absent. If more than one
gesture was produced per comparison (and anecdotally, this
was common), this was not recorded. This finding supports
and extends other predictions about the ubiquity of gesture
across cultures and within instruction. Specifically, it shows
that gestures are clearly a regular part of mathematics
instruction around the world, and further, are common when
teachers are conveying abstract, comparative information.

Percent of Comparisons per Country

Gestures and Source Familiarity. The next analysis
examined the relationship between teachers' gesture use and
learners' familiarity with the source analog. Alibali &
Nathan (2007) have argued that teachers may use more
gestures when topics are less familiar to learners. In order
to investigate this hypothesis within this sample, rates and
types of gestures were analyzed in relation to students'
expected familiarity with the source analogs.

Comparative Gestures versus Gesture to Source or Target
only. There were important differences in the types of
gestures across countries. In all countries, the majority of
gestures produced were directed toward either the source or
target objects individually X2 (1) =75.3, p < .001. However,
as noted above, the likelihood of using gestures that
explicitly moved between source and target objects differed
by country. These comparative gestures are cues to signal
the relevance of alignment and structure mapping between
the objects being compared, and have they have the
potential to be strong cognitive supports for enabling

100
No Linking Gestures

90

Linking Gesture

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
U.S.

Hong Kong

Japan

Figure 1. Rates of producing comparative versus noncomparative gestures when source and target analogs were
simultaneously available
896

A second set of analyses showed that there were
international differences in the relationships between gesture
use and the difficulty of the instructional analogy for classroom
students. U.S. teachers did not show any patterns of
differentiating their gesture use depending upon the novelty of
the source analog. In contrast, both Hong Kong and Japanese
teachers did show varying patterns of gesture depending on the
circumstances. Japanese teachers used overall more gestures
when the source was more novel, and Hong Kong teachers
used more comparative gestures.
Since expertise and
familiarity with a source analog is well known to improve
reasoners' likelihood of attending to relational structure (Chi et
al, 1983; Holyoak, Junn & Billman, 1986), novices would be
expected to require more assistance in analogies involving
more novel source analogs. Thus, these cultural differences in
gesture use may have real impact on the classroom students'
ability to attend to and learn from relational structure.
Theoretically, these data raise intriguing questions about
whether comparative gestures, or the more broad construct of
linking gestures, are tied to the speaker's knowledge of the
representations and relations they describe, or tied to
pedagogical and/or cultural norms of communication.
Speakers are known to gesture differentially when they are
more versus less familiar with the content they describe, though
importantly this does not seem to be the explanation in this
case. Analogies were classified as more difficult based upon
classroom students' likely familiarity with the source analog,
which is quite likely to be different from the teachers'. A
teacher who designed a lesson plan for a specific lesson might
arguably even be more familiar with that source analog than
with one designed for a prior day's class. Thus, there is no
reason to expect that the designation of difficulty coded here
from the learners' perspective would be explanatory for the
teachers. Thus, the use of comparative gestures is more likely
attributable to the culturally or pedagogically derived gesture
routines.
Importantly, there is some evidence that gestures used to link
representations are under teachers' conscious control and are
trainable (Hostteter et al, 2006). That suggests that while the
observed patterns in gesture use may derive from cultural norms
of discourse and mathematics instructional practice, these are not
beyond teachers' control and could be an available tool for
improving U.S. teachers efficacy in teaching by analogy.

First, data for all countries were examined together, to
determine whether there were common patterns in the
relationships between gestures and source familiarity.
Overall gesture rates for comparisons in which the source
was coded “familiar” were compared to gesture rates in
comparisons in which the source was coded “not familiar.”
There was an overall difference X2 (1) = 6.89, p < .01,
such that teachers in all countries used more gestures of any
type when the source was not highly familiar. However,
there were no reliable relationships between the use of
comparative gestures and level of source familiarity, X2 (1)
= 2.2, p = .14. At least, there were no differences when all
countries were examined together.
In order to understand whether there were variations
between countries, each country was also analyzed
separately. When examined alone, U.S. teachers showed no
reliable patterns of either gesturing more during less
familiar comparisons X2 (1) = 1.1, p = .30, nor of using
comparative gestures according to source familiarity, X2 (1)
= 0, p = .99. In contrast, Japanese teachers’ use of gesture
frequency was inversely related to the familiarity of the
comparison. This meant that they used higher rates of
gesturing during less familiar comparisons, X2 (1) = 7.4, p <
.01. Their rates of using comparative gestures did not differ
between familiar and less familiar comparisons, X2 (1) =
.46, p = .55, perhaps because Japanese teachers used fairly
high rates of comparative gestures in all comparisons. Hong
Kong teachers, in a different pattern of tailoring gestures to
learners' familiarity, did not show a difference in the overall
number of gestures used according to source familiarity, X2
(1) = 1.8, p = .18, but they did use comparative gestures at a
higher rate for novel source analogs than for more familiar
comparisons X2 (1) = 5.5, p = .01. These data suggest that
both Japanese and Hong Kong teachers manipulated their
gesture use in a reflection of learners' familiarity with
source analogs, while U.S. teachers did not.

Discussion
Several important results emerged from these data. Least
surprising, but useful as documentation, was the finding that
all teachers commonly produced gestures during
instructional analogies. This is not unexpected, since many
studies have documented that teachers frequently use
gestures during instruction (e.g. Flevares & Perry, 2001).
However, the international commonality of using gestures
during instructional analogies is novel, and suggests that
gestures may play an important role in promoting students'
learning from classroom analogies.
Most exciting are the results that indicate clear
international differences in how and when gestures were
produced during these instructional analogies. First, a
stringent test showed that the teachers in the United States
were least likely to use gestures that physically compared
the two or more representations in an analogy, even when
those two representations were visible simultaneously. In
contrast, both Hong Kong and Japanese teachers were
proportionally more likely to use comparative gestures.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by grants from the Institute
of Education Sciences #R305H030141; and the Office of
Naval Research, N000140810186. I am also grateful to the
many coders who participated in this work.

References
Alibali, M. W. & Nathan, M. J. (2007). Teachers' gestures
as a means of scaffolding students' understanding:
Evidence from an early algebra lesson. In Goldman, R.,
Pea, R., Barron, B. J., and Derry, S. (Eds.) Video
Research in the Learning Sciences (pp. 349-365). Mah
Wah, NJ: Erlbaum.
897

Hostetter, A. B., Bieda, K., Alibali, A. W., Nathan, M. J., &
Knuth, E. J. (2006). Don't just tell them, show them!
Teachers can intentionally alter their instructional
gestures. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.) Proceedings of
The 28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1523-1528). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
National Research Council (2001). Adding it up: Helping
children learn mathematics. J. Kilpatrick, J. Swafford &
Findell (Eds.). Mathematics Learning Study Committee,
Center for Education, Division of Behavioral and Social
Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398415.
Pedone, R., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). The
use of diagrams in analogical problem solving. Memory
and Cognition, 29, 214-221.
Reed, S.K. (1987). A structure-mapping model for word
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 124-139.
Reed, S.K., Dempster, A., & Ettinger, M. (1985).
Usefulness of analogous solutions for solving algebra
word problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 106-125.
Research Advisory Committee of the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics (1996). Justification and
Reform. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 516-520.
Richland, L.E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K.J. (2007). Cognitive
supports for Analogies in the Mathematics Classroom.
Science, 316, 1128-1129.
Rittle-Johnson, B, & Star, J.R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to solve
equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561574.
Ross, B.H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 13, 629–639.
Ross, B.H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456–468.
Stevenson, H. W. and Stigler, J. W. (1992). The learning
gap: Why our schools are failing, and what we can learn
from Japanese and Chinese education. New York:
Summit Books.
Stigler, J. W., & Fernandez, C. (1995). Learning
mathematics from classroom instruction: Cross-cultural
and experimental perspectives. In C. Nelson (Ed.),
Contemporary perspectives on learning and development.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Pp. 103-130.

Alibali, M.W., Flevares, L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1997a).
Assessing knowledge conveyed in gesture: Do teachers
have the upper hand? Journal of Educational Psychology,
89, 183-193.
Alibali, M. W., Sylvan, E. A., Fujimori, Y., & Kawanaka,
T. (1997b). The functions of teachers' gestures: What's the
point? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, Illinois.
Bassok, M. (1997). Two types of reliance on correlations
between content and structure in reasoning about word
problems. In L. English (Ed.), Mathematical reasoning:
Analogies, metaphors, and images (pp. 221- 246)
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R.R. (1999).
How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
National Research Council, Commission on Behavioral &
Social Sciences & Education. Committee on
Developments in the Science of Learning. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K. J., and Cannon, T.D. (2007).
Analogical reasoning in working memory: Resources
shared among relational integration, interference
resolution, and maintenance. Memory & Cognition, 35
(6), 1445-1455.
Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring
intuitions to deal with students' preconceptions in physics.
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30,1241-1257.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization
and representation of physics
problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
English, L. (2004). (Ed.), Mathematical reasoning:
Analogies, metaphors, and images. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Flevares, L. M., & Perry, M. (2001). How many do you see?
The use of nonspoken representations in first-grade
mathematics lessons. Journal of Educational Psychology,
93, 330-345.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Gunn, V. (2001). Structural alignment
facilitates the noticing of differences. Memory and
Cognition, 29, 565-577.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393408
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9,
pp.558-565.
Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., Garnier, H., Givvin, K.B.,
Hollingsworth, H., Jacobs, J., Chui, A.M., Wearne, D.,
Smith, M., Kersting, N., Manaster, A., Tseng, E.,
Etterbeek, W., Manaster, C., Gonzales, P., & Stigler, J.
(2003). Teaching mathematics in seven countries: Results
from the TIMSS 1999 Video Study. NCES 2003-013.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National
Center for Education Statistics.

898

