UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hemispheric Asymmetry in Visual Perception Arises from Differential Encoding Beyond the
Sensory Level

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vp8g073

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Hsiao, Janet Hui-Wen
Shahbazi, Reza
Cottrell, Garrison W.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hemispheric Asymmetry in Visual Perception Arises from Differential Encoding
beyond the Sensory Level
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@cs.ucsd.edu)
Reza Shahbazi (rshahbaz@ucsd.edu)
Garrison W. Cottrell (gary@cs.ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0404, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Abstract

Hierarchical letter Pattern Perception

Hemispheric asymmetries in the perception of local and
global features have been consistently reported: there is an
advantage for responses to global features in the left visual
field/right hemisphere and an advantage for responses to local
features in the right visual field/left hemisphere. It has been
proposed that this asymmetry originates from differential
frequency bias in the two hemispheres (e.g., Ivry & Robertson,
1998). Nevertheless, there is little evidence supporting
hemispheric specialization for particular frequency ranges
(e.g., Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1990) or differential frequency
tuning in the neurons in the two hemispheres. Here we test the
hypothesis that this hemispheric asymmetry in visual
perception takes place at the encoding stage beyond the
sensory level. We use two autoencoder networks with
differential connectivity configurations as the way to develop
differential encoding in the two hemispheres, to reflect the
anatomical evidence that there is more interconnectivity
among the neighboring cortical columns in the right
hemisphere than the left hemisphere (e.g. Hutsler & Galuske,
2003). We show that this differential encoding mechanism
has a better fit with human data than the model based on
differential frequency bias, and thus is a more anatomically
realistic and cognitively plausible model in accounting for the
hemispheric asymmetry in visual perception.

Sergent (1982) used hierarchical letter patterns (Navon,
1977) to examine hemispheric differences in responses to
global and local patterns. A hierarchical letter pattern
contains two patterns: a global pattern and a local pattern.
The global pattern (the large letter in Figure 1(a)) is
composed of a number of local patterns (the small letters in
Figure 1(a)). She referred to the two levels of the stimulus
as having differential spatial frequency contents: low
frequency for the global pattern and high frequency for the
local pattern. In her experiment, she used four letters to
compose the hierarchical letter patterns: "H" and "L" were
designated as targets, and "T" and "F" as distracters. Given
that each letter may appear as the local or the global pattern,
there are in total 16 patterns, which can be put into six
conditions according whether there is a target in the local or
global patterns, as shown in Figure 1(a). Stimuli were
presented to either the RVF/LH or the LVF/RH for 150 ms,
and the participants’ task was to judge whether they saw a
target letter or not, regardless of its being in the global
pattern or the local pattern.

Keywords: Hemispheric asymmetry, visual perception,
Double Filtering by Frequency (DFF), autoencoder networks.

Introduction
The way we analyze and process the global and local forms
of visual stimuli has been extensively examined. Navon
(1977) proposed the "global precedence hypothesis",
suggesting that the global form of a visual stimulus is
unavoidably recognized before the local forms. This effect
was later shown to depend on both the characteristics of the
local and global forms and the hemispheric asymmetry in
the perception of local and global features (Hoffman, 1980).
Follow-up studies further confirm that there is a right visual
field (RVF)/left hemisphere (LH) advantage for responses to
local features and a left visual field (LVF)/right hemisphere
(RH) advantage for responses to global features (Sergent,
1982; Ivry & Robertson, 1998). Nevertheless, studies
examining grating detection did not support the existence of
hemispheric specialization for particular frequency ranges
(e.g. Di Lollo, 1981; Rijsdijk, Kroon, &Van der Wildt, 1980;
Peterzell, Harvey, & Hardyck, 1989; Fendrich & Gazzaniga,
1990). It thus remains controversial about why this
perceptual asymmetry exists (Peterzell, 1991; Martin, 1979).

857

Figure 1: (a) Stimuli in Sergent’s experiment (1982). “H/L”
are targets, “T/F” are distracters. “L+” means the large letter
is a target, and “S+” means the small letters are targets. "Id."
means the local and the global patterns are identical. (b) The
RT data for the L+S- and L-S+ stimuli in the LVF and RVF
presentation conditions (Sergent, 1982).
The stimuli of greatest interest in Sergent's experiment
(1982) were the conflict conditions when the target
appeared in either the local pattern or the global pattern (i.e.,
the L+S- and L-S+ cases in Figure 1(a)), since they are the
conditions in which interference may arise due to that the

target and the non-target letters are at different levels. The
results showed that there was a significant interaction
between the presented visual field (RVF or LVF) and the
target level (global or local) in the response time data: the
participants were faster at detecting the target at the global
level when it was presented in the LVF/RH, and faster at
detecting the target at the local level when it was presented
in the RVF/LH (Figure 1(b)). She thus concluded that global
precedence in form analysis (Navon, 1977) is a property of
the RH but not the LH, and argued that this may result from
a "greater capacity of the LH to deal with higher frequency".
She also argued that "hemispheric differences as a function
of spatial frequencies must result from processing taking
place beyond the sensory level", since studies examining
grating detection did not report a hemispheric difference in
contrast sensibility or visible persistence (De Lollo, 1981;
Rijsdijk et al., 1980. See also Peterzell et al., 1989; Fendrich
& Gazzaniga, 1990); in other words, the two hemispheres
may receive the same type of information beyond the
sensory level (Sergent, 1982).

frequency information (i.e., a high-pass filter), whereas the
RH amplifies low frequency information (i.e., a low-pass
filter). They developed a computational model to account
for this perceptual asymmetry effect (Figure 2). The model
contains six different frequency modules; each module
extracts information of a specific spatial frequency from the
input and maps the extracted information to the output. The
outputs from the modules then go through an "attention
weight" layer as a filter. The filter first selects a frequency
range that is expected to provide the most useful
information for the task (although it is unclear how the
range is decided). At the second stage, in the RH network,
the filter amplifies the information from the low spatial
frequency (LSF) modules within the frequency range,
whereas in the LH network it amplifies the information
from the high spatial frequency (HSF) modules, through
giving different weights to different modules.

Figure 3: (a) In the input representation, there are two target
patterns (10101 and 01110) and two distracter patterns
(10110 and 11010). (b) Shown at the top is an actual input
pattern formed by taking the second distracter pattern and
replacing each black portion with the first target pattern.
Thus this represents the first target pattern at the local level
and the second distracter pattern at the global level (an L-S+
pattern). A 0 unit appears between each local pattern as a
separator (cf. Ivry & Robertson, 1998).
Figure 2: Ivry and Robertson's computational model of the
DFF theory (taken from Ivry & Robertson, 1998). Module 6
has the lowest frequency. The four decision nodes
correspond to four target patterns: whether target 1 or target
2 is present, and whether it is at the global or local level.

The local input patterns in the simulation are created by
turning on three bits in a five-bit vector. These are replicated
three times, separated by all 0 bit patterns, to create the
global pattern. The process is illustrated in Figure 3, where
the global pattern is 11010. Each “1” in the global pattern is
represented by the local pattern, 10101. Each “0” in the
global pattern is represented by 00000.
The results showed that, consistent with the human data,
the model exhibited the hemisphere-by-level interaction
after 20 training epochs; nevertheless, this effect was not
consistently obtained with more training epochs; the LH
network was generally better for both local and global
targets. In another simulation, they enlarged the stimuli by
five so that each local pattern contained 25 units, with a
group of five units corresponding to a unit in the original
representation, and each global pattern thus became 125

Modeling of the Double Filtering by Frequency
(DFF) Theory
Ivry and Robertson (1998) proposed a Double Filtering by
Frequency (DFF) theory to account for the hemispheric
asymmetry in visual perception. The theory argues that
information coming into the brain goes through two
frequency filtering stages. The first stage involves
attentional selection of task-relevant frequency information,
and at the second stage the two hemispheres have
asymmetric filtering processing: the LH amplifies high

858

to be the area for language-relevant processing of auditory
signals. They showed that, through neuronal track tracing,
this area contains a modular network that links regularly
spaced clusters of neurons; although the cluster size was
similar in the two hemispheres, the spacing between the
clusters was about 20 percent larger in the LH. This wider
spacing implies that more functionally distinct columnar
systems can be included per surface unit in the LH than in
the RH. In addition, in the LH, each cortical column has
fewer connections with neighboring columns compared with
the RH (Seldon, 1981a; 1981b; 1982; Buxhoeveden et al.,
2001). Taken together, these data suggest that there is more
interconnectivity between the neighboring cortical columns
of the RH than the LH, which may result in a more
functionally overlapped representation in the RH compared
with that in the LH (Hutsler & Galuske, 2003).
Although these anatomical data are from the auditory
cortex because of the researchers’ interests in language
processing area, the phenomenon of differential frequency
bias in the two hemispheres has been observed in both
visual and auditory processing (Ivry & Robertson, 1998;
Hutsler & Galuske, 2003). Thus, in the current study, we
generalize the findings of hemispheric asymmetry in
microcircuitry organization in the auditory processing area
to visual processing, aiming to test the hypothesis that a
difference in the connectivity configuration at the encoding
stage of visual processing is sufficient to account for the
observed hemispheric asymmetry in the perception of global
and local features (the encoding scheme we propose here
can be applied to auditory processing as well).

units long. They showed that the hemisphere-by-level
interaction was more pronounced in this simulation, and the
interaction persisted across 100 training epochs (Figure 4).
Unfortunately, this result is fragile: with further training, the
LH network became better than the RH network at
identifying both local and global targets, which is
inconsistent with the human data. The model also exhibited
a general advantage for a global target, which is consistent
with the global precedence observation (Navon, 1977).

Figure 4: Results of Ivry and Robertson's computational
model of the DFF theory (1998) with large stimuli after 100
epochs. Note that it is unclear whether the RH advantage in
L+S- was significant. In addition, inconsistent with the
human data, the LH network became better at identifying
both local and global targets with further training.

Anatomical Differences between the Hemispheres
Although the DFF theory has been shown to be able to
account for the observed perceptual asymmetry, there is
little evidence suggesting differential frequency tuning in
the neurons in the two hemispheres. Nor is there anatomical
evidence supporting the existence of the different frequency
modules in the brain as those proposed in Ivry &
Robertson's computational model. In addition, given that it
is unclear how the frequency range that is expected to
provide the most useful information for the task is decided,
Ivry and Robertson's model does not fully explain why there
is little evidence suggesting the existence of hemispheric
specialization for particular frequency ranges (e.g., Fendrich
& Gazzaniga, 1990). Ivry & Robertson (1998) argued that it
is because absolute instead of relative frequencies were used
in these studies. As pointed out by Sergent (1982), given the
lack of evidence of hemispheric specialization for particular
frequency ranges, this hemispheric asymmetry must result
from processing taking place beyond the sensory level.
Contrary to the DFF theory, the two hemispheres may not
differ in the way they extract visual information.
What is the process taking place beyond the sensory level
that results in this perceptual asymmetry? Here we test the
hypothesis that this process takes place at an encoding stage
beyond the sensory level. We incorporate the anatomical
evidence about hemispheric differences in cerebral cortical
networks in a computational model that implements
differential encoding in the two hemispheres. Galuske et al.
(2000) examined the microcircuitry organization in human
temporal cortex and showed hemispheric asymmetry in the
posterior part of Brodmann area 22, which has been shown

Modeling Method
To investigate the hypothesis that the observed perceptual
asymmetry results from the difference in the connectivity
configuration at the encoding stage, we use two autoencoder
networks (Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1986) with
different connectivity configurations as a way to learn an
efficient encoding from the input data. An autoencoder
network is a two-layer neural network trained to map the
input pattern to an output pattern that is identical to the
input pattern; after training, its hidden layer activation when
an input pattern is presented is used as a compressed
encoding of the input pattern. In our simulation, two
autoencoder networks are created: the LH network has a
pattern of connectivity resembling the sparse connections in
the LH, whereas the RH network has more connections
among the neighboring nodes to develop a more
functionally overlapped representation. In the input
representation, as in Ivry and Robertson's model (1998), we
use two target patterns and two distracter patterns, each of
which is five units long, to compose the hierarchical stimuli
(Figure 3). Each stimulus is 29 units long, constructed by
combining two patterns so that one pattern forms the local
features and the other forms the global pattern of the
stimulus, with a blank (0) unit between each local pattern.
16 stimuli are constructed from all possible combinations of
the targets and distracters at either level (cf. Sergent, 1982).

859

Each autoencoder network has 13 hidden units; each
hidden unit has 7 connections to the input layer. This
parameter combination is the point where the overall error
starts to converge and the two networks have a comparable
performance level. A Gaussian probability density function
(PDF) is used to determine the probability of having a
connection between a hidden and the input units. For each
hidden unit an identical Gaussian PDF is used, with the
center of the Gaussian PDF located evenly within the input
layer. A narrow Gaussian PDF is used for the RH
autoencoder network (σ = 1.8), and a wide Gaussian PDF
for the LH autoencoder network (σ = 18; see Figure 5)1; the
variances are chosen as the two extreme cases of
denseness/sparseness of the connections in order to examine
the qualitative differences between them. The connections
from the hidden layer to the output layer are completely
symmetric to those from the input layer to the hidden layer.
After obtaining the efficient encoding of the input
stimulus, we use a perceptron (i.e., a one-layer neural
network) to classify the encoding according to whether there
is a target (at either level) or not in the stimulus. Thus, the
output layer of the perceptron has only one node; the node
has value ‘1’ when a target is present and ‘0’ otherwise. The
error was measured as the difference between the output of
the perceptron and the desired output (0 or 1).
For both the autoencoder networks and the perceptron, the
training algorithm is gradient descent with back-propagation
(Rumelhart et al., 1986). The initial learning rate is 0.05 for
the autoencoder networks and 0.001 for the perceptron, and
is flexible during training: if the error decreases in the
current epoch, the learning rate for the next epoch is the old
learning rate multiplied by 1.01; if the error increases, the
new learning rate is the old learning rate divided by two.
The training stops when the number of training epoch
reaches 1,000 for the autoencoder networks and 1,500 for
the perceptron; the numbers of epochs are chosen so that the
error will have converged before the training stops.

RH network compared with the LH network (F(1, 973) =
8.170, p < 0.01), and an advantage of responses to a target at
the local level in the LH network compared with the RH
network (F(1, 979) = 7.652, p < 0.01). In addition, similar to
Ivry and Robertson's model (with large stimuli), the results
also showed an overall advantage for responses to a globallevel target (F(1, 973) = 53.484, p << 0.001), which is
consistent with the global precedence of visual form
analysis (Navon, 1977). There was no main effect of
network architecture (F < 0.1, n.s.), which is also consistent
with the human data (Sergent, 1982; Figure 6(b)).

Figure 5: (a) Probability density function of the connections
in the LH network (σ = 18) and an example LH network. (b)
Probability density function of the connections in the RH
network (σ = 1.8) and an example RH network.

Figure 6: (a) Modeling results. The error bars show standard
errors. L+S- means the target is at the global level, whereas
L-S+ means the target is at the local level (Figure 1). (b)
Sergent's experiment results (1982), duplicated here for
comparison reasons.

Results
Figure 6(a) shows the mean error over 500 trials for each
network (typically a correspondence is made between
reaction time and error – more uncertainty leads to longer
reaction time)2. The results showed a significant interaction
between network (RH vs. LH) and target level (global vs.
local) (F(1, 973) = 53.140, p << 0.001), which is consistent
with human reaction time data (Sergent, 1982): an
advantage of responses to a target at the global level in the

The combination of 13 hidden nodes and 7 connections
from each hidden node was chosen in our simulation
because it is the point where the error of the perceptron
started to converge. We also explored how the network
performance changes with different parameters. We found
that, while keeping the number of connections from each
hidden node constant, with 14 hidden nodes the two
networks had comparable performance level (F(1, 961) =
0.005, n.s.), and the interaction between target level and
network was significant (F(1, 961) = 22.100, p << 0.001) –
a result very similar to the networks with 13 hidden nodes.
With more than 14 hidden nodes (i.e., 15) or fewer than 13
(i.e., 11 and 12), the interaction between target level and
network remained significant, but the RH networks
outperformed the LH networks when there were more than

1

Note that this Gaussian PDF is used to create connections
between layers and thus is different from the Gaussian receptive
field functions used in some models of hemispheric asymmetry
(e.g. Ivry & Robertson, 1998; Monaghan & Shillcock, 2004). Also,
the distribution widths are opposite of ours (e.g., wide right).
2
Since the connectivity configuration for each trial was randomly
generated, in some rare cases the network did not learn well and
ended up with extremely large error. We use the mean plus/minus
two standard deviations as the upper/lower bound to remove the
outliers, which is about 2 to 3% of the simulation trials.

860

14 hidden nodes, whereas the LH networks outperformed
the RH when there were fewer than 13 hidden nodes. In
contrast, while keeping the number of hidden nodes
constant, the interaction between target level and network
also remained significant, but the RH networks
outperformed the LH networks with more than 7
connections (i.e., 8 and 9), whereas the LH networks
outperformed the RH networks when there are fewer than 7
connections (i.e., 5 and 6). This result shows that the
interaction between target level and network architecture is
robust against parameter changes; changes in the number of
hidden nodes and the number of connections from each
hidden node only alter the difference in performance level
between the two networks. The model fits the human data
the best when the two networks have a similar performance
level; this is also consistent with the human data that there is
no main effect of hemisphere in performance.
We also explored how the performance changed with the
variance on the connection distribution; this allowed us to
determine the proper parameters for the LH and RH models.
Figure 7 shows how the network behavior changes with the
density of the connections in the model with 13 hidden
nodes and 7 connections from each hidden node. The far left
(1.8) is the RH network and the far right (18) is the LH
network. It is clear that the interaction would survive less
extreme parameter variation.

Conclusion & Discussion
Here we test the hypothesis that the hemispheric asymmetry
in the perception of global and local features originates from
differential encoding beyond the sensory level, instead of
differential frequency bias as proposed by the DFF theory
(Ivry & Robertson, 1998). We first argue that the lack of
evidence supporting hemispheric specialization for
particular frequency ranges (e.g., Di Lollo, 1981; Peterzell
et al., 1989; Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1990) suggests that this
asymmetry takes place beyond the sensory level (Sergent,
1982), and the two hemispheres do not differ in information
extraction. We then argue that the difference takes place at
the encoding stage. We incorporate evidence about the
differences in the anatomical and functional microstructure
of the two hemispheres in a computational model that uses
autoencoder networks to develop efficient encoding of the
stimulus (Rumelhart et al., 1986): the columnar structure in
the RH has more interconnectivity among neighboring
columns compared with that in the LH, and thus may be
more functionally overlapped than that in the LH (Hutsler &
Galuske, 2003). We thus use two autoencoder networks
with different connectivity configurations to simulate this
differential encoding: the RH network has a narrower
connectivity distribution to allow more connectivity among
neighboring nodes compared with the LH network. We then
use a perceptron network to examine how good the two
encoding systems are in terms of detecting local and global
level targets. The results match the human data very well; it
shows a significant hemisphere-by-level interaction: a RH
advantage for responses to a global level target, and a LH
advantage for responses to a local level target (Sergent,
1982); and an overall advantage in responses to a global
level target (Navon, 1977).
In the comparison with Ivry and Robertson's model (1998)
based on the DFF theory, we show that our model has a
better fit with the human data (Sergent, 1982). Their model
enforces a discrete separation of frequency information into
modules and the hemispheric differences take place through
a manipulation of the combination of the different frequency
modules; it is thus unclear how these frequency ranges are
selected and why they are combined in a certain way, and
how the model is able to account for the lack of evidence
supporting hemispheric specialization for particular
frequency ranges (e.g., Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1990). In
contrast, through hypothesizing that hemispheric differences
take place at the encoding stage, and using the Gaussian
distribution
to
simulate
differential
connectivity
configuration at the encoding stage, our model develops
naturally the hemispheric difference in the frequency
content in the encoding, without assuming two stages of
frequency filtering (Ivry & Robertson, 1998). In addition,
there is little anatomical evidence suggesting differential
frequency tuning in the neurons in the two hemispheres, or
different frequency modules in the brain similar to those
proposed in their model. In short, compared with their
model, our model is more anatomically realistic, more
cognitively plausible, and has a better fit to the human data.

.0019
.0018
.0017
.0016
.0015

L+S-

Error

.0014
.0013

L-S+

.0012
1.8

4.5

7.0

9.5

12

18

Variance of Gaussian

Figure 7: The network’s performance with different
connection density: the larger the variance of the Gaussian
distribution, the sparser the connection configuration is.
Compared with Ivry and Robertson's model, the current
model has a better fit with the human data (Sergent, 1982).
In their results, a better match with the human data was
obtained when they used large stimuli. However, even with
the large stimuli, it is unclear whether the hemispheric
difference was significant in each level condition as the
human data (they only reported a significant interaction
between network and level but not for each level condition
separately; see Figure 4); also, the LH network eventually
became better at identifying targets at both levels, which is
inconsistent with the human data. In contrast, our results
better match the human data (Figure 6): a significant
hemispheric difference in both level conditions, and a
comparable performance between the two hemispheres.

861

In the current simulation we use the same stimuli as those
used in Ivry and Robertson's model (1998) for comparison
reasons. Although the stimuli are simpler than those used in
the human experiments (Sergent, 1982), the current
simulation presents an important clue in the debate of this
perceptual asymmetry that has puzzled researchers for at
least 25 years: this difference may be due to differential
encoding in the two hemispheres beyond the sensory level;
computational modeling makes it possible to demonstrate
this differential encoding effect. It also predicts that a
hemispheric difference in cortical column structure similar
to that in the auditory cortex may also exist in the high-level
visual areas such as inferior temporal cortex.
We are currently pursuing the incorporation of more
anatomical data into the model, such as using 2D Gabor
filters to simulate responses of complex cells in the early
visual system (Daugman, 1985), and also using the
proposed autoencoder networks as the way to develop
efficient encoding in the two hemispheres in modeling more
complicated (e.g. the hierarchical letter patterns) and real
world visual stimuli (such as faces; cf., the Principal
Component Analysis step in many visual perception
models), in order to examine the cognitive plausibility of
this differential encoding mechanism in accounting for
various hemispheric asymmetry phenomena in perception,
such as the left side bias effect in face perception (e.g.,
Gilbert & Bakan, 1973) and the RVF advantage in visual
word recognition (e.g., Bryden & Rainey, 1963). This
differential encoding account may also be applied to
hemispheric asymmetry in other cognitive domains. For
example, Monaghan and Shillcock (2004) use different
receptive field sizes in the two hemispheres, similar to the
different frequency modules in the DFF model, in a
computational model of visual attention aiming to account
for the unilateral visual neglect phenomenon. Their model
also suffers from the lack of evidence for differential
frequency biases in the hemispheres at the sensory level;
whether the differential encoding mechanism can also
account for this asymmetry in visual attention is currently
under examination.

two-dimensional visual cortical filters. Journal of the
Optical Society of America A, 2, 1160-1169.
Di Lollo, V. (1981). Hemispheric symmetry in visible
persistence. Perception & Psychophysics, 11, 139-142.
Fendrich, R., & Gazzaniga, M. (1990). Hemispheric
processing of spatial frequencies in two commissurotomy
patients. Neuropsychologia, 28, 657–663.
Galuske, R. A., Schlote, W., Bratzke, H., & Singer, W.
(2000). Interhemispheric asymmetries of the modular
structure in human temporal cortex. Science, 289, 19461949.
Gilbert, C. & Bakan, P. (1973). Visual asymmetry in
perception of faces. Neuropsychologia, 11, 355-362.
Hoffman, J. E. (1980). Interaction between global and local
levels of a form. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 6, 222-234.
Hutsler, J. & Galuske, R. A. W. (2003). Hemispheric
asymmetries in cerebral cortical networks. Trends in
Neurosciences, 26, 429-435.
Ivry, R. & Robertson, L. C. (1998). The Two Sides of
Perception. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Martin, M. (1979). Hemispheric specialization for local and
global processing. Neuropsychologia, 17, 33-40.
Monaghan, P. & Shillcock, R. C. (2004). Hemispheric
asymmetries in cognitive modeling: connectionist
modeling of unilateral visual neglect. Psychological
Review, 111, 283-308.
Navon (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of global
features in visual perception. Cognitive Psychology, 9,
353-383.
Peterzell, D. H. (1991). On the nonrelationship between
spatial frequency and cerebral hemispheric competence,
Brain & Cognition, 15, 62-68.
Peterzell, D. H., Harvey, L. O., Jr. & Hardyck, C.D. (1989).
Spatial Frequencies and the cerebral hemispheres:
Contrast sensitivity, visible persistence, and letter
classification. Perception & Psychophysics, 46, 433-455.
Rijsdijk, J. P., Kroon, J. N., &Van der Wildt, G. J. (1980).
Contrast sensitivity as a function of position on retina.
Vision Research, 20, 235-241.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E, & Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning representations by back-propagating errors.
Nature, 323, 533-536.
Seldon, H. L. (1981a). Structure of human auditory cortex. I.
Cytoarchitectonics and dendritic distributions. Brain
Research, 229, 277–294.
Seldon, H. L. (1981b). Structure of human auditory cortex.
II. Axon distributions and morphological correlates of
speech perception. Brain Research, 229, 295–310.
Seldon, H. L. (1982). Structure of human auditory cortex.
III. Statistical analysis of dendritic trees. Brain Research,
249, 211–221.
Sergent, J. (1982). The Cerebral Balance of Power:
Confrontation or Cooperation? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8, 253272.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant MH 57075 and
NSF grant #SBE-0542013 to the Temporal Dynamics of
Learning Center (GWC, PI) and a McDonnell Foundation
grant to the Perceptual Expertise Network (I. Gauthier, PI).

References
Bryden, M.P., & Rainey, C.A. (1963). Left-right differences
in tachistoscopic recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 66, 568–571.
Buxhoeveden, D. P., Switala, A. E., Litaker, M., Roy, E., &
Casanova, M. F. (2001). Lateralization of minicolumns in
human planum temporal is absent in nonhuman primate
cortex. Brain Behav. Evol., 57, 349-358.
Daugman, J. G. (1985). Uncertainty relation for resolution
in space, spatial frequency, and orientation optimized by

862

