UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Outcomes of Actions Influence Infants' Representation of Those Actions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2cg1q713

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Oakes, Lisa M.
Perone, Sammy
Madole, Kelly L.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Outcomes of Actions Influence Infants’ Representation of Those Actions
Lisa M. Oakes (lmoakes@ucdavis.edu)
UC Davis Center for Mind & Brain, 267 Cousteau Place
Davis, CA 95618 USA

Sammy Perone (Sammy-Perone@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Kelly L. Madole (kelly.madole@wku.edu)
Department of Psychology, Western Kentucky University
Bowling Green, KY 42101 USA

information are inextricably intertwined (Goldstone &
Barsalou, 1998; Madole & Oakes, 1999; Rakison, 2005b).
Nonetheless, in some contexts infants do find dynamic,
intermittent features such as object sound, function, and
movement or action more compelling than relatively static
constant features such as object color or shape (Horst et al.,
2005; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004). However, the source of
this differential salience is not well understood. Movement
may attract attention simply because it is associated with lowlevel perceptual features known to automatically attract
attention such as abrupt onset and transients (e.g., Yantis &
Jonides, 1990). Such factors certainly contribute to the
salience of these features.
In addition to these basic, low-level factors, however,
infants’ developing perception of causality may contribute to
the salience of some object features. By 10 months, infants
use spatial and temporal features of events to differentiate
causal from non-causal relations (Oakes, 2003). Because they
perceive causal events as different from non-causal events,
parts of events that appear to be the causes of interesting
outcomes may be particularly attention-grabbing for infants.
Indeed, infants are especially sensitive to the features of
causal agents in events (Cohen & Oakes, 1993; Rakison,
2005a).
Importantly, this selective attention to causes need not
reflect deep conceptual understanding of (or inferences about)
causal mechanisms. Infants’ sensitivity to the spatiotemporal
conditions that differentiate causal agents from non-causal
agent (i.e., actors in non-causal events) may reflect their
perception of causality based on perceived spatiotemporal
contiguity. This perceptual ability may be the foundation of
the deeper conceptual understanding of causes and their
effects that is shown by older individuals.
A consideration of infants’ attention to causal features can
illuminate another aspect of infants' object representations:
By 10 months, infants treat object function—defined as an
action performed on an object that is associated with an
outcome—as an important feature of objects. Under some
conditions infants selectively attend to function over the
surface features of objects (Horst et al., 2005), and they use
function as the basis of categorization (Booth & Waxman,

Abstract
Three experiments examined how the outcomes of actions
influences 10-month-old infants’ (N = 56) representation of
those actions and the objects on which they are performed in
dynamic, multimodal events. In each experiment, infants were
habituated to events in which a colorful novel object was
manipulated by a hand. Infants learned that some actions
produced outcomes while others did not (Experiment 1), but did
not learn that objects with a particular appearance produced
outcomes (Experiment 2). Infants did learn the isolated actions
and appearances even when the actions did not produce an
effect (Experiment 3). Together, these results suggest that how
infants learn about and represent the action performed on
objects depends, in part, on whether or not that action is the
cause of a salient outcome.
Keywords: Infant cognition; object representation; causal
perception; perception of action; visual habituation.

Introduction
Infants’ representation of objects and object features has
become a central focus in cognitive development.
Researchers have documented developmental changes in
infants’ ability to remember features such as color, shape, and
texture of objects, as well as how movement changes infants’
attention to, perception of, and memory for objects (see
Kellman & Arterberry, 1998, for a review). This work has
revealed that young infants have impressive abilities to
represent object features, and that these representations
change dramatically over the first year of life. Recently,
infants’ representation of dynamic features—such as causal
roles, functions, and goals or intentions—has been the focus
of intense interest (e.g., Horst, Oakes, & Madole, 2005;
Rakison, 2005a, 2006; Woodward, 1998).
Some researchers have argued that attention to these kinds
of features reflects a shift from perceptual representations to
conceptual representations (Mandler, 2004), but the
usefulness of this assertion has been questioned (Madole &
Oakes, 1999). In particular, it is not clear that selective
attention to such features reflects the privileged status of
“conceptual” features. Indeed, it has been argued that the
distinction between perceptual and conceptual features or
categories is artificial, and that the two sources or kinds of
987

2002). However, despite the importance of object function,
we know little about how infants represent function. One
possibility is that what infants actually represent are actions
that cause outcomes. This assertion is supported by research
showing that 10-month-old infants associate the actions
performed on objects with the surface features of objects
(e.g., you can squeeze round, purple objects), but they do not
associate the outcomes with the surface features of objects
(e.g., round purple objects squeak when acted on) (Perone &
Oakes, 2006). In addition, causes are thought to be central to
how adults and infants represent and categorize objects (Ahn,
Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis, 2000), and actions
that produce outcomes are key to how objects are
represented in the adult brain (Martin, 2007).
We tested the role of outcomes on infants’ perception of
actions in 3 experiments. In Experiment 1, we examined
infants’ sensitivity to the association between causal and noncausal actions. That is, we asked whether infants would learn
that some actions product outcomes and others do not. In
Experiment 2, we investigated infants’ differentiation
between functional and non-functional objects. That is, we
asked whether infants would learn that objects with one
appearance produced outcomes when acted on but object with
other appearances do not produce outcomes when acted on.
Finally, in Experiment 3, we asked whether infants can learn
the isolated object appearances and actions in events in which
the action is ineffective—that is, it does not produce a salient
outcome.

Figure 1. An example of the stimuli used in all experiments
Each event had the following sequence: an object appeared
stationary for 1 s, a hand then appeared and acted on the
object for 5 s, the hand then retreated and the object remained
stationary for 1 s. This sequence could be looped to play
continuously for 35 s. At a viewing distance of 100 cm, the
objects subtended a visual angle of between 3.64 and 8.72
degrees by between 4.00 and 6.54 degrees.
For Experiments 1 and 2, an outcome (sound) was
produced (squeaking, clicking, mooing, and whistling) when
an action was performed on an object. For example, when the
hand squeezed the spherical purple object it squeaked. The
action, appearances, and outcomes were completely crossed
to create 64 events. Thus, the association between particular
actions and outcomes, particular actions and appearances, or
between particular appearances and outcomes were arbitrary.

Procedure
For each experiment, infants were seated on a parent’s lap
approximately 100 cm in front of a computer monitor
(parents wore occluding glasses in all experiments, and also
listened to music through headphones in Experiments 1 and
2). A trained observer, seated out of view, observed infants on
a monitor. Before each trial, a green circle loomed in the
center of the monitor accompanied by a chirping sound.
When the infant looked at this attention-getting stimulus, the
observer pressed one computer key that simultaneously ended
the attention-getter and presented the stimulus and then
pressed and held another computer key when infant looked at
the monitor. The stimulus remained on the screen until the
infant looked at the stimulus for at least 1 s before looking
away for at least 1 s, or 35 s had elapsed. If no looking was
recorded in the first 10 s, the trial ended and was repeated. A
second trained observer recorded the looking times for 25%
of the infants from video records of the sessions. Across the
experiments, mean inter-observer correlation for duration of
looking on each trial was high, r = .998, and the absolute
difference between observers was low, M = .45 s.
In each experiment, infants were habituated to one
(Experiment 3) or two (Experiments 1 and 2) events.
Habituation continued until infants’ looking time decreased
to 50% of their looking during the first block of trials, or
until 20 trials were presented. In each experiment, infants
habituated to the familiar event(s) and significantly
dishabituated to a completely novel event presented last (see
Table 1). Following habituation, infants were tested with a
series of novel events. The particular habituation and test
events will be described separately for each Experiment.

General Methods
Participants
Fifty-six healthy, full-term typically developing 10-month-old
infants participated; 20 in each of Experiments 1 and 2, 16 in
Experiment 3. The average age of the infants was 304.91
days, SD = 7.59, and there were 30 girls (approximately equal
boys and girls in each experiment).

Apparatus
A Macintosh G4 or G5 computer was used to present the
stimuli and to record infants’ looking time. Stimuli were
presented on a 37 cm (w) X 27 cm (h) region of a CRT or
LCD monitor. Infants were recorded using a low-light
security camera located directly beneath the center of the
monitor. A black curtain hung from ceiling to floor blocking
infants’ view of the equipment. Holes in this curtain revealed
the monitor and the low-light camera.

Stimuli
The stimuli were digitized movies of videotaped events in
which a hand performed one of four actions (squeezing,
rolling, inverting, or pulling a part away from the body of the
object) on an object with one of four appearances (see Figure
1).

988

Table 1: Looking times during habituation and test for
Experiments 1-3

16
14
Looking time (in s)

Trial
Experiment
First
Familiar Test
Novel Test
1
22.10 (13.34)
7.14 (4.75)
20.93 (11.09)
2
19.18 (10.60)
6.49 (4.64)
23.11 (10.99)
3
18.23 (10.01)
5.74 (4.44)
14.71 (8.36)
Note. Means are in s. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

12
10
8
6
4
2

Experiment 1

0

Perone and Oakes (2006) reported that infants associated
actions and object appearances, but that infants failed
toassociate actions with particular outcomes, suggesting that
the specific outcome is not central to how infants represent
actions. Note that actions can be causes even if they are not
associated with a specific outcome—shaking might produce
rattling, whistling, or clicking. What might be relevant is that
the action produces an outcome, not that it is associated
with a particular outcome. Indeed, Cohen and Oakes (1993)
found that 10- to 12-month-old infants attended to the agents
but not recipients in causal launching events; infants did not
attend to the identity of either agents or recipients in
noncausal launching events.
If this pattern reflects a general property of infants’
attention to and representation of events, what may be
relevant in the present context is that the action produces an
outcome, not that it produces a specific outcome. We tested
this hypothesis in Experiment 1 by habituating infants with
two events involving two different actions; one action
produced an effect (i.e., squeaking), the other did not (i.e., the
event was silent). Following habituation, we tested infants on
two switched events; one in which a previously ineffective
action now produced an outcome and another in which a
previously effective action did not produce an outcome. We
reasoned that if infants learn that some actions produce
outcomes (even though they are insensitive to the particular
outcome associated with an action), they should dishabituate
when a previously non-causal action now produces an
outcome as well as when a previously causal action now does
not result in an outcome.

Experiment 1
Familiar

Experiment 2
Switched

Figure 2. Infants’ looking time to the familiar test and the
average of the two switched events in Experiments 1 and 2.
ability to learn the relation in one pair of stimuli). The order
within blocks was random. Habituation was evaluated by
comparing non-overlapping blocks of 4 trials, ensuring that
infants received equal number of presentations with the two
familiar events. Infants habituated in 13.0 trials on average.
Immediately following habituation, four test trials were
presented. The familiar event was presented on the first trial.
Then two switched events were presented, order
counterbalanced across infants. In one switched event, the
previously effective action (i.e., the action in the +outcome
event) was presented in an –outcome event and in the other
the previously ineffective action (i.e., that in the –outcome
event) was presented in an +outcome event. Essentially,
infants were habituated to one causal action and one noncausal action, and then they were tested with the causal action
in a non-causal event, and the non-causal action producing an
effect. The fourth test was completely novel.

Results
Initial analyses revealed that infants’ looking to the two
switch events did not differ significantly. To increase power,
we averaged looking across those two events and compared
infants’ dishabituation to these events by comparing their
average looking time to the two switched tests to their
looking time to the familiar test. Infants significantly
dishabituated to the switched tests, t (19) = 2.92, p = .009 (see
Figure 2), indicating that they detected the association
between the action and whether or not it produced a sound
(separate t-tests confirmed that infants dishabituated to both
switch tests).

Method
Twenty infants were habituated to two events involving the
same object appearance but different actions. One action
always produced an outcome (the +outcome event); the other
action never produced an outcome (the -outcome event). For
example, infants might see the purple spherical object being
squeezed and squeaking on half the trials and the purple
spherical object being pushed and no sound occurring the
other half of the trials. Thus, infants were habituated to
essentially one causal action and one non-causal action.
During each block of 4 habituation trials, infants received two
trials with each of the two habituation events (note that many
different pairs of habituation events were used, and thus the
responding of the group of infants reflects their general ability
to learn this relation, not their

Discussion
Experiment 1 showed that 10-month-old infants can learn that
some actions cause outcomes and others do not, despite the
fact that previous results have shown that at 10 months
infants fail to associate a particular outcome with a particular
action (Perone & Oakes, 2006). In Experiment 1, 10-monthold infants associated a particular action with the production
of an effect (in this case a sound) and a different action with
the failure to produce an effect. They dishabituated when a
989

a particular way (e.g., rolled) and other objects were acted on
in another way (e.g., inverted). Here, we observed that infants
did not learn that when two different looking objects were
acted on in the same way, one object produced and outcome
and the other did not. Thus, infants can associate object
appearances with some aspects of the action, but they are
insensitive to the association between appearance and the
results of that action.
It is possible, however, that infants fail to represent actions
and/or appearances when the actions do not produce an
outcome. Therefore, in Experiment 3 we tested infants’
sensitivity to changes in just appearance or in just action
when the actions did not produce a salient outcome.

previously ineffective action produced an outcome or when a
previously effective action failed to produce an outcome.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 revealed that infants’ learn that particular
actions are associated with outcome. It is possible, however,
that infants learn that any feature of events can be associated
with outcomes. In Experiment 2 we tested infants’ sensitivity
to the association between object appearance and the
outcomes of actions—i.e., whether they will learn that some
objects are functional (i.e., produce an outcome when acted
on) and other objects are non-functional.

Method

Experiment 3

This experiment was identical in all respects to Experiment 1
except that the two events had the same action, and one
appearance was associated with an outcome (the +outcome
event) and the other appearance was not (the –event). For
example, both events might involve squeezing, but purple
spherical objects whistle and pink oblong objects are silent
when squeezed. The 20 infants tested habituated in 15.4 trials
on average.

Method
Sixteen infants were presented with a single event until their
looking time on any block of 3 trials was 50% of their
looking on the first block of 3 trials. The event was identical
to those used in the previous experiments, except that when
the action was executed it did not result in an outcome (i.e., a
sound). Infants habituated in 7.9 trials on average.
Immediately after habituation, infants were tested with the
familiar item to provide a baseline for their response to the
novel items. Then, they were tested with two new items—one
with a new appearance and familiar action and the other with
a new action and a familiar appearance (in both of these
events, the action did not produce an outcome). The order of
these two items was counterbalanced across infants. The last
test was an event with a new action and a new appearance
(again, no outcome was produced by the action).

Results
Once again, infants’ responding to the two switched tests did
not differ; they were therefore averaged to increase power.
The main analysis evaluated infants’ dishabituation (or lack
of dishabituation) to the switched tests. Unlike Experiment 1,
infants in Experiment 2 failed to dishabituate to the switched
test event, p = .46 (see Figure 2) (individual comparisons of
each switched test revealed that infants failed to dishabituate
to both items). Thus, infants did not associate object
appearance with whether or not the action produced an effect
(a sound).

Results
Looking to the familiar, appearance change and action change
tests are presented in Figure 3. Infants dishabituated to both
changes, t (15) = 5.45, p < .001, appearance change, and t
(15) = 3.88, p= .001, action change.

Discussion
Experiment 2 ruled out the possibility that infants simply
associate any distinguishing feature with whether or not
actions produce an interesting, salient effect. In Experiment 2,
like in Experiment 1, half of the events involved an effect. In
Experiment 2, however, the same action occurred on each
trial. The distinguishing feature that was associated with
whether or not there was an outcome was the appearance of
the objects. Despite the fact that the objects were highly
discriminable and could be differentiated using any of several
features (e.g., color, shape, presence of specific parts), infants
failed to link those features with whether or not the event was
causal—or whether or not the action produced an outcome. In
other words, infants did not learn that some objects are
functional (i.e., produce an effect when acted on) and other
objects are nonfunctional (i.e., fail to produce an effect when
acted on).
This pattern of results is particularly striking because
Perone and Oakes (2006) observed that at 10 months infants
do associate specific actions with specific object appearances.
That is, infants learned that some objects could be acted on in

25

Looking time (in s)

20
15
10
5
0
Familiar Test

Novel Appearance

Novel Action

Figure 3. Looking times to each of the tests in Experiment 3

990

causality based on spatiotemporal contiguity. These results
provide no evidence that infants learn, infer, or reason about a
causal mechanism between the action and the outcome.
Rather, we assume that the perception of the spatiotemporal
contiguity between the action and the outcome highlights the
action for infants because they can differentiate such causal
relations from relations that are not characterized by
spatiotemporal contiguity (e.g., when the cause and effect are
separated in time, Oakes, 2003). Indeed, Madole and Cohen
(1995) observed that 14-month-old infants were attentive to
associations between the appearance of objects and how those
objects functioned, even when the associations were not
sensible from the perspective of physical causal mechanisms.
We argue that perceiving such relations, and differentiating
them from non-causal relations, provides a starting point for
children’s developing concepts of causal relations.
Clearly, this discussion has implications for how infants’
representation and categorization of such objects develops.
Theorists have long argued that function—or the kind of
causal action used here—is privileged in young children’s
categorization. Indeed, we have observed that 6- to 7-monthold infants selectively attend to the caused action (or
function) over the object appearance in the events used here
(Perone, Madole, Ross-Sheehy, Carey, & Oakes, in press).
However, research on infants’ perception of causal
relations suggests that such perception develops considerably
over the first year of life (Oakes, 2003). Although there is
some evidence that infants as young as 6 or 7 months
differentiate causal from non-causal launching events, this
differentiation at this age is fragile and is disrupted by
increasing the information-processing demands of the
situation (e.g., by using more complex objects in the events,
see Oakes, 2003, for a review). This developing sensitivity to
causal relations would necessarily have an impact on how
infants’ perceive the actions in events. It is likely that older
infants, whose causal perception is more robust, would
interpret a broader range of action contexts as causing the
outcome than would younger infants. This developmental
difference would contribute to changes in how the actions are
represented.

Discussion
In Experiment 3, infants attended to changes in both
appearance and action in silent events, indicating that they
can learn those isolated features even when the action fails to
produce an outcome. Thus, the failure of infants’ to learn the
association between object appearance and whether or not
those objects are functional (i.e., produce an effect when
acted on) in Experiment 2 is not due to their inability to attend
to and learn appearance when no effect occurs.

General Discussion
These results contribute to our understanding of how infants
represent actions in complex, multi-modal events, and add to
our growing knowledge of how such representation develops
in infancy. Specifically, the experiments reported here show
that infants’ representation of the actions performed on
objects is influenced by the causal effect of those actions.
Although infants fail to associate specific actions with
specific outcomes (Perone & Oakes, 2006), they do learn
whether or not specific actions actually produce some effect
(Experiment 1). Importantly, Experiment 2 showed that
infants will not learn that any distinguishing feature of an
event is predictive of whether or not an outcome occurs—in
that Experiment infants failed to show evidence have having
learned that objects with particular appearances produce an
effect when acted on. Infants do learn the isolated features of
object appearance and action even when the actions do not
cause salient, interesting outcomes (Experiment 3). Thus,
when actions are causal infants represent those actions in
different ways than when actions are not causal.

Causal action as central to object representations
These findings are consistent with a body of work showing
that actions and causes are central to how people represent
objects. Neuroimaging work has revealed that the same
regions of the adult human brain are activated by actions
performed on objects and by the appearances of manipulable
objects themselves (Martin, 2007). Theories of people’s
conceptions of artifact categories have argued that function or
causal features are central to those categories (Ahn et al.,
2000; Keil, 1989). The present results suggest that 10-monthold infants have access to such information, and their
representations of objects in complex, dynamic events is
influenced by whether actions performed are causal or noncausal.
Of course, because our actions are performed by a human
hand, the effects we observed may reflect, in part, infants’
perception of the hand as goal directed or as a causal agent
(Leslie, 1984; Woodward, 1998). At this point, we are unable
to determine the role of the hand in infants’ perception of
these events. Even if infants perceive the hand as central to
the action, it is still the case that infants’ perceptions of the
events differ depending on whether the action performed by
the hand results in an outcome.
Importantly, here we have examined infants’ perception of

Perceptual versus conceptual foundations of object
representation
The present results might be interpreted as demonstrating that
by 10 months infants have a conceptual understanding of
actions, and that at this age infants’ representations of objects
are based on this conceptual understanding. We favor an
alternative interpretation. Specifically, in our events, the
differentiation between causal and non-causal actions is
perceptually-based—causal actions are only causal because a
sound (effect) occurs at the same time that a hand is in contact
with the object. Thus, the effect is spatiotemporally
contiguous with the action. We believe that results such as
those presented here provide insight into how perceptual
features—such as spatiotemporally defined causality—can
provide the foundations for conceptual understanding that
may emerge later. Results like those presented here show that
991

Leslie, A. M. (1984). Infant perception of a manual pick-up
event. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 2,
19-32.
Madole, K. L., & Cohen, L. B. (1995). The role of object
parts in infants' attention to form-function correlations.
Developmental Psychology, 31, 317-332.
Madole, K. L., & Oakes, L. M. (1999). Making sense of
infant categorization: Stable processes and changing
representations. Developmental Review, 19, 263-296.
Mandler, J. M. (2004). The foundations of mind: Origins of
conceptual thought. New York: Oxford University Press.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in
the brain. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 25-45.
Nelson, K. (1974). Concept, word, and sentence:
Interrelations in acquisition and development.
Psychological Review, 81, 267-285.
Oakes, L. M. (2003). Development of Causal Perception. In
L. Nadel, P. Chalmer, P. Culivoer, R. L. Goldstone & R.
M. French (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science
(Vol. 1, pp. 456-460). London: Macmillan.
Perone, S., Madole, K. L., Ross-Sheehy, S., Carey, M., &
Oakes, L. M. (in press). The relation between infants’
activity with objects and attention to object appearance.
Developmental Psychology.
Perone, S., & Oakes, L. M. (2006). It clicks when it is rolled
and squeaks when it is squeezed: What 10-month-old
infants learn about object function. Child Development,
77, 1608-1622.
Piaget, J., Grize, J. B., Szeminsk, A., & Bang, V. (1977).
Epistomology and psychology of functions. Boston: D.
Reidel Publishing Co.
Rakison, D. H. (2005a). A secret agent? How infants learn
about the identity of objects in a causal scene. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 91, 271-296.
Rakison, D. H. (2005b). The Perceptual to Conceptual Shift
in Infancy and Early Childhood: A Surface or Deep
Distinction? In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. H. Rakison
(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time
(pp. 131-158). Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers.
Rakison, D. H. (2006). Make the First Move: How Infants
Learn About Self-Propelled Objects. Developmental
Psychology, 42, 900-912.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of development.
Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor's reach. Cognition, 69, 1-34.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1990). Abrupt visual onset and
selective attention: Voluntary versus automatic
allocation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 16, 121-134.

conceptual understanding may have foundations in infancy.
Importantly, these results do not show that those foundations
must also be conceptual in nature.

Conclusions
In summary, the present results provide important insight into
how infants represent actions, and the objects on which those
actions are performed. Results reported here—in conjunction
with previous findings—have implications for how infants
represent artifacts. Specifically, although function may be
privileged as has been argued by many theorists (Gibson,
1982; Nelson, 1974; Piaget, Grize, Szeminsk, & Bang, 1977),
attention to function likely emerges with infants’ developing
ability to detect causal relations and differentiate them from
non-causal ones. Moreover, the present results suggest that
actions are not the most salient features in events, but that
caused actions may have a special status—at least by 10
months—in infants representations of dynamic, multi-modal
events.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper and much of the work described was
made possible by grants HD49840 awarded to LMO.
Correspondences should be sent to Lisa M. Oakes, Center for
Mind and Brain, 267 Cousteau Place, University of
California, Davis, CA 95618. E-mail: lmoakes@ucdavis.edu.

References
Ahn, W., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature
centrality. Cognitive Psychology, 41.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. (2002). Object names and object
functions serve as cues to categories for infants.
Developmental Psychology, 38, 948-957.
Cohen, L. B., & Oakes, L. M. (1993). How infants perceive a
simple causal event. Developmental Psychology, 29,
421-433.
Gibson, E. J. (1982). The concept of affordance in
development: The renascence of functionalism. In W. A.
Collins (Ed.), The concept of development: The
Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology (Vol. 15, pp.
55-81). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting
perception and conception. Cognition, 65, 231-262.
Horst, J. S., Oakes, L. M., & Madole, K. L. (2005). What
does it look like and what can it do? Category structure
influences how infants categorize. Child Development,
76, 614-631.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kellman, P. J., & Arterberry, M. E. (1998). The cradle of
knowledge: Development of perception in infancy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

992

