UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Key Misconceptions in Algebraic Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n28t12n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Booth, Julie L.
Koedinger, Kenneth R.

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Key Misconceptions in Algebraic Problem Solving
Julie L. Booth (juliebooth@cmu.edu)
Kenneth R. Koedinger (koedinger@cmu.edu)
Human Computer Interaction Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
problems (Anderson, 1989; Van Lehn & Jones, 1993). Use
of incorrect procedures is common when learning Algebra
(Lerch, 2004; Sebrechts, Enright, Bennett, & Martin, 1996),
and by nature, this behavior inhibits accurate solution of
problems.
One reason why use of these incorrect strategies may
persist is that many of the procedures that students attempt
to use are ones that will lead to a successful solution for
some problem situations. Unfortunately, without adequate
knowledge of the problem features, students are unable to
distinguish between the situations in which the strategy will
work and the ones where it is not applicable.
For example, one common strategy students have for
solving equations is that if they want to remove a term from
the equation, they subtract it from both sides of the
equation. This works just fine for removing 4 from the
equation x + 4 = 13. However, when they encounter
equations like x – 4 = 13, many students still try to subtract
4 from both sides to solve the problem. One explanation for
this mistake is that those students may be deficient in their
conceptual knowledge of negative signs. If they don’t
process the fact that the negative sign modifies the 4 and is a
necessary part of the “term” they are trying to remove, they
ignore it, to the detriment of their goal of solving the
problem.
Having good conceptual knowledge may thus be
necessary for students to solve equations correctly, as deep
strategy construction relies on inclusion of sufficient
information about the problem features that make them
appropriate or inappropriate. Unfortunately, for students
with incorrect or incomplete conceptual knowledge about
problem features, shallow strategies, such as the one
described above, will likely prevail.

Abstract
The current study examines how holding misconceptions
about key problem features affects students’ ability to solve
algebraic equations correctly and to learn correct procedures
for problem solution. Algebra I students learning to solve
simple equations using the Cognitive Tutor curriculum
(Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley, & Mark, 1997) completed a
pretest and posttest designed to evaluate their conceptual
understanding of problem features (including the equals sign
and negative signs) as well as their equation solving skill.
Results indicate that students who begin the lesson with
misconceptions about the meaning of the equals sign or
negative signs solve fewer equations correctly at pretest, and
also have difficulty learning how to solve them. However,
improving their knowledge of those features over the course
of the lesson increases their learning of correct procedures.
Keywords: algebraic problem solving; conceptual knowledge;
learning; mathematics education

Introduction
Learners are not blank slates. Each student brings prior
knowledge into a lesson, and that knowledge can greatly
influence what the student will gain from the experience.
Possession of good content knowledge has been associated
with advantages in memory (Chi, 1978; Tenenbaum, Tehan,
Stewart, & Christensen, 1999), generation of inferences
(Chi, Hutchinson, & Robin, 1989), categorization (Chi,
Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981), strategy use and acquisition
(Gaultney, 1995; Alexander & Schwanenflugel, 1994), and
reasoning skills (Gobbo & Chi, 1986; Johnson, Scott, &
Mervis, 2004). It follows, then, that students who do not
possess this important knowledge are at a disadvantage for
successful problem solving or for learning new information.
In the domain of algebraic problem solving, one type of
prior knowledge that is key to learning is conceptual
understanding of features in the problem (e.g., equals sign,
variables, like terms, negative signs, etc.). We operationally
define conceptual knowledge of these features as not just
recognizing the symbols or carrying out an operation, but
understanding the function of the feature in the equation and
how changing the location of the feature would affect the
overall problem. In the next two sections, we describe why a
lack of understanding about these features could interfere
with students’ performance and learning on procedural
equation-solving problems.

Why conceptual knowledge of problem features
should affect students’ learning
Instruction on procedural problems can take many forms,
including demonstration by a teacher, study of written
worked examples, hint messages from a computerized tutor,
or feedback from a teacher or computer program. What all
of these instructional techniques have in common is that in
all cases, students need to be able align the presented
information with the information in the problems they are or
will be attempting to solve.
Carrying out this alignment is not trivial. Often times,
people focus on literal similarity between the two sources -which makes it difficult to identify the crucial features that
have meaningful similarity -- as opposed to the overall
structural similarity, which enables extraction of causal
principles (Gentner, 1989)

Why conceptual knowledge of problem features
should affect students’ performance
Previous research has proposed that student
misconceptions or gaps in conceptual knowledge of Algebra
lead to use of incorrect, buggy procedures for solving
571

Thus, students who do not have sufficient knowledge of
problem features will likely only be capable of making
shallow, surface analogies. If this activity leads to any
learning at all, it can only be that of shallow procedures,
which may be useful in some problem situations, but are not
generally applicable.
In order to gain knowledge of deep procedures, students
need to create deep analogies between the two sources of
information. This requires noticing and attending to more
than just surface features of the problem. Students need to
have adequate conceptual understanding of the key features
of the problem to fully grasp the meaning of instructional
information. Thus, without this deep, meaningful
knowledge of problem features, students will be unlikely to
show great gains in procedural knowledge.

Measuring procedural performance and learning
There are two ways to measure students’ procedural
knowledge: the number of problems they are able to solve,
and the number and type of incorrect procedures they use.
These two measures may be linked in some sense, as use of
incorrect procedures typically precludes correct problem
solution. However, just because a student doesn’t use an
incorrect procedure doesn’t mean that they know (and use) a
correct procedure for solving the problem. Similarly, just
because students decrease the number of incorrect
procedures they use doesn’t mean that they will learn to
solve more problems correctly. Improvement in students’
procedural knowledge requires both reduction in use of
incorrect procedures and construction and strengthening of
correct procedures (Siegler, 1996). Misconceptions about
problem features likely influence both the number of related
errors they make and their ability to construct a correct
strategy that takes into account all of the important features
in the problem. Thus, in this study, we examine both correct
solutions and errors in order to evaluate students’ procedural
performance and learning.

Which Features Matter?
Any given equation is comprised of a number of features
that may be more or less crucial to its comprehension.
These features include, but are not limited to, the equals
sign (=), operation signs (+, -, ×, ÷), variables (x, z), and a
variety of types of numbers (23, ¼, .65,) which may appear
as constants, coefficients (e.g., .65x), exponents (e.g., x23) or
other roles in the equation. For this study, we used
relatively simple linear equations, ones that can be solved in
only a few steps (e.g., 3x + 5 = 9, 12 = 4/x – 7). Certainly,
there are several features of these problems that are
important for correct solution, but we focus on two features
in particular: the equals sign and negative signs.
Understanding the equals sign has previously been shown
to be crucial for algebraic problem solution (Knuth,
Stephens, McNeil, & Alibali, 2006), and students’ difficulty
with the concept has been relatively well documented.
Equality and the meaning of the equals sign in particular are
difficult for students who are in the process of transitioning
from arithmetic to algebraic thinking (Knuth et al., 2006),
likely because students often think of the equals sign as an
indicator of the result of operations being performed or the
answer to the problem rather than of equivalence of two
phrases (Baroody & Ginsburg, 1993). This kind of
misconception greatly distorts perception of the equation
and the intermediate goals necessary for its solution.
Another problem feature that seems important for solving
early algebraic equations is the negative signs. Due to their
abstract nature, working with negative numbers is inherently
difficult for students who are transitioning from arithmetic
to algebraic thinking (Linchevski & Williams, 1999). In
algebra, students have to understand not only the magnitude,
but the direction of numbers or terms in order to fully
comprehend the problem (Moses, Kamii, Swap, & Howard,
1989). Failing to tie the negative sign to the term it modifies
or to understand how changing or moving a negative sign
impacts the equation should therefore preclude equationsolving success.
Thus, we expect that an incomplete or incorrect
understanding of the role of the equals sign and negative
signs will be detrimental to students’ performance and
learning of equation-solving procedures.

Methods
Participants
Participating in this study were 49 high school students
taking Algebra I with the Algebra Cognitive Tutor, a selfpaced intelligent tutor system in which individuals use
various representations (such as tables, symbols, and
graphs) as they attempt to solve algebra problems
(Koedinger et al., 1997). All students in the participating
classes who had not yet begun the unit on solving two-step
linear equations but had completed the prior problemsolving units took part in the study. Two students were
excluded from analysis because they did not complete the
posttest.

Measures
To assess students’ procedural knowledge, we used 8
experimenter-designed items that measured ability to
effectively carry out procedures to solve problems. These
items were representative of the types of problems taught in
Algebra I courses, but were designed to be slightly more
challenging than the majority of problems taught in the
particular Tutor unit by either frequently including the
features of interest (e.g., negative signs) or adding features
the students had not encountered before (e.g., two variable
terms).
To assess students’ conceptual knowledge, we used 40
experimenter-designed items that measured understanding
of concepts that seemed crucial for success in Algebra. In
this paper, we focus on two such concepts: the equals sign
(7 items) and negative signs (10 items).
Finally, as a measure of students’ general math ability, we
utilized two algebra-related released items from the Trends
in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS; Mullis et al.,
2003). Examples of the experimenter-designed items can be
found in Figure 1.

572

In addition, we computed the percent of correct responses
for subsets of the conceptual problems (e.g., those that
target knowledge of the equals sign or of negative signs) to
determine the amount and quality of students’ knowledge
about those particular concepts. Students answered an
average of 58% of the equals sign items correct at pretest
and 57% at posttest; pretest and posttest scores for negative
sign items were 57% and 61%, respectively.

Effect of Conceptual Knowledge on Procedural
Performance
To examine how conceptual knowledge of the equals sign
and negative signs influences correct equation-solving
performance, we correlated students’ percent of equals sign
and negative signs-related conceptual items answered
correctly with their percent of equations solved correctly.
Greater conceptual knowledge of the equals sign (R(47) =
.52, p<.01) and negative signs (R(47) = .48, p<.01) were
both positively correlated with the number of correct
solutions.
To determine whether students’ lack of conceptual
knowledge led to use of certain incorrect procedures for
solving equations, we correlated knowledge of the equals
sign with equality-related errors (e.g., performing an
operation to only one side of an equation, dropping the
equals sign from the equation, etc.) and knowledge of
negative signs with negatives-related errors (e.g., deleting
negatives, subtracting terms that should be added, etc.).
Students with lower knowledge of equals signs made more
equality errors (R(47)= -.30, p<.05); a similar nonsignificant
trend was found for negative sign knowledge (R(47) = -.26,
p<.10).

Figure 1: Example conceptual and procedural assessment
items.

Procedure
Participating students were administered a paper-andpencil test assessing their conceptual and procedural
knowledge of algebra; there were two forms of the test and
half of the students were randomly assigned to receive each.
Following completion of the pretest, students began the
two-step linear equations unit with the Tutor. During the
unit, the Tutor provided guided procedural practice solving
two-step equations; students received immediate feedback
about any errors, and could ask the Tutor for hints if they
were unsure of what to do. While they worked through the
unit, log data of interactions with the Tutor were collected
for each student. After each student completed the unit, he
or she was administered the alternate version of the paperand-pencil test as a posttest.

Effect of Conceptual Knowledge on Procedural
Learning
There are two ways to investigate the role of conceptual
knowledge in procedural learning. The first is whether lack
of conceptual knowledge at pretest hinders learning, as it is
more difficult to decipher instruction, thus leading to weak
gains in procedural knowledge. A second possibility is that
students don’t have to have the conceptual knowledge from
the start, but that if they make gains in it over the course of
the lesson, similar gains in procedural knowledge will
follow.
In order to test the contribution of either or both of these
factors, we conducted a pair of regression analyses to
predict procedural learning, separate for each concept. For
each concept, we first entered pretest percent of equations
solved (to control for amount of improvement possible) plus
pretest conceptual knowledge of that concept and then gain
in knowledge of that concept. We then conducted the
analysis in the opposite way, first entering pretest
procedural performance plus gain in conceptual knowledge,
followed by pretest conceptual knowledge.
As shown in Table 1, for both the equals sign and
negative signs, gain in conceptual knowledge predicted
improvement on the procedural problems beyond that
predicted by pretest conceptual knowledge. However, for

Results
Performance on Procedural Test Items
Answers to the procedural items were coded as correct or
incorrect, and we computed the percent of problems
answered correctly by each student at pretest and at posttest.
Procedural problems were also coded in terms of the error
(if any) that was made (e.g., combined non-like terms, used
the wrong operation, deleted a negative, etc.), and
composite scores were created to indicate the number of
conceptual errors of each type (negative signs and equals
sign) students made on the problems.
Students solved an average of 32% of procedural
problems correctly on the pretest and 33% on the posttest.
Performance on Conceptual Test Items
Conceptual items were coded as correct or incorrect, and
we computed the percent of problems answered correctly by
each student at pretest and posttest. Students answered an
average of 59% of the conceptual items correctly on the
pretest and 63% on the posttest.

573

the negative sign in -9b was not part of the term. These
answers are consistent with the misconception that negatives
can enter and exit phrases without consequence and that
their locations (and connections to numbers or variables in
the problem) are not significant.
When solving the 8 equations on the pretest, he made a
total of 5 negative sign errors, such as leaving negatives out
of the equation when moving on to the next step or
attempting to subtract in order to remove a term which is
already negative; these types of errors comprised 63% of the
total number of errors he made. He solved only 25% of the
equations correctly on the pretest.
When working with the Tutor, he was given the problem
y/-8 + (-6) = -6. His first step to solve this problem was to
try to subtract 6 from both sides. He received a bug message
from the Tutor, stating that “Since -6 is negative, you should
add to remove it from the left side. Erase your last step and
add 6 to both sides.” He went on to solve the problem
correctly. Several problems later, he encountered a similar
equation: -4 = y/5 + (-2). This time, he immediately added
2 to both sides.
On the posttest, he answered 50% of the negative signsrelated conceptual items correctly; the main improvement
was that he now included negative signs as parts of the
terms they modify. He made only 2 negative sign errors
when solving equations (33% of the total number of errors
he made). He solved 50% of the equations correctly on the

both concepts, a trend was found showing that pretest
conceptual knowledge tended to also be a useful predictor of
learning: students who came in with lower amounts of
conceptual knowledge at pretest learned less over the course
of the lesson.
One alternate possibility is that conceptual knowledge
is not itself crucial to learning, that better students simply
learn more from instruction about both concepts and
procedures. To rule out this possibility, we conducted a
similar pair of regression analyses, entering students’
performance on the TIMSS items as well as pretest
procedural performance before pretest conceptual
knowledge and improvement in conceptual knowledge.
For both features, prior conceptual knowledge (equals
sign p < .05, negatives p < .10) and improvement in
conceptual knowledge (equals sign p < .01, negatives p <
.05) were meaningful predictors of procedural learning
above and beyond that predicted by more general math
ability.

Unpacking the Potential Learning Event
Case Study Illustration: When Learning Occurs At
pretest, Student JU answered only 30% of the negative
signs-related conceptual items correctly.
Among his
incorrect answers on these items were endorsing that -4x + 3
was the same as both 4x + 3 and 4x – 3, and indicating that

Table 1. Pretest knowledge and gain in knowledge of the equals sign and negative signs as predictors of improvement in
percent of equations solved correctly
Analysis
R2initial1
R2pre + gain
Added R2
Significance
Equals sign
1. Pretest conceptual knowledge entered before

.05

.27

.22

p < .01

.21

.27

.06

p < .10

.05

.17

.12

p < .05

.10

.17

.07

p < .10

gain in conceptual knowledge
2. Gain in conceptual knowledge entered before
pretest conceptual knowledge
Negative signs
1. Pretest conceptual knowledge entered before
gain in conceptual knowledge
2. Gain in conceptual knowledge entered before
pretest conceptual knowledge
Note: 1 In all cases, R2initial includes pretest performance on the procedural items (to control for the amount of improvement
possible) plus the first factor entered.

574

The current study focused on the equals sign and
negative signs as the key features necessary for learning to
solve simple algebraic equations. Previous research has
also shown that misconceptions about what constitutes like
terms causes similar problems when students attempt to
solve (and learn to solve) more difficult problems (Booth,
Koedinger, & Siegler, 2007). Thus, at various points in the
learning process, misconceptions or gaps in conceptual
knowledge of relevant features inhibit students’
performance and learning. But the good news is that even
if they don’t begin a lesson with this crucial knowledge, as
long as they get it along the way, they can close some of
the gap. These results suggest that providing students with
these conceptual prerequisites should be an important goal
for Algebra courses, and perhaps the math courses that
lead up to it.
Current instructional methods, including those used in the
Cognitive Tutor, are not typically focused on helping
students gain conceptual understanding even though the
need for greater emphasis on conceptual understanding has
been acknowledged (NCTM, 2000, National Mathematics
Advisory Panel, 2007). The IES Cognition Practice Guide
has recommended several instructional methods that could
help increase students’ conceptual understanding, including
studying worked examples and self-explaining solutions
(Pashler et al., 2007). Preliminary findings in the current
line of research indicate that incorporating a combination of
these methods with procedural practice in the Tutor can
improve both students’ conceptual and procedural
knowledge of algebra (Booth, Siegler, & Koedinger, in
press); further research is necessary to determine when and
for whom these techniques are useful.
Conceptual knowledge is presumed to increase learning in
algebra because it helps students to draw deep analogies
between instruction and practice problems; however, this
hypothesis was not tested in the current study. Future
research will need to assess students’ techniques while
working with the problems to determine whether they are
indeed drawing these analogies and the quality thereof.
Another outstanding question is precisely why increased
conceptual knowledge yields increased procedural learning
in algebra. There are at least two possible mechanisms that
could explain the finding. First, it could be that students
learn the concept, which helps them to understand the lesson
better, which leads to greater learning of correct procedures;
this view is consistent with the iterative model of conceptual
and procedural development (Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, &
Alibali, 2001). An alternate possibility is that students with
greater conceptual knowledge are able to solve more
equations correctly (presumably because they notice and
attend to the appropriate features in the problem and apply
correct strategies), so perhaps gains in conceptual
knowledge just helped students to notice and attend to the
correct features and apply correct strategies they already
knew, but weren’t using. We hypothesize that it is the
former, but further research is needed to tease apart these
possibilities.

posttest; 25% (or 2 equations) more than on the pretest.
Thus, he showed improvement both on his conceptual
understanding of negative signs and his ability to solve
equations correctly.
Case Study Illustration: When Learning Doesn’t Occur
At pretest, Student NR answered none of the equals signrelated conceptual items correctly. Among his incorrect
answers on these items was his assertion that the equals sign
“means that the number that is being added, subtracted,
multiplied, or divided. It’s what it equals.” This answer is
consistent with the misconception that the purpose of the
equals sign is to show the answer to the problem rather than
to show that the expressions on either side are equivalent.
When solving the 8 equations on the pretest, he made a
total of 8 equals sign errors, such as performing operations
to only one side of the equation and trying to put all of the
terms on one side of the equals sign; these types of errors
comprised 44% of the total number of errors he made. He
solved only 13% of the equations correctly on the pretest.
When working with the Tutor, he was given the problem
2x + (-9) = -3. He first attempted to subtract 3 from both
sides, trying (incorrectly) to get all terms before the equals
sign. When the tutor indicated that it was incorrect, he
attempted to subtract 2 from both sides. After realizing that
he can simplify the signs to get to 2x – 9 = -3, he then tries
to subtract 3 from both sides again. He then received a bug
message, telling him to “Focus on the side of the equation
with the variable. The variable is on the left side.” He tries
again to subtract -3 from both sides, and upon receiving the
same bug message again, tries to add -3. Finally, he gives up
and goes to the other side of the equation to move the -9.
On the posttest, he still failed to answer any of the equals
sign-related conceptual items correctly and still indicated
that the equals sign “means the answer.” Some improvement
was shown, in that he made 3 equals sign errors when
solving equations (33% of the total number of errors he
made). However, he still only solved 13% of the equations
correctly on the posttest. Thus, he did not improve his
conceptual knowledge of the equals sign or his ability to
solve equations correctly.

Discussion
Results suggest that having incorrect or incomplete
pretest conceptual knowledge of the equals sign and
negative signs is associated with use of related, incorrect
strategies for solving algebraic equations; these students
have difficulty solving equations correctly. In addition,
students who hold these misconceptions at pretest tend to
learn less from instruction on how to solve equations; this
relation exists even when more general math ability is
controlled for. However, having good conceptual
knowledge at pretest may not be entirely crucial, as
improving this knowledge over the course of instruction
does increase the amount of learning that students achieve;
the two case studies highlight the differences between what
can happen when a student gains conceptual knowledge and
when they do not.

575

Knuth, E. J., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M. & Alibali, M.
W. (2006). Does understanding the equal sign matter?
Evidence from solving equations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 37, 297-312.
Koedinger, K.R., Anderson, J.R., Hadley, W.H., & Mark,
M.A. (1997). Intelligent tutoring goes to school in the big
city. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 8, 30-43.
Lerch, C. M. (2004). Control decisions and personal beliefs:
Their effect on solving mathematical problems. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 23, 21-36.
Linchevski, L., & Williams, J. (1999). Using intuition from
everyday life in ‘filling’ the gap in children’s extension of
their number concept to include the negative numbers.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 39, 131 – 147.
Moses, R., Kamii, M., Swap, S.M., & Howard, J. (1989).
The Algebra Project: Organizing in the spirit of Ella.
Harvard Educational Review 59(4), 423-443.
Mullis, I. V. S. et al. (2003). TIMMS Assessment
Framework and Specifications 2003 (2nd Edition). Boston,
Massachusetts: International Study Center.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000).
Principles and standards for school mathematics: Higher
standards for our students . . . higher standards for
ourselves. Washington, DC: Author.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel (2007, January).
Preliminary Report.
Pashler, H., Bain, P., Bottge, B., Graesser, A., Koedinger,
K., McDaniel, M., and Metcalfe, J. (2007). Organizing
Instruction and Study to Improve Student Learning
(NCER 2007-2004). Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education.
Rittle-Johnson, Siegler, and Alibali. (2001). Developing
conceptual understanding and procedural skill in
mathematics: An iterative process. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 346-362.
Sebrechts, M.M., Enright, M., Bennett, R.E., & Martin, K.
(1996). Using algebra word problems to assess
quantitative ability: Attributes, strategies, and errors.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 343.
Siegler, R.S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of
change in children’s thinking. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Tenenbaum, G., Tehan, G., Stewart, G., & Christensen, S.
(1999). Recalling a floor routine: The effects of skill and
age on memory for order. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
13, 101-123.
Van Lehn, K., & Jones, R.M. (1993). What mediates the
self-explanation effect? Knowledge gaps, schemas, or
analogies? In M. Polson (Ed.) Proceedings of the
fifteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1034-1039).

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research is provided by the National
Science Foundation, Grant Number SBE-0354420 to the
Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center (PSLC,
http://www.learnlab.org). Thanks to Golden Valley High
School for allowing us to collect data in their classrooms.

References
Alexander, J.M., & Schwanenflugel, P.J. (1994). Strategy
regulation: The role of intelligence, metacognitive
attributions, and knowledge base. Developmental
Psychology, 30, 709-723.
Anderson, J.R. (1989). The analogical origins of errors in
problem solving. In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds).
Complex information processing: The impact of Herbert
A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ, England: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Baroody, A., & Ginsburg, H. (1983). The effects of
instruction on children’s understanding of the “equals”
sign. Elementary School Journal, 84, 199–212.
Booth, J.L., Koedinger, K.R., & Siegler, R.S. (2007).
[Abstract]. The effect of prior conceptual knowledge on
procedural performance and learning in algebra. In D.S.
McNamara & J.G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Booth, J.L., Koedinger, K.R., & Siegler, R.S. (in press).
Using self-explanation to improve algebra learning.
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Cognitive Science
Society.
Chi, M.T.H. (1978). Knowledge structures and memory
development. In R.S. Siegler (Ed.), Children’s thinking:
What develops? (pp. 73-96). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chi, M.T.H, Hutchinson, J.E., & Robin, A.F. (1989). How
inferences about novel domain-related concepts can be
constrained by structured knowledge. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 35, 27-62.
Gaultney, J.F. (1995). The effect of prior knowledge and
metacognition on the acquisition of a reading
comprehension strategy. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 59, 142-163.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 199-241). London: Cambridge
University Press. (Reprinted in Knowledge acquisition
and learning, 1993, 673-694).
Gobbo, C., & Chi, M. (1986). How knowledge is structured
and used by expert and novice children. Cognitive
Development, 1, 221-237.
Johnson, K.E., Scott, P., & Mervis, C.B. (2004). What are
theories for? Concept use throughout the continuum of
dinosaur expertise. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 87, 171-200.

576

