UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language Abstraction: Consolidation of Language Structure During Sleep

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8r92t1rv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
St. Clair, Michelle C.
Monaghan, Padraic

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language Abstraction: Consolidation of Language Structure During Sleep
Michelle C. St. Clair (michelle.stclair@manchester.ac.uk)
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Lancaster
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK
However, before positing specific language-learning
mechanisms or innately-specified linguistic structure, it is
important to do full justice to the potential richness of
general purpose learning mechanisms for the acquisition of
language structure. There are many candidates for studies
showing the great potential of linguistic input (Monaghan,
Christiansen, & Chater, 2007) and the versatility of general
learning mechanisms that can generate structure from the
language itself (e.g., Reali, Christiansen, & Monaghan,
2003). In the latter study, a simple recurrent network was
trained to learn the patterns of associations between
distributional and phonological cues for categorising
grammatical categories in speech. So, a fundamental
question for language acquisition research is what are the
range of general purpose learning mechanisms available to
the language learner, and how do they apply to language
input?
There is accumulating evidence that there are critical
qualitative distinctions in the effects of learning new
material when assessed before compared to after sleep, and
specifically that sleep may facilitate abstraction and
generalisation in a range of tasks (e.g., Fischer,
Drosopoulos, Tsen, & Born, 2006; Gómez, Bootzin, &
Nadel, 2006; Wagner, Gais, Haider, Verleger, & Born,
2004). Although only a few sleep studies have used
linguistic tasks, the underlying structures and features of the
stimuli used in many of these studies are strikingly similar
to the critical features of natural and artificial languages.
The current study advances the established field of language
learning studies by making use of innovative recent methods
for investigating the cognitive influences of sleep on
complex learning. We contend that sleep elicits critical
general purpose learning that is important for the process of
language acquisition.

Abstract
Recent research on how sleep influences cognitive processes
has pointed to the potential role of sleep in the consolidation
and generalisation of information across a range of tasks,
including some language learning tasks (i.e., Gómez, Bootzin,
& Nadel, 2006; Wagner, Gais, Haider, Verleger, & Born, 2004;
Walker, 2005). The current study investigated the role of sleep
in grammatical category generalisation by testing participants
for categorical knowledge 12 hours after initial training.
Participants were tested on their categorisation of the training
words and also on their ability to generalize to novel, but
consistent category words. The sleep group received training at
9pm and the wake group at 9am. Only the sleep group was able
to abstract the general category characteristics to the novel
category words which implies a domain general abstraction
mechanism may be influential in language acquisition.

Introduction
The child’s language environment provides an immensely
rich source of information that can contribute to the
development of structure at the word level (Saffran, Aslin,
& Newport, 1996) and to the development of grammatical
categories (Redington, Chater, & Finch, 1998) and syntactic
constraints (Bod, 2007). From a sea of sounds (Saffran,
2001), the child must learn where words begin and end in
continuous speech, and the child must also learn the
constraints on the relations between words, as described by
grammatical structure. One of the central issues in the
cognitive science of language over the last 50 years is to
determine the extent to which the language environment
triggers innately-specified, domain-specific processing
(Chomsky, 2006; Pinker, 1991), and the extent to which
sufficient information is present within the signal to provide
structure via general-purpose learning mechanisms (Conway
& Christiansen, 2005; Saffran, 2002).
Chomsky (1965, 1980) proposed that the linguistic input
that a child is exposed to provides insufficient information
to adequately constrain the actual grammar of the language
that the child develops (Gold, 1967). For instance, children
are unlikely to be exposed to instances of auxiliary-fronting
(e.g., converting “the dog that is sleeping is grey” to a
question format: “is the dog that is sleeping grey” by
moving the correct auxiliary verb). The debate over whether
general-purpose learning mechanisms can provide
sufficient, indirect constraints to distinguish between
grammatical versus ungrammatical constructions is a matter
of current contention (see, e.g., Messer et al., 1995; Reali &
Christiansen, 2005).

Sleep Consolidation and Qualitative Changes in
Learning
Sleep has been found to play a pivotal role in memory
consolidation, both in terms of declarative and procedural
memory, as well as being implicated in brain plasticity for
storage (see Walker, 2005 for a review). Increases in
perceptual skills and in explicit knowledge about complex
tasks has also been associated with sleep (Fischer,
Drosopoulos, Tsen, & Born, 2006; Wagner, Gais, Haider,
Verleger, & Born, 2004). Wagner et al. (2004) conducted a
study to test learning of abstract structure in strings of digits,
where the last three digits were the second, third and fourth
digits in reverse order (e.g. 1914419). After an eight hour
727

comprised of non-adjacent dependencies consisting of three
word sequences in which the first word perfectly predicted
the third word. Four hours after training the infants were
played sequences that were either consistent or inconsistent
with the training language. Infants that had slept between
training and testing demonstrated a preference for sequences
that had the same form as the first sequence they had heard
during testing, whereas infants that had not slept did not
indicate this preference. This result suggests that the abstract
structure of the grammar was consolidated during sleep,
even though no systematic preference was shown for either
consistent or inconsistent items.

interval that included sleep 59.1% of the participants “gained
insight” into the underlying pattern, compared to only 22.7%
who did not sleep. Fischer et al. (2006) found a similar result
with a task in which participants simply had to press a key to
match where a star appeared on screen as quickly as possible.
However, a probabilistic finite state grammar controlled the
order in which the stars appeared onscreen; only after sleep
were participants able to show any explicit knowledge of this
implicitly learned grammar. That is, they displayed a
qualitative change in the representation of the task enabling
explicit access to the implicitly learned structure.
Yet, a potential confound in these studies is that the wake
group is exposed to more stimulation and experiences than
the sleep group, which may interfere with learning. However,
Gais, Mölle, Helms, and Born (2002) compared an
associative word pair learning task with a non-learning task
(counting curved letters) and the results indicate that only the
learning task was associated with an increase in the density of
sleep spindles (rhythmic activity between 12 to 14 Hz lasting
at least .5 seconds, associated with neuronal plasticity, (Fogel,
Nader, Cote, & Smith, 2007) in Stage 2 sleep. Additionally,
sleep spindle density correlated significantly with the number
of word pairs correctly recalled, indicating that sleep spindles
are directly involved in the consolidation of the word pair
information. Furthermore, Marshall, Helgadóttir, Mölle, and
Born (2006) found that boosting slow wave sleep oscillations
(through stimulation via external electrodes) improved
memory on a paired associate word task. Specifically, the
slow wave sleep stimulation was shown to influence both
slow oscillation activity and slow frontal spindle activity, but
not fast frontal spindle activity. These studies provide
converging evidence that sleep (and perhaps particularly
spindle activity) leads to a qualitative shift in the way learned
material is represented.

Studies of Grammatical Categorization
The assignation of words to grammatical category roles is a
necessary precursor to producing interpretable phrases in
language production. In acquiring grammatical categories,
language learning may be assisted by the distributional, or
co-occurrence, information from within speech (Redington,
Chater, & Finch, 1998), as well as coherent phonological
information of words within these categories (i.e., nouns
sound more like other nouns than they do to verbs,
Monaghan, Chater, & Christiansen, 2005).
Grammatical categorisation was studied in an artificial
language by St. Clair (2007), who investigated whether
distributional information from high-frequency nonsense words,
similar to function words, helped form categories of nonsense
words with adult participants within artificial languages1.
Participants were either exposed to a two category language with
both phonological and distributional cues to category
membership or simply distributional information and were later
tested with a similarity task whether the participants could
differentiate between correct or incorrect distributional
cue/category word pairings. It was found that when phonological
information cohered with the distributional information, learning
of the categories to which words belonged was observed.
However, when there were only distributional cues available to
guide categorisation only very high frequency category words
were categorised; lower frequency words were not. Thus,
categorisation of words occurred only when there were both
phonological and distributional cues, a result coherent with other
artificial language studies of categorisation (Cassidy & Kelly,
1991, 2001).
However, it was not clear from this study whether
participants learned generic categories or whether the
learning was restricted to the particular words heard during
training. Thus, it has not yet been established whether
participants simply learned particular instances or whether
more general characteristics of the category were acquired,
which could potentially integrate new category members.
The results from Gómez et al.’s (2006) study suggest that
sleep may aid in the abstraction beyond specific instances to
abstract structures.

Sleep Consolidation and Language Acquisition
The influence of sleep on qualitative shifts in language
acquisition has recently been investigated in several
language-oriented tasks. Dumay and Gaskell (2007) studied
the effect of sleep on word learning. Participants were
trained on novel words and were tested after a 12 hour
interval (following sleep or wakefulness) on whether the
word had been fully linked into the mental lexicon (in terms
of whether it interfered with the identification of previously
known words). New words only became a part of the
lexicon after sleep. The effect of sleep on the generalisation
of phonemes from synthesised speech was studied by Fenn,
Nusbaum, and Margoliash (2003). After a synthesised
speech listening phase, adult participants were tested on
novel examples of the phonemes. After 12 hours of
wakefulness participants’ ability to correctly identify the
synthesized phonemes deteriorated but after a further 12
hours that included sleep the ability to correctly identify the
phonemes returned to immediate post training levels.
Gómez, Bootzin, and Nadel (2006) also tested effects of
sleep on generalisation in language learning, but using a
grammatical structure learning task for an artificial
language. Fifteen month old infants were trained on speech

1

Studies of language acquisition using artificial languages have
investigated both adult and infant participants, and have typically
found similar sensitivities in both groups (e.g., Saffran, 2001, 2002).

728

The current experiment investigated the effect of sleep on
grammatical categorisation, specifically looking at whether
there is a qualitative change in the representation of the known
category words as well as the integration of new category
words. In order to test for this change, participants were tested
both on the category words they were trained with and also
with novel category words that shared characteristics of the
trained category words was varied to determine whether any
potential influence of sleep on the novel words was mediated
by frequency. If sleep differentially influenced high or low
frequency words, it may be that the novel category words elicit
quantitatively and not qualitatively different responses.

In addition to the distributional cues to category provided
by the marker words, there were consistent phonological cues
that differentiated the two categories of words. Category A
words contained consonant clusters at the onset and offset,
rounded low vowels, nasals and stops. Category B words had
no consonant clusters, and contained unrounded high vowels
and fricatives. Table 1 lists phonetic transcriptions of the
words.
In the first test, participants were given a two alternative
forced choice (2AFC) task, where one test sentence that
conformed to the language’s regularity (AaBb; compatible)
was paired with a test sentence that contained incorrect
category word-marker word pairings (AbBa; incompatible).
There were 16 items. The compatible sentences did not occur
in the training session.
The second test session had the same format, but sentences
contained novel category words (A’ and B’) which had the
same phonological properties as either the category A or B
words. There were eight 2AFC test items in this test session.
These items tested whether the general phonological structure
of the categories had become associated with the individual
marker words allowing the participants to generalize beyond
the category words in the training session to novel, but
phonologically consistent category words. The phrases with
marker word a (A’a or B’a) were equally likely to occur in
the first and second positions. In each 2AFC item there were
four unique category words, so no category word was
repeated in a set. The pairings of category words per
individual test sentence was counterbalanced.
The language was synthesized with the Festival Speech
Synthesizer (Black, Clark, Richmond, King, & Zen, 2004)
using a monotone male British English voice. Headphones
were used to deliver the stimuli presented on a desktop testing
computer using E-Prime.

Experiment: The Effect of Sleep on Category
Abstraction
Method
Participants Ten University of York undergraduate and
postgraduate students participated in this study, five in the
sleep condition and five in the wake condition. All
participants were native English speakers and were either
paid £5 or received course credit. The sleep participants
reported an average of 7 hours 25 minutes sleep during the
intervening night (range 6 h. 30m. to 7 h. 45 m.) while the
wake participants reported no sleep between initial exposure
to the language and the testing phase.
Stimuli and Materials The artificial language used was an
adapted auditory version of Valian and Coulson’s (1988) written
language. There were 12 category words in the language divided
equally into two categories, A and B. Each category had a
specific marker word that reliably co-occurred with each
category word. Each category A word always co-occurred with
the marker word a, and each category B word always occurred
with the marker word b. In Valian and Coulson’s (1988) study
the marker word always occurred before the category word,
however, due to better category learning from succeeding marker
words (St. Clair & Monaghan, 2005), we constructed the
language such that marker words occurred immediately after the
category words. Thus, the general structure of the language was
AaBb. Category words appeared equally often in first and
second position. Half of the category words were of high
frequency and occurred twice as often as the low frequency
category words.

Procedure There were two experimental sessions separated
by 12 hours. The sleep group was trained at 9pm and tested
at 9am, thus including a night’s sleep intervening between
training and testing. The wake group was trained at 9am and
tested at 9pm and were instructed to not sleep during the
intervening daytime hours (Figure 1).

Table 1: High and low frequency and novel category words

Figure 1: Diagram of the experimental design.
During the training session, the participants were told
that they were to listen to a made up language and that
they would be tested on their “knowledge of the
language” during the second experimental session. They
first heard all the words in the language as a

729

familiarization to both the words and the synthesized
speech. The training session then began where they heard
18 training sentences repeated 32 times each in a random
permuted order. The training lasted approximately 20
minutes. After training, the participants in the sleep
condition were told to note approximately when they
went to sleep and woke up and the wake group were told
to refrain from sleep before the testing session 12 hours
later. We did not test learning immediately after training
to avoid interference effects due to exposure to both
conforming and non-conforming sentences during the
test.
During the test phase, participants were instructed that
they would hear pairs of sentences that were not
presented in the training session and that half of these
sentences were similar to the artificial language and the
other half were dissimilar. They had to indicate which
sentence they thought was “most similar” to the artificial
language. The second test phase that included the novel,
but phonologically consistent, category words included
the same instructions; the participants were told that there
would be novel nonwords but that one sentence is similar
to the training language and the other is dissimilar.

0.8
Trained Category Words

0.7

Novel Category Words

Accuracy

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Sleep

Condition

Wake

Figure 2: Accuracy in the 2AFC task by type of category
word and sleep/wake condition.
To test whether the accuracy was significantly higher
than expected by chance both wake and sleep conditions
were tested against chance level. For the sleep condition,
the participants were not significantly above chance with the
trained category words, t(4) = .66, p = .55, but they were
significantly more accurate than chance with the novel
category words, t(4) = 6.06, p < .01. The exact opposite
pattern was found in the wake condition, in that the
participants were above chance for the trained category
words but did not differ from chance on the novel category
words, t(4) = 5.13, p = .01 and t(4) = 1.63, p = .18.

Results
A mixed ANOVA was conducted with frequency (high
and low) as the within subjects factor and condition
(wake or sleep) as the between subjects factor. The
proportion
of
choosing
the
correctly
paired
category/marker word option was the dependent variable,
but only the trained word data was included as, by
definition, there were no frequency differences in the
novel category words. There were no significant main
effects of frequency or sleep condition, both F < 1, nor a
significant interaction between the two terms, F (1,8) =
1.64, p = .24. For all subsequent analyses the two
frequency groups were combined.
A second mixed ANOVA was conducted with test
sentence type (trained or novel category words) as the
within subjects factor and condition (wake or sleep) as
the between subjects factor. The proportion of choosing
the correctly paired category/marker word option was the
dependent variable. The results are shown in Figure 2.
There were no significant main effects of test sentence
type or condition, F(1,8) = 2.76, p = .14 and F < 1,
respectively. However, the interaction between these
factors was significant, F(1,8) = 7.89, p < .05, η2 = .50.
This interaction was investigated with pairwise
comparisons. It was found that there was no difference
between the sleep and wake conditions (p = .43) with the
trained category word test items. However, with the
novel category word test items the sleep condition was
much more accurate at differentiating the grammatical
versus ungrammatical test sentences (p < .05). Within
the sleep condition, it was also found that the participants
were more accurate on the novel category words (p < .05)
while there was no difference in the wake condition (p =
.44).

Discussion
When looking at the frequency manipulation in the trained
category words, there was no evidence that sleep
differentially influenced either the high or low frequency
words which indicates that any difference found within the
novel category words was not due to frequency differences.
Previous research has shown that category word frequency
has a large influence on categorization when distributional
information is the only cue available to assist in this process.
When phonological and distributional cues are combined high
and low frequency words are readily categorized (St. Clair,
2007). However, it is interested to note that sleep-related
learning also did not provide an additional high frequency
advantage. However, the frequency manipulation in the study
was minimal: high-frequency words occurred 64 times during
training compared to 32 times for low-frequency words.
Additionally, the results indicated that learning the
artificial language did not differ quantitatively when
combined across the trained and novel category words for the
sleep and wake conditions. However, there was a qualitative
difference in what was learned from the sleep and wake
conditions. With no sleep, participants show above chance
discrimination of the test items with known category words,
but no evidence of an ability to generalise beyond the known
words to new category words with the same phonological
characteristics. Strikingly, when the participants had a night’s
sleep between training and testing this generalisation ability
emerged as the participants demonstrated an ability to
generalise to the new category words, though the sleep group

730

these studies. The effect of sleep on learning is an instance
of a general-purpose learning mechanism. We have
demonstrated that coupling this mechanism with only some
of the inherent richness of cues for producing grammatical
categories from within language, is sufficient for generating
abstract categories within language. Providing a cognitive
description of the nature of this learning process associated
with sleep, and exploring the potential for learning at all
levels of language structure provides an intriguing
possibility for future research in both normal and impaired
development (Fabbro, Zucca, Molteni, & Renato, 2000).

did not perform significantly differently from the wake group
for the training items they heard the night before. Thus, it is
in the ability to generalise beyond the known category words
that the sleep and wake conditions differ, not in the
categorisation of the training category words.
Our favoured explanation for the findings in the sleep
condition is that sleep promotes the abstraction of the general
characteristics of the category. These characteristics involve
the phonological cues within the category words themselves.
When faced with novel category words, the participants were
able to use this more abstract conceptualization of the two
categories to guide their decisions. However, this did not
occur with the trained category words; this may have been
due to the concurrent lexicalization process that occurs during
sleep (Dumay & Gaskell, 2007). Indeed, it might be
advantageous for the general phonological properties not to
be applied to known category words, as this may interfere
with processing the significant minority of nouns that sound
like verbs, and verbs that sound like nouns. Further research
will hopefully shed light on this issue.
An alternative explanation for the qualitative differences in
learning between the sleep and wake groups was the quantity
of stimulation that participants may have been exposed to
between training and testing. The wake group were awake
during this time, and this may have interfered with their
learning. Another difference is that participants in the two
groups were trained at different times of day, though
circadian rhythm has not been shown to have an effect over
effects of sleep in memory tasks, for instance (Gais, Werner,
Wagner, & Born, 2000). However, the fact that performance
on the trained category words was similar across the two
groups, and even marginally better in the wake group, argues
against this as the sole explanation for the abstraction effects
we have observed.
Such demonstrations of generalisation over grammatical
categories in artificial languages have been difficult to find in
previous studies, and only seem to be observed in specific
circumstances where the categories are supported by multiple,
overlapping phonological, morphological, and distributional
cues (Braine et al., 1990; Brooks, Braine, Catalano, Brody, &
Sudhalter, 1993; St. Clair, 2007). The indication that sleep
precipitates this generalisation process suggests that this may
be a critical aspect of language development, particularly in
terms of generalising abstract structure of the language
(Gómez et al., 2006). This could mean that multiple cues are
a necessity for learning grammatical categories, as claimed by
Brooks et al. (1993), or it could be that this type of abstraction
in learning requires consolidation during sleep.
Our study provides additional support that sleep is
involved in the abstraction of phonologically consistent
categories of words, and that sleep-facilitated generalisation
can operate at a word category level, as well as a phonemecategory level (Fenn et al., 2003). This observation of
generalisation coheres with other studies of the effects of
sleep on non-language tasks (Fisher et al., 2006; Wagner et
al., 2004), indicating that perhaps the same type of sleeprelated neuronal change is the physiological basis of the
difference between the sleep and wake conditions in each of

Acknowledgements
We thank Gareth Gaskell and the Department of
Psychology at the University of York for helpful comments
on early drafts and funding the research, respectively. We
also thank the Division of Human Communication and
Deafness at Manchester University for aiding in travel costs.
References
Black, A. W., Clark, R., Richmond, K., King, S., & Zen, H.
(2004). Festival Speech Synthesizer (Version 1.95).
Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.
Bod, R. (2007). The data-oriented parsing approach: Theory
and application. In J. Fulcher & L. Jain (Eds.), Handbook
of computational intelligence. Amsterdam: Springer.
Braine, M. D. S., Brody, R. E., Brooks, P. J., Sudhalter, V.,
Ross, J. A., Catalano, L., et al. (1990). Exploring Language
Acquisition in Children with a Miniature Artificial
Language: Effects of Item and Pattern Frequency, Arbitrary
Subclasses and Correction. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 591-610.
Brooks, P. J., Braine, M. D., Catalano, L., Brody, R. E., &
Sudhalter, V. (1993). Acquisition of gender-like noun
subclasses in an artificial language: The contribution of
phonological markers to learning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 32, 76-95.
Cassidy, K. W., & Kelly, M. H. (1991). Phonological
information for grammatical category assignments. Journal
of Memory and Language, 30, 348-369.
Cassidy, K. W., & Kelly, M. H. (2001). Children's use of
phonology to infer grammatical class in vocabulary
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 519-523.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (2006). Language and Mind (3rd ed.). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Dumay, N., & Gaskell, M. G. (2007). Sleep-Associated
Changes in the Mental Representation of Spoken Words.
Psychological Science, 18, 35-39.
Fabbro, F., Zucca, C., Molteni, M., & Renato, B. (2000). EEG
abnormalities during slow sleep in children with
developmental language disorders. Child Development &
Disabilities, 26, 41-48.
731

Pinker, S. (1991). Rules of language. Science, 253, 530-535.
Reali, F., Christiansen, M., & Monaghan, P. (2003).
Phonological and distributional cues in syntax acquisition:
Scaling up the connectionist approach to multiple-cue
intergration. In Proceedings of the 25th annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 970-975). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Uncovering the
richness of the stimulus: Structure dependence and indirect
statistical evidence. Cognition, 96, 143-182.
Redington, M., Chater, N., & Finch, S. (1998). Distributional
information: A powerful cue for acquiring syntactic
categories. Cognitive Science, 22, 425-469.
Saffran, J. R. (2001). Words in a sea of sounds: The output of
infant statistical learning. Cognition, 81, 149-169.
Saffran, J. R. (2002). Constraints on statistical language
learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 172-196.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
St. Clair, M. C. (2007). Language structure and language
acquisition: Grammatical categorization using
phonological and distributional information. Unpublished
Thesis, The University of York, York, UK.
St. Clair, M. C., & Monaghan, P. (2005). Categorizing
grammar: Differential effects of succeeding and preceding
contextual cues. In Proceedings from the 27th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Valian, V., & Coulson, S. (1988). Anchor Points in Language
Learning: The Role of Marker Frequency. Journal of
Memory and Language, 27, 71-86.
Wagner, U., Gais, S., Haider, H., Verleger, R., & Born, J.
(2004). Sleep inspires insight. Nature, 427, 352-355.
Walker, M. P. (2005). A refined model of sleep and the time
course of memory formation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28, 51-104.

Fenn, K. M., Nusbaum, H. C., & Margoliash, D. (2003).
Consolidation during sleep of perceptual learning of spoken
language. Nature, 425, 614-616.
Fischer, S., Drosopoulos, S., Tsen, J., & Born, J. (2006).
Implicit Learning-Explicit Knowing: A Role for Sleep in
Memory System Interaction. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18, 311-319.
Fogel, S. M., Nader, R., Cote, K. A., & Smith, C. T. (2007).
Sleep Spindles and Learning Potential. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 121, 1-10.
Gais, S., Mölle, M., Helms, K., & Born, J. (2002). Learningdependent increases in sleep spindle density. Journal of
Neuroscience, 22, 6830-6834.
Gais, S., Werner, P., Wagner, U., & Born, J. (2000). Early
sleep triggers memory for early visual discrimination skills.
Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1335-1339.
Gold, E. M. (1967). Language identification in the limit.
Information and Control, 10, 447-474.
Gómez, R. L., Bootzin, R. R., & Nadel, L. (2006). Naps
Promote Abstraction in Language-Learning Infants.
Psychological Science, 17, 670-674.
McCabe, P. C., & Marshall, D. J. (2006). Measuring the social
competence of preschool children with specific language
impairment: Correspondence among informant ratings and
behavioral observations. Topics in Early Childhood Special
Education, 26, 234-246.
Messer, S. C., Angold, A., Costello, E. J., Loeber, R., Van
Kammen, W., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1995).
Development of a short questionnaire for use in
epidemiological studies of depression in children: Factor
composition and structure across development.
International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research,
5, 251-262.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). The
differential role of phonological and distributional cues in
grammatical categorisation. Cognition, 96, 143-182.
Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2007). The
Phonological Distributional Coherence Hypothesis: Crosslinguisitic evidence in language acquisition. Cognitive
Psychology(55), 259-305.

732

