UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Novel Neighbors: Distributed mappings help children and connectionist models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80p7d1h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Newman, Rochelle
Samuelson, Larissa
Gupta, Prahlad

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Novel Neighbors:
Distributed mappings help children and connectionist models.
Rochelle Newman (rnewman@hesp.umd.edu)
Dept. of Hearing & Speech Sciences, and
Program in Neuroscience & Cognitive Science, Univ. of MD, 0100 Lefrak Hall
College Park, MD 20742

Larissa Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Prahlad Gupta (prahlad-gupta@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, and Iowa Center for Developmental and Learning Sciences
University of Iowa, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
Abstract

already knew the name for a conceptually-similar referent.
They argued that children find it easier to learn a word
when they already have a contrastive referent in memory.
Both of these prior studies suggest that prior semantic
knowledge can influence the ease with which children
learn new words. The current study examines whether
early word learning is also aided by similarity between
known entries at the phonemic level.

The current study examines whether a word that is
phonologically similar to more words the child already knows is
easier to acquire than a word that is unlike other words. Children
aged 20 and 24 months were taught two new words: “wat,”
which is similar to many words children already know, and
“fowk,” which is not. Learning of the novel words corresponded
to neighborhood density in the individual child’s vocabulary.
We also examined the influence of prior semantic knowledge on
the acquisition of novel words in a connectionist network.
Together with the empirical data, this model provides novel
insights into how similarity at the phonemic level influences
acquisition of semantics.

The role of neighborhoods on word learning

Keywords: word-learning; lexical neighborhoods; connectionist
modeling

Introduction
A great deal of research has investigated factors that might
influence toddler’s rapid word learning. The current study
explores how children’s developing knowledge of word
forms might influence their acquisition of new words. In
particular, we examine whether a word that is similar to
several words the child already knows (that is, a word that
has a dense lexical neighborhood), is easier to acquire than a
word that is similar to fewer already-known words. Below,
we discuss prior research suggesting that vocabulary
knowledge influences word learning, review what is known
about lexical neighborhoods, and suggest how neighborhood
properties could influence lexical acquisition.

The effect of prior knowledge on word learning
The extensive body of research on early word learning
suggests that young children take advantage of many sources
of information when acquiring a new word, including the
structure of the vocabulary they’ve learned previously. For
example, children who have been exposed to a training
vocabulary dominated by names for solid things in categories
organized by shape develop a precocious bias to attend to
shape in word learning tasks, and demonstrate accelerations
in later vocabulary development (Samuelson, 2002). Thus,
similarity between known entries at the semantic level (count
nouns that name solid things in categories organized by
shape) can help children learn more words. Similarly,
Tomasello, Mannle and Werdenschlag (1988) reported that
children were better able to learn a new word when they

29

According to the Neighborhood Activation Model
(Luce & Pisoni, 1998), words in the phonological lexicon
are organized according to their phonological similarity to
other words. For example, the word “cat” is located in a
dense neighborhood, as it is similar to many other English
words (bat, cot, and cap, among others), whereas “vogue”
is located in a sparse neighborhood (being similar to only
four words: rogue, vague, vote, and vole). These storage
differences can affect how easily those words are
accessed (Luce & Pisoni, 1998). It is possible that such
differences might also influence learning of new words.
There are multiple ways lexical neighborhoods could
influence word-learning. Neighbors could influence the
creation of a semantic representation, the creation of a
word-form representation, or the linkages between the
two (see Storkel, 2004). Neighbors could have effects on
perception (children might mishear an unknown word as
being its well-known neighbor), attention (a word with
more neighbors may sound more “English-like”,
attracting attention; see Jusczyk, Luce & Charles-Luce,
1994), memory (a word with more neighbors might be
easier to remember upon first hearing; e.g., Roodenrys et
al., 2002), or might be easier to access for production e.g.,
Newman & German, 2002, 2005). Phonological
neighbors could also provide contrastive representations,
as noted by Tomasello et al. (1988). Thus, neighborhood
density could theoretically influence acquisition of a
novel name at several different stages of processing—
from perception of the novel form to formation of a
conceptual representation of the word’s meaning.
Three studies have examined the effect of phonotactic
probability on lexical acquisition. Phonotactic probability

refers to the frequency with which the phonemes and
phoneme sequences in a word occur in the language, and is
a related concept to that of neighborhoods, in that items that
have many neighbors tend to contain high-frequency
phonemes. Storkel and Rogers (2000; Storkel, 2001) found
that children across a range of ages were better able to learn
words that were composed of common vs. rare sound
sequences. Moreover, Storkel found evidence suggesting
that phonotactic probability played a role both in the
formation of a semantic representation and in associating
that semantic representation with a word form.
In contrast, Heisler (2005) examined 4-year-old children’s
and adults’ learning of bisyllabic nonce words, in which the
probability of the medial consonant cluster, and the
neighborhood density of the component syllables (but not
the entire word), were varied. She found that phonotactic
probability influenced motor production stability (a
kinematic measure of motor skill), whereas neighborhoods
influenced the accuracy of either production or the
phonological representation.
Retrospective research (Storkel, 2004) suggests that
children’s early-acquired words (particularly words low in
frequency) reside in dense neighborhoods, supporting the
idea that existing representations can influence future lexical
acquisition. Similarly, Coady and Aslin (2003) found that
children’s first words came from what were dense
neighborhoods in adult lexicons (see also Charles-Luce &
Luce, 1990; 1995; Dollaghan, 1994 for debate on this
point), and that children’s average neighborhood density
was larger than that for adults, suggesting a learning
advantage for words from dense neighborhoods.
Taken together, the literature confirms the influence of
phonotactic probability on word learning and suggests a
corresponding influence of neighborhood density.
Importantly, however, most of these studies have examined
effects in older children; only two studies have examined
neighborhood effects in toddlers in the early stages of
vocabulary acquisition. Hollich, Jusczyk & Luce (2002)
familiarized 17-month-olds with a list of words, and then
taught them the name of a novel object. Children were better
able to learn the novel object when it was dissimilar to the
familiarized words. However, none of the familiarized
(neighborhood) words were chosen based on whether the
children already knew them. Thus, these items were not true
neighbors, and the difference in performance could have
been the result of a momentary alteration in children’s
attention to the sound structures. It is thus unclear whether
these results would generalize to situations in which the
“neighbors” are words already known to the child (but not
necessarily heard recently).
More recently, Swingley and Aslin (2007) presented 19month-olds with a novel object, and labeled it with a
sequence that was either similar to a word they were likely
to already know (such as tog, similar to dog) or one that
was not similar to any familiar words (such as meb).

Children learned the new nonneighbors better than the
new words that were neighbors to existing words. Thus,
the existence of a known word impaired children’s
learning of a new neighbor in this study.
Swingley & Aslin’s study focused on words with a
single, well-known neighbor (an “entrenched lexical
competitor,” in their terms). However, much of the
research on lexical neighborhoods with adults has
suggested that neighborhoods show a “ganging” effect:
that is, the effect of neighbors is driven by having a
number of similar, well-known words, rather than a single
well-known word. If this is the case, children’s learning
of new words with many neighbors might show a
different pattern than their learning of words with a
single, well-known neighbor.

The current study
The goal of the present study was to examine the role of
neighborhood density (rather than mere existence of a
neighbor) on word learning and whether such effects vary
with the child’s existing vocabulary level. We presented
children with a word-learning task involving two words,
one with many pre-existing neighbors in the children’s
lexicons, and one with few neighbors. We recruited
children from two different age levels, 20 and 24 months,
to examine neighborhood effects at different stages of
word learning and to compare effects based on age to
those based on vocabulary. We also examined the
influence of prior knowledge on the acquisition of novel
words in a connectionist network. Together with the
empirical data, this model provides novel insights into the
how similarity at the phonemic and semantic levels
interact to influence new word acquisition.

Experimental Method
Participants
Twenty-four 24-month-old children (23m 20d – 25m
21d), and 24 20-month-old children (19m 21d – 22m 7d)
participated, with equal numbers of boys and girls at each
age. Seven additional 24-month-olds and 11 additional
20-month-olds were tested but excluded from analysis for
fussiness (n=4), not completing the task (n=6),
experimenter error (n=7), or equipment failure (n=1).

Materials
Words. The nonwords “fowk” and “wat” were used.
Fowk has only 3 lexical neighbors in adult lexicons (fake,
fowl, and a swear word), along with two similar words
that are not technically neighbors by a one-phoneme
substitution rule (fork and folk). Of these, only fork is
common in children’s lexicons according to the LEX
database (Dale & Fenson, 1996). The word fake does
appear once as input to a child in the Bernstein Ratner
corpus (Bernstein Ratner, 1984; MacWhinney, 2000). It
therefore might be heard by some children, but this is
unlikely to be consistent. Thus, while the word fowk is a

30

potential word in English, it is likely to have only few (if
any) neighbors in the lexicons of young children.
Wat has 20 neighbors in adult lexicons (at, that, bat, cat,
chat, fat, gnat, hat, mat, pat, rat, sat, wag, wet, wait, wit,
whack, what, wheat, white), many of which are common in
speech to and by young children. According to the LEX
database, the words hat, cat, what, wet and that are likely to
be in most children’s receptive lexicons by the ages tested
here, and parents in the Bernstein Ratner corpus used 11
“wat” neighbors, suggesting that many children in the range
tested will have heard at least some of the neighbors to wat.
To confirm our word selections, parents completed a
vocabulary checklist based on the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory (Fenson et al.,
1994) with additional neighbors to the target words added in
a separate section. Participants at both ages had significantly
more neighbors for wat than for fowk; the size of this
difference was larger in the production data at the older age.

then production) was done first with the two exemplars
that children had seen during training, and then again with
the third exemplar that was not presented during training
as a test of extension to a novel instance.
To test comprehension the experimenter placed one of
the previously seen targets and one of the previously seen
foils on the table, said “Look!” and counted to ten. The
experimenter then instructed the child to look for the item
five times (i.e., “See the wat/fowk, look at the wat/fowk,
etc.) After this the experimenter placed the objects on a
white tray, slid the tray towards the child and said “get the
wat/fowk.” If the child failed to respond, the prompt was
repeated up to two times. The items were removed and
the comprehension testing sequence was repeated for the
other target set. Children’s selections were not reinforced.
Production tests began with the naming of familiar
items to encourage the children to talk. After the child
produced names to three familiar items2, the experimenter
presented the first target exemplar, and asked the child to
name it. The child was prompted up to four times. If the
child correctly named a target they were praised heavily.
If the child produced an incorrect word for a target (i.e.
said “wat” to an exemplar previously labeled “fowk”) the
experimenter made a note and moved on to the next item
without comment. The child was asked to name both
previously seen exemplars for each target set.
After the production test with the familiar exemplars,
the entire testing procedure (comprehension and
production) was repeated with the generalization
exemplars from each set (the ones the child did not see
during training). In total, each child completed six looking
and choice comprehension tests and six production tests
(two trained and one novel exemplar in each of two sets).

Object stimuli. Two sets of novel target stimuli were
created. Each target set contained three category exemplars
that were highly similar and a contrast item that differed in
shape, color and material from the category examples. In
addition, two sets of novel foils were created. Each foil set
contained three similar items that were different from the
category exemplars in shape, color and material. In addition
to these items, a set of small toys familiar to 24-month-olds
were used as warm-up items for the production tests.

Procedure
Training phase. The experimenter presented the child with
two of the exemplars from the first target stimulus set; the
child played with these for three minutes while the
experimenter named the items 20 times in a naturalistic
manner. The experimenter was not allowed to use the word
“that” (a neighbor to “wat”) at any point during the
experiment1. Half-way through the 3-min. training period
the experimenter produced the contrast item for that set and
pointed out the contrast explicitly (e.g., “Look at this, this is
not a wat/fowk.”) before putting the contrast item away.
After the three minutes for the first target set was completed
this procedure was repeated for the other target set. The
procedure was then repeated for each of the two foil sets
with the exceptions that these items were not named and no
contrast items were presented. Following this, the
experimenter, child and parent colored as filler task during a
five-minute delay period.
Testing. Children were first tested on comprehension, via
both a looking and a handover measure, for both sets. The
target set that was presented first during training was tested
first. Children were then tested on production of the novel
words. This entire testing sequence (comprehension and

Coding and data reduction
Comprehension in the looking and handover tests was
coded from videotape by blind observers. For each task
and age, 30% -35% of the data were recoded by a second
observer; minimum agreement was .93.

Results
Results for 20-month-old children
Looking task. We first examined performance on the
familiar-object trials, based on the proportion of time
spent looking at the target vs. the foil. Overall, children
looked at the named object longer than the foil for both
items (61% for wat, 67% for fowk, both significantly
above chance performance both t’s(23)>2.77, p’s<.05).
There was no difference in performance on wat vs. fowk
trials t(23)=1.34, ns. This was also the case in the novel
trials, with scores of 58% for wat, 64% for fowk; only the
Data was excluded from 5 24-month-olds and 9 20-month-olds
for failure to produce names for 3 familiar objects during the
production phase.
2

Data from an additional 9 24-month-olds and three 20-montholds were not analyzed because the experimenter accidentally used
the word “that”.
1

31

looking time for fowk was above chance levels (wat:
t(23)=0.69, ns, fowk: t(23)=2.70, p<.05).

effect of word, F(1,46)=7.70, p<.05, with better
performance on “wat” than “fowk” (79% vs. 63%).
Although older children showed a trend towards slightly
better performance, F(1,46)=2.58, p=.11, neither this
overall age effect nor the interaction between age and
word were significant (F<1).

Choice task. When children were asked to “get the wat”,
20-month-olds chose correctly 73% of the time for
previously-seen objects, above chance performance,
t(23)=3.41, p<.001. For fowk, they chose correctly 65% of
the time, which was not different from chance, t(23)=1.77,
p<.08. For novel exemplar trials, averages were 71% and
54%, with only the former reaching significance,
t(23)=2.20, p<.01; t(23)=0.41, ns. There was no difference
on wat vs fowk trials for either stimulus set, ts(23)>1.2, ns.

Combined effects by neighborhood size
One possible reason for the ambiguity in results is that
the effects are not based on age, per se, but rather based
on vocabulary knowledge. Although 24-month-olds
tended to have larger vocabularies than did 20-montholds, this was not an absolute difference, and some
younger children had larger vocabularies than some older
children. Indeed, there was a positive correlation between
the number of wat neighbors a child could say and their
learning of that word, based on both looking time
behavior to familiar wat exemplars (r=.32, p<.05), and on
choice performance (r=.30, p<.05). Children who knew
more neighbors for wat showed better learning of that
word. There were no significant correlations for fowk,
(r=.04 and r=.05 for looking time and choice). To
examine these effects further, we split the children into
two groups based on productive wat neighbors, excluding
the middle nine children to ensure our groups were not
overlapping. The few-neighbors group included five 24month-old children and fourteen 20-month-old children;
conversely, the many-neighbors group included thirteen
24-month-olds children and seven 20-month-old children.
The looking-time data are pictured in Figure 1.

Production task. Only 10 children made any correct
productions during testing, although 8 children named one
or both objects during training (7 named the fowk, 4 named
the wat). On average, children produced the word wat 0.5
times (out of 3 opportunities), and produced fowk 0.63
times; these were not significant differences (F<1).

Results for 24-month-old children
Looking task. For familiar-exemplar trials, children looked
at the named object longer than the foils for both words
(68% for wat, 57% for fowk, with only the former being
significantly above chance, t(23)=5.78, p<.0001 and
t(23)=1.38, ns. There was a trend towards better
performance on wat trials than on fowk trials, t(23)=2.06,
p=.05, suggesting better learning for the high-density word.
Children looked at both objects above change on the novel
exemplar trials, t(23) 2.31, p<.05 for the wat and t(23)=3.30,
p<.01 for the fowk; these two did not differ, t(23)=-0.55, ns.
Choice task. For the familiar objects, children selected the
target 91% of the time for wat (significantly above chance,
t(23)=10.74, p<.0001), but only 60% of the time for fowk,
t(23)=1.16, ns. This difference was significant, t(23)=3.50,
p<.05. On novel exemplar trials, children chose the target
over its foil at above chance levels for both wat t(23)=3.44,
p<.01 and fowk, t(23)=2.20, p<.05, with no difference
between the two, t(23)=.64, ns. In summary, children
showed better learning for the dense-neighborhood item.
Production task. Only 9 children made any correct
productions. On average, children produced wat 0.4 times
(out of 3 opportunities), and fowk
0.63 times. These were not significant differences,
F(1,23)=2.67, p>.10, although the trend was towards better
production of fowk than wat.

Figure 1: Looking time results by neighborhood group
Children with many wat neighbors looked longer at the
wat than its foil, t(19)=6.29, p<.0001, but only marginally
longer at the fowk than its foil, t(19)=1.89, p=.07, a
significant difference t(19)=2.14, p<.05. They showed a
similar pattern in their choice behavior (above-chance
performance only for the wat, with a significant
difference between the two trial types). Children with few
wat neighbors, however, showed no significant difference
between wat and fowk in either looking, t(18)=1.43, or
choice t(18)=1.30. They looked longer at the fowk than its
foil, t(18)=3.49, p<.01, but did not choose it more,

Combined effects by age
The analyses of each age group separately suggest that
24-month-olds show a stronger neighborhood effect than do
20-month-olds. To further examine this possibility, we
compared the two groups directly. An age x word ANOVA
on the combined looking time data showed a significant
interaction, F(1,46)=5.73, p<.05, with 24-month-olds
showing better performance for wat (68% vs. 57%), and the
younger children showing a bias towards fowk (67% vs.
61%). The choice data, however, reveal only an overall

32

children with many “wat” neighbors vs. those infants with
few “wat” neighbors (see Figure 1). The primary
question of interest, therefore, was whether the model
would exhibit a similar High/Low x Many/Few
interaction. These two independent variables had close
analogues in the model. The High/Low variable was
represented by the High vs. Low density nonword
presented to the model. The Many/Few variable was
represented by the manipulation whereby the network had
a vocabulary with either many (10) or few (5) neighbors
for the high-density nonword. The dependent variable
was the difference between the network’s TSS error for
the target vs. the foil, in each of the four conditions
defined by the two independent variables.
Figure 2 shows the difference scores broken down by
nonword neighborhood density (High/Low) and number
of neighbors for the high density nonword (Many/Few).
As shown, the model exhibited the same pattern of
interaction as in the behavioral data. A 2-way ANOVA
confirmed that the interaction was significant, F(1,48)=
17.544, p=0.0001. Planned comparisons showed that the
foil-target difference was significantly greater for the HD
than the LD nonword when the network had Many
neighbors for the high density nonword, F(1,24)=20.47, p
Interaction Bar Chart
=.0001,
but
not* NumWatNeighbors
when the network had Few neighbors for
Effect:
Density
Dependent: TSS Difference
the high
F(1,24) = 1.53, p=.23.
With density
Standard Errornonword,
error bars.

t(18)=0.83; they chose the wat at above-chance levels,
t(18)=3.38, p<.001, but only looked at it marginally longer
than the foil, t(18)=1.77, p=.09. Overall then, children with
few neighbors showed only weak learning, while children
with many wat neighbors evidenced learning of wat in both
tasks, and better learning of wat than fowk

Discussion
These results suggest that the word forms in an individual
child’s lexicon influence that child’s subsequent vocabulary
acquisition. The fact that neighborhood size influenced
learning of “wat” but not “fowk” suggests the effect was not
one of general acquisition skill, but was more closely tied to
the phonetic forms the child knew. Thus, children are better
able to learn new words that have one or more similar
phonological referents in their vocabulary.

Computational Connectionist Model
To examine this finding in more detail, a computational
connectionist model was trained on a vocabulary of 250 1syllable words, to correspond to a vocabulary similar in size
to that of children at the ages tested in the experiment. The
network’s task was to translate an input pattern of activation
representing the word’s phonology into an output pattern of
activation representing the word’s semantics. The training
corpus therefore consisted of input-target pairs such that
input was a phonological representation of the word form,
and the target was a semantic representation for the word.
Semantic representations were randomly chosen vectors that
were assigned arbitrarily to be paired with word forms. The
network was trained for 3000 passes through the training
corpus ("epochs"), by which time it had learned the corpus
(i.e., it could produce the correct semantic representation for
each input word form representation). We then created one
low-density and one high-density nonword—i.e.
one
nonword that had 1 CVC neighbor in the corpus of words
known by the network (low density),and one nonword that
had a higher number of neighbors in the corpus (highdensity).
To test the network’s mapping of the low- and highdensity nonwords, two new vocabularies were created.
These differed in the number of neighbors in the vocabulary
for the high-density nonword (5 or 10). The network was
then trained for 20 exposures on either the hi-density wordsemantic representation pairing, or the lo-density wordsemantic pairing. At the end of the 20 exposures, we
examined the model’s total sum-squared (TSS) error in
producing the correct semantic output for the high-density
and low-density nonwords. We also examined TSS error
with respect to "foils" i.e., semantic stimuli that the network
had not been trained to associate with either the high- or
low-density nonword.

30

Cell Means of TSS Difference

25
20
15

HighDensity
LowDensity

10
5
0
-5
10Many

5Few
NumWatNeighbors

Figure 2: Results from the computational model
Why do these results arise in the model? The semantic
activation pattern evoked at the model’s output layer by a
novel phonological pattern presented at the input layer is
an average of the semantic patterns that would be evoked
by similar input phonological patterns. For a novel word
form that has many similar input phonological patterns,
the semantic pattern evoked at the output layer is the
average of the set of semantic patterns that would have
been evoked by those similar input phonological patterns.
The larger the number of similar inputs, the greater the set
of semantic patterns that would be evoked, and therefore,
the more closely that this average reflects the mean of
semantic space. As a result, the model’s output response
will be nonrandom with respect to semantic space, and
therefore fairly different from the semantics of an
arbitrarily selected “foil”. If there is only one similar

Results
The key finding in the behavioral results was of an
interaction such that the effect of high vs. low neighborhood
density on toddler’s looking times differed for those

33

known phonological input, however, the model’s output
response is relatively random with respect to semantic
space, and therefore will not be very different from an
arbitrarily selected foil. Thus the distance between the
model’s semantic response to an input phonological pattern
and an arbitrarily selected semantic pattern (i.e., a “foil”) is
inversely proportional to the number of previously known
similar input phonological patterns. When there are 5
previously known similar input patterns, this distance is not
significantly greater than when there is only one similar
previously known input. However, when there are 10
previously known similar inputs, the divergence is
substantial. This is what gives rise to the pattern shown in
Figure 2.

Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D.
J., & Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 242, 59(5).
Goh, W. D. & Pisoni, D. B. (2002). Effects of lexical
competition on immediate memory span for spoken
words. Quarterly J. of Exp. Psych., 56A, 929-954.
Heisler, L. (2005). The influence of neighborhood density
and phonotactic probability on representational and
production factors in word learning. Dissertation
Abstracts International: Section B, 66(3), 1757.
Hollich, G., Jusczyk, P. W., & Luce, P.A. (2002). Lexical
neighborhood effects in 17-month-old word learning.
In Skarabela, B., Fish, S. & Do, A. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 26th annual Boston University Conference on
Language Development. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla.
Jusczyk, P. W., Luce, P. A., & Charles-Luce, J. (1994).
Infants' sensitivity to phonotactic patterns in the native
language. J. of Mem. & Lang., 33, 630-645.
Luce, P. A. & Pisoni, D. B. (1998). Recognizing spoken
words: The Neighborhood Activation Model. Ear &
Hearing, 19(1), 1-36.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools
for analyzing talk. 3rd Ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Newman, R.S. & German, D. J. (2002). Effects of lexical
factors on lexical access among typical languagelearning children and children with word-finding
difficulties. Language & Speech, 43(3), 285-317.
Newman, R.S. & German, D. J. (2005). Life span effects
of lexical factors on oral naming. Language & Speech,
48(2), 123-156.
Roodenrys, S. & Hinton, M. (2002). Sublexical or Lexical
Effects on Serial Recall of Nonwords? JEP:LMC, 28,
29-33.
Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Statistical regularities in
vocabulary guide language acquisition in connectionist
models and 15-20 month olds. Devel. Psych., 38, 10161037.
Storkel, H. L. & Rogers, M. A. (2000). The effect of
probabilistic phonotactics on lexical acquisition.
Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 14(6), 407-425.
Storkel, H. L. (2001). Learning new words: Phonotactic
probability in language development. JSLHR, 44, 13211337.
Storkel, H. L. (2004). Do children acquire dense
neighborhoods? An investigation of similarity
neighborhoods in lexical acquisition. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 25, 201-221.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R.N. (2007). Lexical competition
in young children's word learning. Cog. Psych., 54, 99132.
Tomasello, M., Mannle, S. & Werdenschlag, L. (1988).
The effect of previously learned words on the child's
acquisition of words for similar referents. J. Child
Lang., 15, 505-515.

General Discussion
The experimental results demonstrated that children find
it easier to learn words that have large numbers of
neighbors. This suggests that, as children learn new words,
their ability to acquire subsequent words will change. The
connectionist model shows a similar pattern of behavior,
demonstrating an advantage for high-density words only
after those words have a sufficient number of lexical
neighbors.
While it would be premature to draw
conclusions regarding the mechanistic basis of the
behavioral result obtained in infants, the model does enable
mechanistic understanding of the similar behavioral effect in
the model. While more investigation is needed, we regard
this as a useful first step towards understanding the
behavioral results described above.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants R01HD045713 ,
R03 HD37822-01 and BCS 99-07849 to the University of
Iowa and BCS 0642294 to the University of Maryland. We
thank Ryan Brink for coordinating data collection and
coding, and the parents and children who participated.

References
Bernstein Ratner, N. (1984). Patterns of vowel modification
in motherese. J. Child Lang., 11, 557–578.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P. A. (1990). Similarity
neighbourhoods of words in young children’s lexicons. J.
Child Lang., 17, 205-215.
Charles-Luce, J. & Luce, P. A. (1995). An examination of
similarity neighborhoods in young children's receptive
vocabularies. J. Child Lang., 22, 727-735.
Coady, J. A. & Aslin, R. N. (2003). Phonological
neighbhorhoods in the developing lexicon. J. Child
Lang., 30, 441-469.
Dale, P.S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. BRMIC, 28, 125-127.
Dollaghan, C. A. (1994). Children's phonological
neighborhoods: half empty or half full? J. Child Lang.,
21, 257-271.

34

