UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning to Associate Object Categories and Label Categories: A Self-Organising Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68z5k3kj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Mayor, Julien
Plunkett, Kim

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning to Associate Object Categories and Label Categories:
A Self-Organising Model
Julien Mayor (julien.mayor@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, South Parks Road
Oxford, OX1 3UD, United Kingdom

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, South Parks Road
Oxford, OX1 3UD, United Kingdom
Abstract

are acquired. They define a qualitative transition between
proto-words (pairing of an under-specified sound pattern to
a specific object) to genuine referential use of words (pairing
of a specified sound pattern and a category of objects). This
qualitative change towards a referential use of words has been
associated with the emergence of constraints on lexical acquisition (Golinkoff, Mervis, & Hirsh-Pasek, 1994; Markman,
1989). Nazzi and Bertoncini (2003) further proposed that the
vocabulary spurt corresponds to a shift from associationist to
referential lexical acquisition mechanisms. Similarly, Markman suggests that word learning is divided in two stages; first,
simple associative mechanisms account for early slow learning. The increase in speed of word learning is attributed to
the application of lexical constraints.
The goal of our research is to understand the mechanisms
that enable children to respond in a taxonomic fashion. This
mechanism has to account for a qualitative change in the way
infants use words – from an associative to a referential use
– as well as a quantitative shift in the number of words that
belong to their lexicon. We introduce a model of early word
learning which exhibits a rapid increase in the rate of acquisition of words as well as taxonomic responding as an emergent property, despite the fact that the model relies on continuous changes and makes no use of a new learning mechanism. We show within a modelling framework that efficient
pre-established categorisation capacities are a prerequisite to
successful word learning. Joint attentional activities, involving just a single labelling event, provide the foundations for
taxonomic responding, in which the label is successfully extended to all members of the category. Once a label is learnt
for the whole category, the word is considered to be part of
the infants’ lexicon.
To our knowledge, no existing model has attempted to
model the generalisation properties of word-object associations from single labelling events. However our model shares
a very similar architecture to previous models of early lexical
acquisition (Miikkulainen, 1997; Li, Farkas, & MacWhinney,
2004; Li, Zhao, & MacWhinney, 2007).

We present a model of early lexical acquisition. Successful
word learning builds on pre-existing, self-organising categorisation capacities and through joint attentional events between
the infant and the caregiver. Our model successfully accounts
for the emergence of a lexical constraint, taxonomic responding, as well as a steep increase in the rate of acquisition of
words, without any need for a new mechanism or rule. We discuss the role played by synapto-genesis in early infancy and
pruning at the end of childhood in relation to word learning.
Keywords: Early word learning; lexical constraints; taxonomic responding; vocabulary spurt; self-organising model.

Introduction
A central issue in early lexical acquisition is how infants learn
to understand the meaning of words. In a typical labelling
situation, the caregiver points at an object (Fido the dog) and
says “Look, this is a dog!”. The infant has then to rule out
a huge number of possible meanings. For example, the word
might refer to the size, to the shape, to the colour, to the individual Fido, etc... (Quine, 1960). However, infants reliably
interpret the word “dog” as a label that can be used for this
dog and for all dogs.
An influential solution to this conundrum is that infants
make use of linguistic constraints to narrow the hypothesis
space in order to assign meaning to words. These constraints
provide sufficient information to guide the infant in apprehending the difficult task of word learning. One of these constraints is the taxonomic assumption (Markman & Hutchinson, 1984). In a “weak” form, it was introduced as the infants’ relative preference over a thematic extension of labels:
if a dog is labelled, infants pick the taxonomic match (e.g., a
cat) rather than the thematic match (e.g., a bone). In its strong
form, taxonomic responding assumes that “when infants embark upon the process of lexical acquisition, they are initially
biased to interpret a word applied to an object as referring
to that object and to other members of its kind” (Waxman &
Markow, 1995). In other words, from a single labelling event,
the infant infers that every object that belongs to the same category has the same name. This capacity provides a powerful
tool for identifying objects and for communication, since it
enables individuals to refer to objects they have never seen
before.
Nazzi & Bertoncini (2003) have proposed that the period
of lexical development around 18 months, known as the vocabulary spurt, reflects qualitative changes in the way words

The Model
Overview
We identified two main contributing factors for successful
word learning: pre-lexical categorisation abilities and joint at-

697

tentional activities. The model combines these two contributing effects; unsupervised categorisation capacity corresponding to perceptual refinement and activity-dependant synaptic
learning, implementing the role of joint attentional activities.
Uni-modal cortical maps (self-organising maps or SOMs,
Kohonen, 1984) receive visual and acoustic input. The selforganising maps extract statistical regularities from the input
and form categories of similar objects and of similar sound
patterns without explicit supervision. They mimic the refinement of the infants’ perceptual systems in early infancy.
We mimic joint attentional activities by presenting objects
and their labels simultaneously. Synapses connecting active
neurones on both maps are reinforced through Hebbian learning. Hebbian synapses connecting the two SOMs are modulated by the joint presentations of objects and their labels so
as to form word-object pairs, as shown in Fig. 1.

Visual map

single labelling event per category only, taking place early
or late in development. This way, we gain an insight into the
learnability of a word in a developmental perspective. This
procedure allows for distinguishing the relative roles of perceptual refinement (Self-Organising Map structuration) and
joint attentional events.

Formal Presentation
Self-Organisation of the Uni-Modal Maps: Pre-Lexical
Categorisation The algorithm of self-organisation is the
standard Kohonen algorithm (Kohonen, 1984). Each map
(acoustic and visual) consists of an hexagonal grid of neurones receiving acoustic and visual inputs, respectively. Each
neurone k is associated with a vector mk . For the presentation
of each input pattern x, the vectors mk are modified according
to the following procedure: We find the Best Matching Unit
(BMU) i, defined by the condition ||mi − x|| ≤ ||m j − x||, ∀ j.
By extension, we identify the second best matching unit,
the third, and so on. The standard weight update rule is
applied with a learning rate that decays over time, α(t) =
0.05
1+t/2000 and a Gaussian neighbourhood function of the distance ||ri − rk || between neurones i and k on the map,
2
2
N(i, k)t = e−||ri −rk || /2σ (t) , that shrinks linearly over time,
from σ(0) = 4 to σ(Tmax ) = 1. For every epoch of training, corresponding to one presentation of each input pattern
in the data-set, we compute the averaged quantisation error,
as a measure of weight alignment to the input, so that the Euclidian distance between input patterns and their respective
best matching units is: E =< ||x − mc (x)|| >x where mc (x) is
the best matching unit for input pattern x. In all experiments,
map sizes were fixed to a 25x25 hexagonal grid of neurones.

Acoustic map

DOG !

Coding the Inputs Objects are represented as distorted dot
patterns. Random dot patterns have been extensively studied by Posner and colleagues (1967) and have been shown
to provide a good approach to the study of concept learning
through the psychophysics of form similarity. We created 100
patterns (prototypes) by randomly distributing 9 dots over a
30x30 square. We then generated 24 tokens in each category,
consisting of 8 tokens at each of 3 levels of distortion. Distortions are achieved by moving each dot by an amount drawn
from a normal distribution with a standard deviation of 1, 2
and 3 respectively. Prototypes were not included in the data
set.
There is little consensus in the field as to what acoustic information infants use when identifying words. A series of
studies emphasise the fact that infants pay attention to much
more than simple phonological features. In particular, it has
been shown that infants are sensitive both to stress and phonetic information, make allophonic distinctions and pay attention to co-articulation (Jusczyk, 1997). All of these sensitivities to the speech signal may have an important impact on
early lexical development. Therefore, we exploit the whole
acoustic signature of word tokens in order to avoid discarding relevant acoustic information. In a preliminary study, we
measured the variance in the sound pattern both across differ-

Figure 1: Sketch of joint attentional activity in the network:
Hebbian synapses are modulated by the coherent activity patterns induced on both maps due to the simultaneous presentation of an object and its corresponding label.
Due to the topographical organisation of the maps that
takes place during development, many neighbouring neurones on each map will be activated by the presentation of an
object and a sound pattern. Hebbian learning then takes place
for many neurones on each map. Therefore, the association
between the paired object and its corresponding sound pattern
will be generalised and will automatically build associations
between all objects in that category to all sound patterns corresponding to the appropriate label. A single labelling event
induces a taxonomic response and the label is extended to
all objects of like type: the novel word is learnt. In a first
experiment, joint attentional activities take place at regular
intervals. The generalisation of word-object associations is
compared when the system is confronted with two rates of
joint attentional events, modelling the role of a high vs. low
interacting caregiver on lexical acquisition. In a second experiment, taxonomic responding is assessed after having a

698

1
.
(1000∗S)

of √

ent speakers (referred to as “high variance”) and within repetitions of words by the same speaker (“low variance”). We
then extracted the acoustic signature from raw speech waveforms for 100 acoustic categories (words) produced by a female native speaker. We generated 24 acoustic signatures for
each acoustic category, centred around the recorded speech
signals. Each category consisted of 80% low variance modifications of the prototype, mimicking the high occurrence
of the mother’s speech, and of 20% high variance modifications, thereby providing the model with a variance in word
pronunciation introduced by different speakers. Token were
then normalised in length and sampled at regular intervals,
4 times per syllable. After sampling, the sounds were filtered using the Mel Scale in order to approximate the human
ear sensitivity. Input vectors were concatenations of four 7dimensional mel-cepstrum vectors, derived from FFT-based
log spectra (Davis & Mermelstein, 1980).

Synapse amplitudes are modulated according

to a standard Hebb rule with saturation. Therefore, synaptic weights stay in a physiological range even for high neural
activities. The synapse connecting neurone i from the visual
map to the neurone j of the acoustic map is computed as follows: wi j (n + 1) = wi j (n) + 1 − e−λai a j where n refers to the
index of the word-object pairing and λ = 10 is the learning
rate. The free parameter λ can be chosen on a wide range of
values with qualitatively similar results. After every wordobject presentation, weights are normalised so as to model
limited synaptic resources: ∑i j w2i j = 1.
Assessment of the Model In order to assess the performance of the model, it is necessary to introduce two definitions. The first definition introduces a measure of the magnitude of taxonomic responding. It may be interpreted as the
learnability of a word. Real word learning situations involve
more than a single labelling event per category. Hence, the
second definition defines a criterion for deciding when a word
is learnt. All results refer to these measures.
Definition 1 We refer to the taxonomic factor as being the
percentage of objects that are associated with their correct
label, following a single labelling event per category.
Definition 2 We consider a word to be part of the lexicon if
more than 80% of the objects of that category are associated
with the correct label.
After training on cross-modal pairings, we assess the capacity of the network to extend the association of a presented
word-object pair to non-paired items that belong to the same
category. Following one simultaneous presentation of a wordobject pair per category, weights are fixed. All images in the
dataset are classified according to whether the induced activity on the acoustic map corresponds to the activation of
the appropriate label (corresponding to the minimal Euclidian
distance). Similarly, acoustic tokens are classified according
to the activity induced onto the visual map. The average of
both classification measures is the taxonomic factor. All results reported are averaged over 35 independent simulations.

Training the Cross-Modal Associations; Joint Attentional
Activities As maps become structured due to the presentations of the images and acoustic tokens in the data set, we
mimic joint attentional activities between the caregiver and
the infant by presenting simultaneously to both maps a randomly picked object from the data set and an acoustic token
randomly picked within the matching category. We build
cross-modal associations by learning Hebbian connections
between both maps.
As a further simplification of the model, we use bidirectional synapses whose amplitudes are modulated by the activity of the connecting neurones. We define the neural activity
of a neurone k to be ak = e−qk /τ where qk is the quantisation
error associated with neurone k and τ = 0.5 is a normalisation
constant.
It is known that the number of synapses is not constant
during life. There is first a process of synapto-genesis, a
maturational process in which neurones make contact with
other neurones. Synapses are then pruned according to an
experience-dependent process (Huttenlocher, 1979) In the
first stage, the process is essentially “blind”; synapses are
formed at random locations. We mimic this phenomenon by
linking together only a percentage of randomly picked neurones on both maps, a percentage that increases with age. The
number of synapses peaks at around 2 years of age (Huttenlocher, 1979). To a first approximation, we model synaptogenesis as a linear increase from 1% connectivity to a full
connectivity after 500 epochs of training. Later we address
the role played by synapto-genesis in greater detail. The
number of synapses then decreases by a process of elimination of “weak” synapses. This synaptic pruning mechanism is experience-driven. The process of synaptic pruning is
thought to minimise energy consumption as well as optimise
network properties (Chechik, 1998)). It is also known that the
total number of neurones decreases over time. However, we
do not address this issue in our model.
All S synapses were firstprandomly initialised with a normal
distribution centred on 1/ (S) and with a standard deviation

Results
We present three experiments highlighting contributing factors to successful word learning. First, we present the time
course of vocabulary acquisition under two conditions; a high
versus a low level of regular joint attentional activities. We
demonstrate that the amount of joint attentional activity correlates with the total vocabulary size. The rate of lexical acquisition undergoes a rapid increase in both conditions, despite the fact there is no change in the underlying neural
mechanisms. In a second experiment, we show that the taxonomic factor increases abruptly at the same time as the network undergoes accelerated lexical growth. The increased
rate of word learning is controlled by the taxonomic factor.
However, it should be noted that taxonomic responding is an
emergent property of the architecture when confronted with a
structured environment. The taxonomic factor is directly determined by the pre-established categorisation skills, in the

699

form of well-structured maps. A further experiment highlights the role played by synapto-genesis and later pruning
for taxonomic responding, emphasising the fact that early
synapto-genesis supports an increase in taxonomic responding. Once the infant, and the model, have gained sufficient experience from the environment, synapses can be pruned without affecting the word-learning capacity, thereby optimising
the system from a metabolic point of view.

tional events. This finding provides a theoretical account of
the corresponding experimental findings (Tomasello & Farrar, 1986).

Role of Pre-Lexical Categorisation Capacity
We now identify the contributing effect of pre-lexical categorical capacity to taxonomic responding. Similarly to
the previous experiment, we train the maps with the (nonsimultaneous) presentation of objects and labels. However
this time, we control joint attentional activities by having only
one labelling event per category taking place after the maps
have been trained for n epochs. For each point on Fig. 3, the
network has seen one word-object pair per category only. We
assess the taxonomic factor, according to Definition 1. This
procedure reveals the time course of the taxonomic factor.
Equivalently, it defines the likelihood, at different points in
time, that a word is learnt following one labelling event. As
the maps gain experience with the structured environment,
they organise topologically so that objects of like kind activate neighbouring neurones on the maps. Generalisation of
word-object associations is thereby facilitated. Taxonomic
responding correlates with the quality of the map structure.
The time course of the taxonomic factor shows a steep increase at around 500 epochs, as shown in Fig. 3. Taxonomic
responding is an emergent property of the network. It is not

Time Course of Lexical Acquisition: Vocabulary
Spurt
We start by monitoring the evolution of vocabulary size with
time when the model is trained in the word-object environment. Vocabulary size (according to Definition 2) is measured at different points of development. After n epochs, each
map has been trained n times on all images and words in the
data set. Simultaneously, the number of synapses between the
maps increases linearly from a 1% random connectivity at the
start of learning to full connectivity at epoch 500, mimicking qualitatively the synapto-genesis occuring in early childhood. Labelling events take place at regular intervals; we
present the network with two environments, one with a small
number of joint-attentional activities (0.2 labelling events per
category and per epoch) and one with a high number of jointattentional activities (0.5 labelling events per category and per
epoch).

80
100

70

low joint−attention families
high joint−attention families

60
Taxonomic factor

80
Vocabulary size

Full connectivity
Linear −> 500

60

40

50
40
30
20
10

20

0
0
0
0

200

400
600
Development [epochs]

800

1000

200

400
600
Development (epochs)

800

1000

Figure 3: Role of pre-lexical experience. As the maps gain
experience with the visual and acoustic environment, they undergo an organisation in their structure. The improvement in
structural organisation impacts directly the system’s ability
to generalise associations from a single labelling event. The
taxonomic factor displays a steep increase from about 500
epochs of training. The exact time course of synapto-genesis
has no qualitative impact on the emergence of taxonomic responding.

Figure 2: Time course of vocabulary growth when immersed
in an environment with a high number of joint attentional activities () and with a low number of joint attentional activities (◦). Our model confirms experimental findings that joint
attentional activities is a predictor of language development.
In both conditions, the rate of lexical acquisition undergoes a
rapid increase, similar to a vocabulary spurt.
Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of total vocabulary size during development. First, note the nonlinear increase in the
size of the lexicon at around 500 epochs, similar to a vocabulary spurt. Second, when the network is confronted with an
environment with joint attentional activities of low intensity,
vocabulary growth is slower and later vocabulary size is reduced when compared to an environment rich with joint atten-

surprising that the nonlinear increase in the taxonomic factor seen in Fig. 3 coincides with the onset of the vocabulary
spurt observed in Fig. 2. It is, however, noteworthy that the
time course of the taxonomic factor is not qualitatively different when the maps are fully-connected throughout development (Fig. 3 solid line) and when there is a linear increase

700

in connectivity (Fig. 3 dashed line). This suggests that the
fact that the onset of the vocabulary spurt coincides with the
peak of synaptic density is accidental, since a constant full
connectivity still exhibits the nonlinearity at the same time in
development. We explore the role of synaptic connectivity in
more detail in the next experiment.

of synapses, the pruning process can take place. We see in
Fig. 4 that pruning can be done without affecting word learning capacity. The taxonomic factor even peaks for a connectivity of about 0.01, when the normalisation procedure is not
penalised by scaling irrelevant weights. It is interesting to
note that synaptic pruning does not take place before the person has experienced most word-label associations, at around
15 years of life. The choice of which synapses to prune is
then stable and can be done without affecting word learning
performance.

The Role of Synapto-Genesis and Pruning
In early childhood, the number of synapses increases during
the first 2 years of life (Huttenlocher, 1979). The process is
determined genetically and is essentially independent of the
environment. The number of synapses remains constant up to
about 10–15 years, when the number of synapses decreases,
according to a pruning mechanism. Weak synapses are eliminated so as to keep the most relevant synapses. We model
both synapto-genesis and synaptic pruning in order to identify their possible impact on word learning capacity. Synaptogenesis is modelled by having an increase in the number of
random connections between the maps. Once maximal connectivity is reached (full connectivity in our model) weak
synapses are eliminated. At different points in the process,
and with well-structured maps, we assess the capacity to generalised a word-object association; the taxonomic factor.

Discussion
We have proposed a model of early word learning which is
based on core aspects of the infants development. First, infants explore their environment and their perceptual systems
become structured to reflect the regularities they experience
in the environment, in the absence of constant supervision.
Structure emerges in their visual system so that they are able
to group together objects that look alike. Similarly, in the auditory system, the infant learns to identify word forms. The
perceptual systems unfold in service of efficient word learning and through joint interactions (labelling events) with the
caregiver, the infant learns to associate a label with its corresponding object. Based on a single labelling event (or very
few of them), the infant excels at generalising this pairing to
associate the word category to the object category.
Our model learns to categories words and objects in an unsupervised way, using self-organising maps. Once structure
emerges, joint presentations of words and objects are generalised efficiently to associate all members of the word category to all members of the object category. Successful generalisation of word-object associations, following a single labelling event, build on “pre-lexical” categories formed in an
unsupervised way by the maps. It is important to note that
we provide a general mechanism for generalising associations
between two categories, based on the association of one exemplar in each category. This process is independent of the
mechanism of formation of these categories. Categories do
not need to be purely perceptually based. The only assumption we make is that most members of a category are closer to
each other than to members of another category. We showed
that taxonomic responding, defined equivalently as the facility of learning a word from a single labelling event, correlates
with the emergence of map structure. We thereby provide a
mechanistic account of experimental findings showing a positive correlation of the infants’ perceptual systems with word
learning capacity (Tsao, Liu, & Kuhl, 2004).
In addition, we have shown that an increase in the number
of labelling events, or an increase in the time spent in joint
attentional activities impacts favourably the size of the lexicon. Again, this provides a theoretical account of the positive
correlation between joint attention and language acquisition
(Tomasello & Farrar, 1986) and of the dependence of the vocabulary size on the social environment (high-talking versus
low talking families) (Hart & Risley, 1995).

90
80

Taxonomic Factor

70
60
50
40
30
20
Synaptogenesis
Synaptic pruning

10
0
0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Connectivity

0.8

1

Figure 4: Role of synapto-genesis and pruning on word learning capacity. In early infancy the number of synapses increases, independently of the statistical regularities found in
the environment. Generalisation of word-object associations
improve with the number of randomly generated synapses.
Later in life, when synapses are pruned according to their
strength, we show that the ability to learn a word stays constant and even improves with a smaller number of synapses.
The full process of synapto-genesis and synaptic pruning satisfies both metabolic constraints and word learning capacity.
Fig. 4 shows the taxonomic factor as a function of the
synaptic connectivity between the maps, both with random
connections (synapto-genesis) and with the strongest connections (synaptic pruning). First, there is a monotonic increase
in taxonomic responding as the number of synapses grow.
Taxonomic responding increases during the synapto-genesis
period. Once the system has established the relative strengths

701

A Computational Account. Neural Computation, 10(7),
1759–1777.
Davis, S., & Mermelstein, P. (1980). Comparison of parametric representations for monosyllabic word recognition
in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 28(4), 357–366.
Golinkoff, R. M., Mervis, C. B., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21,
125–155.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful Differences
in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children.
Brookes Publishing Company, Inc., PO Box 10614, Baltimore, MD 21285-0624 ($22).
Huttenlocher, P. (1979). Synaptic density in human frontal
cortex-developmental changes and effects of aging. Brain
Res, 163(2), 195–205.
Jusczyk, P. W. (1997). The discovery of spoken language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kohonen, T. (1984). Self-organization and associative memory. Berlin: Springer.
Li, P., Farkas, I., & MacWhinney, B. (2004). Early lexical
development in a self-organizing neural network. Neural
Networks, 17, 1345-1362.
Li, P., Zhao, X., & MacWhinney, B. (2007). Dynamic SelfOrganization and Early Lexical Development in Children.
Cognitive Science, 31(4), 581–61232.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in children: Problems of induction. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Markman, E. M., & Hutchinson, J. (1984). Children’s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning: Taxonomic versus
thematic relations. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 1-27.
Miikkulainen, R. (1997). Dyslexic and category-specific
aphasic impairments in a self-organizing feature map
model of the lexicon. Brain and Language, 59(2), 334–
366.
Nazzi, T., & Bertoncini, J. (2003). Before and after the vocabulary spurt: two modes of word acquisition? Developmental Science, 6(2), 136-142.
Posner, M., Goldsmith, R., & Welton Jr, K. (1967). Perceived
distance and the classification of distorted patterns. J Exp
Psychol, 73(1), 28–38.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. (1986). Joint Attention and
Early Language. Child Development, 57(6), 1454–1463.
Tsao, F., Liu, H., & Kuhl, P. (2004). Speech perception in
infancy predicts language development in the second year
of life: a longitudinal study. Child Development, 75, 1067
1084.
Waxman, S., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as invitations
to form categories: Evidence from 12- to 13-month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257–302.

We also address the role of synapto-genesis and synaptic
pruning with regards to word learning. In order to provide
the best substrate for forming new associations between the
visual map and the acoustic map, a high number of synapses
is preferable, so that the system can rely on the presence of
a connection between any neurones on each map. From this
perspective the increase in the number of synapses observed
in early childhood can be understood in terms of offering the
system with a high number of possible connections to choose
from, in order to form cross-modal connections. This process
is considered to be hard-wired, independently of the structure of the environment. At the transition into adulthood,
the number of synapses decreases according to the relative
roles they play after being confronted with the environment.
Weak synapses are pruned and only well-tuned synapses are
kept. A reduction of the number of synapses lowers the
metabolic demands of the brain. We showed that keeping
only the strongest synapses can be achieved without affecting
successful word-object associations. However, this selection
process cannot take place before the learner has experienced
most of the environmental conditions. If synaptic pruning
takes place too early in development, the relative strengths
of synapses are not optimally assigned and potentially useful
synapses would be wrongly suppressed, inducing sub-optimal
word learning capacity. The full developmental trajectory
of “blind” synapto-genesis and later environmentally-driven
synaptic pruning provides a biologically plausible access to
the identification of the synapses required to be maintained.
It is reasonable to suppose that such a developmental trajectory would be beneficial in perfecting the execution of a wide
range of cognitive processes beyond language.

Conclusion
We have presented a model of word learning that reproduced
some crucial aspects of the developmental trajectory of early
lexical acquisition. We propose that successful word learning is facilitated by pre-lexical categorisation mechanisms.
Through joint attentional activities, following a single labelling event, the association built through the simultaneous
presentation of an object and its corresponding label is generalised to all objects of like kind and to all acoustic tokens
corresponding to the same label. This generalisation of associations, commonly referred to as taxonomic responding,
coincides with an increase in the pace of word acquisition. It
provides a mechanistic account of the emergence of a “lexical
constraint”, taxonomic responding, and highlights its role in
word learning. This is achieved without postulating qualitative shifts in the learning mechanisms underlying the transition from early to later lexical development. We identified
a developmental trajectory for selecting the best synapses,
satisfying both metabolic optimisation and an excellent word
learning capacity.

References
Chechik, G. (1998). Synaptic Pruning In Development:

702

