UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mapping and Inference in Analogical Problem Solving — As Much as Needed or as Much as
Possible?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4nk551r8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 30(30)

Authors
Wiese, Eva
Konderding, Uwe
Schmid, Ute

Publication Date
2008-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mapping and Inference in Analogical Problem Solving – As Much
as Needed or as Much as Possible?
Eva Wiese (eva.wiese@stud.uni-bamberg.de)
Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities, University of Bamberg
Markusplatz 3, 96045 Bamberg, Germany

Uwe Konerding (uwe.konerding@uni-greifswald.de)
Institute of Community Medicine, University of Greifswald
Walther-Rathenau-Strae 48, 17475 Greifswald, Germany

Ute Schmid (ute.schmid@uni-bamberg.de)
Faculty of Information Systems and Applied Computer Science, University of Bamberg
Feldkirchenstrasse 28, 96045 Bamberg, Germany
Abstract

The structure mapping engine (SME, Falkenhainer, Forbus, & Gentner, 1989), one of the most influential models
of analogical mapping an transfer, is based on first-order (objects from the base can be mapped to differently named objects in the target, identity mapping for function and relational
symbols), one-to-one, structurally guided mapping. Other
models deviate in one or more aspects from these assumptions. For example, LISA (Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) allows
for mapping of different relations. Because mapping possibilities thereby become more complex, semantic and pragmatic
constraints are used in addition to structural ones. The Analogy via Abstraction (AvA) model (Weller & Schmid, 2006;
Schmid, 2005) allows for mapping of relations with different
numbers of arguments, that is, it gets rid of the one-to-one
assumption. Gentner and Markman (2006) present empirical
evidence that people base their matches on conceptual relations rather than pure graph isomorphs, that is, their data support the first-order one-to-one assumption of SME.

There exist many computational models of analogy making,
which are based on different assumptions about the cognitive
processes which are responsible for successful transfer from
a base to a target domain. In most models, mapping of the
base structure to the target is seen as the core of analogy making. We believe that the way in which this mapping is realized
is a crucial aspect by which the different models can be distinguished. More specific, we identified systematic (as much
as possible) versus pragmatic (as much as needed) approaches
to mapping as critical assumption by which the computational
models can be discerned. In case of pragmatic mapping, only
such aspects of the base domain are carried over to the target which address the current focus of interest. In contrast,
in case of systematic mapping, the greatest relational structure
which contains the aligned parts of base and target is carried
over. In consequence, in systematic approaches, many aspects
of the target problem are inferred at one time and available for
future use, while in pragmatic approaches new questions concerning the target domain may require that mapping and inference must be performed again. We conducted an experiment
in the domain of physics to investigate which type of mapping
is realized by human problem solvers and got significant evidence for systematic mapping.
Keywords: Analogical problem solving; systematicity principle; analogical inference; computational models; problem
solving.

In our opinion, the strongest assumption of SME is that
mapping is based on structural constraints only, whereby
structural mapping is guided by the systematicity principle.
By this principle, an alignment of structural information that
is associated by higher-order relations is preferred over the
alignment of single, isolated structures. Due to the systematicity principle it is possible to transfer information from the
base system without explicitly mapping them on corresponding structures in the target. It is only necessary that such information is connected to a higher-order relation which was
aligned during the mapping process. In a problem-solving
scenario the systematicity principle implies that, for a given
problem statement, not only such parts of the base which are
relevant to produce an answer are transferred to the target but
that all inferences about the target domain are drawn which
can be derived by systematic carry-over from the base domain. In the following, we will call this type of systematic
mapping and inference the “as much as possible” principle.

Introduction
Most approaches to analogy agree that the discovery of a
common structure between base and target – that is, mapping
– is central to analogical processing (Gentner & Markman,
2006; Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1995; Hofstadter,
2001). What parts and how much of the sub-structure of the
base is mapped with the target determines success of analogical transfer (Novick & Holyoak, 1991; Schmid, Wirth, &
Polkehn, 2003). Although mapping is realized in all computational models of analogy making, the way it is performed
differs significantly. Some dimensions in which models can
be compared with respect to the realization of the mapping
process are: Restriction to first-order mappings or allowing
for higher-order mappings, restriction to one-to-one mapping
or allowing for non-isomorphical mappings, guiding mapping
by structural constrains only or allowing for additional semantic and pragmatic constraints.

While the AvA model differs from SME because it allows
many-to-one and higher-oder mapping, it is also based on
the “as much as possible” principle. In contrast to SME,

927

Figure 1: Circuit models of the electrical current analogy
the structural alignment is not realized as a simple structure
mapping but as a structure mapping via the common abstract
structure of base and target domain. Both AvA and SME in a
first step identify the structural commonalities between base
and target. In contrast to SME, AvA explicitly builds an abstract structure which subsumes both domains. This abstract
structure governs the mapping of entities from base to target.
Thereby, search for suitable mappings is omitted and entities
are matched with respect to the roles they play in the common structure. In a problem-solving scenario modelled by
AvA the results may be the same as in SME: One can use
already familiar knowledge from the base to solve problems
in the target. When solving a problem there is not only such
knowledge transferred from the base which is necessary to
solve the current problem but also information which is connected to the greatest common subgraph of already mapped
structures.

domain in some detail. Afterwards we will report our experiment and we will conclude with a final evaluation and further
work to be done.

Analogical Problem Solving in the Domain of
Physics
A well-known analogy in physics is the water flow to electrical current flow analogy (Gentner & Gentner, 1983). In figure
1 the simple circuit models together with the mapping of the
basic components of both problems is shown. Both water circuit (base domain) and electrical circuit (target domain) consist of three main components with analogical functionalities.
In the water circuit a double-water-column (DWS) causes water flow if there is a pressure difference (labelled Δp) between
the two columns. The second component is a gyroscope (labelled K) which indicates the strength of water flow. The
higher the flow rate of the water becomes, the faster the gyroscope revolves. The third component is needed to measure
the pressure difference over the gyroscope. It is therefore
called pressure-difference-analyzer. Like the double-watercolumn it is built up by two water columns around the gyroscope. In electric circuits the double-water-column is replaced by a simple battery which causes electricity flow because of an electric charge difference between its two poles.
Such a charge difference is shown by the needle deflection
of a voltage-analyzer. The common role of DWS and battery is to be the actuator in the circuit. In the electric flow
domain, the gyroscope is replaced by a bulb which indicates
the current strength. The brighter the bulb sparkles the higher
the current strength is. Again, the voltage-analyzer is used to
measure the fall of voltage over the bulb. The common role
of gyroscope and bulb is to be the consumer in the circuit.
The main parameters of a (water or electrical) circuit are
current strength I, voltage U (analog to pressure difference
Δp) and resistance R (due to bulb or gyroscope). There is
a multiplicative relation between these parameters which is
given by Ohm’s law: U = R × I. This principle defines that
voltage is directly proportional to resistance (U ∼ R) and cur-

In contrast to SME and AvA, in most other models (e.g.,
Lisa, Hummel & Holyoak, 1997; AMBR, Kokinov & Petrov,
2001; Copycat, Hofstadter, 2001) mapping is realised by
pragmatic rather than systematic methods, which we will call
the “as much as needed” principle. That is, in a problem solving context, only such aspects of the base are transferred to
the target which are necessary to produce a solution to the
current problem statement. If new problem statements have
to be addressed afterwards, it can be necessary to perform a
new mapping and transfer to obtain a solution.
We conducted an experiment in which we directly confronted the “as much as possible” and the “as much as
needed” assumption in the domain of physical problem solving. Physical problems are highly suitable because the underlying knowledge is highly structured and, at the same time,
problems are sufficiently complex such that inferences cannot easily be drawn spontaneously without prior knowledge.
Since the problem scenarios have to be constructed very carefully to provide for the possibility to transfer only as much as
needed versus as much as possible knowledge from the base
to the target, in the following section, we will describe the

928

(Circuit 2)

(Circuit 1)

In contrast to circuit 1 (fig. 2), bulb a has been replaced by a bulb c
with less resistance and bulb b has been replaced by a bulb d with
higher resistance. Current strength remains unmodified. What is the
ratio between resistance in circuit 1 and circuit 2? (i) Resistance is
smaller in circuit 2; (ii) Resistance is higher in circuit 2; (iii) Resistances in both circuits are equal; (iv) I don’t know.

The circuit is provided with a battery with a voltage of 6 Volt. Bulb a
and b sparkle with the same intensity. What is the ration between the
voltages that you can measure over bulb a and bulb b? (i) Voltage
over bulb a is higher; (ii) Voltage over bulb b is higher; (iii) Both
voltages are equal; (iv) I don’t know.

Figure 2: Voltage problem, addressing U and I (type-1)

Figure 3: Resistance problem, addressing R and I (type-2)

rent strength (U ∼ I), whereas current strength and resistance
are indirect proportional (I ∼ R1 ). This law also holds in the
water current domain. To keep things simple, in the following, we will always refer to the circuit parameters in the wellknown terminology of electrical currents, even if we refer to
the base domain.
If the (water/electrical) current circuit contains more than
one actuator or more than one consumer one has to distinguish between serial and parallel connections. In our experiment, we only considered serial connections with one
actuator and one to three consumers in row. If the circuit
contains more than one consumer and consumers are serially connected, voltage and resistance are fragmented over
every single consumer. Partial voltages or resistances then
add up to the voltage or resistance of the system. Following
the rules for serial circuits, the current strength I in a serial
circuit is constant. Given either partial voltages Vi or partial
resistances Ri , the other, unknown, parameter can be calculated using Ohm’s law: R = R1 + . . . + Rn can be derived from
U = U1 + . . .+Un because Ohm’s law indicates that voltage U
and resistance R are proportional. One can measure the highest decrease of voltage over the highest resistance. Therefore,
partial voltages Ui can be calculated by Ui = Ri × I, if information about partial resistances Ri is provided. This works
the same way for calculating Ri from Ui .
To contrast the “as much as needed” and the “as much as
possible” assumption, it is necessary to provide a base domain knowledge structure consisting of a higher-order relation and two distinguishable first-order structures which are
connected via the higher-oder relation. Ohm’s law represents
a higher-order relation connecting I, U, and R in a specific
way. A first type of first-order relations consists of the adding
up of partial voltages Ui over a series of serial connected consumers. A second type of first-order relations consists of the
adding up of resistances Ri of series of serial connected consumers. The current strength I is a constant, equal at every
possible point of measurement in the circuit. Figure 2 gives

an example of a target problem addressing only the first type
of relations. Figure 3 gives an example for a target problem
addressing the second type of relations.

Experiment
In our experimental setting, subjects learn all concepts of serial rows for the water circuit domain. Afterwards, they have
to solve problems in the electrical current domain, such as
given in figures 2 and 3. The problems are designed in such
a way that they allow for both the “as much as needed” and
the “as much as possible” mapping and inference principle.
Depending on which principle applies to analogical problemsolving, different results can be expected for transfer: If the
“as much as needed” principle holds, only that information
should be transferred to the target that is essential to solve the
actual problem. Following that assumption, given a first problem concerning only type-1 (voltage) relations, only knowledge concerning voltage should be transferred to the target.
That is, if subjects afterwards are confronted with a problem
concerning type-2 (resistance) relations, mapping and inference must be performed again. The same should hold, if resistance problems are presented first and voltage problems afterwards.
In contrast, if the “as much as possible” assumption holds,
when solving a problem concerning type-1 relations knowledge about both voltage (type-1) and resistance (type-2)
should be transferred from the water circuit to the electrical circuit because both structures are connected via Ohm’s
law. In consequence, if the “as much as possible” assumption holds, it should suffice to solve a target problem of either
type to transfer all principles contained in serial circuits in
only one step.

Method
Materials The experiment was done on a computer, consisting of a tutorial for the base problem and a collection of
voltage target problems as well as a collection of resistance

929

Table 1: Experimental design
Experimental
Control
E1
E2
C1
C2
Tutorial type
Water Circuit
Electric Circuit
Testing time 1 type-1 type-2 type-1 type-2
Testing time 2 type-2 type-1 type-2 type-1

target problems. In the tutorial, all concepts were described
by spoken voice together with written information and animated graphical illustrations. All relevant facts were summarized in a table. Furthermore, subjects had to answer multiple choice questions about the base domain. If an answer
was wrong, the correct answer was given together with an explanation. The tutorial finished when a subject answered all
questions correctly. The target problems consisted of electrical circuit problems where answers were also given by multiple choice as shown in figures 2 and 3. Answers and answer
times were written in a log-file. The complete material (in
German) is given in Wiese (2007).
Design and Procedure The experimental design is summarized in table 1. Two experimental groups received a tutorial
about the water circuit domain. Two control groups received
a tutorial giving the same information in the electrical current
domain. Afterwards, for all groups, problems of the electrical current domain were presented. One experimental group
(E1 ) and one control group (C1 ) first worked on voltage problems (type-1) and afterwards on resistance problems (type2). The other experimental group (E2 ) and the other control
group (C2 ) worked first on resistance problems (type-2)and
afterwards on voltage problems (type-1).

Figure 4: Interaction of testing time and tutorial-type wrt average solution times
Participants Seventy students of different social science
programs at the University of Bamberg participated in the
study. Seven subjects had to be excluded from analysis because they already knew the physical laws that had to be
learned. The distribution of subjects over the four groups
was: E1 15 subjects (8 female, 7 male), E2 : 16 subjects (10
female, 6 male)), C1 : 16 subjects (12 female, 4 male), and
C2 : 16 subjects (12 female, 4 male)). The average age was 23
(range 19 until 35). On average the last mark in physics was
3.0 (corresponding to a C). 87 percent of the subjects did not
have contact with physics in the last five years.

Results and Discussion
To control that changes in solution times between episodes
are not correlated with changes in error rates, differences in
solution rates were tested. The average accuracy was about 85
percent. There were significant main effects of tutorial-type
(experimental vs. control groups, p = .026) and problemtype (p < .001) with higher errors rates for the control conditions and for resistance (type-2) problems but no significant
interactions. For analyses of solution times only such problems were included which subjects solved correctly. Tests
were done with regression analysis based on the general linear model with dummy coding for subjects.
The main result is given in figure 4. The empirical data
confirm the “as much as possible” hypothesis. The interaction between testing time and tutorial-type is significant
(p = .041). Additionally, there are main effects for tutorialtype (p = .019) and problem-type (type-1 vs. type-2, p <
.001). The main effect for testing time is not significant
(p = .929). Additionally there are significant interactions between problem-type and tutorial-type (p = .045) and between
testing time and problem-type (p = .013). The overall interaction between tutorial-type, testing time and problem-type is
not significant (p = .374).
The main effect for tutorial type is due to the fact that
subjects in the experimental groups need significantly more
time to solve the problems at testing time 1 (see figure 4).

If the “as much as possible” hypothesis holds, solution
times should decrease from the first to the second problem
solving episode (testing time 1 to testing time 2) for the experimental groups (without an increase in erroneous answers).
To take into account that voltage questions (type-1) and resistance questions (type-2) might take different time effort to
answer, the time differences of interest are the ones between
type-1 questions answered at testing time 1 (E1 ) and type-1
questions answered at testing time 2 (E2 ) and the differences
between the type-2 questions at first (E2 ) and the second (E1 )
testing time.
The control groups were introduced because the experimental sessions needed about one hour of time and we had
to take into account exhaustion and habituation effects. That
is, we had to consider that either solution times increase from
the first to the second problem solving episode due to the demanding nature of the problems, or that solution times decrease because subjects get used to the procedure of solving
multiple choice problems. Therefore to support the “as much
as possible” hypothesis, it is not sufficient to test a main effect
for solution time from the first to the second problem solving
episode. Instead, the interaction between tutorial-type (experimental vs control) and problem solving episode is tested.

930

the water circuit and as voltage-analyzer in the electrical circuit. Therefore, analogical mapping might be more easy for
type-2 (resistance) problems and only under that condition
mapping and inference were fully realized by the subjects.
However, since the threefold interaction of testing time, tutorial type and problem-type is not significant, there is no reason to assume that the processes of analogical mapping and
transfer vary due to the problem-type. A more plausible explanation is that exhausting effects of different strength did
obscure the transfer effect: Since resistance (type-2) problems had been of higher difficulty, it is possible that subjects
who solved these problems at testing time 1 showed more
exhaustion at testing time 2 (when solving the voltage problems) and therefore the transfer effect from resistance problems to voltage problems was shadowed by the exhaustion
effect for this condition. To test this assumption, a new experiment with less demanding material should be performed.

Figure 5: Average solution times for the electric circuit problems
This result supports our assumption that at testing time 1 subjects in the experimental groups needed to perform analogical mapping and transfer from the water circuit to the electrical circuit domain. In contrast, subjects from the control
groups only needed to apply the concepts learned in the tutorial to the problems. At testing time 2, however, experimental
and control groups need similar times for solving the problems. Again, this fact is supporting the “as much as possible” hypothesis: Subjects have inferred knowledge about all
concepts learned in the water circuit domain to the electrical
circuit domain during testing time 1 and therefore, at testing
time 2 could exploit this knowledge without further need of
mapping and transfer. The slight increase in solution time for
the control groups can be explained by exhaustion effects –
which are overridden by the inference advantage of the experimental groups.
A closer look at the results shows that the interaction effect of testing time and tutorial-type, i. e., the confirmation
of the “as much as possible” hypothesis, is due to the resistance (type-2) problems only (see figure 5): While solution times for the experimental groups decrease significantly
between the first an the second episode for resistance problems, this is not true for voltage problems. Although, voltage
and resistance problems were designed as similar as possible
with respect to complexity, subjects had more effort to solve
the type-2 problems (concerning resistance). In average they
needed 8.4 seconds more time to answer resistance questions
than to answer voltage questions with a rate of 79 percent of
correct answers for resistance questions and 94 percent for
voltage questions. Therefore, we must assume that resistance
problems are harder to solve than voltage problems.
On the other hand, subjects have a high profit of analogous
transfer from the water circuit to electrical circuit domain by
solving resistance (type-2) problems first and no profit when
solving voltage (type-1) problems first. This could be due to
the fact that measurement of resistance is realized very similar in the water circuit and the electrical circuit domain – in
both cases it is shown as an obstruction of flow. Voltage, on
the other hand, is shown by a pressure-difference analyzer in

Conclusion and Further Work
The results of our experiment support the assumption of “as
much as possible” mapping and transfer which is inherent in
the systematicity principle of SME and in our Analogy via
Abstraction model. That is, it is plausible for computational
models of analogy to greedily map as large a structure as possible from base to target and to transfer as much of knowledge from the base to the target as possible. More specifically, we could show that, if two disjunct relational structures
(for pressure differences resp. voltage and for resistance) are
connected via a higher-order relation (Ohm’s law), analogical problem solving which addresses only problems of one
relational structure triggers transfer of the complete structure.
In consequence, in later problem solving episodes in the target domain, the relevant knowledge from the base is already
available for the target and the new problems can be solved
without performing a new mapping and transfer from base to
target.
Due to the complexity of our physical problem domains the
effect was somewhat obscured by exhaustion effects. Therefore, we plan to conduct a further experiment with the same
design but with much more simple material. To prevent that
problems in the simple domain can be solved in a trivial
way, without analogical reasoning, we plan to construct artificial domains. Furthermore, it might be interesting to replicate the study with mathematical problems or programming
problems. In addition, it might be interesting to present the
problems to SME and some suitable alternative model to get
a clearer understanding of how the “as much as possible”
respectively “as much as needed” principles are realized in
these systems.

Acknowledgements
We thank Martin Hofmann for realizing the computer program we used in the experiment, Gaby Bauer for producing
the animated graphics, and Sven Kaffille for giving his voice
to the online tutor.

931

References

Kokinov, B. N., & Petrov, A. A. (2001). Integration of memory and reasoning in analogy making: The AMBR model.
In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science (p.
59-124). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17(3), 398-415.
Schmid, U. (2005). A cognitive model of learning by doing.
In S.Bap, J. Gulden, & T. Wieczorek (Eds.), Models and
human reasoning (p. 235-252). Berlin: W&T.
Schmid, U., Wirth, J., & Polkehn, K. (2003). A closer look on
structural similarity in analogical transfer. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 3(1), 57-89.
Weller, S., & Schmid, U. (2006). Solving proportional analogies by E-generalization. In KI 2006: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, 29th Annual German Conference on AI,
KI 2006, Proceedings. Heidelberg: Springer.
Wiese, E.
(2007).
”So viel wie nötig” oder ”so
viel wie möglich”?
Inferenz und Schemageneralisierung beim analogen Schliessen.
diploma thesis,
University of Bamberg, http://www.uni-bamberg.de/
kogsys/research/theses/advised_theses/.

Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure mapping engine: Algorithm and example. Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Gentner, D. R. (1983). Flowing waters or
teeming crowds: Mental models of electricity. In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens (Eds.), Mental models (p. 99-129).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (2006). Defining structural
similarity. The Journal of Cognitive Science, 6, 1-20.
Hofstadter, D. (2001). Epilogue: Analogy as the core of
cognition. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov
(Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive
science (p. 499-538). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps. Analogy in
creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J., & Holyoak, K. (1997). Distributed representation of structure: A theory of analogical access and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427-466.

932

